Title: Proceedings of the Human Biology Association 45th Annual Meeting, Zoom, May 1, 2020


Section: 1 MINUTES OF THE BUSINESS MEETING

Friday, May 1st.
President Alexandra Brewis Slade called the 2020 Business Meeting to order at 5:03 p.m. A quorum was not present. No corrections or additions were made to the 2019 meeting minutes so the minutes stand as approved.
She then moved on to the President's report. She acknowledged that this was an extraordinary year, with an unprecedented cancellation of the annual meetings due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Registrations were reimbursed, while the plenary and Pearl speaker were rescheduled for 2021. Besides this, the association also signed a new 5-year agreement with Wiley. The terms of the agreement were largely similar to the terms of the last agreement, but with a more stable yearly award to the association from Wiley ($35 000). This year, the Association has also resolved its tax-free status in our favor, thanks to the meticulous records of previous Treasurers as well as the efforts of current Treasurer, Jason DeCaro. Brewis closed her report by recognizing and thanking those who served the Association during the past year. She noted that at the close of this meeting, she would transition to Past President, while President-Elect Catherine Panter-Brick would assume the two-year term of President.
Next, Bill Leonard gave the Editor-in-Chief's report of the American Journal of Human Biology . He discussed new associate editor appointments and new appointments to the editorial board. He noted several new changes that he has made to raise the profile of the journal. These include adding two Social Media Editors, having a paper designated as Editor's Choice in each issue, putting the HBA meeting program and abstracts in a separate volume, and asking authors to submit a data availability statement. He also mentioned multiple special issues of the journal that are in the pipeline. Dan Eisenberg asked about open science badges during preregistration. Paul André Genest, Wiley Life Science Publisher, answered that this will be forthcoming in AJHB . Monica Sans asked about the 42% publication rate. Leonard said that the acceptance rate went up and the submission rate went down, raising the publication rate. Sue Johnston moved to accept the report, and Tad Schurr seconded. The motion was accepted unanimously (Leonard abstained).
Jason DeCaro gave the Treasurer's report. He reported that HBA had fully resolved its 501(c)(3) status with the IRS and that it had been applied retroactively. After reviewing the income and expenses for the year, he enumerated the good news: that the Association has a healthy account buffer, it has received an anonymous donation that allow us to sustain the Early Career Award for 7 years, we have realized cost savings via our new website, and that we are largely shielded from the effects of canceling the meetings in L.A. However, he cautioned that our income was not enough to meet the expenses of the meetings. He has convened a committee to explore ways to make sure our budget is sustainable long-term. Tad Schurr asked if other associations track registration with meeting costs. DeCaro answered that he mentioned catering costs because it is our biggest meeting expense, but there are others that contribute as well. Schurr then followed up to ask if there was a way to project costs by location. DeCaro answered that since we don’t pick the location, we have little control over it, but he will be contacting location staff earlier to be able to answer those questions. Dan Eisenberg moved to accept the report, Paul Leslie seconded, and the motion was unanimously approved (DeCaro abstained).
Gillian Ice gave the report for the Program committee. She gave an overview of the planned activities, which were cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The abstracts for the program have been published in AJHB and are available via open access. The plenary, “The Normal and the Normative,” organized by Jennifer Cullin and Virginia Vitzthum, will be deferred until the 2021 meetings. The organizers are working with AJHB on a special issue to be published near the time of the meetings. Andrea Wiley will also deliver the Pearl Memorial lecture in 2021. She noted that winners of HBA awards will be honored in 2021. Ice concluded by thanking the members of the Program committee, Bill Leonard, AJHB , and Wiley for their assistance with this year's program. Bill Leonard mentioned that the plan is for plenary papers to be submitted in advance of the meeting. Gary James moved to accept the report. Sue Johnston seconded the motion and the membership unanimously approved the report (GI abstained).
Claudia Valeggia gave the Membership report. She reported that membership numbers were down for 2020 compared to 2019. This was due to several reasons: some members simply forgot, and renewed on the receipt of a personal message; others renew just before or at the meeting and it slipped through the cracks due to meetings cancelation; and students may be spreading their costs out during the year. She warns that there will need to be some creative solutions for membership campaigns, as the pandemic may create continuing challenges. Sue Johnston moved to accept the report and Gary James seconded the motion. The fellows unanimously approved the motion (Valeggia abstained).
Next, Pablo Nepomnaschy gave the International report. He began by congratulating the winners of the International Travel Award. He reported that the Association continues to struggle to attract an international membership, particularly those from low/middle income countries (LMICs). He proposed to form a task force to investigate this issue, including colleagues from LMICs, the HBA's Country Representatives Team (CRT) and colleagues from the AAPA who are also working on related issues. This sparked a wide-ranging discussion for strategies from the membership. Monica Sans mentioned that there are many colleagues in South America, but it is very expensive for those in some nations. She suggested a cheaper membership for international members. Tad Schurr asks if it is possible to hold an HBA-style meeting at the Latin American Biological Anthropology meetings. Paul André Genest mentioned that Wiley has a Member Resources section that has advice for expanding international audiences to HBA. Jason DeCaro mentioned that the new contract with Wiley will allow us to focus better on having a membership fee structure since we now pay a fixed cost for all members to access the journal. Alejandra Nuñez de la Mora mentioned that the Mexican Society of Biological Anthropology will hold their biannual meeting in Mexico City in 2021. Sam Urlacher asked about the possibility of virtual workshops to extend our reach. Gary James moved to accept the motion. Dan Eisenberg seconded the motion. The membership unanimously approved of the report (Nepomnaschy abstained).
Michaela Howells then gave the Public Relations report. She reported that social media engagement on HBA Facebook and Twitter platforms has significantly increased. She encouraged the membership to engage in these spaces. The website has been highlighting special issues of AJHB , with the assistance of Junior Service Fellow Elizabeth Holdsworth. Finally, she mentioned that the HBA-sponsored podcast, Sausage of Science , was now in its third year. The number of listeners is increasing, and the hosts Cara Ocobock and Chris Lynn are interested in continuing the project. Junior Service Fellow Caroline Owens was rotating off a two-year commitment to the podcast while a second Junior Service Fellow, Theresa Gildner, started in January. Alex Brewis mentioned that the second service fellow was supported by AJHB . Gary James moved to accept the report and Sue Johnston seconded. The report was unanimously approved (Howells abstained).
Kyle Gowen and Carlye Chaney gave the Student Representative report. They also note that student membership dropped dramatically in 2019, most likely because students tend to update their memberships at the meetings in order to spread costs out throughout the year. They announced a proposed initiative, the HBA Community-Building Networking Program. This program would establish mentor-mentee pairings between student HBA members and more senior fellows. There would be a Junior Service Fellow position associated with this program. Tad Schurr asked if the mentoring program would be during the meeting or afterward. Gowan answered that it would be for the meeting only, but he hopes that the mentoring would extend outward from there. Gary James moved to accept the report. Sue Johnston seconded. The report was unanimously approved.
Elizabeth Miller gave the Nominations and Elections report for Lee Gettler. This year, the Nominations and Elections committee fielded nominations for the Franz Boas Distinguished Achievement Award and the Michael A. Little Early Career Award. These awards will be conferred at a later date. Nominations and Elections also Christopher Lynn was elected as the new Public Relations Chair. Kathryn Olszowy and Samuel Urlacher were elected as new members on the Nominations and Elections Committee. Miller noted that next year, there will be a comparatively large number of positions to fill, including President-Elect, International Chair, 2 seats on the Nominations and Elections committee and two seats on the Publications committee. There were no questions. Dan Eisenberg moved to accept the report, Barbara Piperata seconded, and it was unanimously approved (Miller abstained).
Chris Kuzawa gave the report for the Publications Committee. The activities of the Publications Committee were limited to non-meetings activities this year, primarily reviewing and modifying the terms and procedures for nominating and awarding the HBA book award and awarding the inaugural winner. This year, the committee received three nominations; Maurizio Meloni was chosen to receive 2020 HBA book award for his 2016 book Political Biology . Some changes have been made to the award process, including changing the award to every other year, modifying the nomination deadline to June 1st, increasing the amount of the travel stipend, and allowing the recipient to give brief remarks at the award luncheon. Barbara Piperata asked if a member of the publications committee would be willing to write a review of the book. Kuzawa said that would be an excellent idea. Gary James moved to accept the report and Sue Johnston seconded. The report was unanimously approved (Kuzawa abstained).
Lisa Sattenspiel gave the AAAS liaison report. She reported on symposia of interest to the HBA membership at the February 2020 AAAS meetings. In addition, she reported on several initiatives from the AAAS affiliates meeting, where she represented the HBA. She reported on the activities of Section H, Anthropology, and encouraged HBA members to get involved, particularly through submitting symposia proposals. Cynthia Beall noted that the AAAS is revising the bylaws and structures and would be happy to hear ideas for actively involving affiliate organizations. She invited members to contact her for more details. Gary James motioned to accept the report and Sue Johnston seconded the motion. The motion was unanimously approved (Sattenspiel abstained).
Amanda Thompson gave a report as the Liaison to the Societies Consortium on Sexual Harassment. She reported that the HBA has participated in the quarterly activities of the Consortium, which included topics such as designing inclusive meetings, developing comprehensive meeting policies, and incident investigation and resolution. As of April 2020, the Consortium has developed draft policy guides on Ethics, Conduct and Harassment and Model Investigation, Resolution and Consequences. The HBA President and Societies Liaison have used these policies to draft preliminary code of ethics language that members agreed to at registration and will use these policies as guides for future revisions of the HBA Code of Ethics. Gary James moved to accept the report, Cynthia Beall seconded the report, and it was unanimously approved (Thompson abstained).
Alejandra Nuñez de la Mora proposed an item of new business. She proposed an organized response from the HBA on the impact of COVID-19 on fieldwork and career plans, particularly among our junior members. Catherine Panter-Brick mentioned that she would like to discuss the proposal with her going forward. Alex Brewis moved it to the Executive Committee for discussion at the next meeting.
The meeting adjourned at 6:43 p.m.

Section: 2 PLENARY SESSION AND RAYMOND PEARL MEMORIAL LECTURE

The planned plenary session, “The normal and the normative in human biology,” organized by Jennifer Cullin and Virginia Vitzthum, was cancelled this year, along with the rest of the scientific program due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This session will be rescheduled for the 46th Annual Meeting. The Raymond Pearl Memorial Speaker, Dr. Andrea Wiley, planned on a talk entitled “Biological Normalcy: A new way forward for biocultural analysis of human population variation.” This talk will also be rescheduled in 2021.

Section: 3 AWARDS LUNCHEON

The Awards Luncheon for the 45th Annual meeting was cancelled. This year, the Franz Boas Distinguished Achievement Award was awarded to Professor Carol Worthman of Emory University, and the Michael A. Little Early Career Award was awarded to Professors Zaneta Thayer of Dartmouth College and Lee Gettler of University of Notre Dame. Their awards will be conferred at a later date.
Due to the cancelation of the scientific program, this year there were no awardees for the Edward E. Hunt, Jr., Phyllis Eveleth, and Hilde Spielvogel Awards for outstanding graduate and undergraduate student presentations. However, the Executive Committee did award Student Travel Awards and International Travel Awards to members. Student Travel Awards were awarded to Mecca Burris (Indiana University), James Gibb (University of Toronto), Isa Godinez (UNC-Chapel Hill), Kayla Hurd (University of Notre Dame), and Amanda Rowlands (Simon Fraser University). International Awards were awarded to Isabel Escobar (Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla), Sarai Keestra (London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine), Hilton Pereira da Silva (Universidade Federal do Pará – UFPA), and Andrea Silva-Caballero (Durham University).
Thanks to the kindness of those members who donated their 2020 registrations, we are able to roll the planned funds to support the student travel awardee and student service appointees attendance at our next in person meetings. We also plan to do a further call for travel awards for that next meeting, so we can support more student and international attendees. For student members and junior service fellows who rotating off before 2021, one's years allocation of travel allowance will still be available. For those who serve in 2020 and 2021, we will provide up to double of the normal year's support to reimburse travel to the next in person meeting.

RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED,

Elizabeth M. Miller, Secretary, Human Biology Association.
