Title: Abstracts

Presenting authors are listed by last name in alphabetical order; sessions are indicated in bold at the top of abstract. The am poster session (P/AM) is from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. on Wednesday, April 15, 2020. The Plenary Session is from 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Wednesday, April 15, 2020; the Raymond Pearl Memorial Lecture is Wednesday at 5:15 p.m. A second poster session (P/PM) will be held during the HBA reception from 6:30-9:00. Contributed Podium presentations are on Thursday, April 16, 2020. Flash Talks (FT A, FT B) are on Friday, April 17, 2020.

Section: P/AM 1

Studies have shown that the cortisol awakening response (CAR) on a workday is greater than that on a non-workday, but it is unknown as to whether this difference is affected by familial risk for breast cancer (FR) among women. The purpose of the present study was to compare the CAR as assed by salivary cortisol samples collected on a work and non-workday between healthy FR+ (n = 85, age = 33.0 ± 7.4) and FH− (n = 134, age = 34.2 ± 7.8) premenopausal women. The women all worked a day shift and were studied in their luteal phase. Saliva samples were collected upon awakening and approximately 30 minutes afterward. Cortisol concentrations were determined using an enzyme immunoassay (Salimetrics, State College, PA, USA). CAR was calculated as the trapezoidal area under the curve. Both individual samples and the CAR were evaluated using repeated measures ANCOVA with FR included as a fixed factor. As prior studies have found that a variety of demographic characteristics are related to the CAR, they were included as covariates. The results show that there was no differences by FR in the CAR overall or by day. However, consistent with earlier studies, the CAR was higher on a workday than non-workday ( P = .025), as was the cortisol level 30 minutes after awakening ( P = .001). In addition, education level, ethnicity, and marital status were significant predictors of the CAR ( P < .05). Awakening levels were not different. These results confirm reported CAR findings and suggest that although earlier studies show that FR impacts cortisol levels during the day, the CAR is unaffected.
Supported in part by NIH/NCI Grants R01 CA129557 and P30 CA047904

Section: PLENARY

A bioarcheological perspective on meaningful measures and interpretations of bone strength, loss, and aging Bioarcheology (the study of archaeological human remains together with contextual and documentary evidence) offers a unique approach to examine variation in skeletal morphology related to influences such as activity, disease, and nutrition. As a dynamic tissue that is forged by biocultural factors over the entire life course, the human skeleton provides a record of individual and community history. Various aspects of adult bone health, particularly bone maintenance and fragility of bone tissue, and the associated skeletal disease, osteoporosis have been examined in numerous past populations. The focus of bone loss in the past has been on females as a “weaker sex” and interpretation has traditionally been on the signature of normative aging and diminished reproductive capabilities and fragility, contrasted against the male signature of bone strength. However, empirical research on bone maintenance and aging in the Medieval archaeological record, together with comparative historical data, will be presented that show that patterns of bone loss do not constitute predictable consequences of aging or biological sex. Instead, the critical examination of bioarcheological data highlights the complex and changing processes that craft the human body over the life course, and calls for us to question the ideal or “normal” range of bone quantity and quality in the human skeleton, and to critically reflect on what measures are actually biologically and/or socially meaningful. The a priori expectation of normative sex-related bone loss/fragility in bioanthropological studies illustrates the wider gender-ideological bias that continues in research design and data analysis in the field.

Section: P/AM 38

The brain consumes a large fraction of the body's energy budget, and developmental changes in brain energy needs drive trade-offs with functions like body growth. Although these trade-offs are an important influence on patterns of energy allocation, investigating the brain’s changing energy needs across development, and in relation to nutritional and other environmental factors, is limited by the costs and logistical challenges of current methods. Positron emission tomography (PET) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provide good measures of glucose uptake and cerebral blood flow (CBF) but are costly and require access to sophisticated imaging facilities. Here we explore Doppler ultrasound as a non-invasive, portable and field-friendly means of quantifying CBF—a strong correlate of cerebral glucose uptake—and compare CBF values in adults and in children who are near the age of the brain energetics peak. CBF was calculated as the sum of arterial blood flows through the left and right internal carotid arteries (ICA) and vertebral arteries (VA). In 10 Chicago-area adults, mean ICA values were 259.1 (SD 77.8), while mean VAs were 48.2 (SD 31.0) mL/min. Mean total blood flow was 614.6 (SD 151.8) mL/min. Using these data, and comparable values obtained in 4-7-year-old children, we will test the hypothesis that childhood CBF will be roughly double the adult mean. We conclude that Doppler ultrasound holds promise as a field-friendly method for measuring cerebral metabolism in studies of human development and life history

Section: P/AM 52

Infancy is a ‘critical period’ that may shape risk for obesity later in life. In Samoa, where 80% of the adult population are living with obesity, studying the infant period may inform etiology and prevention efforts. Ours is the first study to examine infant body composition and the CREBRF gene variant, rs373863828, which has the largest known effect on adult Body Mass Index (BMI). We genotyped n = 117 Samoan infants and measured body composition using Dual Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry (DXA) in a prospective longitudinal study from birth to 4 months of age. We found the CREBRF phenotype in infants appeared to be different to that seen in adults: there was no difference in BMI or fat mass between infants with and without the variant. After controlling for relevant covariates, infants with the variant did, however, have greater bone mass (4.1 ± 0.2g, P = 0.002) and lean mass (292.4 ± 10.2g, P = 0.013) at four months, and faster lean mass growth from birth to four months (176.8 ± 5.2g, P = 0.018) than infants without any copies of the variant. Our results suggest the adult ‘BMI-increasing' phenotype emerges sometime after four months. Additional research should validate our findings and in particular investigate lean and bone mass accretion as potential pathways to explain the seeming paradoxical ‘protective’ effect of the CREBRF variant against diabetes in adults, which currently has no mechanistic justification. With forthcoming data from this cohort at 18-24 months we will model infant growth and examine effects of CREBRF in greater detail.

Section: PODIUM B

The importance of early growth in predicting later health outcomes is becoming increasingly apparent. Early growth is influenced in part by infant feeding, and parents’ feeding decisions are often made in response to infants’ behaviors. Infant appetite behaviors represent an important domain for research, but the origins of appetite remain unclear. Appetite may be associated with infant milk feeding (e.g., giving infants breastmilk and/or formula) and influenced by hormones such as leptin, which is produced in adipose tissue and promotes satiety in adults. This project uses longitudinal data from 47 infants in North Carolina to answer: 1) are infant milk feeding and leptin associated with infant appetites, and 2) does leptin mediate associations between infant milk feeding and appetites? Infant milk feeding, appetite measures, and dried blood spots were collected at three time points. Dried blood spots were analyzed for circulating leptin. Multilevel regression tested associations between infant feeding, leptin, and appetites. Circulating leptin was not associated with timing of energy intake. Leptin did not mediate but did attenuate associations between breastfeeding intensity and lower satiety responsiveness. Leptin also attenuated positive associations between later initiation of solid foods and enjoyment of food ratings. Higher breastfeeding intensity was associated with lower food fussiness, and leptin was independently associated with lower enjoyment of food, food fussiness, and slow eating. These findings suggest that infant milk feeding is an important predictor of infant appetite behaviors. Furthermore, leptin may be implicated in the long-term rather than acute regulation of energy consumption in infants. This work is supported by: Fahs-Beck Fund for Research and Experimentation Dissertation Grant. National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship, Grant No. DGE-1144081.National Science Foundation Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant, Grant No. BCS 1650751. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Population Research Infrastructure Program, No. R24 HD050924.National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, Clinical and Translational Science Award Program, Grant No. 1ULTR001111. Triangle Center for Evolutionary Medicine Fellowship. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Population Research Infrastructure Program, Grant No. R24 HD050924.

Section: P/AM 19

Heritable traits provide the raw materials for natural selection. Identifying relationships among human traits, genotypes, reproduction, and survival requires considering multiple sources of variation. 1,006 post-reproductive Tibetan women residing above 3000m in Nepal provided this information in 2012. Two loci in the oxygen homeostasis pathway showed the largest estimated allele frequency changes since divergence from an ancestral Han population. EGLN1 encodes a cellular oxygen sensing protein. EPAS1 encodes a transcription factor that induces genes required for the response to hypoxia. EPAS1 associated with unelevated hemoglobin concentration, which associated with greater reproductive success after controlling for sociocultural influences. We report on a seven-year follow-up of 553 of those women residing above 3500m in Upper Mustang, Nepal. Fifty-six had died, 45 had moved away; 428 participated in 2019. Surviving women averaged 53 + 10 (SD) years at baseline compared with 64 + 10 (SD) years among non-survivors. Survivors and non-survivors did not differ in hemoglobin concentration measured in 2012 nor in EGLN1 allele frequencies. Three EPAS1 SNP sites showed significant ( P = 10 −2 -10 −3 corrected for multiple testing) allele frequency differences between survivors and non-survivors, although none associated strongly with hemoglobin concentration. Interpretation of these results is not straightforward; perhaps SNP sites affecting survival differ from those affecting hemoglobin concentrations. In contrast, married women and those with high Relative Wealth Rank ( P < 0.05 Chi-Squares) had higher reproductive success and higher chance of surviving. Studies of natural selection in people must incorporate sociocultural factors with comparatively large effects.
Supported by NSF Award 1831530 to CMB

Section: P/AM 22

Interbirth interval (IBI) likely reflects, in part, maternal investment. Longer IBI may be the product of greater investment in each individual child, while shorter IBI may indicate a “quantity” approach in the face of lower resources, whether monetary or somatic.
Generally, greater maternal height and increased maternal age are associated with longer IBI. Because greater height is an indicator of greater overall maternal health, and older maternal age is an indicator of reproductive senescence and increased birth risks, each may result in a higher maternal investment strategy. Additionally, IBI are often longer after male children.
In this study, we evaluated the extent to which IBI reflects maternal investment among 106 women in the relatively prosperous population of Kilimanjaro, Tanzania (N = 77 with a preceding interbirth interval for analyses). We employed adjusted Akaike information criterion (AIC) to identify the best fit linear regression model of maternal and child characteristics associated with IBI. Selected variables include those predicted by theories of maternal investment as described above.
We observed longer IBI among older mothers ( P = 0.0003) and after a male index child ( P = 0.006), as predicted. Greater maternal height, on the other hand, was associated with a shorter IBI ( P = 0.032). This result may reflect better health and faster recovery from pregnancy among taller mothers, rather than parental investment strategy.
These results add to our knowledge of the circumstances that influence interbirth interval length, which plays an important role in both maternal and child health.

Section: PODIUM C

Understanding variation in the prevalence and predictors of dehydration across ecologically diverse contexts provides insight regarding thermoregulatory and behavioral adaptations to varying degrees of water insecurity. The Water Insecurity, Stress, and Hydration (WISH) study measured hydration (urine specific gravity, USG), household water insecurity, heat index, and sociodemographics following the wet season among 133 Daasanach households (N = 219 adults ≥18 years, 102 children <18 years) in a water-scarce region of northern Kenya and 262 Tsimane' households (N = 410 adults ≥18 years, 230 children <18 years) in a water-rich region of lowland Bolivia. Despite 93.2% of Daasanach households reporting water insecurity, prevalence of dehydration (USG>1.020) was 17.4% and 33.3% among adults and children, respectively. By contrast, only 1.9% of Tsimane' households reported water insecurity, yet the prevalence of dehydration was 57.6% and 42.2% among adults and children. Logistic regression models clustering standard errors on households and adjusting for age, sex, and time of day suggested that BMI (kg/m 2 ) was positively associated with odds of dehydration among Daasanach adults (OR: 1.15; 95%CI: 1.04-1.27), whereas a 5-degree Fahrenheit increase in heat index was positively associated with odds of dehydration among Tsimane' adults (OR: 1.28; 95%CI: 1.10-1.51). Among children in both populations, time of day, but not BMI or heat index, was associated with increased odds of dehydration. Household-level water insecurity scores were not related to dehydration in either population. These findings suggest that distinct physiological, environmental, and lifestyle factors may interact to make some populations more vulnerable to dehydration regardless of water insecurity experiences.
Funding statement: This work was funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF ARCH #1624398; NSF REU #1930719) and a Pennsylvania State University Social Science Research Institute (SSRI) Human Health and Environment Seed Grant

Section: PODIUM D

Individuals that experience adverse childhood events have a higher lifetime risk of developing chronic diseases later in life, including cancer. Here we examine the effects of early life adversity between subtypes of estrogen receptor (ER) status breast cancer. While evolutionary mismatch hypothesis predicts ER positive breast cancer susceptibility, reproductive factors are not predictive of ER negative breast cancer. Using a life history framework, we hypothesize that early childhood adversity may calibrate the physiological systems towards accelerated reproduction at the expense of somatic maintenance, putting these women at a higher risk for ER- breast cancer. Population-wide data from the Utah Population Database (UPDB) and Utah Cancer Registry (UCR) are leveraged to test our hypothesis. Our cohort consists of 24,957 (n = 15,266 ER+; n = 4,281 ER−) cases of women diagnosed with breast cancer spanning 20 years (1990-2010) and 124,785 age-matched controls. Our data show patterns consistent with other studies where, where ER− breast cancer cases show an earlier age of diagnoses (median: 58 years ER−; 62 years ER+), poorer survival after diagnoses and an earlier age at death (median 70 years ER−; 79 years ER+). In support of our main hypothesis, we find a significant positive relationship between early life adversity scores and ER− diagnosis ( P = 0.003), but no relationship for overall breast cancer diagnosis ( P = 0.112). These data suggest that the effect of adverse childhood events varies across breast cancer subtypes, with measures related to a fast life history affecting a woman's risk for developing ER−, but not ER+, breast cancer.

Section: P/PM 1

Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is utilized for non-shivering thermogenesis as an adaptation to exposure to cold temperatures. Little is known about the effects of cold exposure during development or in recent times on amount of BAT activity. Accordingly, 15 students raised in Micronesia and attending the University of Hawaii at Hilo had their extremities exposed to a moderate cool water bath (17°C) for five minutes with infrared thermography taken before and after the exposure. Change in maximum temperature in the supraclavicular area relative to temperature change in a control area above the sternum was used as an estimate of BAT activity. Participants were queried about their exposure to ocean water during childhood and in the past year, as water exposure is the primary means by which cold is experienced in Micronesia and Hawaii; an index of frequency of exposure was created. There was no significant relation between estimated BAT activity and water exposure index during development (water exposure in childhood: β = 0.09, t = 0.3, ns), but there was a significant relation between estimated BAT activity and recent water exposure index in a backwards regression with water exposure, sex, BMI and age as predictor variables (recent water exposure: β = 0.84, t = 3.0, P = 0.01; sex: β = 0.60, t = 2.2, P = 0.05). Past year cold exposure appears to be a more important determinant of BAT activity than exposure during childhood, but the relatively warm ocean water temperatures in Micronesia may also have affected these results. Supported by: NIGMS R25GM113747.

Section: P/AM 23

Weaning and quality of weaning foods are important to health. WHO recommends exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months of life and breastfeeding until 2 years or beyond. In Vanautu, a lower-middle income country in the South Pacific, mean breastfeeding duration is 18.7 months, with exclusive breastfeeding until only 4.3 months. This difference may seem small, but 2 months can make a huge difference to infant health. Early introduction of solid foods is associated with increased risk of micronutrient deficiency, obesity, and infection. Both adult diets and weaning foods in Vanuatu are changing as more processed foods are available. Stable isotope analysis (carbon and nitrogen) of hair was paired with traditional survey/interview data to understand the effect of processed food on diet and weaning behavior for mother-infant pairs in the Vanuatu communities of urban Efate and rural Aneityum islands. Hair samples were collected between June-August 2017. A total of 45 mother infant pairs were included in the study (Efate: Mothers n = 21, Children n = 22; Aneityum: Mothers and children n = 24). Initial results show that children at both sites have slightly enriched average δ 15 N values (Efate 9.67‰; Aneityum 9.99‰) compared to mothers (Efate 8.59‰, Aneityum 8.54‰). All individuals show enriched δ 13 C values with only a slight enrichment in samples from Efate. The individual δ 15 N patterns in most children indicate a maintained level of mixed feeding (breastmilk and solid foods) regardless of place of residence, while some patterns may indicate weaning. Serial samples of mother’s hair indicate a stable diet from month to month.

Section: P/AM 24

Chronic inflammation has been implicated in cardiovascular and metabolic disease and is hypothesized to be a developmental mechanism linking early life conditions to adult health and disease. Inflammation dysregulation during pregnancy has additionally been associated with adverse birth outcomes in select, high-income countries. To clarify how these associations may shape health inequalities across generations, we investigated socioeconomic differences in inflammation during pregnancy using data from the Cebu Longitudinal Health Nutrition Survey, conducted in the Philippines (1983-present). Our sample included 344 women, with 457 pregnancies, between 2009 and 2014. We used linear regression to evaluate predictors of inflammation during the third trimester of pregnancy. Independent variables included level of education and income during pregnancy and we also controlled for confounding maternal and pregnancy characteristics. Final models will include C-reactive protein (CRP), cytokines IL6 and IL10, and the IL6:IL10 ratio, measured in dried blood samples. Education (β = −0.039, SE = 0.012, P < 0.001) and income (β = −0.15, SE = 0.004, P < 0.00) were inversely associated with IL6. Associations with education were attenuated in fully adjusted multivariate models (β = −0.021, SE = 0.014, P < 0.155), but remained significant for income (β = −0.011, SE = 0.005, P < 0.02). These findings highlight the potential importance of socioeconomic factors to the regulation of inflammation during pregnancy and suggest that inflammation may be an important mechanism for the intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic disparities in health.

Section: PODIUM D

Children's health and development remain understudied in several parts of the United States, with many children in rural and low socioeconomic status regions experiencing inadequate nutrition, stunted growth, obesity, and exposure to infectious diseases. The present study is part of an ongoing research project exploring relationships between rural lifestyles, infectious and chronic disease burden, and growth/health among children in communities in the American south. Preliminary data collection in rural Mississippi in 2019 yielded finger-prick blood samples, family interviews, and anthropometric measurements for 32 children (ages 3-15 years) from 17 families. Twenty children returned stool samples for intestinal inflammation analysis. 53% of families sampled reported incomes of <$10,000 per year, with 71% making <$20,000 per year. Preliminary analyses of stool samples for fecal calprotectin (FC), a measure of intestinal inflammation, documented clinically elevated levels (FC > 50 ug/g) in 18 children (90%). The prevalence of elevated FC in this sample is higher than in previous studies of otherwise healthy children around the world, which range from 5% to 23%. Intestinal inflammation was not related to age. The local nurse practitioner reported a high prevalence of active Helicobacter pylori infection, an often-inflammatory bacterial infection of the digestive tract, among children in this community. Further analyses test relationships between FC, biomarkers of inflammation (Interleukin-6, C-reactive protein) and adaptive immune responses to macroparasitic and bacterial/viral infections (Immunoglobulin E and G), and lifestyle factors related to pathogen exposure in order to understand what may be contributing to elevated inflammation among children in this rural community.
Support: Boettcher Foundation's Webb-Waring Biomedical Research Grant; Dartmouth College McKennan Postdoctoral Fellowship

Section: P/AM 28

Exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals is ubiquitous in the United States. These endocrine disrupting chemicals have a wide range of health consequences, largely due to their ability to mimic or block endogenous hormones such as estrogen. Given the scarcity of information on the impact of endocrine disrupting chemicals on fertility in nationally representative samples, we aimed to investigate whether exposure to certain endocrine disrupting chemicals is associated with lifetime fertility using data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). We extracted a sample of 189 adult women after excluding pregnant women and those with incomplete data. We examined data on urinary phthalates and plasticizer metabolites, serum perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), personal care and consumer product metabolites, urinary estradiol, and biologically relevant confounders. We used multiple linear regression to predict lifetime fertility, and our model included four statistically significant variables: BMI, sum PFAS score, age, and education ( P < 0.001, adj. R-squared 0.14). In our secondary analysis, we investigated the influence of specific PFAS metabolites on fertility. After controlling for confounders, the only PFAS chemical that was statistically significant was n-perfluorooctanoic acid. We found that greater exposure to PFAS predicts lower fertility in this sample, which suggests that exposure to PFAS may affect the lifetime fertility of adult women in the United States. These results shed light on the influence of endocrine disrupting chemicals on human reproduction.

Section: P/AM 25

From an evolutionary perspective, the ability for the female reproductive axis to influence immune function is crucial for reproductive success, both to optimize energy allocation and utilize immunological tools for reproductive function (inflammation, self-tolerance, etc). Previous studies of female reproductive hormones and immune function have produced contradictory results due to differences in experimental controls or menstrual phases. We compared the effect of menstrual phase (follicular, luteal, or hormonal contraceptive) on immune profiles (morning white blood cell (WBC), granulocyte and lymphocyte count) between two populations with different disease ecologies and baseline immune function (Honduran women [n = 82] and US women [n = 828]) controlling for age and BMI. Compared to US women in their follicular phase, luteal phase and contraceptive use were associated with lower WBC counts (B = −0.05, P = 0.07; B = −0.06, P = 0.05). The opposite effect was observed in Hondurans where luteal phase and contraceptive use were associated with higher WBC counts (Interaction effects: B = 0.22, P = 0.05; B = 0.27, P = 0.01). A similar pattern was observed for granulocyte cell counts in the US, where luteal phase and contracepting women had lower counts (B = −0.06, P = 0.08; B = −0.06, P = 0.08), while Honduran women in the luteal phase or on contraception had higher counts (Interaction effects: B = 0.40, P < 0.001; B = 0.43, P < 0.001) than follicular phase women. This pattern was not observed for lymphocyte cell counts. Overall, these results indicate that the effect of menstrual phase and hormonal contraceptive use on immune profiles vary across populations, suggesting that immune ecology impacts the relationship between the female reproductive and immune systems.

Section: P/AM 2

After WWII, cases of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinsonism-dementia (PD) were prevalent on Guam at a rate of 40-50 times that of the worldwide average. While the cause of high prevalence and eventual decline of both diseases on Guam are unknown, Guamanian ALS patients sometimes lived an unusually long time (up to 20+ years) without respirators or medical treatment. C-reactive protein (CRP), a biomarker of inflammation associated with multiple chronic diseases, is associated with disease severity in sporadic ALS; in clinical trials, drug-induced CRP suppression reduced disease severity and slowed disease progression in ALS patients. The purpose of this study was to evaluate serum C-reactive protein (CRP) as a risk factor for Guamanian ALS and PD. Serum CRP concentrations were estimated in cases for whom pre-diagnosis specimens were archived, and two controls matched for age, sex and region, both pre- and post-diagnosis (n = 21) via CRP enzyme immunoassay. Median CRP was higher in pre-onset and post-onset cases vs. controls for ALS and PD. Overall, there was no significant difference in CRP between cases and controls or between pre and post- cases for either ALS or PD. Results suggest that there may be variability in CRP production in different immunological settings. Negligible change in CRP may also be related to longer lifespan in Guamanian ALS patients. In pre-1980 Guam, inflammation may have been better controlled overall due to higher burden of infectious diseases and exposure to "old friends" (low pathogenicity infectious agent and commensal microbes) relative to the modern environment.

Section: PODIUM B

With high adult obesity and related noncommunicable disease prevalence, the moderate burden of child malnutrition is often overlooked in Samoa. Understanding the predictors of malnutrition is essential to intervene. In prior cross-sectional analyses focused on the role of urbanicity in health, we identified individual-and household-level factors associated with overweight/obesity, stunting, and anemia status at age 2-4 years. Building off this work, we used modified Poisson models to assess whether the same factors predict malnutrition risk at a later age in childhood. Children from the Ola Tuputupua'e study (n = 256) with complete assessments in 2015(2-4 years) and 2017-2018 (3.5-8 years) were included. Overweight/obesity and stunting were classified using WHO Z-scores for body mass index (BMIZ>+2 for under 5 and >+1 for 5-8 years), and height-for-age(HAZ<-2SD) respectively. Anemia was defined as a hemoglobin concentration <110g/L for under 5 and <115g/L at 5-8 years. At age 3.5-8 years, 25.8% of children were overweight/obese, 22.7% stunted, and 27.7% anemic. Household socioeconomic resources in 2015 was a weak predictor of overweight/obesity risk (adjusted-RR for highest vs. lowest: 0.6, 95%CI:0.3-1.2), despite a positive association with overweight/obesity at 2-4 years. Children in urban households had higher overweight/obesity risk than those in the rural households, despite no association at 2-4 years. No predictors of stunting and anemia risk were identified except for the presence of the same condition at 2-4 years. Differences between cross-sectional associations and the prospective findings highlight the importance of longitudinal data to identify malnutrition intervention targets in children, but the paucity of predictors suggests additional data should be collected.
Funding: The Ola Tuputupua'e study has been/is supported by funds from Yale School of Public Health (Faculty Funding, David Dull Internship Fund, Jan A.J. Stolwijk Fellowship Fund, Yale Downs International Health Student Travel Fellowship, Thomas C. Barry Travel Fellowship), National Institutes of Health Minority and Health Disparities International Research Training Program, U.S. Fulbright Graduate Student Research Fellowship, Brown University School of Public Health (International Health Institute and Nora Kahn Piore Award), and Brown University Population Studies and Training Center which receives funding from the NIH, for training (T32 HD007338) and general support (P2C HD041020). CCC is currently supported by Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award Individual Predoctoral Fellowship (NIH 1F31HL147414-01), the Fogarty Global Health Equity Scholar Program (FIC D43TW010540).

Section: P/AM 40

Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte initiated a controversial anti-drug campaign in 2016 that includes extra-judicial killings of suspected drug users and drug dealers. By increasing perceived mortality risks, this policy affords an opportunity to study how such risks, in conjunction with poverty, adversely affect a variety of attitudinal, psychological and health-related outcomes. Life History Theory (LHT) explains individual differences by positing mortality risk and resource availability as independent variables, to which coordinated developmental, physiological, and psychological systems adjust over the lifespan. The current study aims to investigate maternal exposure to several kinds of ecological stressors and their effects on (1) maternal psychology and (2) birth outcomes (e.g., birthweight). Pregnant Filipina women (N = 62) provided self-report data on their early environment, attitudes toward the administration, psychology (e.g., future safety, anxiety), and birth outcomes. Results revealed that mortality risk is positively associated with future safety and positive birth outcomes, in line with LHT. Negative attitudes toward the Duterte administration but not early life environment was related to higher pregnancy-related anxiety. Preliminary results suggest that perceptions of mortality risk influences cognition and developmental trajectories in adaptive ways, which has implications for fetal programming. Research is on-going to determine biological underpinnings that might be mediating these relationships.

Section: P/AM 3

Physical activity and diet are factors that have been shown to mitigate the impacts of cardiometabolic disease (CMD) risk in adult populations while sustained levels psychosocial stress have been shown to worsen the impacts of CMD. Inflammation is a possible pathway through which these lifestyle and behavioral factors impact CMD risk. This poses an alarming issue for populations that are predisposed to higher levels of sustained psychosocial stress – college students. This study seeks to define the most prominent factors interlinking diet, psychosocial stress, inflammation, and physical activity as it pertains to CMD risk in college students. Data collection processes included the use of questionnaires, monitoring biometric devices (heart rate and physical activity), and biomarkers of stress (cortisol) and inflammation (C-Reactive Protein and Adiponectin). These methods were used to (1) examine the relationship between lifestyle factors and CMD risk, (2) assess the ability of physical activity to mitigate the effects of psychosocial stress and subsequent inflammation, and (3) explore how dietary practices may underlie the quantitative data surrounding stress, physical activity and CMD risk. Data was collected on 21 UNC Chapel Hill undergraduates. Findings suggest that a diet deviating from the Western diet in conjunction with increased physical activity can be correlated with decreased CMD risk based on inflammatory profiles generated from anthropometric data and CRP levels. These results support the combination of dietary and physical activity interventions for reducing inflammation and down regulating the negative impacts of psychosocial stress on CMD risk in college students.

Section: P/PM 10

Despite widespread interest in maternal-infant co-sleeping, few quantified data on sleep patterns outside of the cultural west exist. Here, we provide the first report on co-sleeping behavior and maternal sleep quality among habitually co-sleeping hunter-gatherers. Data were collected among the Hadza of Tanzania who live in domiciles constructed of grass huts with no access to synthetic lighting or climate-controlled sleeping environments. Using interview data, we recorded baseline ethnographic data on co-sleeping. Using actigraph data, we tested whether sleep quality, sleep-wake activity, and/or sleep duration differs between breastfeeding women, non-breastfeeding women, and men. CamNtech Motionwatch 8 actigraphs were used to collect one minute, epoch-by-epoch data on a sample of 33 adults. Functional linear modeling (FLM) was used to characterize sleep-wake patterns and a linear mixed-effects model was used to assess factors that drive sleep duration and quality. The FLM suggests that breastfeeding mothers were early risers and had reduced day-time activity. Additionally, total number of co-sleepers, not breastfeeding, was associated with less sleep duration and quality, suggesting that greater number of co-sleepers may be a primary driver of poorer sleep. The current study makes important contributions to the cross-cultural literature on sleep and augments our understanding of maternal-infant co-sleeping. The majority of Hadza participants co-sleep with at least one other individual and the majority of married couples sleep with their spouse and their children on the same sleeping surface. Our preliminary sleep quality data suggest that breastfeeding does not negatively impact maternal sleep quality.

Section: PLENARY

Body fat is an often highly visible aspect of human biological variation both within and between populations. The observable phenotype of a body with a high proportion of fat has been and continues to be evaluated largely in a cultural context, where it may be viewed as either positive or negative, depending on place, time, and localized histories. In the U.S., average weight and fat stigma have both been on the rise over the past several decades. Those in the “overweight” and “obese” BMI categories are largely assumed to be in worse health compared to those in the “normal” BMI category, and responsibility for poorer health outcomes is often placed on the individual. This paper discusses the relationships between normative views and statistical norms relating to body weight using a case study of adolescents and young adults in Indiana. This work exposes var iation in implicit fat bias between two populations varying by obesity prevalence, suggesting that observations of body fat in a population may influence perceptions of what a “good” or “bad” level of body fat should be. Biomarker, questionnaire, and ethnographic interview data are discussed to flesh out relationships between obesity prevalence, perceived weight stigma, and allostatic load to understand how perceptions and normative views relate to fat stigma and the subsequent distribution of health outcomes in a population.

Section: P/AM 17

C-reactive protein (CRP) is a biomarker, detectable in blood, that increases in concentration in response to inflammation. Elevated CRP levels are associated with acute and chronic illnesses due to stimulation of the immune system. Biomarkers, including CRP, may be useful tools to understand the health and prevalent diseases of populations from the recent past. However, sera specimens are often kept frozen for extended periods of time. The effect of this long-term storage on CRP is unknown. To validate the reliable assessment of serum CRP concentrations in specimens kept in long-term storage, sera collected from 20 healthy individuals were subjected to 50 freeze-thaw cycles (FTC), with aliquots taken at 2 (baseline), 10, 25, and 50 FTC. CRP concentrations were measured for each aliquot via in-house CRP enzyme immunoassay to test for potential degradation of CRP. CRP concentrations remained stable across 50 FTC. Post hoc tests using RMANOVA ( P > 0.05) concluded significantly similar values with continued FTC, and the Spearman’s Rank Order Correlation ( P ≤ 0.05) remained constant across 50 FTC. These results suggest that archived sera specimens are reliable for estimating CRP concentrations at the time of the specimen’s collection, and variation in CRP concentrations can be attributed to individual differences, rather than biomarker degradation within the sera. This study opens up opportunities for CRP research with frozen archived human sera, potentially providing researchers with a glimpse of CRP levels and immune function in populations of the recent past.

Section: P/AM 42

Humans have long idealized fat bodies as symbols of beauty, fertility and health. However, the Westernization of the developing world, alongside the nutritional transition, has led to widespread adoption of Western thin-idealism and simultaneous increasing obesity prevalence. The Qom of Argentina are an indigenous group undergoing a nutritional transition and an epidemic of obesity. We hypothesized that this situation is accompanied by changes in perception of the healthy body and we predicted that there would be gender and generational differences in health-related cultural domains. We asked Qom adults (n = 273) residing in Namqom, Argentina to choose what they perceived as the healthiest body size from the Stunkard Figure Rating Scale (FRS). We performed multiple linear regression with age, gender, BMI and an age*BMI interaction effect predicting FRS score. A majority (66%) of women chose overweight bodies as healthiest, while a majority (69%) of men chose normal or underweight bodies as the healthiest. Among women, age was a statistically significant predictor of FRS score when controlling for BMI and an age*BMI interaction (β = 0.136, P = 0.001). In men, neither age nor BMI predicted FRS score. The Qom exhibit complex perceptions of the healthy body that differ by gender and age. Qom women exhibit the adoption of Western thin idealism alongside traditional perceptions that large bodies are healthy, as evidenced by older women preferring heavier bodies compared to their younger peers. This evidence shows that the nutritional transition is accompanied by growing Western thin idealism, which may impact women more than men.

Section: P/AM 45

Taekwondo is a combat sport very popular in Mexico. To record anthropometric characteristics and to evaluate somatotype of young male taekwondo athletes from Merida, Mexico and to compare with other studies from Mexico and abroad. A cross-sectional study was carried out in the month of July 2019 among 28 young adult male taekwondo athletes from the Sports Institute of Yucatan who participated in the national and international level championships in the recent years. The athletes in the welterweight category (68 to 80 kg) were selected. Anthropometric measurements were recorded following International Society for the Advancement of Kinanthropometry (ISAK) guideline. Height, weight, skinfolds (biceps, triceps, subscapular, iliac crest, supraspinale, and medial calf), girths (flexed and relaxed mid-upper arm, calf) and breadths (bi-epicondylar humerus and femur) were recorded. Body fat (%), height-weight-ratio, and somatotype (endomorphy, mesomorphy, ectomorphy) were calculated. Mean values (standard deviation) of age, body weight and height were 24.13 (5.60) years, 72.36 (9.52) kg, and 172.95 (6.03) cm respectively. Height-weight-ratio and body fat (%) were 41.68 and 12.6%. The taekwondo athletes were endomorphic mesomorph and mean values of somatotype were 3.17 (1.19) – 5.16 (1.18) – 2.01 (1.04) (endomorphy – mesomorphy - ectomorphy). In comparison with reported data from the USA and other Latin American countries, the taekwondo athletes from Yucatan show higher endomorphy, mesomorphy, and lower ectomorphy.
Keywords: Taekwondo, endomorphy, mesomorphy, ectomorphy, body fat.

Section: P/AM 60

The underlying proximate mechanism behind aging has remained elusive despite much research into the topic. The free-radical theory of aging, by which oxidative damage reduces DNA and protein integrity, has long been a leading theory, however many studies have not supported its predictions. A more recently proposed and not widely discussed of tested theory, the hyperfunction theory of aging, aligns more closely with evolutionary mechanisms, such as pleiotropic antagonism and life history tradeoffs. This paper considers whether hyperfunction, and not decline/atrophy, combined with a limit on cellular replication due to DNA and cancer risk, is the main cause of aging and age-related conditions. A highly conserved cellular mechanisms, the mTOR signaling pathway, is activated by nutrients, growth factors, and reproductive signaling molecules and drives this cellular hyper functionality. Previously identified energetic life history tradeoffs can be reconceptualized based on the molecular limitations to pathway activation that combine growth, reproduction, and metabolism while opposing cellular maintenance mechanisms. Further, mutational load can be calculated as the basis for cancer risk, and the limit this imposes on cell division can be inferred. These equations can then be combined with the rate of glucose metabolism (a proxy for mTOR pathway activation) to better understand the cellular mechanisms that underlie both aging and life history theory.

Section: P/AM 39

The settlement of the Pacific Islands occurred in two major waves - first in Near Oceania ~40-60 KYA with non-Austronesian speaking populations and second in both Near and Remote Oceania ~3.5 KYA with Austronesian speaking populations. Genetic studies of these populations shown there are distinct mitochondrial and Y-chromosome lineages associated with each of these settlements and have found there are positive correlations between language spoken and genetic distance. Haplogroups P, Q, and M as well as haplogroup M as the dominant lineages for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and the Y-chromosome respectively for non-Austronesian speaking populations while haplogroups B and O for mtDNA and the Y-chromosome respectively are dominant in Austronesian speaking populations. This study expanded on previous works in Near Oceania by focusing on non-Austronesian and Austronesian speakers from the islands of Bougainville (n = 229) and New Britain (NB) (n = 195) with a total of 14 microsatellite markers and 17 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), providing a high-resolution Y-chromosome analysis of Bougainville and NB. Preliminary analysis using the markers DYS19, DYS388, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392, and DYS393 shows haplogroup R1b is the dominant lineage for both non-Austronesian and Austronesian speakers in Bougainville and NB. Further analysis using markers DYS385a&b, DYS389I&IIDYS437, DYS438, DYS439, and DYS448 and the SNPs M4, M9, M16, M38, M69, M74, M89, M130, M170, M175, M177, M214, M226, M254, P78, P79, and P117 is expected to result in these samples being reclassified into haplogroups O and M. This study aims to better assess genetic variation of these populations by adding these markers.

Section: PODIUM A

Environmental toxicants precipitate approximately 9 million premature deaths every year, far outstripping infectious diseases such as malaria, HIV, and Tuberculosis. Relatively few studies document household air pollution in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) with a focus on linking exposures, behaviors, and biological mechanisms related to disease. This study’s goal is both to measure household and personal exposure to airborne toxicants in Eastern Zambia and determine what behaviors and beliefs modify exposure profiles. This cross-sectional study compares two populations based on household fuel use; one population utilizing mixed electric/charcoal and a second using exclusively charcoal/wood. Airborne toxicants measured were polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and fine particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5). Individual and household exposures were assessed using three different methods (1) passive air sampling in the home to measure PAHs (2) active air quality monitor measuring PM (3) and urinary analysis to measure PAH metabolites. This allows to assess both what is in the immediate home environment and what participants were inhaling. Both groups were exposed to significantly elevated levels of airborne toxicants, particularly the charcoal/wood exclusive group. On average, women in the charcoal/wood group were exposed to significantly more PM10 & PM2.5 than the electric/charcoal group, though both were above WHO recommendations (maximum safe levels are 50 and 25 μg/m3 respectively for a 24-hour average). PAH levels in the home, and urinary metabolites, show significant intragroup variation. This suggests specific behaviors associated with cooking alter exposure profiles despite differences in fuel availability and factors such as income, education, home size, etc.

Section: PODIUM A

Recent research suggests that the intestinal microbiome plays a key role in iron absorption. While studies have demonstrated differences in gut microbiota composition between anemic and non-anemic children and associations between systemic inflammation (assessed by C-reactive protein [CRP]) and child nonresponse to iron supplementation, there has been limited exploration of the role of gut microbiota in the ability to recover from childhood anemia. This study explores the gut microbiome as a hypothesized predictor of response to iron supplementation in 50 anemic Peruvian pre-school-aged children, aged 2-5 years. Average hemoglobin (Hb) at the beginning of the study was 10.0 g/dL (SD: 0.67). After one month of treatment with ferrous iron sulfate syrup, 50% of participants responded to supplementation (Hb>11.0g/dL). Baseline diversity and taxa did not differ between children who responded to iron supplementation and those who did not (Wilcoxon Test, W = 340, P = 0.60). While CRP was not associated with response to supplementation (OR: 0.93, 95%CI: 0.54-1.62), children with higher CRP had lower microbiota diversity, with higher proportions of Clostridia. These bacteria are associated with gut barrier function, suggesting that alterations in the gut microbiota associated with immune activation may impact gut health and metabolism. This analysis highlights the importance of examining intestinal microbiota when investigating risk and resilience to anemia in children.

Section: P/AM 66

Six Nations of the Grand River (SN) is the largest First Nation reserve in Canada, located in the densely populated urban region of southern Ontario. Despite a community-operated water treatment plant, 90% of households are not connected to the plant’s water lines and many do not have access to clean, potable water. Water security has impacted wellbeing for residents, though little is known about the severity of health issues related to contaminated water. Our interdisciplinary project, Co-Creation of Indigenous Water Quality Tools, sought to (1) document the prevalence of water security among SN households; and (2) describe the consequences of water insecurity for both day-to-day use and physical and cultural well-being. A co-created health survey with SN Health Services was used to connect water security and use with self-reported health (n = 77), and interviews were conducted (n = 20) on Indigenous Knowledge of connections between water and human health. The Household Water Insecurity Experience (HWISE) questionnaire within the health survey found 58% of the 40 households reported experiencing water insecurity. Individual interviews with household heads revealed 3 primary themes: psychosocial burdens of having to buy bottled water in bulk, distrust of water from the treatment plant, and reduced capacity to engage in traditional medicine making and consumption, ultimately impacting physical and cultural wellbeing. This presentation will evaluate how mixed methods can be used to develop more culturally appropriate measures of health for Indigenous Peoples and suggest ways to incorporate cultural livelihood, spiritual beliefs, and environmental dispossession in health and water security assessments.

Section: P/AM 46

Ponderal index (PI; weight/length 3 ) provides a measure of infants' adiposity (or leanness). It is used to identify impaired fetal growth in newborns and is a measure of soft tissue growth across infancy. Life history theory suggests infant PI is likely to be associated with better maternal health and high maternal investment during pregnancy and infancy. We evaluated PI (range: 15.9-35.4) among 103 mother-infant dyads in Kilimanjaro, Tanzania and assessed predictors of PI with multivariate linear regression. PI decreased with infant age (B: -0.43; P : 0.000), reflecting proportionately greater growth in length after 6 months. PI was also inversely associated with birthweight (B: -1.17; P : 0.007), suggesting that smaller newborns remained smaller throughout their first year of life. PI was inversely associated with maternal age (B:-0.10; P : 0.086), and the inter-birth interval preceding the birth of the participating infant (B:-0.00099; P : 0.033). Unexpectedly, PI increased with the mother's total number of pregnancies (B: 0.85; P : 0.012). There were no associations between PI and indicators of family wealth, infant’s diet, or sex. These findings may point to maternal investment during pregnancy, rather than postpartum factors, as the most important predictors of PI. These results are consistent with greater canalization of growth in utero rather during infancy. This may explain how maternal investment during pregnancy affects a child’s lifelong health, as lower birthweight and PI have been shown to increase risk of developing cardiovascular disease and diabetes in adulthood.

Section: P/AM 62

Despite the inaccuracies that can plague such data, self-reported health (SRH) is associated with variables such as healthcare utilization and can even predict mortality risk. Biomarkers also predict health risks and it has been suggested measuring them alongside SRH strengthens health outcome predictions. Our objective was to investigate relationships between SRH and multiple neuroendocrine, cardiovascular, and metabolic biomarkers. We measured 14 biomarkers in a sample of elderly Kuwaiti (aged 60-94 years, = 67.96, SD = 7.23, n = 252) who reported their health as “excellent,” “very good,” “average/normal,” or “weak.” Depending on biomarker distributions, each was analyzed using either linear regression or generalized linear mixed effect models with a gamma distribution and log-link, with age, sex, education, and smoking status included as fixed effects. Those reporting poor health had significantly higher cortisol (Β = 2.784, SE = 0.389 , P < 0.0001), DHEA-S (Β = 2.364, SE = 0.483 , P < 0.0001), epinephrine (Β = 3.198, SE = 0.352 , P < 0.0001), norepinephrine (Β = 312.709, SE = 106.610, P = 0.004), SBP (Β = 115.582, SE = 7.948, P < 0.0001), DBP (Β = 92.892, SE = 6.608, P < 0.0001), resting pulse rate (Β = 0.030, SE = 0.849 , P < 0.0001), HbA1c (Β = 1.810, SE = 0.221 , P < 0.0001), WHR (Β = 0.970, SE = 0.078, P < 0.0001), LDL (Β = 1.480, SE = 0.269 , P < 0.0001), HDL (Β = 0.856, SE = 0.218, P = 0.0001), and cholesterol (Β = 1.805, SE = 0.171, P < 0.0001), while those reporting very good or excellent health had significantly lower cortisol (Β = −0.442, SE = 0.200 , P = 0.028), SBP (Β = −10.385, SE = 3.995, P = 0.010), DBP (Β = −6.908, SE = 3.321, P < 0.039), HbA1c (Β = −0.086, SE = 0.042 , P = 0.041), and LDL (Β = 0.299, SE = 0.135 , P = 0.028). Results show SRH and physiological dysregulation are closely linked, although directionality is unknown. Such research is critical to better understanding how intangibles such as perception shape our biology and health.

Section: P/AM 68

Untreated tooth decay (UTD) is the most widespread chronic condition and childhood disease, affecting 60-90% of schoolchildren as well as the vast majority of adults worldwide. Dental caries disproportionally affects low income groups and is often accompanied by acute comorbidities; it frequently causes pain, difficulties in eating and sleeping, has negative impacts on nutrition, growth, and school attendance, and significantly impacts the quality of life, social interactions and general health throughout life. In countries such as Mexico, where the intake of added sugars (mostly in the form of soft drinks) corresponds to 12.5% of daily total caloric intake, UTD affects about 95% of children < 8 years of age and 99% of adults. Other dietary practices such as frequent fasting, meal skipping, and low dietary diversity have been found to be associated with dental caries. The aim of this study was to determine the dietary, behavioral and sociodemographic factors associated with UTD in a population of primary school children living in a poor rural setting in Veracruz, Mexico. Dental examinations, sociodemographic questionnaires, anthropometric measurements and 24-hour dietary recalls were conducted in 76 children (6-14 yrs old). Caries prevalence was used to calculate the DMFT score and significant caries index (SiC) following WHO criteria. Results show a very high prevalence of UTD (Mean DMFT = 10.96 (0-18); SiC = 14.56) with the largest component of DMFT being decayed teeth and the smallest one, filled teeth. The association of UTD with other sociodemographic, maternal, nutritional and dietary diversity variables are discussed.
Funded by CONACyT Mexico (PN2014-No.246999)

Section: P/AM 29

Disruptions to traditional food environments Alaska Native people have experienced in recent decades has contributed to rising rates of obesity not only among adults, but among children as well. Although reduced consumption of nutrient-dense, protein-rich traditional foods, including salmon, moose, and berries are important predictors of adult weight gain, less is known about the effects of these changes on excess weight gain in infancy and early childhood. This study uses interview data from Alaska Native mothers to examine how infant diet and breastfeeding patterns impact early growth trajectories (weight-for-age z-scores (WAZ)) of Alaska Native children (n = 146) between 6 months and 7 years. More than half (54.1%) and 27.4% of children had eaten traditional foods once or more than once in the past week, respectively. In addition, more than half (51.4%) of children were primarily breastfed, meaning that the majority of their feedings consisted of breastmilk before 3 months old (range: 3-72 months). Combined or separated by age categories, there was no significant difference in WAZ between children who had eaten subsistence foods and those who had not ( t -test, P > 0.25). However, primarily breastfed children were approximately 0.5 SD below the group average with marginal significance ( P = 0.06). While further research is needed on the impacts of traditional foods on early weight gain, these analyses demonstrate that breastfeeding may protect against obesity in infancy among Alaska Native children, with effects that could persist into adulthood. This research was funded by an NSF GRFP, NSF DDRIG #1613340, and Wenner Gren. Dissertation Fieldwork Grant #9148.

Section: FT A

Understanding how the process of human evolution continues to affect the health of contemporary populations represents a significant area of research within human biology. Human adaptations offering an advantage at one time, or in a specific environment, may also bring with them trade-offs or unexpected consequences. This project investigates the role of mitochondrial (mtDNA) variation in human climate adaptation by focusing on mitochondrial metabolism and its association with disease risk. Different mtDNA lineages vary in the extent of energy production and efficiency and thus the amounts of damaging reaction oxygen species created by this process. As such, different lineages may have variable thresholds for development of diseases associated with mitochondrial damage, such as cancer. Through analysis of human papillomavirus (HPV) types and mtDNA sequences, we are assessing whether mtDNA lineages confer increased risk or increased protection against progression toward cervical cancer in women infected with HPV. Focusing on women from the Philadelphia area who are HPV positive, we are examining the cytological presence of cervical lesions in HPV positive cases with mtDNA haplogroup status to assess whether specific mitochondrial backgrounds confer a higher susceptibility to cervical cancer dysplasia after infection with high-risk HPV types. Overall, this study will show whether metabolic distinctions associated with mtDNA variants shaped by climatic adaptation play a role in the susceptibility to cervical cancer development. In doing so, it will reveal the role of human evolution and adaptation in shaping contemporary disease patterns and provide insights into possible intervention opportunities.

Section: P/AM 26

Malnutrition may impair maternal health, but evolution may have produced buffered milk nutrients. Human milk production evolved to buffer milk nutrients against the impact of maternal malnutrition. Buffering may vary by evolutionary novelty of nutritional stress; milk may be well-buffered against routine malnutrition such as energy shortfalls, but less against novel malnutrition such as deficiency in one or more of specific nutrients. Buffering may also be stronger for vulnerable infants. We tested this hypothesis using archived cross-sectional data from Ariaal mothers in northern Kenya. Regression models for select milk nutrient contents evaluated the effect of chronic energy deficiency (CED), micronutrient deficiency (MND), CED and MND (CED&MND), infant age, and the interaction between infant age and each malnutrition. MND was defined as deficiency in iron, vitamin A, vitamin B9, and/or vitamin B12. All malnutrition categories predicted lower fat, but only MND was significant (standardized coefficient Beta = −.018, P = .032). Infant age was a positive predictor (Beta = .369, P < 0.001), and it interacted with MND (Beta = −.227, P = .007) and CED&MND (Beta = −.186, P = .015). These interactions were such that among MND and CED&MND mothers milk fat concentrations decreased as infant age advanced, while among replete mothers milk fat concentrations increased as infant age advanced. These results suggest that human milk fat may be buffered against the effect of maternal CED but not against the impact of maternal MND, particularly for older infants.
Support: National Science Foundation (BCS-0622358, BCS-1638167); Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research (Gr. 7460, Gr. 9278).

Section: FT A

Many life histories features, including immune function, are calibrated according to localized ecological and physiological demands. Because altered immune function underlies a wide range of diseases (cardiometabolic/autoimmune/cancer), understanding how immune profiles vary cross-culturally may have important implications in the etiology of diseases in different environments. However, cross-cultural comparisons of human immune function are largely unexplored, as most studies are conducted in relatively homogenous urban industrial contexts. To characterize immunological diversity and examine variation in relation to aspects of lifestyle and ecology, we compared mRNA expression across select candidate immune-related genes in three Latin American populations: Honduran immigrant women on the island of Utila (n = 140), Mosetén horticulturalists from Bolivia (n = 187), and Tsimane horticulturalist-foragers from Bolivia (n = 174).These data are directly comparable because of their parallel collection and analysis protocols. After Bonferroni correction, and controlling for age and sex, ecology was a significant predictor of variation in gene expression. Relative to Hondurans and Moseténes, Tsimane were characterized by significantly higher expression of several genes related to aspects of both innate and adaptive immune function (e.g. natural killer, IL4, IL10, CD4, B-cell markers). Mosetén had elevated glucocorticoid receptor expression as well as elevated pro-inflammatory cytokine genes (e.g. TNF, IL1B, CXCL8, IFNG). Hondurans were characterized by low glucocorticoid receptor expression (e.g. NR3C1), and reduced inflammatory cytokine expression. Principal components analysis revealed no single dimension of variation distinguishing all three populations, but rather multiple axes of variation, including independent shifts across populations in pro- and anti-inflammatory profiles, humoral immunity, and hormonal regulation of immunity.

Section: P/AM 11

This research investigates the ways in which rural, middle school girls experience and perceive social stress. This project explores how daily social cues and relationships impact girls’ physical and psychological well-being through an applied biocultural approach. Specifically, we examine self-identified events juxtaposed with the real-time physiological experience of these events measured through blood pressure and heart rate. Twenty-six 6th – 8th grade girls in a Mississippi school participated in Spring, 2017. Split into four groups, girls in each group independently documented social interactions using diaries and interviews for one week. Groups rotated through until all had participated for three weeks. Using these data, self-reported events were coded as Ordinary or Out of Ordinary and compared to daily heart rate (HR) via a FitbitHR. Events and heart rates were also compared to anthropometrics, blood pressure, quantitative measures of life-events, coping, and perceived stress (SM) to explore the longitudinal effects of stress.
1) Qualitative data reflected increased stressful events over study period.
2) Waist circumference and pulse significantly correlated to SM.
3) Systolic blood pressure negatively correlated with peer stress (-0.462, P = 0.035) and positively correlated to waist circumference (.487, P = 0.044).
4) Coping strategies were significantly correlated with both life events and perceived stress.
Data show that coping strategies may be a protective factor in how stress manifests in this population. The combination of biomarkers; standard measures of coping, perceived stress, and life events; alongside qualitative data captures nuances of the girls’ complex social environment we may otherwise neglect.

Section: P/AM 18

Anemia (insufficient hemoglobin) impairs health and daily function. Women of childbearing age are particularly at risk. Anemia can be caused by infectious diseases, nutritional deficiencies, and pregnancy (including the high iron demands of pregnancy and blood loss during childbirth). We investigated the relationship between anemia status in postpartum mothers and these three factors to determine which might serve as a better predictor for anemia risk. 106 breastfeeding mothers of infants (≤12m) in Kilimanjaro, Tanzania were tested for anemia (hemoglobin < 12.0 g/dl) and responded to a questionnaire addressing individual and household characteristics and recent illness (preceding 2w). When controlling for maternal age, anemia was not associated with time since birth. Anemia was also unassociated with several indicators of wealth or diet, such as livestock owned, variety of crops grown, or electricity in the home. However, anemia was associated with dwelling material: mothers living in houses with concrete floors were less likely to be anemic ( P = 0.095), possibly due to increased risk of encountering a soil-transmitted helminth on earthen floors. Additionally, stomachaches—common symptom of intestinal parasites—were positively associated with maternal anemia ( P = 0.012). Overall, these results suggest that intestinal helminth infections contribute more to anemia in postpartum mothers than inadequate nutrition or maternal recovery from pregnancy and may suggest that this population faces greater strain from infectious disease than undernutrition. A greater understanding of the predictive factors for anemia may increase efficiency of treatments or intervention programs while simultaneously improving health outcomes of mother and child.

Section: P/AM 90

For refugees living under long-term encampment, social routines help mitigate the psychological stress of protracted waiting. Specifically, market consumption of familiar goods and services contributes to a sense of normalcy and dignity. In a sample of adult Somali and Ethiopian refugees (N = 169; 43% female) living in Kakuma Refugee Camp, Kenya, we compared ummar-inflammatory biomarkers (Epstein-Barr virus [EBV] antibody and C-reactive protein [CRP]) with a standardized measure of self-reported psychological and physical well-being. We predicted that EBV antibody titer and CRP values would be lower in those with greater perceived well-being. In linear regression models controlling for potential confounder and explanatory variables, refugees with better psychological well-being had lower EBV ( P < 0.05). Unexpectedly, however, CRP was higher in those with better perceived psychological and physical well-being ( P < 0.05). CRP was also positively correlated with sum of skinfolds ( P < 0.001). Based on extensive participant observation, we suggest that consumption of “luxury” foods may help explain these results. Products such as sugary beverages and packaged sweets are incorporated into everyday social practices that help refugees cope with stress. The psychological benefits of this consumption behavior may positively affect cell-mediated immune function (EBV), while high sugar intake might contribute to increased inflammation (CRP) as an outcome of greater adiposity. In this traumatized population, “luxury” foods likely have some short-term psychosocial and physiological benefits, but could simultaneously be detrimental to long-term health, since inflammation and overweight/obesity are cardiovascular disease risk factors. These insights help illuminate the biosocial complexities of daily life and political economy under highly stressful conditions.
Funding: National Science Foundation Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant (#1732077); Wenner-Gren Foundation Dissertation Fieldwork Grant; Department of Anthropology, University of Notre Dame

Section: P/PM 4

Depression during pregnancy is a risk factor for adverse pregnancy outcomes. A previous study by this group did not find a relationship between first trimester depression and the risk of preterm birth among a cohort of women living in Qatar. This study explores whether cumulative depression during the first, second, and third trimesters of pregnancy contributes to preterm birth. The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) score was used as a measure of depression. Deliveries which occurred <37 weeks were categorized as preterm, while those occurring ≥37.0 weeks were categorized as term. Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics were described, and multiple imputation implemented for missing values. A marginal structural model (MSM) was constructed to assess the causal effect of cumulative depression score across the three trimesters on the odds of preterm birth, accounting for potential time-dependent confounders including age, sleep hours, sleep apnea, poor social support, and preeclampsia. Of the 908 women included in the study, 676 had gestational age recorded, 64 (9.5%) of whom delivered a preterm infant. Median gestational age was 39.1 weeks. A one-point increase in cumulative EPDS increased the odds of pre-term birth by a factor of 1.016 (95% CI: 1.002-1.030, P = 0.026). Cumulative depression, measured at three time points during pregnancy, demonstrated an increase in the risk of preterm birth, after adjusting for time-varying confounding. Support: Qatar National Research Fund.

Section: P/AM 70

Persons of minority sexual orientations (SM) experience significant stress associated with discrimination, and stigma contributing to a disproportionally high burden of mental and physical illness experienced by these individuals. To date very little research has examined bone mineral density (BMD) and osteoporosis risk among SMs. In order to gain a better understanding of the factors influencing bone health among SMs we analyzed an available BMD cross-sectional data set which included SMs. Data from the 2007-2008, 2009-2010, and 2013-2014 cycles of US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey were combined to examine differences in z-scored BMD in the femur, trochanter, and intertrochanter and osteoporosis risk factors among adult (mean age = 37, range 20-49) SMs (n = 182) and heterosexuals (n = 1345). Disparities in trochanter ( P = 0.002) and intertrochanter ( P = 0.02) BMD between sexualities were observed among men but not women. This effect was due to differences between heterosexual and gay men in both cases. Differences in trochanter, but not intertrochanter, BMD persisted in linear regressions adjusted for sedentary behavior, past history of drug use, HIV status, smoking status, and yearly alcohol intake. Moderate depression was independently associated with trochanter BMD (b = -0.35, 95% CI = −0.63 to −0.07, P = 0.016) in the fully adjusted model. Our findings suggest that SM men but not women are at greater risk for poor bone health than their heterosexual counterparts and this disparity is not explained by the psychosocial risk factors identified in our study.

Section: PODIUM D

Testosterone (T) is thought to influence tradeoffs between reproductive effort and immunity. Yet, hormones rarely act in isolation, and research among non-human primates suggests that concentrations of both T and cortisol (CORT) have independent, positive associations with intestinal parasitic worm (helminth) burden. Few human studies though have tested whether high T and CORT levels interact synergistically, resulting in increased parasite loads, especially in subsistence-based populations with high infectious disease burdens. Here, we use regression analyses to test whether CORT moderates the relationship between T and helminth infection intensity among indigenous Shuar males (n = 129, ages 12-67 years). Morning and evening saliva samples were collected over three consecutive days to capture diurnal T and CORT variation. Kato-Katz thick smears made from a single fresh stool sample were examined for standardized counts of helminth eggs per gram (EPG). Controlling for age and body mass, preliminary analyses identified a significant positive association between CORT and T concentrations (β = 0.897, P < 0.001). However, no significant main effects or interactions were detected between the hormones and helminth EPG values. This may reflect previous findings that Shuar exhibit low T and CORT levels compared to many other populations, perhaps due to limited energetic resources and high disease exposure. The hypothesized immunomodulatory effects of high T and CORT concentrations, if present, may therefore not be observable in populations with low T and CORT production. Additional work is needed to further test associations between T, CORT, and other aspects of immune function.
Support: Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research (Grant #9231, 8476, 7970); National Science Foundation (Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant #BCS-1650674, BCS-1341165); The American Philosophical Society Lewis and Clark Fund; Ryoichi Sasakawa Young Leaders Fellowship Fund; the Center for Latino/a and Latin American Studies; and, the University of Oregon.

Section: P/AM 76

This research received support from the Carolina Population Center (P2C HD050924), the National Geographic Society (GR-000039121 and GR-000043978) and from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program (Grant DGE-1144081). Migration and health research focused on Latin Americans in the U.S. suffers from a lack of data from immigrant source populations. This investigation sought to create a dataset to be used as a baseline for comparison between immigrants in the U.S. and never-migrants in Mexico. In addition, this work sought to measure factors influencing health in the place of origin to compare with factors influencing health in the place of destination. This study examines cardiometabolic health among 151 Purepecha indigenous Mexicans recruited in the state of Michoacán, Mexico from July to September 2019. This research examined patterns of physical activity, dietary consumption, and the food and physical environments and their association with metabolic syndrome (MetS). Among participants, 87% reported no vigorous physical activity and 60% reported 25 minutes or less spent walking as a means of transportation. In terms of the food environment, return migration from the U.S. has led to changes in availability. In recent years, the population has experienced the introduction of food trucks and independent U.S.-style fast-food restaurants. In addition, food preferences and cooking methods are changing. This is reflected in bimodal diet patterns, with 48% of the sample consuming a traditional, predominantly plant-based diet vs. 52% consuming a diet high in meats and fat. In terms of cardiometabolic health, MetS components ranged from a low of 22% (hypertension) to a high of 83% (low HDL-C). These results highlight the dynamic processes affecting source populations which may in turn obscure conclusions about immigrant health in the U.S.

Section: PODIUM A

Over the past several decades, the Republic of Vanuatu, an island nation in the South Pacific, has been part of an ongoing health transition due to the influx of Western trade goods associated with World War II. Since 2007, the Vanuatu Health Transitions Project has documented the effects of this transition on the health and behavior of the Ni-Vanuatu. As part of this project, we collected data focused on food consumption, food production, technology usage, and physical activity, in addition to anthropometric data, from 323 participants (173 adults, 150 children) from Aneityum island in 2017. A recurring question that has yet to be addressed in our research is the effect of kava ( Piper methysticum ) consumption on health. Kava is consumed traditionally for its sedative and relaxant properties and is commonly drunk with a variety of small foods, which could increase obesity risk. However, excessive consumption of kava commonly leads to nausea and lack of appetite, which could decrease obesity risk due to food aversion. Preliminary analysis on a small subset of Aneityum adults (N = 39) reveals two negative correlations between the number of days per week that kava is consumed with both body fat (−.439, P = .005) and BMI (−.396, P = .013). Additionally, the number of shells of kava consumed per night of drinking kava displays a negative correlation with BIA as well (−.519, P = .001). This preliminary analysis, which our full data set will elucidate, tentatively suggests that kava consumption may be associated with lower rates of obesity in the Ni-Vanuatu.
Funding: Binghamton University Provost's Doctoral Fellowship Program

Section: PLENARY

Anatomically modern human beings ( Homo sapiens sapiens) are a relatively young species (~300,000 years old) with small amounts of genetic variation contained within them. The vast majority of its existence was spent in Eastern Africa, with migration out of the region estimated to have begun around 100,000 YBP. For this reason, 75% of human genetic variation is found within sub-Saharan African populations. However, migration to new environments allowed populations to accumulate genomic variation associated with living in artic environments, higher altitudes, disease resistance, living on high fat or starchy foods, surviving toxic arsenic-rich environments, lactase persistence, changing skin pigmentation, gaining thicker hair, and changing height and body mass index. Understanding these aspects of human evolution force us to reconsider our notion of the “normal.” In the crudest aspect of the definition, normal for our species includes having dark melanic skin, brown eyes, and brown tightly curled hair. Derived features include lighter skin (~10,000 YBP), blue eyes (~6,000 YBP), and blond straight hair (~6,000 YBP). Yet in reality, “normal” has no meaning for a species that inhabits the broad geographic range of anatomically modern humans, as the evolutionary forces of natural selection and genetic drift have genetically differentiated human populations. This differentiation is small, and most of it occurs in non-coding regions of the genome. The differentiation is not significant enough to allow any unambiguous classification of human populations into biological races.

Section: P/AM 72

One of the treatments for advanced prostate cancer is Androgen Deprivation Therapy (ADT), characterized by chemical or physical castration, and which markedly reduces men’s testosterone levels. Given effects of testosterone on body composition, sexual function and other outcomes, what do men treated with ADT perceive its effects to be? Here, we undertake qualitative research with men treated in an urban Oncology clinic in Pretoria, South Africa to address men’s self-reported experiences on ADT. Preliminary analyses rely upon 10 men's responses to open-ended questions during interviews. These men were 64-78 years of age, and almost all married (one widowed), had children and were no longer engaged in paid work. In addressing a question about the positive effects of ADT, men referred to its treatment for prostate cancer, with several generally specifying health or life. Several men also referred to eating and gaining weight. In addressing questions about the negative effects of ADT and effects on romantic/sex life, 7 of 9 married men referred to deleterious impacts on their sex lives. Responses implicated compromised desire and capacity for engaging in sexual behavior. With respect to perceived family, work or broader social life impacts, some men noted others’ worries and social support. Men also reported other symptoms that appeared to reflect a mixture of influences of prostate cancer and ADT: pain, nausea, difficulties urinating, and breast growth. Findings are situated within discussions of existing research on ADT largely from North American or European samples, and broader views of testosterone and male social behavior.

Section: P/AM 61

Biological aging refers to the gradual process through which physiological dysregulation increases frailty, degenerative diseases, and mortality risk. While aging is a normal physiological process, the rate is a non-universal process impacted by physiological and lifestyle factors. This study investigated heterogeneity in biological aging among 50 men and 50 women living in the Oriente, located in the northern Amazon of Ecuador. The majority of those living in the Oriente are small scale agriculturalists who reside in rural areas with poor infrastructure and high pathogenic burden. The goals of the project were to assess how biological age is impacted by high levels of pathogen exposure and physical activity. Biological age was quantified through the collection of multiple indices reflecting four age related chronic degenerative conditions: osteoporosis, peripheral arterial disease, cognitive decline, and frailty. These indices were recorded using a Sunbeam MiniOmni Ultrasound, the Ankle-Brachial Index, the Montreal Cognitive Assessment, and five domains of physical dysfunction. Additionally, activity was measured using accelerometry data collected over three days and pathogen exposure was estimated using household surveys. Linear regression found a statistically significant positive relationship between pathogen exposure and biological age. These results indicate that individuals in the Oriente with higher levels of pathogen exposure exhibited accelerated rates of biological aging. Total effects mediation analysis determined that physical activity had both direct and indirect effects on biological aging. These results indicate that the negative impacts of pathogen exposure may be are downregulated through activity.

Section: P/AM 59

Personal Activity Monitors (PAMs) have become ubiquitous recently; they also offer an affordable and readily-available method to track the sleep behaviors of research participants. This project draws on interviews conducted in Puebla, Mexico and Springfield, Massachusetts to examine whether PAMs are a viable method of collecting sleep data from individuals who are living at home and have been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Methods: Fifty-seven caregivers of people diagnosed with AD were interviewed across two field sites over 24 months. The persons experiencing AD were also interviewed. As part of the interview, participants with AD were asked to wear a PAM, specifically a FitBit, for one week and complete a sleep diary. Caregivers were instructed to assist. Results: Thirty-five participants agreed to wear the FitBit but only 19 completed the protocol. Discomfort with the wristband and an inability to remember why they were asked to wear a FitBit were the primary reasons for withdrawal. Seven caregivers also expressed concern that the person diagnosed with AD might lose the FitBit. For those who did wear the FitBit for the full week and completed the sleep diary, it was possible to catalog several sleep behaviors including total sleep time, sleep fragmentation, and sleep latency. Conclusion: It may be possible to use PAMs to track the sleep of participants diagnosed with AD living at home, but strategies to improve participation in those with memory loss and identifying more comfortable wrist straps are needed to improve adherence to the research protocol.

Section: PODIUM B

This research was funded by the Wenner-Gren Foundation, Dissertation Fieldwork Grant, Gr. 9232. Pregnant Muslim women around the world participate in Ramadan fasting. This study investigated the association between fasting during late pregnancy and infant birth anthropometry in Rabat, Morocco. Participants (N = 92) completed questionnaires and a subsample (N = 75) participated in maternal and infant anthropometry measurements 48-72 hours postpartum. Infant measurements included weight, length, head circumference, arm circumference, skinfold measurements, and ponderal index, along with z-scores for 46 infants with known gestational ages. In this subsample, participants fasted between 0-29 days, averaging 18.6 days. Duration between last day of fasting and labor was 0-43 days, averaging 10.4 days. In multivariate regression analyses, any fasting was associated with reduced z-scores for infant weight (β = −1.1, P < 0.06), length (β = −0.6, P < 0.014), and head circumference (β = −0.7, P < 0.03). The same measurements were positively correlated with duration between discontinuation of fasting and birth (β = 0.02, P < 0.02, β = 0.001, P < 0.03, β = 0.02, P < 0.01, respectively), suggesting catch-up growth. Fasting duration was only retained as a predictor of infant measurements when controlling for days between fasting and labor. Unexpectedly, duration of fasting was positively correlated with head circumference (β = 0.07, P < 0.04). Measures of fatness (ponderal index, arm circumference, and skinfold measurements) were not associated with fasting. The opposing finding of any fasting associated with reduced infant size and fasting duration positively associative with infant size suggests a potential non-linear relationship between fetal growth and fasting duration. These findings support the hypothesis that birth anthropometry varies by maternal fasting behaviors but suggest that birth outcomes are not well-modeled by situations of food restriction or malnutrition.

Section: P/AM 36

How do new norms spread in social groups? We apply the framework of cultural evolution theory to examine what drives norm change among Himba in the Namibian Kunene region. Access to formal medical care is on the rise in this region, and health workers visit communities to promote WHO-recommended norms regarding perinatal care, including hospital delivery, and immediate and exclusive breastfeeding. This study tests how conformity bias, prestige bias, exposure to outgroups and access to resources affect women’s preferences, plans and practices of perinatal care norms. We interviewed 100 Himba mothers about their preferences, plans and previous practices related to perinatal care and modeled the effects on norm adoption of perception of ingroup attitudes, prestige ascribed to others practicing outgroup norms, interaction with the outgroup, and access to resources using Bayesian multi-level logistic regression models. Women who perceive outgroup norms as common among ingroup members, as well as those who visit the provincial capital and hospital more often, adopt more outgroup norms themselves. Perceptions of prestige, education, wealth, and access to resources had no effect on the likelihood of adopting outgroup norms. Our results indicate a role of conformity bias in the adoption of WHO-backed perinatal care recommendations. The current situation of increased interaction with health workers does not lead to the erosion of all ingroup norms regarding perinatal care: while recommended norms are adopted, several Himba norms serving as cultural identity markers persist, as they are not in direct conflict with new norms, and are relatively costless to maintain.

Section: P/AM 47

The association between leptin, a lipostatic hormone, and adiposity has been well documented. However, variation in this association between populations living in different ecologies remains understudied. The association in humans has largely focused on western industrialized populations in the United States and Europe. Studies undertaken in populations outside of this criterion have shown more variation than was originally believed. This study surveys this variation to determine the range of variation across various ecologies. Data was compiled from the scientific literature, using Pubmed, with the aim to examine the association between leptin and adiposity found in populations outside of those most represented in the literature to date. Out of 42,000 results 40 were eligible as non-WEIRD for inclusion in the meta-analysis; of these, only 27 focused on assessing the general population. Statistical analysis and regressions were done in R 3.5.3. In the population dataset (n = 27), leptin had a mean = 5.3ng/mL −1 (Min:1.1, Max:41.3) and a mean BMI = 24.8 (Min:18.0, Max:31.5) with only a quarter of variation in leptin explained through BMI (r 2 = 24.9%). For females, leptin levels contained much more variation and spread than seen in the males with a mean of 12.0ng/mL −1 (Min:4.1, Max:41.3; r 2 = 27.1%). Mean leptin levels of the males were 3.21ng/mL −1 (Min:1.1, Max:5.3) with very little of the variation in leptin explained through BMI (r 2 = 0.3%). Population variation in the association between leptin and adiposity is broader than previously suspected. The breadth of variation is critical to a better understanding of the role of leptin in the body, its relationship with adiposity, and the impact of human variation.

Section: P/AM 30

In recent years, the Hadza of Tanzania have experienced increased access to mobile clinics where nurses provide basic health care. Here, we report on data extracted from semi-structured interviews of 80 mothers residing in both the village and bush. We report parity, location of birth, mode of delivery, birth attendants, and changes in breastfeeding practices and colostrum distribution, as doctors and nurses tell them of the “dirtiness” of the first milk. A total of 68% of our sample gave colostrum to their newborn. The mean age of mothers in our sample was 33.99 (SD ± 14.48) with an average of 4.13 births and 3.52 children living. The mean age of first birth was 17.56 (SD± 5.08). The majority of women had home births (97%) with traditional birth attendants, predominantly their mother, grandmother, and/or other older women. However, eleven total births (3%) occurred in the hospital and seven of those transfers resulted in cesarean sections. All of our participants reported that home birth was better than hospital birth, but our data suggest that mothers are being encouraged to travel to hospitals. Many choose not to go, however “home births” are currently illegal in Tanzania, making this situation challenging. It is also currently illegal for pregnant teenage mothers to attend school – a regulation that impacted 3 of our 8 mothers under the age of 16 years. Future work will evaluate the health outcomes of such changes as these laws take effect and mothers increasingly interact with the biomedical system.

Section: P/AM 77

Recent studies have shown that environmental conditions (e.g. harshness, pathogen salience) can influence individual disgust levels, while others have found that disgust affects health-protective behavior (e.g. sociosexuality). However, it has yet to be tested in one model if environmental factors are associated with disgust levels, which then alter sociosexual attitudes and behavior. Here we investigate if: (1) pathogen exposure predicts pathogen and sexual disgust; (2) disgust variables predict respondents’ sociosexual attitude; and (3) sociosexual attitude predict behavior. We collected a global online sample (N = 322; 160 women) through Amazon Mturk. Respondents reported information on recent exposure to pathogens in social contexts, sexual and pathogen disgust, and sociosexual attitude and behavior. Additionally, a measure of environmental pathogen load was calculated using online data for the number of deaths caused by communicable diseases for each participant’s country. We conducted a structural equation model and interpreted the regressions and correlations between latent variables, as well as between latent and observed variables. Reported pathogen exposure, along with national disease data, significantly predicted levels of pathogen and sexual disgust. Higher levels of sexual disgust, but not pathogen disgust, were associated with more conservative sociosexual attitudes. Individuals’ sociosexual attitude and their levels of sexual disgust positively predicted sexual behavior. These results support a growing body of literature on the behavioral immune system, as individuals who report being exposed to more pathogens experience higher rates of sexual disgust and alter their sociosexual behavior, perhaps as a means to prevent infection.

Section: P/AM 69

Men’s voices may serve as a cue to overall condition; however, little research has assessed whether voice parameters honestly signal health. In Study 1, we investigated whether listeners could classify voices belonging to men with either relatively lower (n = 10) or higher (n = 10) self-reported health. Participants rated voices for speaker health, disease likelihood, illness frequency, and symptom severity. Participants perceived the voice recordings from healthier men as sounding healthier. In Study 2 we tested if men's (n = 108) vocal parameters and aspects of their self-reported health predicted listeners' health and disease resistance ratings. Speakers' fundamental frequency (F 0 ) significantly (negatively) predicted ratings of health. However, speakers' self-reported health did not predict listeners' ratings of health . In Study 3, we investigated whether separately manipulating two sexually dimorphic vocal parameters—fundamental frequency (F 0 ) and apparent vocal tract length (VTL)—affected listeners' health ratings. Participants rated men’s voices with lower F 0 (but not VTL) as healthier. Results of the above studies suggest that although listeners' assign higher health ratings to speakers with more stereotypically masculine vocal parameters, these ratings may not be accurate except at the extremes of self-reported health.

Section: P/AM 43

Syndemic theory has been employed in medical anthropology and global health to address the social, political, and ecological factors that produce the clustering of two or more diseases or conditions. Despite growing popularity, scholars have identified significant limitations in current syndemic analyses, specifically issues emerging from the use of a sum score approach. Sum scores fail to document biological interaction and therefore have limited the testability of syndemic hypotheses. Human biologists are uniquely situated to move syndemic analyses forward: our knowledge of the local realities of our fieldsites combined with our understanding of disease interactions and statistical methods provide us with the unique toolkit to test syndemic relationships. We draw on data from 93 mother infant/dyads enrolled in a semi-longitudinal study of infant health conducted in Nuñoa, Peru to test the syndemic hypothesis that ecological, geographic, and economic conditions in Nunoa result in nutritional & pathogenic risks to child growth concentrated/co-occurring in marginalized segments of population where disease and malnutrition interact biologically to compromise growth (HAZ, WAZ, WHZ). We employ a both survey and biomarker-based data in a series of regression models to examine relationships between economic inequality, pathogenic and nutritional environments, infectious disease, malnutrition, and growth. While our analyses do not reveal a syndemic relationship between malnutrition, infection, and impaired growth we demonstrate the falsifiability of a syndemic hypothesis, indicating the utility of the syndemic framework for generating testable hypotheses.

Section: P/AM 27

Maternal prenatal stress and emotional well-being has been identified as an influence on fetal and childhood growth and development. However, less research has explored the influence of maternal postnatal emotional well-being on child growth trajectories. Infancy is a sensitive period of rapid growth and neuroendocrine development, and previous cross-sectional research has identified maternal-infant interaction quality as associated with infant adiposity. The current research begins with an ethnographic study of migrant women living in rural New York State (n = 23) to identify salient variables of maternal stress that might affect child growth. Maternal social isolation and experiences of childhood adversity emerged as important ones. These variables are included in the analysis of a large longitudinal sample (n = 1018) to test the relationship between maternal emotional well-being and 1) maternal-infant interaction quality and 2) child growth trajectories in height and weight. This analysis of the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children uses a composite measure of self-reported maternal postnatal stress (including depression, anxiety, financial stress, childhood stress, social support, and social network) to evaluate its contribution to observed maternal-infant interaction quality (Thorpe Interaction Measure) in a linear regression model, controlling for infant age, maternal socioeconomic status, and number of children in family. Maternal-infant interaction quality is then used as a covariate along with age, sex, and gestational age at birth in linear spline mixed-effects models for anthropometric measures of height and weight from birth to age 10. This research is important in identifying how stress may be embodied and transmitted transgenerationally during infancy.

Section: P/AM 67

Previous work indicates high rates of self-reported urinary infections among mothers and children in Galapagos, Ecuador decreased after the installment of a new drinking water treatment plant. While environmental exposures to contaminated water may be underlying high rates prior to water treatment, we investigate the influence of water and sugar-sweetened beverage consumption on urinalysis indicators of hydration and urinary tract infections following the opening of the water treatment facility. Ethnographic data, 24-hour dietary recalls and urine samples were collected from 74 mothers and 105 children ages 2-10 living in the urban area on Isla San Cristobal. Although 24% of mothers and 7% of children reported urinary tract infection symptoms, levels of urinary nitrites and/or leucocyte esterase suggest 41% of mothers and 21% of children had probable infections. The median daily consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages was 500 mL for mothers and 750 mL for children, and 750 mL of water for both. Only 10% of mothers achieved the recommended daily fluid intake, yet we found no associations between beverage consumption and hydration levels. Logistic models demonstrate both increased odds of high sugar-sweetened beverage consumption (OR 5.3, 95%CI 1.1-26.2) and moderate (OR 5.3, 95%CI 1.8-15.5) and high (OR 3.2, 95%CI 0.9-11.5) water consumption on urinary infections among children, while adjusting for co-founders. Higher urinary specific gravity indicating relative dehydration lowered odds of urinary infection among children (OR 0.2, 95%CI 0.1-0.7). These results complicate the theorized relationship between hydration strategies and status, and risk of urinary infection in this population.
Funding sources: NSF DDRIG (#1341156); Wenner-Gren Dissertation Fieldwork Grant; Triangle Center for Evolutionary Medicine; NICHD 5T32HD007168, Carolina Population Center; University of North Carolina’s (UNC) Institute for Global Health and Infectious Disease; UNC’s Royster Society of Fellows.

Section: FT A

Pregnancy alters maternal immune function in order to tolerate a genetically foreign conceptus, but little is known regarding how maternal immune profiles change across the postpartum period or how this transition may be impacted by variation in ecological context and/or breastfeeding behavior. This study characterizes the immunological transition from pregnancy to the postpartum period among Tsimane women (a natural-fertility Bolivian population experiencing high pathogen load and exhibiting nearly ubiquitous breastfeeding rates) and women in the United States and evaluates how breastfeeding status affects postpartum immune trajectories. Using cross-sectional data collected by the Tsimane Health and Life History Project and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, we estimated the population-specific effects of reproductive phase on total white blood cell prevalence, lymphocyte, neutrophil, eosinophil, monocyte and basophil counts, and C-reactive protein among Tsimane (n = 4136) and US women (n = 7603) and the effects of breastfeeding status on immune trajectory among postpartum US women (n = 319) using GAM modeling. All models accounted for age, BMI and parity. Our results indicate that the postpartum period is characterized by population-specific immunological bounce-back, wherein shifts induced by pregnancy (e.g. elevated neutrophil prevalence and inflammation, downregulated lymphocyte and eosinophil counts) are reversed. Among US women, breastfeeding is associated with more gradual return to non-pregnant baselines, with breastfeeding status explaining 10.4%, 11.1%, and 18.8% of variation in postpartum leukocyte count, neutrophil prevalence, and CRP concentration, respectively. These patterns suggest that maternal immunity is reoptimized across the postpartum period according to socioecological conditions, with breastfeeding moderating the degree of immunological reorganization.

Section: P/PM 12

In Samoa, STI rates have been endemically high over the past decade. However, testing has historically focused on youth and antenatal populations. Recent modifications to STI testing procedures by the Samoan Ministry of Health expanded testing to all samples regardless of perceived risk, increasing information on underrepresented sex and age groups. We used this surveillance data to investigate rates of positivity of chlamydia, hepatitis B and C, and syphilis across groups from 2012, 2014, and 2017. Youth aged 15-19 were significantly more likely to test positive for chlamydia than other age groups from 2012 and 2017 ( P < .05). Males age 30+ were more likely to have hepatitis B infections in both 2012 and 2017 ( P < .05). Hepatitis C was more common in males in 2012, and in females in 2017 ( P < .05). Most surprisingly, individuals 45+ were more likely to have a positive syphilis test in 2014 and 2017 than other age groups. These differences may be related to a range of health education and cultural factors. Older generations had fewer opportunities for sexual health education/prevention and may be experiencing latent infections. This may also reflect generational differences in social authority and agency surrounding sexual behavior. Samoa’s close-knit community dynamics can exacerbate challenges stemming from social stigma towards sexual health issues and the lack of discreet access to testing and treatment services for STI’s. This research has implications for prevention programming, health marketing, and patient counselling, and identifies a need to tailor prevention services to reach patients across the age spectrum. This study was funded by the Ministry of Health, Samoa.

Section: PLENARY

Public health researchers and social scientists frequently compare height against universal models of normal human growth to assess well-being, deprivation, and disease risk. However, underlying population differences in height can make some populations appear well-nourished by such universal standards, even though they live in severe states of deprivation. In this talk, I describe the worldwide extent of these population differences and illustrate how using a universal yardstick to compare population height can create puzzling disparities (e.g., between South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa) and underestimate childhood stunting in specific world regions (e.g. West Africa and the Caribbean). I conclude by discussing potential challenges of developing and implementing population-sensitive standards for assessing normal development.

Section: P/AM 41

Globalization has had major effects on changing patterns of food consumption in many societies. While insects are of importance to traditional diets of many communities in Mexico, these practices may be changing as a consequence of pathways related to globalization. As part of a pilot study in Oaxaca, Mexico focusing on seasonality of insects, identity, and food practices, we explored whether women’s (n = 27) recent consumption of chapulines (roasted grasshoppers) was correlated with their consumption of food items in three potentially overlapping categories, assessed from daily dietary recalls: raw, traditional, and processed. Because we were interested in how the consumption of chapulines and other traditional food items relate to identity and nutritional health, we also tested for correlations between women’s BMI, hemoglobin levels, and their dietary patterns during four field seasons in 2019. Qualitative interviews revealed that chapulines were a core component of identity in Oaxaca for a majority of participants. However, women’s consumption of chapulines was not significantly linked to their BMI, hemoglobin levels, or percentage of calories they consumed from other traditional foods. Women who consumed more of their calories from processed foods had higher hemoglobin levels, while those who consumed a greater percentage of raw food calories had lower levels. Additionally, women with higher BMIs had higher hemoglobin levels. Our future research will build from these initial results by analyzing how shifting dietary practices across seasons among Oaxacan women, including the seasonality of insect consumption, relate to changes in BMI, hemoglobin levels, and other dietary practices.

Section: P/PM 8

Economic growth since the late 1980s in Vietnam has resulted in the increase in cardiovascular diseases (CVD). Given that CVD risk factor profiles differ according to country/area, we have established a population-based cohort study on CVD in Khánh Hòa Province, Vietnam, in which we collect information from and follow-up a total of 3000 non-institutionalized individuals aged 30 to 59 years. For this study, we used information collected in a pilot survey of 100 community adults recruited via convenience sampling (31 males and 69 females). More specifically, we collected questionnaire data, anthropometric data (height, weight and waist circumference), and blood sample for biochemical measurements (total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein, low-density lipoprotein, triglycerides, uric acid, C-reactive protein (CRP), insulin, fasting glucose and hemoglobin A1c). Results showed that prevalence of overweight (body mass index [BMI] = 25-29.9 kg/m 2 ) and obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m 2 ) was 25% and 2%, respectively. Abdominal obesity (defined as waist-to-height ratio ≥0.57) was higher than general obesity prevalence. Elevated CRP (3-10 mg/L) was observed among 21% of the participants while 4% of the participants were regarded as experiencing acute inflammation. Those who were hypertensive, diabetic and dyslipidemic occupied 24%, 18%, and 79% of the study participants, respectively. We will focus on detailed associations between socio-demographic and behavioral factors and these cardiometabolic risk factors. This study was financially supported by the JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP19K20536 and the Grant for National Center for Global Health and Medicine (19A06).

Section: P/AM 5

Important both developmentally and evolutionarily, growth within the first 1000 days constitutes a sensitive period during which an individual’s phenotype is plastic. Research has shown that stress during this time shapes long-term risk for metabolic disease and neurobehavioral disorders in offspring, but the mechanisms for these relationships are unclear, and research has not fully explored the role of the microbiome. We test the effects of pre- and postpartum maternal stress, depression, socials support, and maternal-infant attachment on infant gut microbiome diversity and abundance. Data come from 26 mother-infant dyads participating in the Madres Sanas, Bebés Sanos study in San Cristóbal, Galápagos. Stress, depression, and support surveys were given at 34-36 weeks gestation and one and two months postpartum, and maternal-infant attachment surveys were given at one and two months postpartum. Stool samples were collected from infants at two months postpartum. Mixed models were used to test the associations between gut microbiome measures and survey scores. Results demonstrate that while maternal depression during pregnancy was not associated with significant differences in infant microbial diversity, maternal depression at two months postpartum was associated with lower infant microbial diversity ( P = 0.04). Further, high maternal prenatal stress was not associated with significant differences in infant microbial diversity, but high maternal postpartum stress was associated with lower microbial diversity in infants ( P = 0.02). These results suggest the need for continual support for maternal mental health throughout the perinatal period to promote the development of healthy foundational microbiota infants.

Section: P/PM 9

An earlier study found that the circadian blood pressure changes related to variation in perceived microenvironmental stress was consistent across the menstrual cycle (MC). The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether there was a similar consistency in the circadian variation in the rates of urinary catecholamine (epinephrine (epi) and norepinephrine (NE)) excretion by MC phase. The participants were 71women (mean age = 34.9 ± 7.7 yrs.) who all worked in clerical, technical, or professional positions at a major medical center in NYC. Each was studied on a mid-follicular (day 8 ± 2) and mid-luteal (day 22 ± 2) day of their MC. Perceived stress at work and home was measured on a 0-10 scale; women were classified as work stressed (WS) or home stressed (HS) on each day based on the difference in work-home stress designation. The rates of Epi and NE at work (11 AM -3 PM ), home (ummari. 6 PM -10 PM ) and during sleep (ummari. 10 PM - 6 AM ) were compared by menstrual cycle phase and WS/HS designation using repeated measures ANOVA models. In these analyses, women were classified into four groups based upon their phase and stress designation: WS/WS (N = 20), WS/HS (N = 20), HS/HS (N = 11), and HS/WS (N = 20). The results show that overall, the comparative patterns of both Epi and NE changes between WS and HS women did not differ by MC phase. If women changed the WS/HS designation from the follicular to luteal phase, their patterns of excretion remained similar. These results suggest that microenvironmental stress effects on circadian catecholamine changes are unaffected by MC phase.
Supported by NIH grant HL47540.

Section: P/AM 15

Stressful and traumatic experiences have been associated with changes in inflammation and cell-mediated immune function and are strongly linked to poor health outcomes. Refugees experience migration- and displacement-related stress and trauma, yet we know little about how individual variation in those domains relate to their health and physiology. Here, we draw on data from mental health-related surveys and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) antibody titers and C-reactive protein (CRP) assayed from dried blood spots collected from refugees (n = 70) in two Asylum Centers in Serbia who were awaiting repatriation or resettlement. EBV antibody titers are an indirect measure of cell-mediated immune function, which can be impaired by chronic psychosocial stress, while CRP is a well-established measure of inflammation. We found that refugees who experienced longer journeys to Serbia had elevated CRP and reported poorer well-being and physical health ( P < 0.05), as did those who experienced psychological trauma on their journeys ( P = 0.06). We also found that participants who experienced psychological trauma on their journeys exhibited greater EBV-antibody levels and higher post-traumatic stress scores ( P = 0.05). The duration of time refugees spent in Serbia did not significantly predict their health profiles or immune markers. Our results generally align with previous findings concerning psychosocial stressors and their association with impaired cellular immune function and elevated inflammation. Our findings suggest that higher EBV antibody and CRP levels may result from migration- and displacement-related trauma and indicate pathways through which refugees may be at risk for certain acute and chronic illnesses, alongside their well-documented mental health challenges.

Section: P/AM 86

Inquiry-based curricula have been widely documented to improve college student learning of science concepts. Studies suggest that inquiry approaches have also been effective in helping students to better understand evolution, but comparatively little such work has been done in biological anthropology. At West Chester University, eleven new student-centered, inquiry-based laboratory modules were developed and taught for the introductory biological anthropology course between fall 2013 and spring 2016. In 2015-2016, clicker ‘questions’ were adopted as a formative assessment measure – to examine student learning over each laboratory session and provide immediate feedback to both instructor and students. While some of these questions or statements pertained to the specific lab sessions’ content, each set of clicker items included one or more evolution misconception statements. In addition, some items assessed understanding of scientific method. Student responses pre- and post-lab module were analyzed by comparing % items answered correctly using paired-sample t-tests. Student performance increased from pre- to post-lab over all items and modules ( P < .001) and within each module. For items related to evolution misconceptions, student performance also increased significantly across all items and modules ( P < .001). This impact was greatest early in the semester, when labs focused on basic concepts related to evolutionary theory, genetics, and classification. Performance on items assessing student understanding of scientific method also increased significantly over all items and modules that included those items. We discuss these findings and implications for efforts to foster correct understanding of evolution concepts in introductory biological anthropology students.
Supported by an NSF TUES Award (DUE-1245013) and West Chester University.

Section: P/AM 78

This study investigates the timing of adrenarche in a Maya population experiencing the dual burden of under-and-over nutrition. Adrenarche is a physiological milestone unique to humans and apes, marking the transition into the juvenile period. Adrenarche signifies the gradual maturation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis from age 6-8 through the increased production of the adrenal androgens dehydroepiandosterone (DHEA) or its sulphate ester (DHEA-S). Only few studies consider adrenarche in non-Western populations; but Helfrecht et al. (2017) found that adrenarche occurs only around age 8-9 in three sub-Saharan populations. We combined anthropometrics, questionnaire data including a modified version of the physical development scale, and salivary DHEA-S from 25 Maya girls (aged 6.95–9.83 years) from Merida, Mexico, to investigate if age-adjusted growth, psychosocial stress, and perceived health during childhood are associated with adrenarcheal timing. Adrenarche I at 8.8 years in Maya girls. Despite the small sample size, low weight- or height-for-age or a serious case of illness in the family, were negatively associated with adrenarcheal status. In contrast, obesity and other higher age-adjusted body size variables were positively associated with adrenarcheal status, as was, surprisingly, poor health status during infancy as perceived by mothers. Maya girls undergo adrenarche much later than white-British girls we previously studied. These findings suggest that early life conditions, especially energy balance during development, might alter the juvenile and pubertal tempo of sexual development. Further research in non-Western environments is needed to enhance our understanding of the effects of childhood ecology on adrenarcheal timing and progression of sexual maturation.

Section: P/AM 73

Greater social support is well known to promote positive health outcomes. In settings like the U.S., women tend to report more sources of social support under routine conditions; however, less is known about how support emerges and relates to well-being when individuals encounter physically and psychosocially demanding conditions. Working with the National Outdoor Leadership School, we studied individuals (n = 71) who spent three months in the extreme conditions of the Rocky Mountains. Here, participants engaged in intense activities while simultaneously collaborating/forming relationships with others. Using free-listing, individuals reported who they could depend on for (a) physical support and (b) emotional support. We tested whether men and women differed in how many people they reported they could depend on for both physical and emotional support. We also tested if received support predicted whether or not an individual was sick (i.e acute illness) at multiple check-points across the three-month expedition. We found that throughout the course participants who received more emotional support also reported more physical support ( P < 0.05). There were no significant differences between men and women in received emotional or physical support. Though women tended to report being sick significantly more than men ( P < 0.05), received support did not predict whether an individual reported being sick. These results suggest that, in intense conditions, men and women may not differ in how many people they seek support from, though future study is needed to understand the nuances of support and health in these settings.

Section: P/AM 4

While the positive relationship between social support and mental health has been established (Suls & Wallston, 2003; Reblin & Uchino, 2008), little is known about the particular benefits of grandmother-mother relationships on mental health, especially during pregnancy. Evolutionary theory places particular importance on the role of grandmothers (Hawkes, 2003), but what is the adaptive benefit, if any, of grandmothers during pregnancy and in a modern cultural context? Close family relationships are culturally valued among Latinos (Smokowski & Bacallao, 2006), who also have unique experiences of discrimination and acculturation. We examine if the relationship quality, physical proximity, or cultural proximity between Latina women (soon-to-be-mothers) and their own mothers (soon-to-be-grandmothers) moderate the effect of participants’ experience of discrimination and acculturative stress on mental health. We ran a series of multiple linear regression models on data collected from new and expectant mothers (n = 262) in Southern California. After confirming positive correlations of social support and negative correlations of acculturative stress and discrimination with mental health, we found that social support from the to-be-grandmother moderates the correlation between discrimination and to-be-mothers’ depression and state anxiety. Additionally, communicating with the to-be-grandmother every day moderates the correlation between discrimination and to-be-mothers' depression, state-anxiety, and perceived stress. Seeing the to-be-grandmother in person moderates the correlation of discrimination with happiness and perceived stress; as well as the correlation of acculturative stress with pregnancy-specific anxiety (interaction: b = −0.02, SE = 0.009, CI = −2.43, P -value = 0.01). Grandmother-mother relationships thus appear to buffer certain stressors that have particular salience for pregnant, Latina women.

Section: P/AM 80

As evidence accrues on the negative health effects of a “Westernized” diet, emerging results from around the globe suggest that diet change processes are ongoing and unpredictable. Studies assessing immigrants' diet change in Western countries provide important perspective for this research by elucidating how adaptation to new social and food systems disrupts eating patterns and impacts health. Here, we assess how immigrants' diet and health respond to living in Spain. Although Spain's Mediterranean cuisines are internationally recognized as the dietary gold standard, growing evidence suggests a population shift toward fast-food practices, especially among new residents. We therefore tested how immigrants' diets compared to those of native Spaniards, and how eating habits in each group were associated with body-mass index. Data come from the Longitudinal Studies of Immigrant Families Project (PELFI), which includes 362 adults who immigrated from Ecuador, Colombia, and Morocco, as well as 111 adults originally from Spain. All participants completed a 15-item food frequency questionnaire and a 4-item health assessment. Results show that diet patterns differed significantly by sex, country of origin, and length of residence, but overall aligned with Spanish dietary standards. Meanwhile, over half the sample was overweight (mean BMI = 26.2, SD = 3.9), and this was consistent across all sub-groups. Multivariate logistic regression analysis found that being overweight was closely correlated with frequent consumption of sweets ( P = .03) and meats ( P = .03). These findings underscore the variety of diet practices that co-occur in diverse societies, and advocate continued investigation of immigrants’ diet change processes to better understand population health trends.

Section: P/AM 55

Age at menarche is a trait subject to energetic pressures. We worked with a sample of healthy adult rural Polish women (n = 76) to test for associations between menarcheal age and both menarcheal and adult body size. Data was collected via surveys. Analyses use ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey HSD. Recalled weight and height at menarche were asked as categories relative (more, less, same) to peers at age at menarche. Weight at menarche was significantly associated with age at menarche ( P = 0.01). Women who weighed more at menarche had earlier menarche than women who weighed less ( P = 0.008), but other comparisons were not significant. Current weight was associated with weight at menarche ( P = 0.001). Women who weighed more at menarche weighed 12.5 kg more as adults than women who weighed the same as their peers ( P = 0.01) and 18.0 kg more than women who weighed less at menarche ( P = 0.001). Adult height was associated with menarcheal height ( P <<0.001). Women who were taller at menarche were 11.8 cm taller as adults than women who were shorter at menarche ( P <<0.001) and 9.8 cm taller than women who were about the same height as their peers at menarche ( P <<0.001). Adult height was not significantly different between women who were shorter at menarche vs. those who were about the same height ( P = 0.3). These results may reflect ecological and energetic pressures affecting timing of menarche. Adult body size showed similar trends to menarcheal body size, which may reflect trait persistence or biased recall.
This material is based upon work supported by the NSF (BCS-1317140, BCS-1732117, BCS-1650839, DGE-1144245), Wenner-Gren (#084918, #089812), APS Lewis and Clark Fund, Beckman Institute CS/AI Award, Sigma Xi & more.

Section: P/AM 58

A field-friendly assessment of energy balance (the ratio of calories consumed to total energy expenditure) would be advantageous to human biologists interested in human energetics and cardio-metabolic health. Researchers must control for variation in energy balance when testing evolutionary hypotheses that investigate differences in energy allocation across competing biological functions. The hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis is part of a dynamic neuroendocrine system that contributes to the regulation of energy expenditure by responding to shifts in energy balance. For these reasons, we conducted a pilot study to examine the utility of urinary triiodothyronine (uT3) as a biomarker of energy balance. T3 is the biologically active form of thyroid hormone and recent work suggests that uT3 levels reflect whole-body thyroid hormone dynamics. We quantified uT3 levels using an enzyme immunoassay (EIA) protocol (K056-H5, Arbor Assays) in 120 urine samples from 40 adults (22 men, 18 women) living around New Haven, Connecticut. We also used standardized techniques to quantify anthropometric dimensions, a bioelectric impedance scale (TBF-300, Tanita) to assess body composition, indirect calorimetry (VO2000, MedGraphics) to measure resting metabolic rate (RMR), 24-hour activity recall diaries to estimate physical activity levels, and the MyFitnessPal phone application (Under Armour, Inc.) to estimate total caloric intake. Spearman’s rank correlation test revealed a significant relationship between morning uT3 levels and energy balance (ρ = 0.28 P = 0.008). Additionally, uT3 levels were significantly associated with RMR (ρ = −0.24 P = 0.024). These data suggest that uT3 levels may represent a useful biomarker of energy balance and metabolic regulation.

Section: P/PM 11

Chronic elevation of cortisol, an important stress hormone, can lead to negative health outcomes. For example, chronically elevated cortisol levels can influence immune function by disrupting inflammatory responses and downregulating cellular immunity. Few studies, however, have investigated neuroendocrine-immune interactions in subsistence-based populations. Here, we examine relationships between diurnal cortisol activity, C-reactive protein (CRP; marker of general inflammation), and antibodies to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV-Ab; measure of cell-mediated immune function) among 184 indigenous Shuar from Amazonian Ecuador (87 males, 97 females; age 3 – 86 years). Saliva samples were collected three times daily (waking, 30 minutes post-waking, evening) for three consecutive days to estimate diurnal cortisol parameters. Circulating CRP and EBV-Ab concentrations were measured in dried blood spots using validated procedures. Serum-equivalent CRP was treated as a dichotomous variable indicating the presence (CRP ≥1 mg/L) or absence (CRP <1 mg/L) of acute inflammation. Natural log-transformed values of EBV-Ab and all cortisol parameters were used due to non-normality. Regression models (including age, sex, BMI) indicate that all relationships between cortisol parameters, CRP, and EBV-Ab are non-significant. Conversely, age is a significant predictor of CRP (OR > 1, P < 0.05), whereby the likelihood of acute inflammation increases with age. Age is also a significant predictor of EBV-Ab (β = 0.27 – 0.31, P < 0.05), with levels increasing with age. These results suggest that diurnal cortisol levels among the Shuar may not be chronically elevated, and thus, may not be associated with the same patterns of immune dysregulation as documented in industrialized societies.
Support: Wenner-Gren Foundation (8749, 8476); National Science Foundation (BCS-1340958, BCS-1341165, DGE-1144152, IBSS-1329091); Ryoichi Sasakawa Young Leaders Fellowship Fund; Leakey Foundation; University of Oregon.

Section: P/PM 13

Recent studies using tattooing as a model for culturally supported and purposeful stress illustrate important interactions between the endocrine and immune systems. Endocrine responses to novel stressors normally include temporary immunosuppression but enhanced immune levels to relatively higher tattoo experience (more tattoos or hours being tattooed over time) suggest allostatic changes occur as adaptations to repeated short-term stress (Lynn et al. 2016, 2019). We sought to replicate these findings in a larger sample of participants (n = 50) collected at a tattoo festival and to investigate the mechanisms of immune activity. We investigated if IgA levels are related to faster healing or other immune activity. We compared immunoglobulin A (IgA) as a biomarker of immune response to bacteria-killing activity using a recently developed salivary assay. One of the issues with using secretory IgA and similar biomarkers is that they can be impacted by oral hygiene, which is relatively poor among many people and difficult to control for in field settings. Furthermore, tattooing as a physiological stressor may stimulate immune response, but tattooing as a cultural practice is often associated with other risk factors that can compromise immune or biomarker measurements, such as smoking, drinking, or drug use. Using the bacteria-killing treatment, we were able to partially control for this challenge. We describe the total bacteria killing activity in samples collected at the beginning of and an hour into receiving tattoos with respect to nicotine and marijuana use and compare these pre-post tattoo measures to IgA, C-reactive protein, and cortisol.

Section: P/PM 14

Skeletal growth may be subject to trade-offs against immune function. While such trade-offs have been explored in relation to linear growth, less attention has been paid to processes of bone formation and resorption. Advances in biomarker assays permit novel preliminary investigations into associations between markers of immune function and bone formation/resorption in remote subsistence populations. Here, we investigate whether biomarkers of immune function (total immunoglobulins G and E [IgG, IgE]) and inflammation (C-reactive protein [CRP]) predict levels of osteocalcin (OC; an approximation of bone formation) and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRACP-5b; a marker of bone matrix degradation). We investigate this relationship among Amazonian Shuar children and young adults (n = 67, ages 3-20 years; males: 33; females: 34). Age- and sex-specific standardized z-scores for height, weight, and BMI were calculated using Shuar references. Biomarkers were analyzed in dried blood spots using established procedures; biomarker concentrations were log-transformed due to non-normality. Stepwise linear regressions investigated relationships between OC and TRACP-5b (as outcomes and predictors in separate analyses) and anthropometric and immune function variables (as predictors). Higher OC levels were found among individuals who are taller for age, have higher CRP, and lower TRACP-5b (R 2 = .383, P < 0.001). Higher TRACP-5b was associated with higher IgE and lower OC concentrations (R 2 = .209, P < 0.01). Results suggest that bone formation and resorption processes may be associated with immune and inflammatory biomarkers that either indicate acute (i.e., CRP) or chronic (i.e., IgE) activation of immune function, although these relationships are complex.
SUPPORT: Wenner-Gren Engaged Anthropology Grant, PSC CUNY Award, University of Oregon Travel Grant, Wenner-Gren Foundation (8476, 7970); NSF Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant (BCS-1341165, BCS-0824602, BCS-0925910); NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (2011109300); NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Science Research; Ryoichi Sasakawa Young Leaders Fellowship Fund; Leakey Foundation

Section: P/AM 81

Fermentation is a widely used food preparation method that lies at the crux of nutrition, culture, and biology. Fermented foods are a salient component of diet as they are both a prebiotic and a probiotic. Prebiotics are food items containing non-digestible chemicals that promote the growth of specific microorganisms. Probiotics are food items that contain live bacterial cultures capable of colonizing a host’s gut. The human gut houses a complex and dynamic community of microorganisms whose metabolic byproducts impact health. Because of the number of live colonies required for fermentation and the secondary metabolites produced by those colonies, fermented foods have a profound impact on the human gut microbiome. This study assesses the link between the rate of fermented food consumption and gut microbiota composition to evaluate the energetic and anti-inflammatory properties of fermented foods. We investigated the rate of fermented food consumption, gut microbiota profiles, and cardiometabolic health across several populations that displayed different levels of fermented food consumption. Data for the study were obtained from the Human Microbiome Project database and analyzed using MetaPhlAn and HUMAnN2 to obtain species-level data. Microbial metabolic pathways were analyzed using QIIME2. There is a positive association between the level of fermented food consumption and gut microbial diversity composition (function: PERMANOVA F1,170 = 51.9, P <0.001). This study contributes to the emerging field of microbiome research by proposing new mechanisms by which diet indirectly impacts cardiometabolic health via microbial diversity.

Section: FT B

C-reactive protein (CRP) is an inflammatory response molecule that can help assess disease status and risk. Interestingly, human populations differ in baseline CRP level averages. The CRP gene is polymorphic with many alleles in linkage disequilibrium (LD). Characterizing population specific CRP variation and possible predisposition to certain health outcomes has yet to be explored on a worldwide level. Previously, we sequenced the CRP gene in participants from the Pacific Island nation of Vanuatu and found alleles associated with both an increase and decrease in CRP serum levels (rs3091244T/A and rs1205T, respectively). In this current study, we genotyped Kenyan (n = 37), Bali (n = 29) and Papua New Guinea (n = 62) individuals. Additionally, data from gnomAD and 1000 Genomes was included (n = 19 populations). Next, we analyzed CRP allele frequencies and LD patterns of common alleles rs3091244, rs1417938, rs1130864, and rs1205. African populations had the highest percentage of rs3091244T/A alleles but had no LD. East Asians had a higher frequency of rs1205T alleles and ¾ alleles were in LD. European populations were all in LD, including rs3091244A and rs1205T. For greater visualization, we assigned relative CRP serum values for each genotype and then generated a plot of expected baseline CRP values for each population. The observed trend supports an underlying genetic contribution to known population CRP level differences. We propose that CRP variation may have been selected upon outside of Africa, thus creating regional differences and potentially affecting health outcomes. Finally, CRP genotyping can be performed easily and can therefore complement hormone studies in Human Biology.

Section: FT A

This study documents inequalities in childhood IQ trajectories of Guatemala City children, aged 6-15 years and born 1961-1993, according to school attended, height-for-age Z-scores (HAZ) and over time. IQ data come from the Universidad del Valle de Guatemala Longitudinal Study of Child and Adolescent Development. IQ was measured using standardised tests from the Otis-Lennon Mental Ability Test-series. A multilevel model was developed to describe 60 986 IQ observations (level 1), in 22 724 children (level 2), in five schools representing students of different socioeconomic position (SEP) (level 3). Average IQ trajectories differed by school. The inequality in average IQ at age 11 years between the students of high and low SEP schools was 28.7 points. A one-unit increase in HAZ was associated with a 1.42 (0.72, 2.11) unit higher IQ if HAZ was < 0, this association was stronger in public compared to private schools. Conversely, one unit increase in HAZ was only associated with a 0.3 (0.001, 0.5) unit higher IQ if HAZ was ≥ 0. With each birth year increase, IQ at age 11 years increased by 0.14 (95% CI 0.12, 0.16) units, although this Flynn effect attenuated slightly across adolescence. We found no evidence of secular change in the inequality in IQ trajectories (according to school or HAZ). Shorter children from disadvantaged schools in Guatemala City suffer the most inequality in IQ, possibly reflecting the damaging effects of poor early life environments both for linear growth and cognitive development.

Section: FT B

Human-environment interactions shape host microbial communities, which in turn influence a multitude of factors related to health and physiology, including nutrition and immunity. Emerging evidence suggests that direct contact with the environment, including other people, promotes microbial sharing. As such, social interactions may help spread important microbes between individuals. Because caregiver behaviors promote direct skin-to-skin contact with infants (e.g., through holding and carrying), social interactions between infants, mothers, and alloparents likely influence the acquisition of skin microbes early in life. We explored allocare and the skin microbiome in 47 infants across four cohorts in Mexico (rural; peri-urban; and urban) and the USA (urban), where sociocultural differences likely drive variation in allocare across the communities. Skin swab samples were collected from three different body sites on each infant, and questionnaires administered to the mother addressed early life environments and patterns of allocare. Almost all infants in the rural Mexican cohort receive daily allocare from someone other than the father (predominantly grandmothers and older siblings), compared to 50% of infants in the USA and peri-urban Mexican cohorts, and only one infant in the urban Mexican cohort. This variation suggests differential microbial exposures for infants and thus contributes to a novel perspective on allocare that emphasizes the role of social interactions in shaping the infant skin microbiome. By exploring the sociocultural factors that promote variation in allocare, these data help lay the groundwork for future studies that address patterns of early life microbial acquisition, development, and health outcomes.

Section: P/AM 44

Nuñoa, a high-altitude district in Southern Peru, has been the site of numerous anthropological research studies over the past fifty years. Studies have included anthropometric measurements and nutritional intake of residents in the region, providing a comprehensive record throughout a period of major political, economic, and social change. In this study, the authors seek to evaluate secular trends in height, weight, triceps skinfolds, and body mass index (BMI) among adults for evidence of a nutritional transition resulting from delocalized food systems and changing dietary patterns in the district. Anthropometric data from adults collected by anthropologists in the 1960s (142 females, 163 males), 1980s (176 females, 145 males), and 2010s (172 females, 16 males) are evaluated. In order to account for growth that may still be occurring in young adults, loss of height in older adults, and general height differences between males and females, data is divided by sex and the following age categories: 19-24 years, 25-64 years, and greater than 65 years. Preliminary analysis of variance (ANOVA) reveals that mean height (females P = 0.000, males P = 0.0238), BMI (females P = 0.000, males P = 0.000), and adiposity (females P = 0.000, males P = 0.000), determined by triceps skinfolds, in both females and males have increased over the past fifty years. For females, the largest increase in height and BMI occurs between the 1980s and 2010s. For males, the largest increase in height and BMI occurs between the 1960s and 1980s. This temporal difference suggests that a nutritional transition may have impacted men in Nuñoa before it impacted women.

Section: FT B

Evolutionary-based theories predict that high mortality environments select for faster life histories—earlier reproduction and higher fertility. However, cues of mortality risk and pathways of influence remain poorly understood. We investigate the effects of childhood exposure to sibling deaths on fertility among 122 Bolivian forager-farmer women. Fertility and exposure to sibling deaths were assessed from detailed reproductive histories. Mortality perceptions and reproductive preferences were gathered via survey. Linear mixed models controlling for relevant covariates suggest sibling deaths had no effect on women’s preferred age at first birth for their offspring, but women whose mothers had high infant-deaths-for-parity were 1.95 ( P = 0.04) times more likely to prefer high fertility for daughters than women whose mothers had low infant-deaths-for-parity. However, Cox survival analyses suggest siblings’ deaths before women were born associate with older age at first birth (β(S.E.) = 0.33(0.14), P < 0.05) and lower parity-for-age (β(S.E.) = 0.25(0.15), P < 0.10), whereas younger siblings’ deaths associate with younger age at first birth (β(S.E.) = −0.39 (0.13), P < 0.01) but not parity-for-age. Our results suggest that sibling deaths are an important but time-dependent cue. Unwitnessed older sibling deaths, that may promote greater parental investment by women’s parents, may motivate a slower life history, but witnessed younger sibling deaths may trigger bereavement psychology and lead to a faster life history. Cross-cultural differences in fertility are explored through comparisons with rural Bangladeshi and USA undergraduate women. We help bridge the gap between life history expectations based on exogenous mortality measures versus lived experience.

Section: P/AM 31

According to the Centers for Disease Control, Alabama had the United States’ highest infant mortality rate (IMR) in 2014. The Alabama Department of Public Health reported in 2015 the IMR for White residents was 5.2%, but among Black and Other residents it was 14.4%. Here, I provide geographical data on IMR by county and demographic group, location of hospitals with obstetric centers, rural and low income communities across Alabama, in addition to case studies to better understand the implications of Alabama’s IMR and to address factors in the overall gap in treatment between demographic groups. Data suggest the IMR tends to be highest for Whites in rural counties, and especially those with fewer hospitals in the region, but higher for African Americans in counties surrounding large cities. Case studies of birth experiences from low-income minority women in rural areas were compared to case studies of higher income women from urban and suburban areas. Obstetric care experience for rural-dwelling minority women was characterized by different barriers than for urban- and suburban-dwelling women, such as access to care and transportation. These narratives, when combined with geographical analyses, elucidate treatment gaps in underserved populations that inform where improvement can be made in Alabama’s obstetric care. This study highlights how human reproduction is affected by structural issues and their biological implications impacting communities across the United States, exacerbated by the lack of access to care.

Section: P/AM 6

Occupational stress in first responder personnel is important because it increases physiological stress and can lead to burnout. This study investigated perceived and biomarker stress (salivary cortisol). Salivary cortisol is a key hormone in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, and an indicator of stress. This project used a mixed-methods biocultural approach to understanding the occupationally induced stress response in first responders. Salivary cortisol was collected from 16 participants 5 times/day over three days (one day on, two days off) using the passive drool technique. In addition, heart rate (Polar H7) and accelerometry (GT3X-BT Actigraph) were measured over the same three days along with baseline blood pressure and anthropometrics. Occupational questionnaires and post-data collection interviews were used to provide context with responders’ work shifts. A modified version of Cohen's perceived stress scale was used to classify work related stress events. It was predicted that participants with higher perceived stress would present with delayed reactivity, measured by the time taken for cortisol to return to baseline after a stressful event. It was found that participants with higher perceived stress showed greater reactivity from baseline and increased heart rate variability on working days than non-work days. Full-time personnel had heightened baseline cortisol levels and took longer to return to baseline following a stressful event than did part-time individuals. This, and other studies looking more broadly at occupational effects for first responders and increased rates of suicide, show a pressing demand for additional consideration of this issue.
Funding: Office of Undergraduate Res. @ UNC-CH

Section: P/AM 55

Leptin is primarily an adipocyte-secreted hormone, has been shown to be highly related to measures of fatness, and plays an important role in energy regulation and in several other physiological systems (e.g. reproduction, immune function). Although originally studied in relation to obesity, its primary role is most likely as a signal of energy deficits, acting in ways to prevent starvation. Despite this role, much of the research on leptin has focused on a circumscribed set of affluent populations, with large adipose stores and a history of relative energy abundance. This study presents and validates an electrochemiluminescent assay for analyzing leptin in dried blood spots (DBS). The application of DBS rather than traditional serum- or plasma-based assays will facilitate data collection in non-clinical settings across a wider range of populations. This method shows good agreement between sixty-nine matched serum and bloodspot samples (r = 0.909, P < 0.001). The assay shows low levels of intra-assay and inter-assay levels of variation; low, medium, and high controls show coefficients of variation less than ten percent on both measures. Additionally, using this method we present a preliminary analysis of leptin results from 1643 Filipino women age 43 to 75 years. These women show an average DBS leptin level of 6.15 ng/mL ± 6.02 (SD). As expected, leptin levels show a strong correlation with measures of fatness, including percent body fat (r = 0.604, P < 0.001) and body mass index (r = 0.680, P < 0.001).

Section: P/AM 49

As a theoretical perspective, the developmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD) paradigm has yielded a large number of insights on the relationship between early nutrition and later health. The effects of early nutrition alter the function and form of many body systems, including body composition. The purpose of this study was to assess the relationship between birthweight and upper arm anthropometry in United States children. Using the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from 2005-2010, I analyzed 3155 children between the ages of 1 and 5 years. I converted mid upper arm circumference and triceps skinfold measures to upper arm fat area (MUAFA) and upper arm muscle area (MUAMA) using standard equations and converted these to z-scores-for-age (MUAFAZ and MUAMAZ). Control variables included height-for-age z-score (HAZ; WHO Child Growth Standards), age in months, and sex. I constructed two statistical models with MUAFAZ and MUAMAZ as dependent variables using PROC SURVEYREG in SAS 9.4. In the arm fat model, birth weight and sex were not significantly associated with MUAFAZ, while HAZ and age were significantly positively associated with MUAFA ( P < 0.001). In the arm muscle model, MUAMAZ was significantly positively associated with birth weight, age in months, and HAZ; and negatively associated with male sex ( P < 0.001). In conclusion, low birth weight appears to exhibit its effect on body composition via lower muscle mass rather than higher subcutaneous adiposity in U.S. children. This work joins the growing number of studies that show a relationship between muscle mass/strength and birth weight.

Section: PLENARY

Pregnancy nutrition impacts maternal-infant health and chronic disease risk later in the life course. As such, Public Health is increasingly promoting a healthy pregnancy diet and monitoring Gestational Weight Gain (GWG). Health Canada provides GWG guidelines and suggests that pregnant women only need a little more food each day, e.g. “half a bagel with cheese”. They identify those who are “…Aboriginal, less educated, and less than 25 years old” as at higher risk for excessive GWG. Thus, the normative, healthy pregnant body is lean, educated, and consumes Eurocentric foods. In reality, however, pregnant people embody complex foodways, mediated by social inequities, and pregnancy cravings and aversions.
The Mothers to Babies study (M2B) located in Hamilton, Ontario used mixed methods to investigate knowledge and perspectives about pregnancy nutrition. Survey findings from 404 pregnant people from diverse backgrounds indicated that the normal pregnant body is difficult to obtain: 68% of respondents received advice from their healthcare providers about GWG but 45% did not know the appropriate GWG according to guidelines; 59% were worried about gaining too much weight. Furthermore, 21% of respondents were food insecure and 65% reported lack of time to prepare healthy meals. In focus groups pregnant/postpartum people raised concerns about body image and eating unhealthy foods due to nausea/vomiting and food cravings. Construction of the “normal”, healthy pregnancy body pathologizes deviations from the ideal, leading to anxiety about achieving the ideal pregnant body. We need to improve communication of this information to support more positive pathways to healthy pregnancy.

Section: FT A

Global investigation of depression among older adults is critical due to its high prevalence, the negative impacts on health, and prediction of mortality. Cross-country comparisons of depression prevalence have been useful understanding global patterns, identifying cultural variance in depression diagnosis and symptom reporting, and informing clinical and policy interventions by accounting for regional contexts. We sought to identify factors predicting depression by symptom reporting using samples of adults aged 50 years and older in China (n = 13,368) and Mexico (n = 2,703) from the first wave of the World Health Organization (WHO) study on global AGEing and adult health (SAGE). Binominal logistical regressions were used to assess if location, functional health, self-rated health, access to health, health services satisfaction, stigma and social cohesion were significant predictors. In both countries younger ages, poor functional quality of life, and low of satisfaction with healthcare were associated with greater depression. In China, low income, urban residence, and poor self-rated health were the significant predictors while in Mexico being female and lower educational attainment mattered. Overall, our study indicates that functional health, health services satisfaction and aging are significant predictors of depression in both China and Mexico. However, we found substantial heterogeneity in predictors of depression between the two nations. Comprehensive survey data on older adult health offers the opportunity to make cross-country analysis and our results set the stage for further investigation of what drives the observed differences. Clinical interventions should consider contexts such as urban poverty and depression in rural China.
Funding:NIA through NIH R01-AG034479 and Interagency Agreements (OGHA 04034785; YA1323-08-CN-0020; Y1-AG-1005-01) with WHO

Section: P/AM 82

There is a growing interest in how human bodies acclimatize to extreme conditions, particularly how individual differences, such as prior training and experience (e.g. at high altitude) may influence physiological health after acclimatizing. Heart rate, a relevant component of metabolic function, is a widely used measure of cardiovascular fitness and health. We assessed individuals (n = 18) on a 3-month long physically intensive course through the Rocky Mountains at the National Outdoor Leadership School. Based on daytime heart rate collected every 10 seconds over a week, we calculated average daily minimum heart rate (MHR). We tested whether MHR in the early phases of the expedition was higher than the later stages of the course. Prior physical training and better cardiovascular health may have helped ease the acclimatization process (i.e. lower MHR). There were no significant differences in MHR for early vs. late stages of the expedition. Self-reported athleticism did not predict MHR. MHR was reduced among individuals with lower body fat, and men had lower MHR on the course compared to women ( P < 0.05). Sex and body fat were strongly related and when modeled together neither were significant predictors of MHR. These findings are in line with prior research on differences in resting heart rate between men and women. Though these results are preliminary, we suggest that future research with a larger sample size should examine the importance of body fat, as a unit of energy storage and a correlate of cardiovascular fitness, as potentially relevant to metabolic function during acclimatization.

Section: P/PM 6

From an evolutionary perspective, the timing of reproductive maturation is considered as a life history trait that captures dimensions of an individual’s energetic experience during development. However, some elements of these relationships are rapidly being transformed as new global economic forces interact with nutritional shifts. The increasing number of reports in the literature on the association between high BMI and advanced age at menarche suggests that a trend towards earlier maturation may be a concomitant effect of the overweight/obesity epidemic. Recent reports highlight the worrying increase in the prevalence of overweight and obesity in young children alongside persisting under-nutrition, a scenario particularly marked in rural, poor and food-insecure groups in low and middle-income countries. I review the literature on worldwide trends in age at menarche in 20th century to advance some hypotheses on the consequences of the double burden of malnutrition on reproductive maturation, the potential mechanisms and its implication for health.

Section: P/AM 48

Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a metabolically costly heat-generating tissue activated under cold conditions, which may have played a crucial role in human cold adaptation. However, little is known about the seasonality of BAT activation. This study compared summer and winter patterns in BAT activity in upstate New York. BAT was inferred by combining metabolic rate (MR) measurements and thermal imaging under room temperature (RT) and mild cold exposure (CE) in two separate but overlapping cohorts. The summer portion of the study took place from May-October 2018 (external temperature >15°C) and winter measurements were taken February-April 2019 (external temperature <10°C). The summer sample consisted of 59 participants (females n = 37, ages:18-51). The winter sample consisted to 60 participants (females n = 36, ages:18-63) 44 of which also participated in the summer. While not significant, results showed greater MR measurements during winter compared to summer at RT and CE. However, suprascapular skin temperatures under both conditions were significantly higher during colder months ( P <0.05). These findings suggest that BAT may generate heat more efficiently over a longer period of time in winter months as evidenced by a reduction of its associated metabolic cost, indicating a seasonal pattern in BAT activity. This is supported by significant increases in MR during initial cooling followed by a gradual decline over time. This seasonal metabolic buffering of BAT activity in a temperate climate sample reduces the energetic cost of heat production and thus further supports the implication of BAT in cold adaption.

Section: PLENARY

Skin, hair, and iris pigmentation are easily visible traits that show extensive variation across the human species. However, until recently much of our understanding of this variation, its underlying genetic architecture, and evolutionary history has been derived from studies of populations of primarily European ancestry or from studies contrasting Europeans to other populations. This narrow focus has impacted views of “normal” pigmentation diversity, biology, and evolution, as well as influenced the development of tools used in phenotypic prediction and in assessing skin response to ultra-violet radiation and associated cancer risks. Although recent research has highlighted the importance of looking outside of Europe to identify novel and relevant genetic mutations associated with variation in pigmentation and other complex traits, our understanding of pigmentation diversity and its underlying biology remains limited by this primarily European focus. In this talk I draw on my own investigations of pigmentation diversity and associated genetic variation in multiple populations, as well as recent advances from others in the field of pigmentation genetics, to demonstrate how the normalization of skin, hair, and iris pigmentary traits in European populations limits our understanding of the complexity of pigmentation in humans, erases or discounts the importance of variation in other populations, and has implications for how scientists in multiple fields, including anthropology, human genetics, medicine, and forensics investigate and understand pigmentation and the underlying causes of its variation.

Section: PODIUM C

Elevated resting metabolic rates (RMR kcal/day) are a well-established mechanism for maintaining core body temperature among cold climate populations. Recently, however, a high degree of interindividual variation has been noted among Inuit and Siberian populations. To further examine the presence of and variability in RMR among cold climate populations, we measured RMR among 20 reindeer herders (5 females and 15 males) from seven herding districts surrounding the Arctic Circle of Finland in January of 2019. Females had a mean RMR of 1798 ± 216 kcal/day and males 1753 ± 503 kcal/day. When scaling RMR to body mass and fat-free mass, females had a significantly higher RMR relative to males ( P < 0.01). Contrary to previous studies, measured RMR among males was not significantly different from RMR predictive equations for males ( P > 0.05). However, predictive equations significantly underestimated female RMR by a mean of 25.2% ± 5.9 ( P < 0.01), which is consistent with previous work. These results mirror two earlier findings, though in ways previously unseen, that in this population: 1) there is a high degree of RMR interindividual variability, but only among males 2) and that there is evidence for elevated RMR, but only among females. Though the sample size is small, this work suggests that within this population there may be sex-based differences in metabolic adaptations to cold climates. Future research on physical activity and endocrinological differences between the sexes could elucidate the physiological and behavioral mechanisms responsible for these observed differences in RMR.

Section: P/AM 33

B-vitamins are important for human health through their roles in cell metabolism. B-vitamins from animal foods are more abundant than plant foods. The vitamin content in maternal diet during lactation may influence infant health, particularly in populations with high variance in animal food consumption. While maternal nutrition is generally associated with infant health, existing literature is scant regarding maternal B-vitamin intake postnatal and childhood morbidity. The present study, therefore, determined if child morbidity could be predicted by maternal intake of B-vitamins, focusing on B12 (vit.B12) and B9 (folate). We hypothesized that vit.B12/folate content in maternal diet would protect child against morbidity. Cross-sectional data on 10-day morbidity recalls (presence/absence of diarrhea, fever, or cough) from a convenience sample (n = 85) of breastfeeding mother-infant dyads from northern Kenya were utilized. The vitamin content in maternal diet was calculated from 24-hr dietary recalls. Logistic regression models estimated the odds of each symptom associated with vit.B12/folate. After adjusting for inflammation and time postpartum, maternal vit.B12 increased the odds of fever (OR = 1.566, P = 0.048), but decreased the odds of diarrhea (OR = .082, P = 0.040). It was not associated with the odds of cough. Folate was not associated with any of the symptoms. The results suggest that maternal vit. B12 intake may protect breastfeeding children from diarrhea as hypothesized but may also increase their risk of fever, contrary to our hypothesis. Further research is needed to clarify the impact of maternal intake of B-vitamins on child health and the pathways connecting the two.
African Futures Research Leadership Program, the Alliance for African Partnership, Michigan State University; National Science Foundation (BCS-0622358, BCS-1638167); Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research (Gr. 7460, Gr. 9278).

Section: PODIUM B

Children's growth status remains an important measure of health, development and nutrition and has commonly been used as a proxy for advancements in a country's health, human capital and economic development. Using 145 publicly available Demographic Health Surveys of children under 5 years across 64 countries from 2000 to 2018 we created a multi-country pseudo-longitudinal dataset of children's heights using cross-sectional data. The Super-Imposition by Translation And Rotation (SITAR) modeling approach were applied to mean height data for boys and girls within each country and survey year to estimate random effect parameters of height trajectories. The final SITAR model explained 81% of the between-survey variation in mean boys’ height and 80% in mean girls' height. Postnatal size was ≥ 90% explained by average size at birth and postnatal intensity regardless of sex. Size parameters for boys and girls (relative to the WHO growth standards) were distributed non-normally around a mean of -5.2 cm for boys (range: −7.9 cm to −1.6 cm) and -4.9 cm (range: −7.7 cm to −1.2 cm) for girls. Across all surveys, boys exhibited 10% slower growth (range: 19.7% cm slower to 1.6 % faster) and girls 11% slower growth compared to the WHO (range: 21.4% cm slower to 1.0 % faster). We have successfully demonstrated and applied SITAR for modeling child height using multi-country pseudo-longitudinal data. We have shown that SITAR provides a feasible alternative approach to summarizing height trajectories based on survey data. The SITAR intensity parameter may be a useful indicator for tracking and determining progress in low- and middle-income countries.

Section: FT B

Globally, women are at greater risk for obesity than men, a phenomenon that has not been fully explained. One possible contributor to the gender gap in obesity is differences in substance use patterns between men and women. This study examines the association between gender, body composition, and alcohol, tobacco, and kava use in Vanuatu, a Pacific Island nation undergoing a rapid health transition. Kava is a traditional beverage that produces anxiolytic and soporific effects. Data were collected in June-August 2017 on two islands (Efate and Aneityum) representing an urban and rural comparison. Participants (n = 369) completed a sociobehavioral survey, including questions on frequency (days per week) of tobacco, alcohol, and kava use, and underwent multiple anthropometric measurements, including height, weight, body mass index (BMI), and circumference and skinfold measurements on the limbs and trunk. Men were significantly more likely to consume all substances than women. Additionally, in men each additional day of tobacco smoking per week was associated with a significant ( P <0.01) reduction in all measurements of body size and fat, including a 0.8 kg decrease in weight, a 0.27-point decrease in BMI, and a 0.6 cm reduction in waist circumference. Kava drinking also showed a negative association with weight, BMI, and sum of skinfolds in men. In contrast, no substance was significantly associated with any measure of body composition or size in women. These results indicate that tobacco and kava consumption have sex-specific relationships with body size and composition.
Funding: This research was supported by the Wenner Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, Post-PhD Research Grant, Protocol Number 2147-13.

Section: P/AM 50

Brown adipose tissue (BAT), a highly metabolically active form of fat, promotes non-shivering thermogenesis in response to cold exposure, enhances insulin activity, and regulates lipid metabolism. Recent studies (pediatric and adult) suggest that infrared thermal imaging can be used to assess cold-induced changes in temperatures of skin overlying BAT depots, but no feasibility studies have been conducted in infants. We investigated the feasibility of using infrared thermal imaging to measure BAT activity in Samoan infants. Changes in maximum skin temperature at the supraclavicular region were determined using thermal imaging following a mild 5-minute cooling condition (removal of clothes in room temperature: 24-25°C) in 67 Samoan infants. Temperature changes of the forehead and hand, known BAT-free regions, were measured to serve as a comparison. Infants who exhibited increases in hand and forehead temperature after cold exposure were excluded from analysis, reducing the effective sample size to 19 infants. This large reduction in sample size suggests that our cooling condition requires significant improvement. On average, the skin temperature of the forehead and hand dropped significantly ( P < 0.001), while the skin temperature of the supraclavicular area remained constant. Further, participants with greater decreases in forehead temperature exhibit greater supraclavicular thermogenesis ( P = 0.0838), suggesting the presence of BAT in this region. With forthcoming dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry body composition data, we will further explore BAT's role in energetic regulation in these infants. While this study provides proof-of-concept for non-invasive in-vivo testing of BAT activity in infants, it also invites discussion of possible avenues for further protocol refinement.

Section: FT B

Oral probiotic treatments are occasionally prescribed to individuals suffering from poor oral health states. However, the extent to which these short-term probiotics alter the oral microbial ecosystem is still debated. Previous studies have shown no significant difference in alpha or beta diversity in short term probiotic use but have shown an increase or decrease in abundance of particular pathogenic microbial strains. Here, we investigate the effects of probiotics on the microbiome in plaque from patients with periimplantitis. Plaque samples were taken from 13 patients from three locations: periodontal pockets of healthy teeth, teeth impacted by periodontitis, and those with periimplantitis. These were sampled before and after 90 days of being administered either a placebo or probiotic treatment ( Streptococcus salivarius Lactobacillus reuteri and L. paracasei ). We sequenced the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene using an Illumina MiSeq and analyzed the data using QIIME and R packages. We observe no differences in alpha diversity and beta diversity between placebo and probiotic recipients. However, we report significant differences in abundance between treatment groups for 20 bacterial strains including an increase in Porphyromonas gingivalis in the probiotic group, a bacterial strain that is part of the Red Complex and traditionally associated with periodontitis. These findings have extensive impacts on how we view the effectiveness of probiotic treatments on complex oral health states in clinical dentistry.

Section: P/AM 37

Mothers can confer specific immunity, which an infant’s inexperienced immune system has yet to attain, through transfer of antibodies across the placenta during pregnancy or via breastmilk to an infant. Maternal cells and DNA can also traffic across the placenta, and likely during labor/delivery and breastfeeding, to the offspring. Retention of a small quantity of these maternal cells or DNA by the offspring is called maternal origin microchimerism (MMc). A recent study found, in cases of placental malaria, children with greater MMc were more likely to be infected with malaria parasites but less likely to have symptoms or be hospitalized for malaria symptoms. Whether MMc might have protective effects against symptoms of other infectious diseases is currently unknown. We preregistered the research plan for this study at the Open Science Framework ( https://osf.io/qxenf/ ) and tested whether women in the Philippines with greater MMc had decreased diarrheal or respiratory morbidity during their first two years of life. In multiple regression models, we found no significant relationship between MMc and infant diarrheal prevalence or respiratory morbidity. However, our assays for MMc rely on distinguishing mother from offspring by a genetic marker, mostly in the HLA region of the genome, which is responsible for immune function. The offspring we were unable to test for MMc had near-significantly lower diarrheal ( P = 0.060) and significantly lower respiratory morbidity ( P = 0.032). That these individuals also had greater HLA-compatibility with their mothers suggests that HLA-compatibility may have obscured our ability to detect a relationship between MMc and early life infection.

Section: P/AM 35

Concentration variation in human milk immune components in relation to infant illness can be understood from two contrasting paradigms. The protective model posits that initial high immune component concentrations in milk prevent infant illness. The responsive model proposes that milk immune component concentrations increase in response to infant illness. Previous research reported an increase in lactoferrin, an iron-binding protein important for antibacterial and antiviral activities, in response to infant illness, supporting the responsive framework. Less is known about how concurrent maternal-infant illness status relates to lactoferrin. This research explored the responsive paradigm for human milk lactoferrin and maternal-infant illness status. We hypothesized that infant illness would trigger maternal illness, resulting in higher lactoferrin. If so, elevated lactoferrin must be associated with concurrent maternal-infant illness but not with infant-only illness. Methods: A convenience sample (n = 19) of milk specimens from predominantly anemic mothers in northern Kenya were assayed for lactoferrin using ELISA. Morbidity symptom recall data (presence/absence) were utilized to evaluate the association with lactoferrin using regression models. Lactoferrin levels were compared between every combination of maternal-infant illness status. Results: Maternal morbidity was a positive predictor of lactoferrin ( P = 0.016). Lactoferrin was significantly higher in mother-infant dyads with both or neither ill than infant-only-ill dyads. There were no mother-only-ill dyads. Conclusion: These results suggest that maternal illness status is important to consider when studying lactoferrin variation in response to infant illness. Given the small sample size, results are preliminary. This presentation will be based on a larger sample size.
Funding: National Science Foundation (BCS-0622358, BCS-1638167); Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research (Gr. 7460, Gr. 9278).

Section: P/PM 15

Quantitative dietary intake is labor intensive and costly, so programmatic and surveillance studies tend to rely on simplified indicators. Building on Caswell et al.’s work foundation, we built tablet-based data collection 24-hour dietary recall tool for use among adults and children in Tanzania. We used an Android platform in Open Data Kit and linked it to the Tanzanian food composition table (FCT). The module allows for collection of food groups, food lists, meals, ingredients, quantity and amount consumed, breastfeeding frequency, and a recipe feature to collect details (e.g., cooked and uncooked weights). To accurately capture the dietary intake the tool contains summary features such as time between meals and a review of meals and portion size consumed. The mobile tool was used to collect dietary intake (1) among 960 children 0–18 months of age enrolled in the EFFECTS trial (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03759821) in Mara, Tanzania, and (2) among adult families enrolled in the DECIDE study in Dar es Salaam. Field workers were trained using paper-based methods with food models followed by tablet-based training. Because the tool is linked to the Tanzanian FCT and nutrient intake for the individual is embedded, the team can assess dietary intake data for quality assurance and analysis. Demonstration of the tool along with dietary profiles, food patterns, food ways and analysis are presented. This tool will be made available to the public in December 2020 and can be adapted to different contexts. Mobile-based flexible platforms linked to a pre-existing FCT demystifies the black box processes of converting dietary intake to nutrient intake, thus reducing the time, labor, and costs associated with paper-based 24hr-DR approaches.
Funding Sources: Drivers of Food Choice Grants Program by Bill and Melinda Gates foundation and UK AID.

Section: P/AM 14

Children often experience frequent residential moves as unpredictable and uncontrollable events that can activate stress-responsive physiology. Previous studies have demonstrated the negative impact of childhood residential mobility on health-relevant outcomes, such as exacerbated risk behaviors (e.g. alcohol and drug use) in young adulthood. However, little prior research has explored whether high residential mobility prior to adulthood is linked to later-life stress-related physiology and mental well-being. To examine these issues, we drew on longitudinal data collected from a large nationally representative sample of individuals (n = 2814) enrolled in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). We specifically tested whether high residential mobility (2+ moves) in adolescence (Waves I and II; 1997-1999) was linked to elevated physiological markers (Epstein-Barr virus [EBV] antibody titers; C-reactive protein [CRP]) and self-reports of psychosocial stress in adulthood (Wave IV; 2008), adjusting for race/ethnicity, sex, and SES in adolescence and adulthood. Residential instability was not associated with CRP. However, individuals who moved at least twice during both Waves I and II had significantly increased EBV antibodies and also reported greater psychosocial stress in Wave IV when compared to those who did not move over the same time period. Self-reported stress did not meaningfully attenuate the relationship between residential instability and EBV, indicating that EBV and perceived stress were independently linked to earlier life residential instability. These longitudinal results are consistent with models and past results that emphasize that adverse developmental experiences can have cascading long-term effects on health and biology.

Section: PODIUM A

Historically, anthropological research has focused on the adaptive significance of skin color to minimize the harmful effects of exposure to ultraviolet rays while maintaining vitamin D production. Yet, unanswered questions remain regarding the developmental and environmental factors that shape vitamin D production within populations. For example, gender, season of birth, urbanicity and socioeconomic factors all contribute to patterns of sun exposure, and potentially levels of vitamin D. Additionally, recent work has shown that DNA methylation is an epigenetic mechanism through which vitamin D can influence health outcomes. This study draws on longitudinal data to explore the influence of early life experiences on methylation and vitamin D metabolism. Questionnaire and methylation data from 496 participants (20-22 years) are analyzed from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey (latitude 10.3° N) to assess the influence of nutritional, economic, and social factors during infancy and childhood on methylation in the vitamin D metabolic pathway. Vitamin D was quantified using DiaSource 25(OH) Vitamin D Total ELISA kits for each participant. Regression analyses were run controlling for vitamin D intake, smoking, and adiposity, and the Benjamini and Hochberg step-up procedure was used to control for the false discovery rate. Our research suggests that early-life social and environmental factors play an important role in shaping variation in vitamin D production in young adulthood in Cebu, Philippines, providing avenues for further research into risk factors for decreased vitamin D production and areas to target for its prevention.

Section: P/AM 53

Sleep patterns—cardiometabolic disease risk factors in other populations—are poorly characterized in Samoans, who experience a high burden of cardiometabolic disease. We sought to characterize sleep in adult Samoans and explore associations with cardiometabolic conditions. We collected questionnaire data on sleep quality and timing among 491 participants (age 30-72, 54% female). Insomnia was reported using the Women’s Health Initiative Insomnia Rating Scale (0-20, low-high), and daytime sleepiness using the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (0-24, low-high). Participants self-reported the prior night’s bed- and wake-times. Sleep duration and quality were compared by age group, sex, region (rural/peri-urban/urban), and health conditions (hypertension status, diabetes status, BMI category).
Sleep duration was greatest among the youngest and oldest age groups. Women and men reported similar bedtimes, waketimes, sleep duration, and insomnia scores; men reported greater daytime sleepiness (7.33 vs 6.40, P = 0.014). Rural participants had earlier bed- and waketimes, and shorter sleep duration than urban participants. Sleepiness was higher among rural and urban than peri-urban participants (7.51, 7.76 vs 5.81, P < 0.05); insomnia scores were highest among peri-urban participants (6.91 vs 6.01, 6.36, P = 0.005). Participants with prediabetes reported earlier waketimes than participants with or without diabetes (5:46 vs 5:54, 6:12, P = 0.013). No sleep time or quality differences were detected with other health conditions. Self-reported sleep patterns and cardiometabolic health conditions are not strongly associated in this cohort. Sleep differences between cohort sub-groups indicate there may be other factors associated with cardiometabolic health affecting sleep. Additional objective sleep data is being analyzed to provide further insights.
Funding: National Institutes of Health (5R01HL093093)

Section: FT A

Studies of the neuroendocrine impacts of androgens often link testosterone to elevated mating effort at the cost of reduced paternal care, in addition to elevated energetic demands and immunomodulation. Much of this work comes from WEIRD settings where strict mating/parenting dichotomies are common. In other cultural contexts, mating and parenting effort are less distinct, with individuals pursuing multiple marital and non-marital relationships, providing for children from both relationship types, and responding dynamically to reproductive opportunities. Partitioning endocrine responses between mating and parenting effort in the context of informal partnerships is particularly problematic. To understand the dynamics of androgens in a small scale, high reproductive effort population, we explored testosterone and DHEA concentrations from afternoon saliva samples (n = 236) in Himba men and women, where both formal and informal relationships are frequent, and mating/parenting trade-offs are complex. Results of Bayesian multilevel models correcting for age, body fat, current illness, time of sample collection, and recent sexual activity indicated that marriage increased DHEA (pr[b>0] = 0.95) while having an informal relationship decreased both DHEA (pr[b]<0 = 0.97) and testosterone (pr[b<0] = 0.98) in men. Fatherhood had no impact on androgen concentrations. In women, neither marital nor informal partnership status had an impact on androgen concentrations. These findings highlight the need to understand androgen psychobiology in cultural contexts where mating/parenting dynamics are fluid, particularly when reproductive effort in non-marital relationships and resultant children is common.

Section: P/AM 8

Menarche represents a critical reproductive transition for women. Age at menarche has been associated with a broad range of negative health outcomes including diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, breast cancer, and obesity. Importantly, age at menarche appears to be affected by several environmental factors including nutrition and psychosocial stress. Notably, less is known about the influence of chronic inflammation on the pace of women’s reproductive maturation. Here we use data from a longitudinal cohort study in Guatemala to explore potential links between immune function and the pace of reproductive maturation in a group of 22 Mayan girls. To that aim, we evaluated the associations among immunomarkers (interleukin-1 β and C-reactive protein), anthropometric measures, and reproductive hormones (urinary metabolites of estrogen, progesterone, and follicle stimulating hormone). Biomarkers were quantified in urine and saliva specimens obtained in 2013 (before the girls’ first ovulatory cycles; age range: 10-13) and 2017 (after their menarche; age range: 14-16). In 2013, urinary cortisol presented mean = 54.17 ng/mL, median = 47.88 ng/mL and SD = 32.30; salivary IL-1 β had mean = 377.77 pg/mL, median = 329.28 pg/mL and SD = 261.83; and salivary CRP had mean = 862.11 pg/mL, median = 744.17 pg/mL and SD = 707.97. In 2017, girls’ urinary cortisol had mean = 42.73 ng/mL, median = 25.11 ng/mL and SD = 46.82; salivary IL-1 β had mean = 166.89 pg/mL, median = 143.34 pg/mL SD = 174.20; and salivary CRP had mean = 695.51 pg/mL, median = 609.86 pg/mL and SD = 631.90. Our results suggest that HPAA and immune function present important changes during the menarcheal transition.

Section: P/AM 83

Lyme disease, caused by Borrelia burgdorferi, is the most prevalent vector-borne disease in the United States, affecting about 300,000 people annually. B. burgdorferi is transmitted to humans and domestic dogs through the bite of infected blacklegged ticks, Ixodes scapularis, which also transmits Anaplasma phagocytophilum and Babesia microti , pathogens that cause anaplasmosis and babesiosis, respectively. Domestic dogs carry ticks into the household which can subsequently increase risk of human exposure to tick-borne diseases. This study seeks to determine human risk of Lyme disease, anaplasmosis, and babesiosis by examining the presence of tick-borne pathogens in domestic dog blood samples. Samples (n = 637) were collected from veterinary hospitals in the Upper Susquehanna River Basin in 2012 and 2013. The presence of pathogens in blood samples was determined through DNA extraction and either standard or real-time PCR. Human risk was determined by prevalence of infected domestic dogs within the Southern Tier of New York State. Prevalence of B. burgdorferi within the canine population of two counties was found to be 27.6% and A. phagocytophilum 1.8%. B. microti was not detected. Co-infections with B. burgdorferi and A. phagocytophilum was 0.9%. These results are consistent with the prevalence of these pathogens in nymphal ticks within this region, and indicate a high risk of infection for Lyme disease in dogs who may bring ticks into the household. The high prevalence of the Lyme pathogen in domestic dogs suggest the need to develop and implement prevention and mitigation strategies targeting dog owners to reduce human risk and increase awareness.

Section: FT A

Maternal stress is known to impact newborn health, many decades into the future, and possibly transgenerationally. DNA methylation (DNAm) may possibly mediate this effect, but the underlying mechanism is not known. Many studies have assumed that environmental stressors could create new epigenetic marks, i.e. ‘plasticity’, but Tobi et al. (2018) recently proposed instead that natural selection may act on existing DNAm variation between cells. In the current study, we test a hypothesis of natural selection in our ongoing investigation of maternal stress and newborn health in the Democratic Republic of Congo (n = 91). We hypothesized that infants with mothers who had high stress exposures would exhibit reduced variation in DNAm. A reduction in DNAm variation would be consistent with natural selection acting to increase an optimal epigenotype and reducing DNAm variation. DNAm data were generated using Illumina's Infinium MethylationEPIC BeadChip Array, which assays methylation at over 850,000 CpG sites. Over 700 candidate CpG sites were chosen for testing based on their association with maternal stress in an epigenome-wide association study ( P < .001). We compared the variation across candidate DNAm sites between newborns with high and low levels of maternal stress exposure using a resampling procedure that randomized stress exposure 100,000 times. Natural selection acting on existing DNAm variation is an extension of evolutionary theory and both plasticity and selection should be tested as mechanisms by which in utero environments can produce differential epigenetic patterns that may lead to altered gene expression and resultant phenotypes.
Funding statement: This research was supported by NSF grants BCS-1231264, BCS-1540372 and BCS-1719866, University of Florida (UF) Clinical and Translational Science Institute, UF College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, UF Research Opportunity Seed Fund, and the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-1315138.

Section: P/PM 5

A large number of mothers in the United States report issues with low breast milk supply (LMS). Globally, the incidence of LMS is estimated at 2-5%; in the USA this can be as high as 30-50%. Much of the theory and research around LMS developed before the recent shift towards mothers expressing and seeing their milk output. We conducted an online survey with 887 women, asking them to quantify their regular milk expression practices, volume expressed, and perceptions of this milk meeting their infant's needs. Participants were asked to view a photograph of expressed milk and then imagine that they expressed that amount. Each was exposed to one of three experimental conditions: a small volume of expressed milk (<1 ounce), an intermediate volume (4 ounces), or a large volume (>8 ounces). We predicted that: 1) Women randomized to lower volumes of milk than they typically pump will have more negative affective responses; 2) Women randomized to higher volumes of milk would have more positive affective responses. Women randomized to lower volumes of milk than they typically pump were more likely to use negative terms such as failure, depressed, and disappointed compared to women in the increased volume group. Women in the increase groups used more positive terms, such as incredible, great, and accomplished compared to women in the no change or decrease groups. Study findings demonstrate that women report a range of emotional responses to viewing expressed milk, which may also influence their personal pumping experiences and experiences with LMS.

Section: P/AM 34

The functional-morphological properties of the placenta are important influences on the intrauterine environment and fetal growth, which help set life-course health trajectories across generations. However, little is currently known about placental morphology in populations with chronic nutritional insufficiency and low birth weights. This study reports morphological and histological characteristics as well as ratios of neonatal weight (NW) to placental weight (PW) and villous surface area (VSA) in placentas from offspring of women enrolled in a longitudinal birth cohort study in Cebu, Philippines, a population marked by relatively high rates of stunting. We compare findings in Cebu to data from 15 other global populations to help contextualize variation in placental characteristics across economic/nutritional settings. Mean birth weight in Cebu was 3162 +/- 80 g (ranked 9/16) and placental weight was 454 +/- 32 g (ranked 12/16). NW:PW ratio was 7.0 (ranked 3/16). Average villous surface area for Cebu placentas was 6.5 m 2 (ranked 9/12); NW/VSA ratio was 0.048 g/m 2 (ranked 4/12). Cebu placentas produced on average more neonatal mass per unit of placental mass and per unit of villous surface area than most other populations, despite relatively lower villous surface areas and less complex surface-to-volume topography. The highly efficient placentas of women at Cebu raise questions about the trade-offs that contribute to global variation in structure and function of the placenta, as well as the mechanisms by which the placenta optimizes efficiency in different environmental contexts.

Section: PODIUM C

Obesity has reached alarming levels in the Pacific Islands. In Samoa, the prevalence of adult obesity in 2013 was estimated at 53.1% in men and 76.7% in women. Despite inflammation being a major driver of obesity-associated cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk, few studies have investigated inflammation in Samoans, and its impact on health. Our specific aims were to: 1) assess levels of high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) in adult Samoans, 2) measure associations between hsCRP and adiposity, and 3) identify factors that predict participants’ high (≥3mg/dL) or low hsCRP levels. Anthropometrics, demographics, Cohen’s Perceived Stress Scale, dietary, body composition, smoking history, and physical activity data, along with fasting serum, were collected from n = 118 adults; a subsample of participants in the Soifua Manuia “Good Health” study in Samoa. Serum hsCRP levels were analyzed via enzyme immunoassay. CRP levels ranged from 0.08-46.66 mg/dL. With outliers removed (> 10 mg/dL), visceral adipose tissue mass (VAT) was statistically associated with hsCRP values (r = .37, P = 0.00). Expected associations between inflammation and cigarette smoking, physical activity, and psychosocial stress were not observed. Sixty three percent of participants were classified as having intermediate or high CVD risks based on hsCRP values. VAT mass (OR: 4.8, P = 0.01), and female sex (OR: 3.8, P = 0.04) increased the likelihood of high CRP levels. hsCRP was positively associated with adiposity. However, the absence of strong known associates of inflammation (i.e. smoking, psychosocial stress) in this sample, suggests that further inquiry is needed into inflammation risks and pathogenesis in this Pacific Islander population.
Funding: Soifua Manuia (Adiposity): National Institutes of Health (5R01HL093093), Global Health Equity Scholars program: NIH Fogarty (5R25 TW009338)

Section: PODIUM D

The tend-and-befriend hypothesis predicts that friendship should buffer stress, and that this evolved mechanism is particularly important in women. Socioemotional selectivity theory predicts that with age, adults become especially comfortable with friends. Here, we examined these predictions in an experimental paradigm with younger (N = 16, ages 18-25) and older (N = 16, ages 60-80) adult women participating in a social communication task. Half of the participants were randomly assigned to bring a friend to participate together in the task, and the other half were paired with an unfamiliar confederate. Salivary cortisol was collected at baseline before participating in the task, and after the communication task. Saliva samples were assayed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. In a general linear mixed model, we found that participants experienced higher cortisol concentrations after the communication task compared to baseline (F 1,154 = 12.004, P < 0.001). Furthermore, participants communicating with a friend had lower cortisol concentrations than those communicating with a stranger (F 4, 154 = 4.431, P = 0.037). Neither of these effects varied with age (F 4, 154 = 2.318, P = 0.130). Younger and older dyads significantly differed in the length of their friendships (t 14 = −2.760, P = 0.015), but not in their relationship quality (t 14 = 2.046, P = 0.060). Despite having longer friendships, cortisol concentrations among older adults were not disproportionately reduced by the presence of a friend. Thus, our findings support the predictions of the tend-and-befriend hypothesis but may be contrary to socioemotional selectivity theory. We suggest friendship remains important in buffering stress through the lifespan, and that its effect is equally applicable across ages.
Research was funded by Beckman Postdoctoral Fellowships to MAR and SOY.

Section: P/AM 20

The dominant discourse around early marriage and motherhood is largely negative, in large part due to the truncation of education that is typically concurrent with these life events. However, recent, more nuanced work finds that women’s marital and reproductive timing results from a complex interplay of individual- and family-centered needs. Most existing studies either present ethnographic data on general patterns and norms or analyze large demographic datasets to identify predictors of outcomes related to women’s health and well-being. These are rarely combined in the same study. In a cross-sectional, multi-generational study of women living in southern Malawi, we use demographic and ethnographic data in combination with a vignette study to compare social norms with actual outcomes related to marriage, motherhood and education. We find substantial differences between women’s stated norms and their lived choices. A vignette study (n = 78) focused on reproductive timing and educational attainment showed strong norms condemning early pregnancy and valorizing education. In contrast, our demographic data show leaving school, concurrent with early motherhood, was common. To understand this discrepancy, we then analyzed qualitative responses from semi-structured interviews. Women identified a suite of explanations for early marriage and truncation of education, including personal safety and well-being, family needs and interests, as well as romantic ideals. Generational and life-stage differences also emerged, highlighting changing ideas about marriage, rural life and the value of education.

Section: P/AM 79

Post-menarcheal adolescent girls frequently experience anovulatory menstrual cycles and high variation in reproductive hormone concentrations. Here we investigate anovulation and variation in salivary follicular estradiol and luteal progesterone concentrations in a sample of American adolescent girls (n = 17). In this sample, two menstrual cycles were missing consecutive samples, and ovulation could not be determined. Three cycles, or twenty percent of complete cycles, were characterized as anovulatory. Variation in reproductive hormones was assessed in relation to timing of and since menarche. The average (SD) of ages at menarche was 13.15 (1.45) years (range 10-15.67 years). The average (SD) of gynecological ages was 2.44 (1.67) years (range 0-5.02 years). In this sample, age at menarche is not associated with average follicular estradiol ( P = 0.363), nor with average luteal progesterone ( P = 0.668). Similarly, gynecological age is not associated with average follicular estradiol ( P = 0.133), nor with average luteal progesterone ( P = 0.888). Including or excluding anovulatory cycles did not change the lack of association between age at menarche and gynecological age with follicular estradiol and luteal progesterone concentrations. No girls experienced precocious puberty or substantially delayed menarche for an American context, which may help explain why neither age at menarche nor gynecological age are associated with reproductive hormone concentrations in this sample. Early and late ages at menarche have previously been associated with characteristics of adolescent menstrual cycles, and this data suggests that anovulation is common during this transitional time period, even for girls who do not experience precocious or delayed puberty.
Funding: This research was supported by the NSF GRFP DGE-1144245 and DGE-1144245, and UIUC Campus Research Board Seed Grant, Beckman Fellowship, Leadership Center Leadership Fellowship, and Beckman Institute Postdoctoral Fellowship.

Section: P/AM 84

Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease in the United States, affecting an estimated 300,000 people annually. Transmission is generally well understood: Black-legged ticks become infected by a reservoir host, white-footed mice (and other small mammals), and can transmit the bacterium, Borrelia burgdorferi , to humans in a future life stage. However, beyond these basic mechanisms, human risk factors for Lyme are poorly understood. 185 active or past Lyme cases and 139 non-case controls participated in an online questionnaire designed to elucidate risk factors associated with the disease. Questions addressed demographic, lifestyle and household characteristics, and use of prevention measures. Associations with Lyme risk were modeled using logistic regression and average marginal effects were estimated. The majority of respondents were white (95%) and women (65%). When controlling for age, gender, and type of residential area, owning pets increased the probability of having Lyme disease by 11.1% ( P = 0.038). This effect was limited to cat owners ( P = 0.005; dog owners, P = 0.216). Living in rural areas increased Lyme risk by 36% ( P = 0.001) compared to living in an urban area. Participants who reported knowing someone with Lyme were more likely to wear insect repellant and perform tick checks. Cat ownership may increase risk for Lyme disease if outdoor cats bring infected ticks into their owners’ residence. Cats that pursue small rodents may also carry ticks from these animals to their owners. It may be unlikely that cat owners are as concerned about ticks on these animals as are dog owners.

Section: P/PM 3

Water needs increase during pregnancy, yet proper hydration is critical to physiological functioning. Evidence from animal models suggest that in-utero water restriction may reduce birth size. Yet, we know little about human hydration status changes throughout pregnancy or how timing of dehydration impacts birth outcomes. We used data from the Healthy Mom Zone study, a randomized-control trial aiming to regulate weight gain in 27 pregnant women with overweight/obesity. Gestational weight gain and hydration were measured weekly from ~9 weeks gestation through birth. 14 control women received standard of care; 13 intervention women received standard of care plus weekly nutritional, physical activity, and water intake advice. Urine osmolality (hydration biomarker) was measured in 652 overnight urine samples. Linear mixed effect regressions adjusting for pre-pregnancy BMI, weight change, age, trimester, intervention status, and trimester-intervention interaction demonstrate an increase in urine concentration (B = 96 mOsm/kg, SE = 27, P < .001) during the 2nd trimester compared to other trimesters. A significant trimester by intervention interaction in the 2nd trimester (B = −105 mOsm/kg, SE = 38, P = .006) revealed improved hydration in treatment versus control women. Second, linear regressions demonstrate that the number of times a woman was inadequately hydrated (Uosm>500 mOsm/kg) in the 2nd trimester was negatively associated with birth weight Z-score (B = -0.46, SE = 0.18, P = 0.005). These findings suggest intervention content on prenatal hydration improves hydration status among pregnant women and that inadequate hydration frequency in the 2nd trimester may be associated with reduced birth weight. We discuss implications of early life hydration changes for a developmental origins of health and disease framework.
Funding statement: This work was funded by NIH NHLBI 1R01H119245; NIH 1R56HL126799-01; This work was also supported by Penn State HHD start-up funds.

Section: P/AM 16

We hypothesize that changes in two critical metabolic energy modulators may mediate the adolescent transition: sleep and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPAA) function. Furthermore, we argue that sleep and stress may interact influencing the onset and pace of the adolescent transition. We investigate these interactions in 21 Mayan girls aged 12 to 15 years (avg = 13.5 y). We monitored growth (BMI and waist/hip ratios); sleep (actigraphy data - CamNtech Motionwatch8); HPAA activity (first morning urinary [FMU] cortisol); metabolic energy (FMU adiponectin); and reproductive maturity (FMU estrogen, progesterone, and follicle-stimulating hormone). Results : BMI, waist/hip ratio and the proportion of girls reaching menarche was lower in 12 than 15 year olds (BMI: 24.0 to 31.06; W/H: 0.84 to 0.80; menarche: 40% to 100%, respectively). Sleep quality was higher in older girls (sleep fragmentation 24.24% in 12yo vs 19.99% in 15yo). Cortisol levels initially increased from 12 to 13yo (36 ng/ml to 46 ng/ml), then gradually declined with age. Adiponectin levels were highest in 12yo (1.8 ng/ml) and lowest in 15yo (1.35 ng/ml). Lower energy reserve levels at age 12 coincided with an HPAA activity peak, which suggests a shift in energy allocation at the time when most girls are maturing reproductively. Increased sleep quality with age suggests an increased need for energy restoration, as girls began investing more energy into maturation of reproductive tissues and function. This study will contribute novel information about how sleep and HPAA may modulate metabolic trade-offs and the variation of reproductive maturation in girls.

Section: P/PM 7

Despite recommendations that parents and babies room-share for at least 6 months to reduce the risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome, parents often move infants into a separate room earlier to ‘improve’ infant and/or parental sleep. Here we examine changes in infant and maternal sleep when infants were moved to a separate room. Methods: Data were collected as part of a prospective longitudinal study of infant sleep involving 61 mother-baby dyads. We selected 14 dyads in which the infant was moved out of the parents’ room between 8 and 18 weeks postpartum and for whom we had in- and out-of-room observations from consecutive data collection points. Paired t-tests were used to examine infant total sleep time (TST) and longest sleep period (LSP) from maternal report and objectively measured using actigraphic monitors; maternal TST and LSP (subjective and objective); and maternal sleep disturbance and reported fatigue, before and after the infant was moved. Mothers reported significantly longer infant TST ( P = 0.002) and LSP ( P = 0.045) after the infant was moved, but actigraphic data showed no difference in either parameter. Subjective and objective measures of maternal sleep did not vary from before to after and there were no differences in reported maternal sleep disturbance score or rating of fatigue.Moving an infant out of the parental room prior to six months of age influences maternal perception of infant sleep but does not increase the amount of sleep that the infant or mother actually experiences or reduce maternal sleep disturbance or fatigue.

Section: PODIUM C

Symptoms experienced at midlife vary among individuals in relation to age, menopausal status, ethnicity, body mass index (BMI), social roles, and other factors. This study highlights symptom frequencies among women in Nagaland, India, in addition to symptom clusters, and variables associated with symptom experience. This population has a lower mean BMI compared to women in western countries, therefore we hypothesized a relatively low frequency of hot flashes among Naga women. Cross-sectional data were collected among women aged 35-65 years (n = 352) through semi-structured questionnaires and anthropometrics to determine the frequency of symptoms, as well as socio-demographic and health parameters. Bivariate analyses and linear regressions were employed to identify socio-demographic and health factors associated with symptoms, and symptom clusters were ascertained using factor analysis. In our population, the most prevalent symptoms reported were feeling tired or lack of energy (72.2%), followed by headaches (63.6%), and difficulty in concentration (63.4%). The frequency of hot flashes was 55.4%. Mean BMI was 21.7±3.4 kg/m 2 . We identified four factors, namely symptoms related to the loss of estradiol, somatic symptoms, psychosomatic symptoms, and psychosocial symptoms. In multivariable linear regression models, higher BMI was found to be inversely associated with psychosocial symptom factors after adjusting for menopausal status, socioeconomic status, education, and health status. We did not find an association between BMI and other menopausal symptom factors.

Section: PODIUM A

The connection between parity, health outcomes, and lifespan in women has been established through large meta-analyses across multiple populations. These findings are consistent with ‘costs of reproduction’ that are central to evolutionary models of aging. However, the molecular processes that link reproductive investment with disease susceptibility and shortened lifespan are not known. To clarify the proximate pathways through which costs of reproduction are incurred, we examined reproductive investment in the context of a new predictor of health and longevity based on variation in DNA methylation referred to as DNAmGrimAge. Devised using plasma protein levels closely tied to mortality, as well as age, sex, and smoking pack years, DNAmGrimAge has been extensively validated as a robust predictor of time-to-coronary heart disease, time-to-cancer, comorbidity count, and time-to-all-cause mortality. We hypothesized that measures of reproductive investment would predict accelerated DNAmGrimAge in a cohort of 393 young (20-22-year-old) women in metropolitan Cebu, Philippines. DNAmGrimAge was positively associated with pregnancy number ( P = 0.0002) in this sample, and this effect remained significant after adjusting for age and composite measures of genetic variation, urbanicity, and socioeconomic status. DNAmGrimAge was markedly accelerated during pregnancy ( P < 0.0001), especially late in gestation ( P < 0.0001), hinting at potentially transient, in addition to cumulative, changes in the maternal epigenome during pregnancy. These findings add to growing evidence that reproduction carries costs reflected in epigenetic predictors of disease risk and mortality and underscores their potential utility in human biology research.

Section: P/AM 13

Links between parenting behaviors and neuroendocrine responses differ based on individual differences, such as parenting styles or mental well-being, and interactional contexts. For example, positive interactions with young children, such as play, often increase oxytocin and decrease cortisol levels in parents, while testosterone reactivity has been linked to parental behaviors during and after challenging interactions. The Still-Face Paradigm (SFP) is a useful tool to investigate how well parents in settings like the U.S. adjust their behaviors to their infants’ needs, through the coding of behaviors such as parental sensitivity and intrusiveness. The SFP includes three phases: 1) a play phase where parents and infants behave typically; 2) a still-face phase where parents do not respond to their infant and; 3) a recovery phase where parents can resume typical behavior. This project assessed how parents’ (N = 98) oxytocin, cortisol, and testosterone reactivity levels and parental mental well-being correlated with their sensitivity and intrusiveness during the SFP recovery phase. Fathers’ parenting stress and depressive symptoms were not significantly linked to their sensitivity or intrusiveness, but mothers with higher stress scores exhibited lower sensitivity ( P <0.05). We also found that fathers with larger acute cortisol increases behaved less sensitively during the recovery phase ( P <0.05), which was not found in mothers. The SFP is often stressful and the recovery phase serves as a way for parents to console their distressed infants. Our initial results suggest how mental health and physiology may relate to parental ability to respond to infant affect and needs during challenging circumstances.

Section: FT A

High levels of inflammation are associated with increased risk of morbidity and mortality among older adults and are an established risk factor for age-related degenerative diseases and functional decline. Inflammatory response to a stimulus provides additional insight into individual differences in the regulation of inflammation and has recently been looked to as an additional indicator of risk for disease. The influenza vaccine represents a promising mechanism for investigating variation in response in vivo to a mild controlled stimulus. Here we investigate predictors of inflammation and inflammatory response to the influenza vaccine in a sample of older women in the Philippines (mean age: 58.2; N = 402). Four cytokines (IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, and TNF- α) were measured at baseline and 72 hours post-vaccination in dried blood spot samples. Influenza vaccination resulted in a statistically significant cytokine increase in two of the four cytokines (IL-8 and TNF- α) ( P < 0.005), as well as a significant change in the ratio between anti- and pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6:IL-10) ( P < 0.001). Lower cytokine levels at baseline were associated with greater response to vaccination in all four cytokines. Individuals with symptoms of infectious disease at baseline exhibited smaller responses to the vaccine than individuals without symptoms. This study demonstrates the utility of methods for assessing inflammatory response and regulation in vivo. Ongoing analyses of these measures will contribute to a greater understanding of the associations among inflammation, aging, and disease.

Section: P/AM 10

In high altitude or cold environments, ecological and psychological stressors impose intensive demands on human physiology and psychobiological functioning. Key to psychobiological functioning is the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, and its output cortisol, which plays an important metabolic role in energy allocation. The HPA axis is also highly sensitive to social dynamics such as physical and emotional support, which often differ between men and women. However, little is known about the relationship between cortisol and social support when individuals are under intensive energetic stress. Here, we worked with participants (n = 71) enrolled in ~90 day expeditions through the American Rockies as part of the National Outdoor Leadership School We measured longitudinal, within-individual patterns of cortisol and self-reported levels of received physical and emotional support from fellow team members at multiple time points during the expedition. Early in the expedition, during daily activity women’s cortisol acutely declined more steeply compared to more muted acute declines later in the expedition. These attenuated cortisol declines in women may be due to the cumulative energetic demands on their bodies across the expedition. Further, using linear mixed models, we found that participants reporting greater emotional support had lower baseline cortisol, though this main effect was primarily driven by the negative correlation between support and cortisol in women. These results suggest that women and men may experience these intensive conditions differently both psychosocially and physiologically, with cortisol’s dual role in energy allocation and psychobiology potentially manifesting differently in women and men’s bodies.

Section: FT B

Concurrent partnerships, which often co-occur with a culture of transactional sex, are commonly viewed as high-risk, and discussed mainly in relation to the transmission of HIV and other STI’s. However, concurrency, and a relationship between sex and resources, is a practice that is both historically deep and cross-culturally broad. Despite this legacy, we know little about how concurrency affects the health and well-being of women outside the context of disease transmission. Here, we present data from a population of semi-nomadic pastoralists where concurrent partnerships are common and normatively sanctioned. Using a longitudinal, mixed-method approach we show: (1) concurrent partnerships are common for both men and women, with 77% of married women and 85% of married men having at least one nonmarital partner (n = 176); (2) resource transfers from husbands are more common and more reliable, but boyfriends are a significant source of support for most women. For example, 77% of transfers from husband to wife occurred in the last 30 days, compared to 46% between women and their boyfriends (n = 302); (3) among married women, having an informal partner reduces food insecurity (pr[b<0] = 0.94) and increases diet breadth (pr[b>0] = 0.93); (4) women report relatively low levels of stress about their partners’ extra-marital partnerships (n = 129 surveys); (5) women also report some costs of concurrency, including increased risk of intimate partner violence and divorce. These results highlight the need to destigmatize concurrent partnerships and more thoroughly investigate the complex interplay between formal (marital) and informal partners within women’s support networks.

Section: P/AM 21

Information about reproductive practices and beliefs among populations has been vital to understanding and researching reproductive ecology. This study examined the reproductive practices and beliefs among Central Nepali women, who are poorly understood compared to their Western Nepali counterparts. In Western Nepal, Chhaupadi has received public attention following the deaths of several women; however, not all Nepali women practice Chhaupadi. Information on the reproductive practices and beliefs from other ethnic groups in Nepal is lacking. We surveyed 30 Tamang women from Bhorle, Nepal to understand how community beliefs influenced women's health. Interviews were conducted using standard questions that aimed to assess a women's knowledge of reproduction, including pregnancy, menstruation, and reproductive healthcare. Focus groups were used to identify beliefs and practices regarding menstruation, pregnancy, and postpartum. Tamang women do not follow any menstrual, pregnancy or postpartum restrictions. They understand menstruation as “a gift from god to women” and explain the cessation of menstruation during pregnancy because “menstrual blood is used to grow the baby.” Menarche is often not discussed with prepubescent girls by female relatives, but rather with a teacher or friend. Due to the cost, old cloth is mostly used among menstruating women; sanitary pads are preferred. Research on reproduction is important to understand women’s health and expand our understanding of marginalized populations.

Section: PODIUM C

Syndemics are population-level clusters of context-specific social and health problems that interact synergistically to increase the severity of disease burden. The syndemics framework has proven particularly useful in the analysis of epidemics linked to global nutrition transition. However, few studies have documented syndemic interactions during early-stage nutrition transition. We assessed the interrelationship between central adiposity (waist-height ratio Z-score; WHtR-Z), systolic blood pressure (SBP) and self-rated health (SRH; bad, average and good) among 193 Tsimane’ forager-horticulturalists aged ≥15 years from eight communities in 2012-2013. We modeled each outcome against the others and in relation to two sociocultural predictors, subjective community social standing and generalized cultural consonance–a combined measure of individual approximation to cultural prototypes of lifestyle and social support. Accounting for several key covariates, our OLS regressions suggest that SBP and WHtR-Z have a synergistic relationship that is mediated by SRH. Participants whose good SRH was incongruous with objective measures (+1 SD WHtR-Z or +1 SD SBP) had ~8 mmHg higher SBP (SE = 0.00, P < 0.01) and ~0.5 higher WHtR Z-score (SE = 0.01, P < 0.04). An interaction between wealth and community standing mediated SBP ( B −0.16, SE = 0.0, P < 0.01) while dummy variables of increasing market proximity trended towards lower WHtR-Z and worse SRH. Generalized cultural consonance moderated SBP ~5 mmHg (SE = 0.0, P < 0.02) and WHtR ~0.6 Z-score (SE = 0.1, P < 0.00). Our syndemic model suggests that the synergistic interactions between the outcomes represent embodied consequences of unequal change to local beliefs, behaviors and expectations that are moderated by a countersyndemic of cultural consonance during early-stage nutrition transition.

Section: FT B

Sickness results in several outward signs, including visible symptoms, changes in behavior, and possible alterations in skin color and gait. A potential adaptive function of these indicators is to signal distress and elicit care from close others. Based on this hypothesis, we predicted that sickness would be displayed more freely among friends/family than strangers. We explored this possibility in a national US sample (n = 1,259). In accordance with our prediction, a greater percentage of individuals were more likely to talk about sickness and exaggerate symptoms around friends/family (47% and 32%, respectively) than strangers (~25% for both). We also hypothesized that demographics and social norms (e.g., stoicism, familism, etc.) would affect willingness to display sickness among friends and family. Weighted logistic regressions showed that machismo (OR: 0.79, P < 0.001), collectivism (OR: 0.81, P < 0.001), and familism (OR: 0.76, P = 0.02) were associated with reduced likelihood of talking about sickness, while endurance of pain/discomfort was associated with increased odds (OR: 1.66, P < 0.001). Machismo was also associated with reduced odds of exaggerating symptoms and feeling subjectively worse (OR: 0.7 and 0.74, P < 0.001 for both). Women (OR: 2.04, P = 0.02) and African-Americans (OR: 1.64, P = 0.05) were more likely to exaggerate symptoms and feel subjectively worse (ORs: 2.33 and 1.96, respectively, P < 0.001). These preliminary, self-reported data lend support to the signaling hypothesis and highlight the need for experimental or observational support.

Section: P/AM 63

Grandmothers can play an important role in their grandchildren's survival and well-being. Maternal and paternal grandmothers have been shown to have different effects on the fertility of their children: maternal grandmothers have positive effects, while paternal grandmothers often have a neutral or opposite effect. The difference between maternal/paternal grandmothers has been attributed to paternity certainty: maternal grandmothers are more confident in their relatedness to their grandchildren. Little research has been done on the behavioral mechanisms that enable these demographic trends. This study had two aims: to examine potential behavioral variation in maternal and paternal grandmothers’ caretaking strategies, and to explore whether differences in caretaking lead to different health outcomes in the grandmothers. I hypothesized that maternal grandmothers would dedicate more time and resources to their grandchildren, and that they would have better health measures than paternal grandmothers. Research was conducted in three Ukrainian populations (one urban and two rural) because Ukraine is neither heavily matrilocal nor patrilocal. Sixty-five grandmothers were recruited for semi-structured interviews and anthropometric measurements. Results show that, in Ukraine, maternal and paternal grandmothers do not differ significantly in caretaking behaviors, but maternal grandmothers are more likely to be a primary caretaker for a grandchild ( P = 0.02) and they see and talk to their child more frequently than paternal grandmothers. There were no significant differences in health outcomes. This research adds more nuanced data to the literature on various caretaking behaviors and challenges paternity certainty as a driver for maternal/paternal grandmother differences.

Section: FT A

Previous literature suggests an early mean recalled age at menopause among women in the Yucatán peninsula (44 years). This study examines age at menopause among 543 Maya and non-Maya women aged 40 to 60 years within the state of Campeche, Mexico. The analyses include data derived from interviews and body measurements. Women were drawn from the capital city, two rural Maya communities close to the capital, five very rural Maya communities in the south of Hopelchén, and four very rural non-Maya communities of Calakmul. Analyses include ANOVA, probit, and Cox regression. Among postmenopausal women (n = 142), Maya women from the south of Hopelchén recalled the earliest age at natural menopause (43.9 years, s.d. 4.6) in comparison to urban women (47.8 years, s.d. 3.9), rural women near the city (47.9 years, s.d. 4.1), and non-Maya women of Calakmul (45.8 years, s.d. 3.9) ( P < 0.001). Ages at natural menopause computed by probit analyses (n = 480) were later than ages averaged from recall, but the pattern of difference was similar, with the earliest age at menopause among Maya women in the south of Hopelchén (49.17 years) and the latest age at menopause in the city (51.15 years). Our findings are consistent with earlier research only among rural women, and only by computing a mean recalled age at natural menopause. Probit analysis, which provides a better measure of central tendency, suggests that the mean age of menopause in Campeche (50.55 years, total sample) is not as different from other parts of Mexico as has been previously reported.

Section: P/AM 85

Sickle Cell Disease (Hb SS) has a prevalence of approximately 3,500 new cases each year in Brazil. It is a chronic disease of difficult management, occurring mostly in individuals considered phenotypically "black" or "brown." The patients have limited access to diagnostics and genetic counseling, especially in the North and Northeast regions of the country where most of the cases occur. Sixty individuals with SCD being treated at the regional hemocenter in the State of Pará, Amazonia, were investigated in relation to their genomic ancestry, SES, epidemiologic situation, self-declared race/color, and results of genetic counseling. 41% presented European aDNA and 90% self-declared black/brown. Women overall presented more severe symptoms than men ( P > 0,05). Having suffered some form of racism or social discrimination was reported by 72% of the participants. They received counseling to avoid having children to "prevent the disease", reminiscent of past eugenic procedures. There are no public resources available to deal with the reproductive rights of this population and most of the individuals find out that they are Hb SS only when the symptoms appear what can be construed as institutional racism since the law mandates the realization of the "Teste do Pezinho" (Guthrie Test) for all at birth. It is fundamental the investment in the implementation of the existing public policies as humanized genetic counseling and the creation of mechanisms to eliminate institutional racism in Brazil. Key words: Sickle Cell Disease; Genetic Counseling; Reproductive Rights; Racism; Hemoglobinopathies.

Section: FT B

In the last two decades the impacts of environmental changes and biosocial stress on the health of Caboclos groups of the Brazilian Amazon have been investigated. The study groups live in different environments (floodplains, upland, white, and black water), employ different subsistence activities, and are differentially exposed to Westernization, providing a broad picture of the effects of different stressors on their physical growth and health. Over 75% of the children (ages 2 - 13 years) from three communities were analyzed during the rainy and the dry seasons (N = 754). Research methods included anthropometry, clinical exams, interviews, and epidemiological surveys. The children are short and light for age, between the 25th and the 50th percentile of WHO reference. Ecological data indicate that the fast environmental changes taking place, specially intensive fishing and cattle ranching, are related to food scarcity and changes in occupational activities, affecting particularly the populations of the floodplains, which present higher rates of malnutrition ( P > 0.05). Simultaneously, infectious and parasitic diseases, along lack of access to public health services, contribute to perpetuate the short stature and small weight frequently described in Amazonian children. These groups are under intense biosocial stress which is reflected in their growth rates and nutritional status when compared to international references. Traditional populations are excluded from all decision-making processes in Brazil, and suffer the most with the absence of adequate environmental and social policies.
Funding: CNPq, UFPA

Section: P/AM 87

Although studies have shown that sleep patterning changes during adolescence due to the interplay of endogenous and exogenous factors, most of these have been undertaken in WEIRD environments, where teenagers can access electronic devices (i.e. mobile phones, computers, tablets, TV, etc.), and where particular social, school and/or workloads heavily influence sleep. In contrast, I examine sleep patterns among 45 teenagers (mean age 13.9) from a Yucatec Maya agricultural community that is transitioning from a traditional subsistence to a mixed market economy. Adolescents here differ in access to electronic equipment, and in time and energy allocation compared to WEIRD youth. Data collection between May-June, 2019, employed actigraphy, sleep diaries, semi-structured interviews and ethnographic observations. Using puberty as a reference point to examine changes in adolescent sleep, my results challenge the current literature explaining the adolescent phase shift. While overall changes in sleep duration in this sample were inversely related to pubertal developmental stage, two contradictory sleeping trends were observed: juveniles who sleep longer during school days compared to weekends, and juveniles who sleep longer during weekends. Notably, boys showed a marked preference for later sleep onset during pre-early puberty, which was not observed in girls. These behavioral differences were associated with access to mobile phones and to sex-related participation in the household economies. These findings stress the role of energy and time allocation tradeoffs between physical activity and life tasks in modeling adolescent sleep patterns, indicating that gendered physical activity can considerably shape sleep patterns.

Section: P/AM 88

Across cultures, infants generally benefit from extensive allomaternal care (AMC: care provided by individuals other than mom) in terms of nutritional supplementation and improved learning via signal-rich environments. AMC exposure may also be correlated with certain aspects of child behavior, like temperament. Children may gain more AMC as a result of key temperamental traits that make them more pleasant to interact with, such that those who score high for surgency (i.e., positive affect), low for negative affect, and high for effortful control (i.e., emotional control) may be easier charges for allomothers. Participants included typically developing 13-18-month old infants and their mothers from Tucson, AZ. AMC exposure was characterized by four multidimensional principal components composed of twenty-one variables derived from questionnaire, daily diary, and interview responses to capture AMC exposure from birth to present. Child temperament was assessed using the mother rated Rothbart Early Childhood Behavior Questionnaire Revised Short Form. Pearson’s correlation coefficients were used to determine whether AMC and dimensions of child temperament are correlated. None of the AMC components (including Highly Involved Familial AMC, Household AMC, Formalized AMC, and Overall AMC Network Extent) were significantly correlated with child surgency, negative affect, or effortful control ( P > 0.1 in all cases). A more nuanced, person-centered approach may reveal whether AMC is correlated with other child characteristics, such as maternal-infant attachment or child sensory processing pattern.
Funding Statement: Support for this project received from the National Science Foundation (BCS-1752542), the International Chapter of the P.E.O. Sisterhood, UA's School of Anthropology, UA's Social and Behavioral Sciences Research Institute, UA's Graduate and Professional Student Council, and UA's Confluencenter for Creative Inquiry.

Section: P/AM 9

Stress is a chronic problem in the US, and most Americans live with at least moderate stress. Research by Bolger et al. (1989) suggest that humans can “catch” stress from each other through the “stress contagion effect” by way of mirror neurons. Mirror neurons help people to empathize with others. Through this study, we tested whether olfaction is a factor in perceiving and mirroring stress in others. To do so, we used the “stinky t-shirt” model. Stinky t-shirt studies typically involve one set of participants wearing t-shirts and another set of participants smelling the t-shirts and rating the odors on a number of dimensions related to attractiveness. For this study, 19 people wore a t-shirt for two nights. We gave them materials for scent neutralization, and we also gave them a survey with stress inventories. A second group of 18 participants smelled those t-shirts and rated them on intensity and pleasantness. We measured smellers’ skin conductance to determine if their stress levels were impacted by that of the t-shirt wearers. However, we did not find any significant relationship between the skin conductance of the smellers and any of the stress inventories of the wearers. These results question the extent of the stress contagion effect, but research is needed to fully understand this phenomenon.

Section: P/AM 71

Prescription testosterone sales in the United States have skyrocketed in the last two decades due to an aging population, direct-to-consumer advertising, and prescriber views of the benefits and risks to testosterone, among other factors. Few studies have attempted to directly examine patient experiences on prescription testosterone therapy. The present exploratory study involved an online self-report survey of U.S. testosterone patients (at least 21 years of age). The primary focus was on patient perspectives concerning motivations leading to the initiation of testosterone therapy initiation and the perceived effects of treatment, with descriptive data on testosterone formulation, length of treatment, and self-report diagnostic criteria also recorded. Responses to open-ended questions drew upon a coding scheme incorporating both inductive and deductive (influenced by the clinical, male life history theory, and behavioral endocrinology literatures) approaches. Responses from participants (n = 105) were also analyzed based on age group (≤39 years of age, n = 52 or ≥40 years, n = 53) to evaluate how senescence or shifting life history strategies may affect codes. Results indicated that the most frequent reasons men gave for taking prescription testosterone were low testosterone (37.1%), well-being (35.2%), energy (28.7%), libido (21.9%), and social energy (19.4%); older men claimed libido as a motivation for testosterone initiation more frequently than younger men ( P <.05). Men most frequently claimed testosterone improved their energy (52.3%), libido (41.9%), and muscle (28.5%). Results are interpreted in the context of medical, life history theoretical and behavioral endocrinology approaches, including an emphasis on sex and energy. Testosterone Replacement Therapy, Andrology, Hypogonadism, Low Testosterone, Libido

Section: P/AM 65

Market integration and subsequent changes in diet and physical activity affect health and life history in small-scale populations undergoing economic transitions. Here we investigate the effect of proximity to town on measures of cardiometabolic health (blood pressure, body fat percentage, blood lipids; males n = 92, females n = 108; age = 18-79 yrs) and female reproduction (n = 96; ages = 15-50 yrs) among Daasanach pastoralists, a population living in northern Kenya near the town of Ileret. Prevalence of hypertension among Daasanach adults is high: 32.6% of adults 40–65 yrs and 44.4% of adults 65+ yrs. On average, female diastolic and systolic blood pressures increased by 2.46 mmHg per decade ( P = 0.003; SE = 0.08) and 3.71 mmHg per decade ( P = 0.001; SE = 0.11), respectively. Female body fat increased by an average of 1.4% per decade ( P = 0.008; SE = 0.05), while male body fat increased by 0.6% per decade ( P = 0.01; SE = 0.03). Age-adjusted diastolic blood pressures were negatively associated with distance (km) from the town center for males (β = −1.9; P = 0.005; SE = 0.82) and females (β = −1.4; P = 0.02; SE = 0.59). Average total cholesterol, HDL, and LDL values for adults (n = 53) were all below US norms: 1.7% of adults had LDL >160 mg/dL and 17.7% had HDL >40 mg/dL. Age-specific fertility for Daasanach women assessed by interview was higher among those living farther from the town center (β = 0.32; P = 0.01; SE = 0.12). These results suggest that distance from town may relate to dietary, activity, and/or environmental differences associated with variation in cardiovascular health and fertility among Daasanach. We discuss the possible roles of diet and physical activity in mediating these effects.
Funding statement: NSF ARCH #1624398; NSF REU #1930719; This work was funded by the PSU SSRI Human Health and Environment Seed Grant, and the Triangle Center for Evolutionary Medicine (TriCEM) Graduate Research Grant.

Section: P/AM 51

Research has demonstrated there are measurable differences in body composition (BC) between Pacific Islanders and other populations, notably that the former has more lean mass per kilogram of body weight. Because of this, body mass index (BMI) may not serve as a useful indicator of BC among Pacific Islanders, but gold standard techniques – such as Dual-Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry (DXA) imaging – are not always practical in low-resource settings exposure participants to radiation. We aimed to explore the association of various anthropometric measures of size and body composition with percent body fat (%BF) in Samoan children, in order to inform the potential development of population-specific BC prediction equations. Anthropometric and DXA data were collected from 83 children (females, N = 43; males, N = 40; age 3.5-8.0 years). Measurements included weight, height, abdominal, hip, mid-upper arm, and calf circumference, as well as bicep, tricep, subscapular, and suprailiac skinfolds. In sex-specific analyses, Pearson’s correlations were used to measure associations between each of the anthropometric variables and DXA-measured %BF. BMI and %BF were poorly correlated in boys (rho = 0.25; P = 0.12) but strongly correlated in girls (rho = 0.76, P = <0.0001). Among girls, BMI was most strongly correlated with %BF. Among boys, %BF was more strongly correlated with mid-upper arm circumference, tricep, subscapular, and suprailiac skinfold measurements (all rho>0.5 and P < 0.0001). The next steps for this analysis will be develop population-specific prediction equations, using these variables, and to examine their performance compared to other, established equations.

Section: P/AM 75

Studies in high-income countries show that married persons tend to have better health than their single counterparts. The effect of gender on this benefit is unclear, although it has been claimed that men receive greater benefits than women. Additionally, some researchers suggest that gendered protective effects of marriage may relate to economic transitions within countries, rather than a universal pattern across cultures. More studies are needed to determine if the protective effect of marriage is universal or context based, and models in low-income countries undergoing economic development can be particularly helpful in analyzing the effects of societal transitions. The purpose of this study is to examine gendered differences in the relationship between chronic disease risk and marriage in Vanuatu, a low-income South Pacific Island nation. Data were collected on two islands: Efate (urban) and Aneityum (rural) in June-August 2017. Participants (n = 368) completed socio-behavioral surveys and underwent anthropometric measurements for percent body fat, visceral fat, and lean muscle tissue, as well as skinfolds and circumferences on the trunk and limbs. Participants were also screened for hypertension and elevated blood glucose levels. Statistical analyses controlled for participant age, island of residence, and parity. All measures of body size and fatness were greater in married women than in single women ( P < 0.05). No significant differences in indicators of chronic disease risk were found between married and single men. Further analysis will examine potential behavioral differences between married and non-married men and women that might explain increased chronic disease risk in married women.
Funding: This research was supported by the Wenner Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, Post-PhD Research Grant, Protocol Number 2147-13.

Section: PODIUM D

Anthropologists are interested in understanding how environmental exposures shape patterns of human biology. One aspect of the environment that has been found to shape biology is exposure to stress. But what is the best way to measure stress? Here we prospectively compare the biological impacts of psychological stressors we categorize as those reflecting threat as opposed to those representing deprivation using a longitudinal birth cohort study from New Zealand (N = 6822). According to life history theory, we would predict that early life signals of threat are more likely to impact offspring growth and indices of biological aging than those indexing deprivation. However, deprivation may also be associated with offspring growth and biological aging due to deprivation-associated impacts on nutrition and infectious disease risk. We found that exposures reflecting threat during pregnancy were more consistently related to birth outcomes and telomere length measured in childhood than those reflecting deprivation. These findings are consistent with the predictions from life history theory, which suggest that organisms are particularly sensitive to early life cues of threat.

Section: PODIUM A

Past research shows that psychosocial stress during pregnancy predicts adverse birth outcomes such as low birthweight. Maternal diet might interact with stress and exacerbate its effects. However, most studies of prenatal stress and birthweight do not consider relationships with maternal diet. Furthermore, past studies have shown curvilinear relationships between prenatal stress infant development outcomes among advantaged samples in high-income countries, such that moderate stress promotes some aspects of development but high stress results in adverse outcomes. Few studies have assessed these relationships in low- and middle-income countries. We analyzed symptoms of stress, anxiety, depression, and dietary diversity among 660 pregnant women in Vanuatu, a lower-middle income country in the South Pacific. We collected birth records indicating birthweight and gestational age, and maternal characteristics such as parity and pregnancy complications. We analyzed relationships between prenatal stress, dietary diversity, and infant birthweight, controlling for confounding variables. Parity and the number of prenatal visits were significant predictors of infant birthweight ( P < 0.001, P = 0.001). We found a curvilinear relationship between stress and infant birthweight ( P = 0.041). Birthweight was lower among infants with both low and high levels of prenatal stress exposure, corresponding to birthweight Z-scores of -0.31 and −0.41, respectively. There were no direct or interactive relationships between dietary diversity and infant birthweight. Results highlight that prenatal stress has effects on infant development independent of maternal diet. The curvilinear relationships observed mirror those in high-income countries suggesting that high prenatal stress has detrimental effects but that moderate stress promotes some aspects of development.
This study was funded by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, Post-PhD Research Grant, Protocol Number 9029.

Section: P/AM 57

This study explores the relationship between three metabolic hormones (leptin, ghrelin, and adiponectin) and self-reported food insecurity among the Tsimane forager horticulturalists of lowland Bolivia. The Tsimane have high parasite and pathogen loads, low access to market foods, and high levels of physical activity, with a little more than a third of individuals sampled reporting some feelings of food insecurity. Leptin and adiponectin both originate in adipose tissue; leptin levels are generally proportional to the amount of fat tissue in the body, while adiponectin is negatively correlated with adiposity. Ghrelin is produced by the gastrointestinal tract and pancreases and is associated with the onset of hunger and meal initiation. All three of these hormones play a crucial role in metabolic function and energy availability and therefore are important indicators of nutritional status. However, these hormones have not been well studied in subsistence populations. Enzyme immunoassays for leptin, ghrelin, and adiponectin were performed on Tsimane adults (n = 148, mean age = 58, range = 36-92, 49% female). In this sample, 34% of respondents reported worry about food insecurity on a depression questionnaire. Regression models explored the associations between these three metabolic hormones and food insecurity, and controlled for age, body fat, obesity status, and sex. Log leptin levels were negatively associated with reported food insecurity (β = -0.372, P = 0.022). No associations were found between ghrelin or adiponectin and food insecurity. These results suggest that comparatively lower leptin levels may be a proxy for self-reported food insecurity

Section: P/PM 16

Considerable research links the experience of food insecurity with a number of health conditions, including stunting, overweight, and poor mental health. Less is known about the pathways through which food insecurity shapes health at the individual and household levels and even less about how food insecurity overlaps with water insecurity to impact physical and mental health. Thus, we examine the individual and joint effects of food and water insecurity on the dual burden of disease and test whether these pathways are mediated by psychological distress. Data come from 110 households (n = 389 individuals, aged 2 weeks to 66 years) participating in the Healthy Families Study in San Cristobal, Galápagos. Adjusted multilevel logistic models were used to test whether water and food insecurity were associated with the dual burden in children and adults, and psychological distress was added as a potential mediator. Food and water insecurity were common, with 36% of households experiencing both conditions. The burden of overweight, stunting, and psychological distress was also considerable at 68.7%, 10%, and 23.6%, respectively. Food and water insecurity were not significantly associated with the dual burden or its components among individuals. However, they were separately and jointly associated with psychological distress, providing evidence that mental health mediates the association between food and water insecurity and physical health outcomes. These results suggest that further research is needed to understand the social and biological pathways linking the experiences of food and water insecurity to the dual burden of disease in low- and middle-income countries.
This research is funded by NIH/FIC (1R21TW010832; PI: Thompson).

Section: FT B

The concept of syndemics is described as two or more epidemics (or health problems), interacting synergistically and contributing, as a result of their interaction, to excess burden of disease in a population. The 1865 epidemic of cholera in Gibraltar took its course in a syndemic fashion, with overlapping cholera and smallpox epidemics, impoverished social conditions, as well as the imposition of a quarantine.
Consensus over when an “excess burden” of a syndemic is observed has yet to be established. We propose employing the concept harvesting effect to clarify this problem. Harvesting begins with a temporary increase in the number deaths of frail or the highly vulnerable during a period of unusual stress (such as extreme cold or heat; famine, or an epidemic). Second, is a period followed by a decrease in mortality, albeit temporary, in the population among the age group that have been removed. Life table analysis was used to establish the prevailing conditions in Gibraltar during the period of 1860 to 1868. The result was in a significant decline in life expectancy at birth from the normal or baseline mortality (that existed from the period 1861 to 1864 and 1867 to 1868) relative to 1865 (26.683 +/- 0.572 vs 16.102 +/- 0.871, Z = 10.15, <.001). This was followed by a significant rise in life expectancy in 1866 relative to the normal baseline mortality (38.286 +/- 1.551 vs 26.683 +/- 0.572, Z = 7.018, <.001). These events capture harvesting, and as such the “excess burden” of the syndemic.

Section: PODIUM B

Previous research show that a compromised nutritional status, during growing years, impairs motor development. These associations are often confounded by sociocultural factors (e.g. ethnicity and maternal education). We analysed the effects of compromised nutritional status (low-height-for-age, elevated-BMI-for-age, and elevated-subcutaneous adiposity-for-age) on motor development among 3901 Yucatec-Mexican children and adolescents (males = 1939, females = 1962), with ages between 5-18 years. Flexibility associated positively with age, height and BMI; and negatively with being Maya. Grip strength associated positively with being a girl, age, height and BMI; and negatively with sum of skinfolds. Explosive strength associated positively with being a girl, height, and BMI; and negatively with age and sum of skinfolds. Balance associated positively with age, height, BMI, sum of skinfolds and maternal education. Abdominal strength associated positively with BMI and maternal education; and negatively with height and sum of skinfolds. Height caused the largest R 2 change on the flexibility (+), handgrip (+) and abdominal strength (-) regression models. BMI caused the largest R 2 change on the balance model (+). Sum of skinfolds caused the largest R 2 change on the explosive strength model (-). Ethnicity showed significant effects on all motor development outcomes prior to the inclusion of nutritional status variables in the model. After that it only remained significant on flexibility. In some cases, maternal education also played a significant role. Our results add to the body of research showing that disparities in nutritional status, and sociocultural and parental factors impact on motor development outcomes and on the general health of children and adolescents.

Section: P/PM 2

Dehydration has negative effects on human health, especially in children, and may limit women’s ability to breastfeed. To illustrate this, we analyzed relationships between household water source and storage methods, breastfeeding outcomes, and child digestive and respiratory morbidity in Yucatec Maya subsistence farmers. Methods: This study drew data from longitudinal studies of Maya families (49 mothers, 91 children aged 0-5 years, 2350 observations total). We used binary logistic generalized estimating equations to model longitudinal data on child respiratory and digestive morbidity and breastfeeding/formula-feeding status (yes/no), as a function of water source (piped/purified) and storage method (indoor/outdoor/no storage). Breastfeeding durations were modeled with respect to water source and storage methods using Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. Results: All families had sporadic piped water access to their homes, 12% used purified water, 16% used internal water storage only, 20% used external water storage only, and 2% used both storage methods. Median breastfeeding duration was 32.0 months (95% CI: 30.9-33.1). Purified water was not associated with child morbidity outcomes or breastfeeding durations. Large outdoor water storage receptacles were associated with reduced childhood respiratory morbidity (by ~17%) and significantly shorter breastfeeding durations (median = 24.1 months, SE: 1.3, 95% CI: 21.5-26.6). Small indoor water storage receptacles were associated with a two-fold increase in child digestive morbidity, but not with breastfeeding durations. Conclusions: Water storage practices are associated with variability in breastfeeding durations and child morbidity outcomes in the Yucatec Maya. In particular, small indoor water receptacles contribute to disproportionate child digestive morbidity.

Section: PLENARY

Virtually every depiction of the human ovarian cycle—whether in medical textbooks or informational brochures for patients or posted on innumerable web sites—shares an idealized vision of the ebb and flow of “female” hormones over a 28-day span. In these canonical descriptions, ovulation invariably occurs at the cycle's midpoint, neatly dividing a 4-week cycle into two equal segments. Hormone concentrations on each cycle day closely match supposedly “normal” values which have been inferred from measurements of samples of women (who are neither dieting nor engaged in strenuous physical activity) selected from Western industrialized countries. It's a pretty picture…symmetrical, rhythmic, predictable…and rare. Nonetheless, medical practice has tended to treat deviations from this normative ideal as pathology. For example, for several decades, purportedly “low” progesterone concentrations following ovulation were described as “luteal phase deficiency/defect” and often treated with progesterone supplements or other drugs. In fact, fertile women around the world have a very wide range of ovarian cycle patterns and hormone concentrations. Total hormone concentrations vary by as much as a factor of four from one woman to another within a single population, and average concentrations vary by up to a factor of two from one population to another. Apart from their effects on an individual woman's medical care, these persistent misperceptions of women’s reproductive functioning have wide-ranging impacts on the development of appropriate contraceptive and other medical technologies, and on our understanding of both the proximate and evolutionary causes of variation in human fertility.
Funding: U.S. National Science Foundation, Wenner-Gren Foundation, Fulbright Senior Fellowship, NSF-Fulbright Arctic Scholar Fellowship, University of California, Indiana University.

Section: PODIUM D

Immune factors in human milk are numerous, and together constitute the immune system of milk. The immune system of milk is thought to bolster the immature infant immune system to protect against infectious diseases (ID) and to shape immune development. We characterized pro-inflammatory milk immune responses as in vitro interleukin-6 (IL-6) cytokine production after 24h incubation with Salmonella among 99 mother-infant pairs in Kilimanjaro, Tanzania. Infants were monitored for ID for ~4-10 weeks. ID are quite common in this age group at this time of year in Kilimanjaro: we observed an incidence of ID (overall) of 78 per 100 children per month; the majority of these were respiratory infections (upper respiratory tract infections, URTI: 36 per 100 children per month; pneumonia: 29 per 100 children per month). In Cox proportional hazards regression analysis, IL-6 responses to Salmonella were associated with lower risk for ID: for any infectious disease, HR: 0.805 ( P : 0.020); for URTI, HR: 0.758 ( P : 0.064); for pneumonia, HR: 0.695 ( P : 0.023). Independent predictors of the magnitude of in vitro IL-6 response include maternal age (B: 0.086; P : 0.020), total pregnancies (B: −0.351; P : 0.013), and the inter-birth interval preceding the birth of the participating infant (N: 76; B: 0.00041; P : 0.017). From a life history perspective, these patterns may suggest milk IL-6 responses are part of higher maternal investment among older mothers (who invest more in current reproduction as their prospects for future reproduction diminish), and that a faster pace of reproduction may compromise milk immune protection.

Section: P/AM 32

Human milk (HM) is the primary source for nutrition during early life, a period when infants are highly sensitive to environmental insults and nutritional cues. The infant In order to assess the predictive power of HM macronutrient composition on infant growth outcomes, indexed by height-for-age (HAZ), weight-for-age (WAZ), and weight-for-height (WHZ) Z-scores at 1 and 2 years of age, we measure fat, protein, and lactose (g/dL) using mid-infrared spectrometry (LactoScope FTIR, Perten Instruments) in milk collected from rural Gambian mothers (n = 238) at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of lactation, as part of the HERO-G (Hormonal and Epigenetic Regulators of Growth) study. Linear mixed effects models identified maternal parity, duration of exclusive breastfeeding, morbidity frequency, and infant sex as significant ( P <0.05) predictors of 1 and 2 years. macronutrient concentrations at 3 months predicts higher HAZ, WAZ, and WHZ at 1 but not 2 years. The results emphasize the combined influence of infant feeding practices, morbidity, and maternal factors on infant growth, and suggest that HM macronutrient content may relate to differential growth outcomes at 1 and 2 years of age. explain 64.3%, 83.5%, and 81.8% of the variation in growth at 1 year for HAZ, WAZ, and WHZ respectively, but at 2 years the predictive effect of the macronutrient composition decreases >20% for each of the growth indices. Further analyses are needed to determine more precisely the relative contributions of these factors on infant growth and health, along with investigation of independent determinants of milk macronutrient concentrations across the first year of lactation in this population.
Funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (OPP1066932).

Section: PODIUM C

Increases in global temperatures have altered the heat exposure patterns of most of the world’s populations. In India, record ambient temperatures (often 45oC and above) have been recorded in many areas; but no research has been conducted to quantitatively evaluate the heat stress experienced at the population level. This study was designed to evaluate the heat stress experienced by a particularly vulnerable component of the population: the elderly poor. It was conducted in urban slum areas of Kolkata, and in a village of rice farmers about 50 miles south of Kolkata. A questionnaire was administered to 406 individuals to determine their subjective assessment of heat stress. In addition, the interiors of 212 dwellings and the personalized heat stress of 294 people were measured over 24-hour periods. In Kolkata slums, where the elderly poor live in single rooms with a door to the outside (but often without windows), indoor temperatures stay above ambient temperature throughout the day and particularly at night. Village houses are larger with more windows and are generally cooler. But, materials used in the construction of walls and roofs contribute to significant differences in indoor temperatures between houses. Individuals in both the rural village and urban slums commonly experience heat stress at levels that significantly increase risk for heat related disorders. This is particularly true for elderly women in the village. Cooking responsibilities cause their maximum heat stress indexes to average 15% greater than for men; and they are 3 times more likely to report severe heat-related symptoms.

Section: P/AM 12

The degree to which the biological effects of trauma are detectable during adolescence is unclear. Extant studies of traumatic stress have documented mixed associations with biomarkers, such as cortisol, during adolescence. Some researchers have suggested traumatic experiences result in an initial upregulation of cortisol production that is followed by hyposecretion of cortisol. Many studies report no associations between trauma exposure in adolescence and cortisol levels. We examined associations between childhood and lifetime exposure to traumatic events and salivary cortisol in a community cohort of first-time adolescent mothers participating in a parenting intervention in São Paulo, Brazil. Trauma exposure was assessed using a locally adapted version of the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire and the Composite Interview Diagnostic Instrument (CIDI) 2.1. Salivary cortisol was quantified from morning and evening samples using stand enzyme immunoassay protocols. The number of traumatic events was not associated with morning or evening cortisol levels, after controlling for medication use, intervention group, and sample collection time. The CIDI 2.1 assultative violence subscale was associated with increased evening cortisol levels (β = 0.469, P -value = 0.032). No associations were found between cortisol and the other subscales (injury and shocking events or life-threatening illness and death of a friend or family member). These results suggest that associations between traumatic experiences and adolescent cortisol levels may not be detectable using standardized assessment tools. The use of contextually relevant and locally adapted trauma scales may elucidate possible associations between traumatic stress and adolescent cortisol levels.
Funding: National Science Foundation, Wenner-Gren Foundation

Section: PEARL MEMORIAL SPEAKER

Biological normalcy is a new analytical framework for understanding human biological variation that considers the bi-directional relationships between the biology of populations and cultural norms. Specifically, it evaluates the relationships between normative social views of, and statistical norms for, human biological variation. Populations are characterized by statistical distributions - i.e. measures of central tendancy and variance – for biological traits, which co-exist in societies with ideas about what constitutes “normal” human bodies, i.e. normative views about what bodies “should” be like. While statistical norms may carry no explicit evaluative weight, the question is how they are related to judgments about what is “normal” or “abnormal.” In a 1947 paper, Margaret Mead recognized their potential relationship: “normal…may refer to the statistically usual in the culture – usually without any recognition that this is culturally relative – so that the statistically usual is identified with the basically human….” Despite her observations over 70 years ago, little has been done on this topic, yet such work promises new insights into the relationship between culture and biology, here described at the population level, rather than as individual genetic characteristics. Using examples, including my own work on human variation in the ability to drink milk, I outline the ways in which statistical norms may: influence individuals’ perceptions of what is “normal” (Mead’s “basically human”), lead to normative judgments about what human biology “should” be (“ethno-biocentrism”), which are reinforced by biases in discourse about human variation, and potentially feed back to mold the biological characteristics of a population.

Section: P/AM 89

Access to economic resources is a well-established determinant of biological well-being. In the last decade, researchers have proposed a number of methods for comparing economic well-being in low-income countries, largely relying on assets (e.g. TVs) and access to services (e.g. sewer access). However, each method relies on different assumptions about the universality of asset weightings and there have been no systematic comparisons across these methods. We compared four emerging measures of wealth which differ in the degree to which they assume universal weightings of assets: the Absolute Wealth Estimate (AWE), the International Wealth Index (IWI), the Comparative Wealth Index (CWI), and the “Standard of Living” portion of the Multi-Dimensional Poverty Index (MPI). We used data from over 300 Demographic and Health surveys in 84 countries (n = 4,378,858 households, 282,439 women, 405,037 children) to examine 1) the correlations between the estimates from each of the three methods and 2) how well they predict three measures of biological well-being—adult BMI, child height-for-age, and likelihood of child mortality. We found that these four measures are all highly correlated (r = 0.80 to 0.90). Although all measures predicted a substantial portion of variance in the three measures of biological well-being, the measure based on universal asset weightings—the international wealth index—accounted for the largest portion of variation in all outcomes both between and within countries. We discuss the implications of these findings for choosing and interpreting these measures of wealth for different purposes.

Section: P/AM 54

Anemia is a global public health problem with significant adverse health outcomes. In 2014, prevalence of anemia among children in the Pacific Islands ranged from 20% to 70%; in Samoan preschool age children, prevalence was estimated at 44.1%. There are, however, few longitudinal studies of anemia in young children in the Pacific so it remains unclear whether anemia is transient or persistent in this setting. Our study is the first longitudinal study to address this knowledge gap. Samoan children (n = 263) aged 2 to 5 years were recruited in 2015 and followed up two-three years later (2017/2018) as part of the Ola Tuputupua'e “Growing Up” study in Samoa. We measured hemoglobin in capillary blood and assessed risk factors (measured in 2015) including: age, sex, stunting, micronutrient intake, deworming medication usage, maternal anemia, household socioeconomic resources, rural/urban residence, food security, and sanitation. Prevalence of anemia (Hb <11g/dL) among the sample declined from 34.6% in 2015, to 28.5% in 2017/2018. Only 35.2% of the anemia cases identified in 2015 were persistent, the other 64.8% had resolved two-three years later. Risk factors for ever-having anemia were child age ( P = 0.01; <3 years in 2015), stunting ( P = 0.03), sodium intake ( P = 0.04), and maternal anemia ( P = 0.01). Only maternal anemia was significantly associated with chronic anemia ( P < 0.01). These findings have implications for the management and surveillance of anemia among pre-school children in Samoa. More research, including examination of infectious disease burden, is needed to identify additional risk factors for chronic and transient anemia in this setting.
Funding: China Scholarship Council.Yale School of Public Health (Faculty Funding, David Dull Internship Fund, Jan A.J. Stolwijk Fellowship Fund, Yale Downs International Health Student Travel Fellowship, Thomas C. Barry Travel Fellowship), National Institutes of Health Minority and Health Disparities International Research Training Program, U.S. Fulbright Graduate Student Research Fellowship, Brown University School of Public Health (International Health Institute and Nora Kahn Piore Award), and Brown University Population Studies and Training Center which receives funding from the NIH, for training (T32 HD007338) and general support (P2C HD041020). Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award Individual Predoctoral Fellowship NIH 1F31HL147414-01, the Fogarty Global Health Equity Scholar Program FIC D43TW010540,

Section: PODIUM B

A small qualitative study describing the contemporary shifts in birth practices in a rural community Veracruz, Mexico. Recent changes in national social welfare programs, accessibility of public health services, prevalence of chronic illness, availability of traditional birth attendants and cultural attitudes towards pregnancy and birth, have drastically changed the landscape of birth in the last twenty years in rural Mexico. This research aims to describe changes in local attitudes toward birth, perceptions of risk, and patient-provider dynamic in birth care. A range of qualitative research methods were employed including participant observation, focus groups and in depth interviews with women, traditional birth attendants and clinical health care providers. Research was conducted in Ocotepec a small mestizo subsistence farming community of nearly 500 inhabitants, in the highlands of the Cofre de Perote mountain, an hour outside of Xalapa, the capital of Veracruz. While analysis is still being conducted, researchers are identifying the importance of social welfare obligations, economic and geographic barriers and generational cultural attitudes on the experiences of maternal health of women in this community. Conditional cash transfer programs and expansion of public health care services have increased hospital births, while the shortage of healthcare professionals, persistent class and gender based biases, and increased medicalization of pregnancy and birth threaten care quality and patient integrity.

Section: P/AM 7

While chronic stress is known to be a risk factor for hypertension, there is conflicting evidence among older adults. We hypothesized that age-related arterial stiffening, which leads to a lower blood pressure (particularly diastolic blood pressure), is more pronounced among older adults with higher stress vs. lower stress. The objectives of this study were to investigate the association between age and blood pressure, and to examine whether the age-related patterns were different by chronic stress status as measured by Epstein-Barr virus antibody titer. Cross-sectional data was collected from 764 community-dwelling adults in rural Fujian, China (mean age = 59.4 years old). Participants were categorized into higher and lower stress groups by median split. Results showed that there was an inverted U-shaped association between age and diastolic blood pressure. When stratified by chronic stress, the inverted U-shaped associations between age and blood pressure (both systolic and diastolic blood pressures) were seen only among those with higher stress; diastolic blood pressure peaked at the age of ~68 years, and the declining trend of diastolic blood pressure later in life was more clearly observed among those with higher chronic stress.
This study was financially supported by the JSPS KAKENHI from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (KAKENHI Grant No. JP13J06172). AY is financially supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science as a JSPS Overseas Research Fellow.

Section: P/AM 74

All small-scale societies divide labor by sex, including in politically egalitarian foraging cultures. Yet, although social and productive roles change throughout the lifespan, relatively few time allocation studies in such settings have explored age-related trends in the division of labor of men and women, which may reflect shifting priorities and physical capacities with age. Here, through the use of single, ~3-hour morning focal follow data from BaYaka foragers in the Republic of Congo, we tested for sex differences and age-related patterning of time allocated to hunting, fishing/collecting, gardening, childcare, and domestic work. Across these domains, men (n = 17) spent the most time fishing/collecting and doing home-based work, whereas women (n = 20) spent the most time fishing/collecting and on childcare. Women and men did not significantly differ for time devoted to fishing/collecting, gardening, or domestic work. We found that women spent significantly more time doing childcare than did men, whose participation in childcare was relatively minimal. Men spent more time hunting than did women, who did no hunting during the follows. Older men spent more time on home-based tasks, but their hunting and childcare did not meaningfully vary with age, compared to younger men. Comparatively, older women did substantially less childcare than younger women. These data indicate that BaYaka men and women may differentially shift their allocations to work tasks with age and highlight the importance of considering how the sexual division of labor changes alongside adult male and female social roles across the life course.
Funding: Jacobs Foundation
