Title: Current Officers and Members of Standing Committees




Section: 1 GREETINGS FROM HBA PROGRAM COMMITTEE CHAIR!

The 47 th Annual Meeting of the Human Biology Association will be held simultaneously in Denver, CO and online in a hybrid/hyFlex format from Tuesday, March 22 to Friday, March 25, 2022. As we enter the third year of the COVID-19 pandemic, this hybrid format allows us maximum flexibility for people with varying levels of risk, travel restrictions, and economic circumstances to participate to the maximum extent possible. At the same time, this new flexible format presents many challenges for the program and executive committee, and I ask for your patience as we continue to work out the finer details of this complex program. At the time of this printing, the room information and the online structure had not yet been finalized. These details will be available in the online program. We expect that COVID transmission rates will still be substantial and ask that in-person attendants take measures to keep us all safe, including being up to date COVID vaccination, testing prior to arrival, staying home or in your room if symptomatic, and masking where possible.
As is typical, the meetings will open with a large Poster Session on Wednesday March 23 rd , 8:00 am -11:00 am MST. While the majority of posters will be presented in person, a number of posters will be made available online. All poster presenters will be asked to upload a PDF version of their poster to the online portal. Following the poster session, the student representatives will host a Breakout Session , “Managing expectations of a dissertation or thesis.”
Wednesday afternoon, we have an exciting Plenary Session , “ The Now and Future of Human Biology at the Extremes ” organized by Alexandra Niclou and Mallika Sarma. This session takes our field’s historical focus on human variation in response to environmental challenge and brings us to the impact of extreme conditions such as climate change, space, and social disruption. This year’s Raymond Pearl Memorial Speaker is Dr. William Leonard . He will present “Humans at the Extremes: Exploring human adaptation to ecological and social stressors” at 5 PM MST. Dr. Leonard is the Abraham Harris Professor of Anthropology at Northwestern University and current Editor in Chief of the American Journal of Human Biology . His research examines how environmental and social factors shape human biology and health. In addition, he explores the impact of dietary transitions and lifestyle changes on chronic disease risks.
Following the plenary, we will have our annual welcome reception , combined with the awards ceremony. Congratulations to this year’s recipients of the Franz Boas Distinguished Achievement Award and the Michael A. Little Early Career Award: Dr. Lynnette Leidy-Sievert (Boas) and Cara Ocobock (Little) and Asher Rosinger (Little). During the reception, we will also highlight the goals and achievements of our Community Networking Building Program.
On Thursday, we will have contributed podium presentations on a variety of topics, with almost two full sessions with student presentations. Thursday evening, the students will host their annual student reception and networking session.
The conference closes with our second edition of Place Based Human Biology. This year’s focus is Argentina and Uruguay, and features work by our colleagues at institutions in these two countries. The session includes both podium and flash poster presentations. Thank you to Claudia Valeggia for making this session a reality.
A detailed schedule of presentations and events, abstracts, and an index of presenters follow this summary and is also available at www.humbio.org .
Thank you to the 2022 HBA Program Committee members, Dan Eisenberg, Ruby Fried, Morgan Hoke, Asher Rosinger, Zaneta Thayer, Claudia Valeggia, and Sharon Williams. A special thanks to the American Journal of Human Biology and to Wiley for their sponsorship of the meetings. We welcome you to the meetings, thank you for your participation in this exciting group of presentations and events, and sincerely hope that you enjoy this year’s hybrid program!
Gillian Ice
HBA Program Committee Chair
47th Annual Meeting
HUMAN BIOLOGY ASSOCIATION
PROGRAM SUMMARY

Much biological anthropology work has been done on humans at the extremes. Leaders in our field have contributed groundbreaking work to our understanding of human variation in different environments such as high altitude, cold climates, or the effects of disease and malnutrition on populations across the world. The disastrous impacts of climate change and the rise of global health crises threaten the sudden exposure of entire populations to extreme environments. Simultaneously, nations and private agencies are expanding their forays into space exploration. These rapidly accumulating physical and social challenges call for an in-depth understanding of the effects of extreme conditions on the human body and how the body responds to such environments. Human biologists are increasingly taking multi-field and intersectional approaches incorporating new methodologies, frameworks, and a diversity of perspectives into exploring biological responses to acclimatization and adaptation in a rapidly changing world. Building on the well- established tenants of the field, biological anthropologists possess the tools and knowledge to shed light on the future of human surviving and thriving, as we fight global pandemics, venture beyond our planet, and rise to the challenges of global warming. This plenary session, the speakers will each examine a different aspect of our understanding of human survival at the extremes and highlight new methodologies and insights from medical and evolutionary anthropology. The proposed plenary topics include health, water scarcity, obesity, cold adaptation, high altitude, space exploration, psychosocial stress, and resilience. Speakers represent different career stages, anthropological perspectives, and cultural and ethnic backgrounds. In a time of devastating climate disasters, global health crises, and ongoing exploration, the Pearl Lecture will examine the critical contributions of biological anthropology to the understanding of human adaptation to the extremes and the future of the field in the face of this rapidly shifting global landscape.

