Title: Novel applications of minimally invasive biomarkers in human biology research

Methodological innovation is a central and critically important feature of research in human population biology. Indeed, our field has a rich history of developing and adapting novel methods for assessing aspects of human biological variation in diverse populations, often in remote field settings (see Ellison, 1988 ; Lasker & Mascie-Taylor, 1993 ; Shephard, 1978 , 1991 ; Weiner & Lourie, 1969 , 1981 ). Since 2012, the American Journal of Human Biology has featured important methodological contributions to the field in its “Toolkit” Series .
A particularly important development in human biology has been the growth and expansion of minimally invasive (“field-friendly”) techniques for assessing biomarkers of health and physiological function (e.g., Eick et al., 2019 , 2020 ; McDade, 2014 ; McDade et al., 2007 ). In this special issue, co-editors Josh Snodgrass and Geeta Eick have brought together a group of prominent young researchers to discuss their innovative applications of minimally invasive biomarkers.
Cepon-Robins ( 2021 ) discusses the need for the development of field-friendly methods for evaluating population risks of autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. Given the difficulties associated with the diagnosing autoimmune diseases, there has been relatively limited research done in non-western settings. Yet, as Cepon-Robins notes, among many indigenous populations around the world, the transition to a more market-oriented lifestyle produces changes in diet, reproductive patterns, and infectious disease loads that may increase risks for the development of autoimmune diseases. Consequently, there is critical need to test and validate new methods for detecting biomarkers of autoimmunity using minimally invasive collection techniques.
Theresa Gildner ( 2021 ) examines the challenges and opportunities associated with using minimally invasive methods for measuring variation in reproductive hormones. Gildner effectively highlights the advantages and disadvantages of using different sample types (i.e., saliva, dried blood spots, urine) for analysis, noting the specific considerations for collection and storage of each. Moreover, she outlines how these biomarkers can be used to test an important range of evolutionary hypotheses of about human reproductive function and life history strategies.
Quinn ( 2021 ) highlights similar themes in discussing the importance of evaluating variation in human breast milk composition from comparative bio-cultural and evolutionary perspectives. Quinn notes that there has been very little consideration of human milk as a domain of human phenotypic variation, despite the fact that infant feeding patterns play a strong role in shaping growth, body composition, and metabolic function. She also outlines the critical role that human biologists can and should play in challenging the narrow framing of lactation and infant feeding in much biomedical research.
DuBois et al. ( 2021 ) consider the effective use of minimally invasive biomarkers for advancing gender/sex research in human biology. Transgender and gender diverse (TGD) people face numerous health disparities as well as stigma, marginalization, and lack of access to quality healthcare (Bradford et al., 2013 ; Safer et al., 2016 ). DuBois and colleagues argue compellingly for wider use of minimally invasive biomarkers to develop richer biocultural models for addressing disparities in mental and physical health outcomes of TGD people.
Rej et al. ( 2021 ) conclude this special issue with a “Toolkit” paper that explores alternative minimally invasive methods for evaluating variation in telomere length, an important biomarker of aging. They present a DNA extraction protocol from dried blood spots (DBS) and show that telomere length measured from DBS has higher external validity (relative to measures from whole blood) than that assessed from either saliva or buccal cell samples. These methodological innovations will allow for broader assessment of population-level variation in telomere length and have important implications for better understanding the influence of social and ecological factors on biological aging.
I sincerely thank Josh Snodgrass, Geeta Eick, and all the authors for their contributions to this thoughtful and important special issue, Minimally Invasive Biomarkers in Human Population Biology Research . I look forward to the AJHB continuing to play a central role in promoting methodological innovation in our field.
