Title: Water & Human Biology and New Developments for the American Journal of Human Biology


Section: 1 SPECIAL ISSUE ON WATER AND HUMAN BIOLOGY

I am delighted for the American Journal of Human Biology to open the new year with this special issue on “Water and Human Biology” co-edited by Asher Rosinger and Alexandra Brewis. This issue draws together and expands on the papers from the Human Biology Association's 2019 Plenary Session, “Life and Death: Human Biology and Water”. Most impressive is the way that this set of papers showcases the power and potential of human biology to integrate biocultural, evolutionary, and applied perspectives to explore and address a pressing global health challenge. The volume opens with an introductory overview by Rosinger and Brewis ( 2020 ), and is followed by Amber Wutich's ( 2020 ) Pearl Lecture that identifies water insecurity as a critically important research domain for human biologists. The papers by Swanson and Pontzer ( 2020 ) and Rosinger ( 2020 ) examine the physiology of hydration and water turnover. These papers underscore how much is still unknown about variation human water needs, and outline important directions for future research.
Building on the physiological foundations of water as an essential nutrient, this volume goes on to explore the influence of water insecurity on a wide range of health outcomes in populations around the world. Adams et al. ( 2020 ) draw on published literature to identify the pathways through which extreme poverty and water insecurity interact to shape health outcomes in populations of the global south. Schell ( 2020 ) draws on his long-term research with the Akwesasne Mohawk Nation in developing a biocultural framework for understanding the impact of PCB contamination on water security in these indigenous communities. Papers by Piperata et al. ( 2020 ), Thompson et al. ( 2020 ), Brewis et al. ( 2020 ) and Schuster et al. ( 2020 ) explore the influence of water insecurity on diverse aspects of nutritional health, ranging from the gut microbiome in children to infant feeding strategies, and the dual nutritional burden. In turn, the contributions by Houck et al. ( 2020 ) and Dinkel et al. ( 2020 ) examine the impact water quality and availability on infectious disease risks.
The volume concludes with a contribution to the journal's “Toolkit” Series by Wutich et al. ( 2020 ) describing methods for evaluating human water needs. This paper considers a range of novel techniques for assessing hydration status, water quality, and household risks for water insecurity. Overall, this special issue elegantly synthesizes current research on the emerging domain of Water Insecurity while offering a vision for future work in the field. I hope you enjoy this important collection of papers.

Section: 2 NEW DEVELOPMENTS

With this issue, I also want to introduce the new members of the AJHB editorial team and discuss some of the new features of the journal. I am pleased to welcome both Grazyna Jasienska and Peter Katzmarzyk as new Associate Editors, joining our current AEs Darna Dufour, Chris Kuzawa, and Tad Schurr. I also thank David Tracer for his outstanding work as he transitions out of his role as an AE.
In addition, it is my pleasure to welcome four new members to the AJHB 's Editorial Board: Chris Lynn, Robin Nelson, Alejandra Nuñez de la Mora, and Cara Ocobock. Cara and Chris will serve as the social media editors for the journal, highlighting articles on Twitter and Facebook. They will also feature research from the journal in their popular Sausage of Science Podcast Series. Starting with this issue, each future issue will have an “Editor's Choice” article which will be selected by the editorial team as the most prominent article published in the issue. The “Editor's Choice” article will be made freely available to download for a period of three months post issue publication and will be promoted on social media via the Human Biology Association/AJHB and Wiley channels.
Later this year the AJHB will also move forward to promote greater data sharing and archiving in our field. When submitting manuscripts, authors will be asked to answer questions on data sharing and data access, and the selected data availability statement will appear on the article outside of the paywall. Those articles providing free access information to datasets or methods/protocols will be highlighted with Open Science badges from the Center for Open Science.
I look forward to rolling out these new developments for the journal to further enrich and expand the impact of the important work being published in the AJHB .
