Title: American Journal of Human Biology Moves to a Monthly Publication Schedule

With this issue, I am very pleased to announce that the American Journal of Human Biology will transition to a monthly publication schedule. Since its founding in 1989 as the Official Journal of the Human Biology Association (HBA), the AJHB has published the foremost research in human population biology on a bi-monthly basis. Over the last few years, the journal has seen a marked rise in the number and quality of manuscripts that we receive and publish annually. After consultation with our colleagues at Wiley and the leadership of the HBA, we are excited to move forward with this new era of publishing for the journal.
Our monthly publication schedule will offer a number of advantages. It will decrease the backlog of papers in “Early View” and reduce the time from manuscript acceptance to final publication. Additionally, this transition will double the number of papers that we are able to feature and highlight as “Editor's Choice” (freely available for 2 months post-publication) and Cover articles. Most importantly, this shift will increase the level of engagement that we have with our readers and authors, helping to further expand the reach and impact of the work being published in the AJHB . The increased frequency of publication will not result in greater subscription rates/dues for HBA members.
I offer my sincere thanks to Gillian Greenough (Executive Editor) and Paul-André Genest (Publisher, Life Sciences) of Wiley for encouraging this important initiative and to Catherine Panter-Brick (HBA President), Josh Snodgrass (HBA President-Elect), and Lynnette Sievert (Past Editor-in-Chief, AJHB ) for thoughtful discussions and their support in moving forward with this plan. I am tremendously grateful to our Associate Editors, Editorial Board Members, Editorial Staff, and reviewers for their outstanding work in continuing to make the AJHB the field's leading journal. To our authors and contributors, I most strongly encourage you to send your best research to the journal. I look forward to this next chapter for the AJHB in promoting thoughtful and innovative research in human population biology.
