Title: Re-examining Biocultural Approaches in Human Biology

In this special issue of the American Journal of Human Biology , co-editors Morgan Hoke and Lawrence Schell have brought together an impressive group of authors to present current research and emerging trends in biocultural anthropology. Since the publication of Goodman & Leatherman's ( 1998 ) landmark volume, Building a New Biocultural Synthesis : Political-Economic Perspectives on Human Biology , biocultural approaches to the study of human biology and health have expanded and become increasingly sophisticated. Over the last two decades, work published in the AJHB has been central to the development of this important research domain (eg, Brewis, 2003 ; Dufour, 2006 ; Pike & Williams, 2006 ; Schell et al., 2007 ; Sancilio et al., 2017 ).
The authors in this volume have addressed many of these challenges and provided us with rich examples of the innovative methods used to investigate social dimensions of human biology.
Hoke & Schell ( 2020 ) open this special issue with a consideration of what biocultural anthropology does . With this focus, they side-step the semantic debates about how to define “biocultural”, and instead highlight the distinctive and powerful features of different strands of this research domain. Particularly notable are the ways in which the biocultural framework allows for and promotes the integration of evolutionary/adaptive and political-economic perspectives. Such integration is well-articulated in several papers in this issue. Brewis & Wutich ( 2020 ) explore the utility of linking evolutionary and political-economic perspectives for better understanding the biological and health consequences of stigma. Hicks ( 2020 ) argues for similar integration in evaluating interventions to address gestational weight gain and maternal obesity.
Dressler ( 2020 ) takes up the challenge of integrating evolutionary and sociocultural perspectives by developing a model of culture as an evolutionary niche for the human species. The three-dimensional model of culture presented in this paper builds on Dressler's foundational work in operationalizing cultural constructs for evaluating variation in human biology and health.
Papers by Lynn et al. ( 2020 ) and Boyette et al. ( 2020 ) use biocultural frameworks to test evolutionary hypotheses. Lynn and colleagues examine Samoan tattooing as an example of “costly signaling” of enhanced immune status, while Boyette and colleagues analyze the influence of paternal investment, cultural practices, and social norms in shaping variation in children's nutritional status among two communities in the Congo Basin.
Several other papers in this issue highlight the important role that biocultural research can play in both measuring and addressing the differential impact of social and ecological stressors on health outcomes. The mixed methods used by biocultural anthropologists allow for a much deeper exploration of the nature of health disparities than is typically seen biomedical research. Howells et al. ( 2020 ) examine the determinants of vulnerability to psychological distress among pregnant women in North Carolina following Hurricane Florence. Papers by Quinn & Childs ( 2020 ) and Hoke ( 2020 ) examine the impacts of economic change on child growth measures among high altitude populations of Nepal and Peru, respectively. Both of these studies show how the ongoing transformation of small-scale, rural economies can promote disparities in growth and nutritional status. Quinn & Childs ( 2020 ) show that children's adipose reserves are inversely related to levels of economic development in Nepal, while Hoke ( 2020 ) finds that greater levels of home food production are associated with better statural growth among Peruvian infants.
Leatherman & Goodman ( 2020 ) reflect on the developments in biocultural anthropology since the late 1990s. They provide a brief overview of the original goals of the New Biocultural Synthesis and thoughtfully discuss the novel approaches and frameworks that have emerged for examining the linkages between social inequalities and human biology. Andrea Wiley ( 2020 ) concludes this issue with commentary on each of the papers and her thoughts for future directions in biocultural anthropology. Wiley's detailed consideration of the methodological and analytical approaches used in this set of papers highlights both the progress that has been made over the last 20 years and the challenges that remain.
I sincerely thank Morgan Hoke, Larry Schell, and all the contributors for producing this compelling special issue, Continuity and Change in Biocultural Anthropology , and I look forward to the AJHB continuing to be a central venue for publishing research that advances this important domain.
