Title: Sustainable Consumption: The Psychology of Individual Choice, Identity, and Behavior


Abstract: Abstract

The global human community is facing an increasingly urgent dilemma: How do we improve standards of living while lessening our impact on the environment? This special issue presents recent contributions from both psychological and interdisciplinary research on sustainable consumption. To situate these articles in a broader context, we first establish the necessity of improving sustainable consumption and discuss some of the foundational psychological work addressing this issue. Second, we outline how sustainability can be addressed at various stages, from production and marketing to consumption and waste. Third, we stress the need to broaden the focus on individual consumption to include collective action. Fourth, we discuss a number of critiques of past research on sustainable consumption. Finally, we highlight the importance of interdisciplinary research in supporting sustainable development. These themes are all addressed in greater depth by each of the contributions to the special issue.

Section: Sustainable Consumption: The Psychology of Individual Choice, Identity, and Behavior

Human well-being is critically intertwined with natural environmental systems (Leviston, Walker, Green, & Price, 2018 ). Like all living creatures, humans depend on natural environments for life and prosperity. Unlike other species, humans also massively damage and destroy those very environments upon which we depend. Human activity has assaulted and challenged natural systems to the point that we are now in a set of connected global environmental crises, with rapidly closing windows of opportunity to take remedial action before we are locked into widespread, potentially catastrophic, system changes (IPCC, 2019 ). Those crises are of our own making—climate change is perhaps the most prominent, but no less important are the rates of natural resource depletion, pollution, loss of biodiversity, and the collapse of ecosystems, all caused through human activity. Indeed, some analyses claim we are close to overstepping, or have already overstepped, critical planetary boundaries that define a “safe operating space for humanity” (Steffen et al., 2015 ).
The challenge for humanity is to find ways to mitigate the damage we do to global environmental systems. Changing our patterns of consumption is key to this. How we consume food, energy, water, and other natural resources lies at the heart of many of our environmental challenges. Consumption issues relate not only to the materials and resources directly consumed, but also to the production and distribution of commodities for consumption, the infrastructure required for those supply chains, and the pollution, land-clearing, greenhouse gas emissions, and other by-products inherently involved in consumption. The social sciences, including social psychology, have a long history of addressing sustainable consumption (e.g., Reisch & Thorgersen, 2015 ; Schandl & Walker, 2017 ). Interest in sustainability is by no means limited to the social sciences—Figure 1 documents the rapid rise in the relative usage of the words “sustainable” and “sustainability” from the early 1990s.
The challenge of changing our patterns of consumption to be more sustainable is all the more difficult because we humans have built for ourselves social and economic systems that are consumptogenic—that is, they promote the consumption of goods and services to the detriment of human and environmental health (Lawrence & Friel, 2019 )—and because consumption is intrinsically connected to human health and welfare. To help direct global efforts toward sustainability, the United Nations developed a set of 17 Sustainable Development Goals ( https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/ ). These articulate the major global social and environmental challenges facing humanity, show how they are interdependent, and set targets for addressing those challenges to be reached by 2030. A notable feature is how many of the goals relate to changing consumption behaviors, individually and collectively, to lessen environmental impacts and simultaneously improve standards of living. Goal 12 specifically relates to “sustainable consumption and production.” This notes that consumption in the resource-intensive economies and lifestyles of the West (the “overdeveloped” world, in C. Wright Mills’ ( 1959 ) memorable phrase, in contrast to the “under-developed” or “developing” world) is wholly unsustainable—it would take more than five planets’ worth of material resources every year if everyone on the planet lived as Americans and Australians do ( https://www.footprintnetwork.org/ ). It also notes the rapid increase in per capita consumption of nations in central and eastern Asia, which is accelerating the total global consumption of natural resources. However, despite significant growth in global wealth and prosperity, 783 million people (slightly more than 10% of humanity) still live below the international poverty line of US$1.90 a day ( https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/poverty/ ), and these people are also the most vulnerable to environmental changes.
The challenge is thus not just in reducing total consumption and in reshaping the patterns of consumption. Major issues of social justice and morality are at play here as well. “Sustainable consumption” means “doing more with less,” of course, but also means fair and equitable systems of production, distribution, and consumption.
When working on issues of sustainability and pro-environmental behavior, social psychology often focuses on discrete behaviors, and attempts to predict and change them by capturing the antecedents of those behaviors (e.g., Osbaldston & Schott, 2012 ; Steg, Bolderdijk, Keizer, & Perlavicuite, 2014 ). This atomistic approach is valuable for closely and carefully isolating causes of behaviors, but is limited in producing scalable interventions that produce durable and generalizable behavior change. Part of the reason for this limitation is social psychology's inattention to the broader systems within which behaviors happen. Systems approaches are available to social psychology, though. Perhaps the most notable—paradoxically developed by one of the founders of modern social psychology—is the social ecological systems framework developed by Kurt Lewin ( 1947a, 1947b ). Lewin's framework reminds us that any behavior is produced by a set of systemic forces, and allows us to identify systemic pressures and tensions that often counter efforts to change individual behaviors (Hobman & Walker, 2015 ).
One example of Lewin's work stands as particularly pertinent to some of the contributions to this special issue. Lewin ( 1943 ) sought to encourage households in wartime United States to consume more organ meats (e.g., kidney, liver, tripe) as the country was exporting more traditional forms of meat for its military forces based overseas. Rather than attempting to change attitudes to such meats, or providing more information about them, he analyzed the systems through which food was brought into the household, prepared for consumption, and ultimately consumed. By developing targeted interventions at critical points in this ecological system, and delivering interventions that combined social norms with information designed to overcome key points of resistance, he significantly increased households’ consumption of organ meats (Greenwood & Levin, 2006 ; Lewin, 1943 ).
This special issue of the Journal of Social Issues presents contributions from psychology to meeting the sustainable consumption challenge. The Journal of Social Issues has addressed sustainability before: McKenzie-Mohr and Oskamp ( 1995 ) edited an issue in 1995, and a dozen years later Vlek and Steg ( 2007 ) edited another. Contributions to those issues spanned risk and decision-making, motives, and values as determinants of pro-environmental behaviors; the intersection of technology and behavior; the role of activism; and the importance of multidisciplinarity. Many of those topics return in the current issue. The current special issue expands on these previous contributions, and focuses more specifically on sustainable consumption.
Papers in the current issue are clustered into three main sections: those examining sustainability behaviors primarily at the individual level; those focusing on groups and identities; and papers exposing systemic processes, conceptual issues, and institutional constraints within university departments and disciplinary operations and reward systems. This organization of the papers is necessarily somewhat contrived—topics, methods, and issues cut across these artificial divisions.
The papers are organized according to Figure 2 , reading from left to right. In Figure 2 , and drawing from a life-cycle approach (e.g., UNEP, 2004 ), we provide a schematic of the whole consumption and production chain, and indicate which stage each article in the special issue addresses. For example, Judge et al. ( 2020 ) present two experiments demonstrating that methods of production (as art, craft, or mass-produced) affect the perceived inherent value of an object and its perceived sustainability and disposability; meanwhile, Saber and Silka ( 2020 ) describe a multidisciplinary team-based experience, incorporating food scientists, nurses, economists, engineers, and anthropologists as well as social psychologists, all focused on reducing food waste within a large hospital. The schematic in Figure 2 thus illustrates how many of the articles—especially the empirical articles—in the special issue are (necessarily) narrow in scope since they focus on one part of the process through which sustainable consumption may (or may not) occur. As a result, they also employ—explicitly or implicitly—subtly different definitions of sustainable consumption. At the same time, these parts connect to form a whole . For example, one of the outcome measures in the Judge et al. paper is how disposable the object is—in other words, under which conditions it is likely to become waste. Here, many of the issues raised by Saber and Silka ( 2020 ) become salient. Judge et al. argue that people place less value on, and hence are more likely to discard, objects that are industrially produced, and this may contribute to the massive amount of (typically mass-produced) food that is thrown away in hospital settings, as discussed by Saber and Silka.
The second point this schematic illustrates is the challenge in shifting focus from the trees (individual studies or papers, or perhaps even individual subfields) to the entire forest. Some of the articles in this special issue tackle this challenge (as also illustrated in Figure 2 ). For example, Dreyer et al. ( 2020 ) strongly encourage psychologists to seek out and contribute to interdisciplinary projects addressing complex real-world problems. Specifically, they argue that psychology can play a critical role in understanding and managing complex food–energy–water nexus systems, as part of a necessarily interdisciplinary team. Such work often requires social psychologists to engage with colleagues and paradigms from many different disciplines, many of which will be unfamiliar to, and may seem incompatible with, social psychology. There are many challenges, but many rewards too, in working in such environments (Bammer et al., 2020 ). As Romero-Canyas and Hiltner ( 2020 ) point out in their commentary, many of the institutional practices of social psychology impede this interdisciplinary work. In this vein, Richardson et al. ( 2020 ) highlight both the unique challenges faced by early career researchers (ECRs) in psychology who are interested in studying sustainable consumption in interdisciplinary contexts, and possible ways forward for these researchers.
Our schematic points to the central importance of the PERSON: the individual is the link between marketing and consumption (narrowly understood). This individual comprises their thoughts, feelings, beliefs, attitudes, and, ultimately, choice and behavior . The empirical articles in this special issue all have the individual as their unit of analysis; many of them also focus on a particular (un)sustainable behavior. This is core social psychology work, linking (social) psychological theories to individual sustainability behaviors. For example, Ginn and Lickel ( 2020 ) report two studies on the perceived efficacy of reducing meat consumption for mitigating climate change. As meat-based diets produce significantly more greenhouse gas emissions than plant-based diets, cutting meat intake is a simple and effective change that people in the overdeveloped Western world can make to reduce our environmental impact. However, many people fail to connect their dietary choices to their environmental impacts (Ginn & Lickel). Given the links between perceived efficacy and willingness to change, drawing attention to this disconnect is critically important.
As Hamann and Reese ( 2020 ) further illustrate, feeling efficacious in the face of environmental challenges is complex—it is easy to be overwhelmed into inaction by the scale and scope of the environmental issues confronting us, and to feel as though individual action is trivial, pointless, and ineffectual. Hamann and Reese suggest it is important to distinguish between individual self-efficacy (the sense that one can achieve an individual goal) and collective efficacy (the sense that one's group can mobilize to achieve a collective goal), and between goal-directed efficacy (the ability to achieve a goal) and other-directed efficacy (the ability to mobilize others to act to achieve a goal). Indeed, pro-environmental behaviors can be individual (recycle an empty container) or collective (encourage others to recycle).
At this individual locus, classic social psychological approaches come to the fore (e.g., Bandura, 1997 ; Stern, 2000 ; Van Zomeren, Postmes, & Spears, 2008 ). Although their results from correlational and experimental studies are mixed, Hamann and Reese show the value in further understanding the relationships between individual- and group-level senses of efficacy on the one hand, and individual- and group-level environmental behaviors on the other.
Another feature of social life is social comparison and the importance of both descriptive and injunctive norms. Leviston and Uren ( 2020 ) focus on people's beliefs about their and others’ pro-environmental behaviors. Few of their participants reported that they thought they did fewer pro-environmental behaviors than average—clear evidence of the well-known “better-than-average” effect (e.g., Brown, 2012 ). Leviston and Uren end by suggesting that behavior change efforts must simultaneously consider the accuracy of people's perceptions of their own behavior, their readings of prescriptive and descriptive norms, and their environmental identities.
Despite the important individual contributions of these (and similar other) empirical social psychological articles, an emphasis on the individual and their behaviors can also be considered one of the weaknesses of social psychology as it tries to tackle sustainable consumption. Kurz et al. ( 2020 ) highlight this—behaviors are not just atomized activities, but also help to define us by forming the basis of important social identities. One does not usually just avoid eating meat; one becomes a vegetarian or a vegan. One does not just ride a bike to work; one becomes a cyclist. The activity, then, is performative. Moreover, many of the sorts of behaviors that are desirable—from the point of view of sustainable consumption—are minority behaviors. Kurz et al. develop an analysis of “moralized minority practice identities” (moralized, because the behaviors they refer to are seen as desirable, or are prescriptively good things to do; and minority because they are done by relatively few people). Their analysis shifts the focus of sustainable consumption away from individual consumers and onto social identities , and from there onto social change, as captured by social identity theory (Tajfel & Turner, 1986 ).
This “zooming out” is the final point illustrated in Figure 2 , and is tackled in different ways by Kurz et al ( 2020 ), Bloodhart and Swim ( 2020 ), and Schmitt et al ( 2020 ). Bloodhart and Swim examine sustainable consumption through a gender analysis lens, and argue that gender stereotypes and norms shape the way that people tend to think about, and respond to, the challenge of sustainable consumption. Furthermore, they articulate the need for sustainable consumption solutions to carefully consider issues of power, inequality, and social structure. Schmitt et al. provide a provocative critique of the common reference to barriers to action—one example being Gifford's ( 2011 ) influential synthesis—arguing that the barrier metaphor places an unhelpful focus on inhibitory aspects of common psychological processes, ignoring or minimizing the role of social contextual forces. Instead, psychologists could reframe the same processes to facilitate behavior and social change.
The theoretical and high-level critique by Schmitt et al ( 2020 ) is echoed at the practical and specific level by Richardson et al.’s ( 2020 ) frustration with incentive structures faced by ECRs, by Dreyer et al.’s ( 2020 ) exhortation to work in interdisciplinary teams, by Bloodhart and Swim's ( 2020 ) recommendation to the examine the intersection of (un)sustainable practices with gendered and/or marginalized social identities, and by Saber and Silka's ( 2020 ) case study of interdisciplinary efforts to address the “wicked problem” of food waste. These concerns may cause some discomfort among traditional empirical social psychologists, and taking them seriously ought also to cause some discomfort among the institutions of social psychology.
The importance of identifying solutions is the focus of the commentary by Romero-Canyas and Hiltner ( 2020 ), which concludes this special issue. They argue that for social psychology to contribute to developing solutions to the global problems facing us, it must exploit its existing scientific strengths, embrace a problem-solving approach, and broaden its scope to include community, social, cultural, and national processes. All of this requires interdisciplinary collaboration for us to translate social psychological insights into scalable solutions.

Section: Concluding Comments

We face an increasingly urgent paradox: Human well-being is critically intertwined with natural environmental systems, yet human activity is damaging or destroying global environmental systems to the point where we may be crossing the critical planetary boundaries for human survival (Steffen et al., 2015 ). Much of this deleterious human activity is driven by our consumption of natural resources. In addition, as the UN Sustainable Development Goals make clear, environmental issues, both local and global, intersect with concerns about social justice and morality.
Psychology and other human sciences ought to have a significant role in understanding how social systems and environmental systems are linked, and in mobilizing the social and behavior changes—at local and global scales—needed to achieve the sustainable development targets. Social psychology offers a unique and vital social science approach to sustainability, but we recognize that it is but one of the many scholarly disciplines necessary to tackle the challenges we face. Tools must be fit for purpose—expecting a hammer to do the work of a screwdriver makes little sense. In the same way, academic disciplines are capable of addressing some questions directly, but are inappropriate for others.
A secondary challenge is to overcome the meta-scientific difficulties of fusing different disciplinary approaches, frameworks, and methods. In addition, new, inter- and trans-disciplinary approaches are being developed: Sustainability science (Kates et al., 2001 ; Watt, 2017 ) is a prominent example. Social psychology must develop deep intellectual connections with such new areas of scholarship while preserving its unique disciplinary perspective. This will also require changes to how the academy operates, to promote and celebrate rather than inhibit social psychological scholarship that engages with inter- and trans-disciplinarity while tackling sustainability problems.
These sustainability problems are immediate, complex, and wicked (Brown, Harris, & Russell, 2010 ). No single discipline can provide all the answers to these problems, but many disciplines have something unique to contribute. Social psychologists can contribute much to further our understanding of the issues at the intersection of material consumption and social justice, especially if they work in interdisciplinary teams and connect to other disciplines in ways that use their strengths. We hope that the papers in the present special issue of the Journal of Social Issues in some small way further this understanding and encourage these contributions.
