Title: Reflections From Editors of Journal of English Linguistics


Section: 1. Introduction

Alexandra D’Arcy
University of Victoria
Peter J. Grund
Yale University
As Journal of English Linguistics ( JEngL ) reached fifty published volumes this year (2022) and as we as the current editors of the journal were contemplating the past and future of JEngL in light of this milestone, we were curious what past editors thought about their tenure at its helm. Rarely do we hear much about how editors think about their work or what their takeways from such work are. Devoted broadly to issues of the profession, our In the Profession column (introduced by the two former editors Anne Curzan and Robin Queen; see below) seemed an ideal place to explore their thoughts. We therefore invited previous editors to submit reflections on their experiences, prompted by questions such as “What do you take away from your tenure as JEngL editor?”; “How has the work influenced you professionally or impacted your scholarship?”; “What were the joys (and perhaps challenges) of being a JEngL editor?” Their thoughtful and wide-ranging answers follow below.
As current editors, we have refrained from adding our own specific reflections here. Being in the middle of the editorship and undertaking editorial work pretty much every day, we do not have the same (critical) distance as our predecessors. But our joys (and challenges) certainly mirror many of those singled out by previous editors. Editing involves a very substantial time commitment, and, like so many other aspects of academic life (and beyond!), journal editing has experienced significant challenges over the past couple of years. We suspect we are in the midst of a turning point in academic publishing as a result of the unsustainable pressure on especially early-career scholars to publish more and more journal articles and the concomitant stresses on the process of finding reviewers and obtaining timely reviews (see, e.g., the discussion in Warner 2022 ). But, despite the all-encompassing nature of journal editing, it is immensely rewarding to be able to shepherd exciting research through to completion, to support early-career scholars, and to work collaboratively to make the publication machinery run smoothly. And you cannot work collaboratively in this way without building meaningful connection with your co-editor, which is immensely rewarding as well. Even without the benefit of distance, as we think about this work, one thing stands out to us. We have been incredibly fortunate to have worked and to be working with a fantastic line-up of editorial assistants over the years: Christopher Strelluf, Lauren Fath, and Corinna Cook (for Peter and Matthew Gordon), and Candice Wuehle, Lucia Iglesias, Erika Grandstaff, and, at the time of writing, Sajib Ghosh (for Alex and Peter). As our submitting authors can attest (irrespective of whether their work is published or not), the professionalism, dedication, and hard work of our editorial assistants is remarkable, especially considering their many other commitments—their tenure with the journal has always coincided with their tenure as graduate students.
The future of JEngL is bright. We continue to publish thought-provoking and cutting-edge research, and with the support of our editorial board, we have been able to provide a venue for diverse voices in our field, whether from article authors, review writers, column writers, or interviewers and interviewees. We look forward to working with and learning from submitting authors and reviewers over the coming years, and to contributing to the continuing success of JEngL beyond this fifty-volume milestone.
