Title: Interpersonal Gut Microbiome Variation Drives Susceptibility and Resistance to Cholera Infection


Abstract: Summary

The gut microbiome is the resident microbial community of the gastrointestinal tract. This community is highly diverse, but how microbial diversity confers resistance or susceptibility to intestinal pathogens is poorly understood. Using transplantation of human microbiomes into several animal models of infection, we show that key microbiome species shape the chemical environment of the gut through the activity of the enzyme bile salt hydrolase. The activity of this enzyme reduced colonization by the major human diarrheal pathogen Vibrio cholerae by degrading the bile salt taurocholate that activates the expression of virulence genes. The absence of these functions and species permits increased infection loads on a personal microbiome-specific basis. These findings suggest new targets for individualized preventative strategies of V. cholerae infection through modulating the structure and function of the gut microbiome.

Section: Introduction

Gastrointestinal infections represent a major global health concern. One major human diarrheal pathogen is Vibrio cholerae , the etiologic agent of the severe disease cholera that affects millions of people annually ( Clemens et al., 2017 4. Clemens, J.D. ∙ Nair, G.B. ∙ Ahmed, T. ... Cholera Lancet. 2017; 390 :1539-1549 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (279) PubMed Google Scholar ). V. cholerae cycles between aquatic reservoirs and the small intestine, requiring the coordinated regulation of environmental fitness genes versus virulence genes including the attachment factor toxin co-regulated pilus (TCP) and cholera toxin (CT) ( Herrington et al., 1988; Miller et al., 1987 14. Herrington, D.A. ∙ Hall, R.H. ∙ Losonsky, G. ... Toxin, toxin-coregulated pili, and the toxR regulon are essential for Vibrio cholerae pathogenesis in humans J. Exp. Med. 1988; 168 :1487-1492 Crossref Scopus (553) PubMed Google Scholar 34. Miller, V.L. ∙ Taylor, R.K. ∙ Mekalanos, J.J. Cholera toxin transcriptional activator toxR is a transmembrane DNA binding protein Cell. 1987; 48 :271-279 Abstract Full Text (PDF) Scopus (439) PubMed Google Scholar ). In this and other pathogens, regulation depends on the chemical state of the gut, shaped by the gut microbiome, the dense resident gut microbial community ( Eckburg et al., 2005 9. Eckburg, P.B. ∙ Bik, E.M. ∙ Bernstein, C.N. ... Diversity of the human intestinal microbial flora Science. 2005; 308 :1635-1638 Crossref Scopus (6205) PubMed Google Scholar ) that varies dramatically across host species and across individuals as a function of diet, geography, and environmental insults ( Yatsunenko et al., 2012 46. Yatsunenko, T. ∙ Rey, F.E. ∙ Manary, M.J. ... Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography Nature. 2012; 486 :222-227 Crossref Scopus (5629) PubMed Google Scholar ). In cholera-endemic areas, the gut microbiome is subject to mutually reinforcing pressures: malnutrition, leading to reduced host infection resistance, repeated diarrhea, and poorly controlled antimicrobial usage in an attempt to mitigate the resulting sequelae. Previous 16S ribosomal gene studies of the gut microbiome in these areas demonstrate that these factors are able to drive the gut microbiome into a characteristic dysbiotic state, dominated by Streptococci such as Streptococcus salivarius , Enterococci, and Enterobacteriaceae. This configuration has been shown to be inducible by malnutrition ( Subramanian et al., 2014 44. Subramanian, S. ∙ Huq, S. ∙ Yatsunenko, T. ... Persistent gut microbiota immaturity in malnourished Bangladeshi children Nature. 2014; 510 :417-421 Crossref Scopus (884) PubMed Google Scholar ), and diarrhea irrespective of etiology, including enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli , V. cholerae , and rotavirus infection ( David et al., 2015; Hsiao et al., 2014; Kieser et al., 2018 6. David, L.A. ∙ Weil, A. ∙ Ryan, E.T. ... Gut microbial succession follows acute secretory diarrhea in humans MBio. 2015; 6 e00381-15 Crossref Scopus (124) Google Scholar 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar 21. Kieser, S. ∙ Sarker, S.A. ∙ Sakwinska, O. ... Bangladeshi children with acute diarrhoea show faecal microbiomes with increased Streptococcus abundance, irrespective of diarrhoea aetiology Environ. Microbiol. 2018; 20 :2256-2269 Crossref Scopus (33) PubMed Google Scholar ).
Generalized model “healthy” microbial communities of the human gut have been shown to be resistant to V. cholerae infection ( Hsiao et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ), and associative metagenomic studies have examined how the microbiome differs between cholera patients and household contacts that did not exhibit disease symptoms ( Midani et al., 2018 32. Midani, F.S. ∙ Weil, A.A. ∙ Chowdhury, F. ... Human Gut Microbiota Predicts Susceptibility to Vibrio cholerae Infection J. Infect. Dis. 2018; 218 :645-653 Crossref Scopus (56) PubMed Google Scholar ). Yet, few studies have mechanistically explored how interpersonal microbiome variation can drive pathogen susceptibility. Here, we show that the post-malnutrition/post-diarrheal dysbiotic community is highly vulnerable to subsequent infection. Moving beyond a dichotomous “normal” versus “dysbiotic” comparison, we show that microbiome differences among healthy humans drive striking differences in susceptibility. We show that fecal studies in animals and potentially humans may have limited utility for studies of community interactions with pathogens of the small intestine, and that microbiome-dependent infection susceptibility at the small intestine can be rescued by microbiome transplantation. In order to identify commensals that strongly interact with enteropathogens across many community contexts, we established an efficient unbiased experimental pipeline that revealed that the commensal species Blautia obeum can suppress virulence. We identify an enzymatic mechanism in B. obeum that degrades the host-produced virulence-inducing molecule taurocholate (TC), which B. obeum uses alongside other mechanisms ( Hsiao et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ) to suppress V. cholerae virulence gene activation and colonization.

Section: Results

We took a two-pronged approach to study the effects of microbiome variation on pathogen resistance, both involving reconstituting human gut microbiomes in animal models of V. cholerae colonization and virulence. The first involved the construction of defined gut communities using cultured human isolates ( Figure 1 A), and the second involved studies with complete human fecal microbiomes ( Figure 1 B).
As the basis for designing defined model communities, we compared fecal microbiomes of a healthy adult volunteer cohort in the United States ( Figure 1 C; Table S2 C) and previously published 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing of Bangladeshi adults ( Hsiao et al., 2014; Subramanian et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar 44. Subramanian, S. ∙ Huq, S. ∙ Yatsunenko, T. ... Persistent gut microbiota immaturity in malnourished Bangladeshi children Nature. 2014; 510 :417-421 Crossref Scopus (884) PubMed Google Scholar ). Previous studies in Bangladesh revealed that cholera drives the human gut microbial community to a highly dysbiotic, low-diversity state dominated by Streptococci, which recovers to a configuration similar to non-diarrheal individuals over the course of weeks after the cessation of acute disease ( Hsiao et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ). This has also been observed in other diarrheal infections, such as enterotoxigenic E. coli and rotavirus ( David et al., 2015; Kieser et al., 2018 6. David, L.A. ∙ Weil, A. ∙ Ryan, E.T. ... Gut microbial succession follows acute secretory diarrhea in humans MBio. 2015; 6 e00381-15 Crossref Scopus (124) Google Scholar 21. Kieser, S. ∙ Sarker, S.A. ∙ Sakwinska, O. ... Bangladeshi children with acute diarrhoea show faecal microbiomes with increased Streptococcus abundance, irrespective of diarrhoea aetiology Environ. Microbiol. 2018; 20 :2256-2269 Crossref Scopus (33) PubMed Google Scholar ), and other gut pathologies, such as severe malnutrition ( Subramanian et al., 2014 44. Subramanian, S. ∙ Huq, S. ∙ Yatsunenko, T. ... Persistent gut microbiota immaturity in malnourished Bangladeshi children Nature. 2014; 510 :417-421 Crossref Scopus (884) PubMed Google Scholar ). Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) of a human cohort from Bangladesh ( Hsiao et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ) displays the dysbiosis caused by cholera ( Figure 1 C, Diarrhea (start)) and community structure weeks after the cessation of diarrhea (Diarrhea (end) to Recovery (end)), when the microbiome becomes similar to that of individuals in the same area not suffering from acute malnutrition or diarrhea ( Subramanian et al., 2014 44. Subramanian, S. ∙ Huq, S. ∙ Yatsunenko, T. ... Persistent gut microbiota immaturity in malnourished Bangladeshi children Nature. 2014; 510 :417-421 Crossref Scopus (884) PubMed Google Scholar ). Interpersonal microbiome variation in Bangladesh was far higher than among healthy US individuals sampled as part of this study; indeed, some Bangladeshi “healthy” microbiomes closely resemble cholera-diarrheal communities. As infectious diarrhea and malnutrition are frequent in cholera endemic areas, we hypothesized that the distinctive dysbiotic microbiome structure observed during recovery from multiple sources of environmental insult to the gut may be a recurring window of vulnerability to cholera.
We then used human-derived isolates to assemble defined gut communities ( Figure 1 A) based on these metagenomic analyses. One model microbiome (“CR”) was based on metagenomic surveys of healthy individuals, characterized by high taxonomic diversity but commonly including members of the genera Bacteroides, Clostridium, and Blautia ( Arumugam et al., 2011; Qin et al., 2010; Yatsunenko et al., 2012 1. Arumugam, M. ∙ Raes, J. ∙ Pelletier, E. ..., MetaHIT Consortium Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome Nature. 2011; 473 :174-180 Crossref Scopus (5332) PubMed Google Scholar 39. Qin, J. ∙ Li, R. ∙ Raes, J. ..., MetaHIT Consortium A human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing Nature. 2010; 464 :59-65 Crossref Scopus (8548) PubMed Google Scholar 46. Yatsunenko, T. ∙ Rey, F.E. ∙ Manary, M.J. ... Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography Nature. 2012; 486 :222-227 Crossref Scopus (5629) PubMed Google Scholar ). Another (“DS”) model microbiome is characteristic of the dysbiotic state found in cholera-endemic areas, comprising Streptococci, Enterococcus faecalis , and E. coli . 16S sequencing analysis confirmed that the CR community is more similar to healthy human microbiomes than dysbiotic diarrheal microbiomes, while the DS model community was more similar to microbiomes at the conclusion of cholera ( Figures 1 C and 1D).
We grew bacterial species from each defined group in pure culture and used culture optical density (OD 600 ) to introduce equivalent amounts of each member species with V. cholerae to germfree (GF) adult C57BL/6 mice by intra-gastric gavage. Overall, microbial load during infection was equivalent as measured by qPCR of 16S gene levels ( Figure 2 F). Mice that received the CR microbiome at infection were resistant to V. cholerae colonization, compared to animals receiving DS microbes ( Figures 2 A and 2B). We observed these colonization phenotypes in both feces and in the medial and distal thirds of the small intestine. In prior studies in adult mice, small intestinal colonization by V. cholerae required antibiotics ( Freter, 1955, 1956 11. Freter, R. The fatal enteric cholera infection in the guinea pig, achieved by inhibition of normal enteric flora J. Infect. Dis. 1955; 97 :57-65 Crossref Scopus (88) PubMed Google Scholar 12. Freter, R. Experimental enteric Shigella and Vibrio infections in mice and guinea pigs J. Exp. Med. 1956; 104 :411-418 Crossref Scopus (90) PubMed Google Scholar ) and ketamine anesthesia ( Olivier et al., 2009 36. Olivier, V. ∙ Queen, J. ∙ Satchell, K.J. Successful small intestine colonization of adult mice by Vibrio cholerae requires ketamine anesthesia and accessory toxins PLoS ONE. 2009; 4 :e7352 Crossref Scopus (70) PubMed Google Scholar ). Our results with human, as opposed to murine, gut bacteria suggest that microbiome differences across host species and inter-individual variation within host species both play key roles in determining pathogen susceptibility. Significantly, we could restore colonization resistance by mixing the CR and DS bacteria, suggesting that susceptibility is reversible through microbiome modification ( Figures 2 A and 2B). In “Mix” groups, where mice were administered a 1:1 mixture of CR and DS, V. cholerae levels were significantly less compared to that in DS mice, in fact dropping below the level of CR mice 2 days post-infection.
We also observed increased colonization susceptibility of DS microbiomes when compared to a simplified model healthy microbiome (“SR”) when GF mice were colonized with defined communities for 2 weeks prior to introduction of V. cholerae ( Figure 2 C). The SR community consisted of three species representing major phylogenetic lineages commonly found in the healthy human gut. To model an attempted microbiome restoration of a fully established and dense gut community, we also introduced DS microbes for 10 days, followed by a gavage of SR microbes 4 days prior to infection with V. cholerae . In this Mix group, pathogen colonization was strongly inhibited compared to DS-colonized mice, suggesting that microbiome modification could be used to restore colonization resistance even to entrenched dysbiotic communities.
We then profiled gut microbiome structure during infection in feces and small intestines of gnotobiotic animals with different communities ( Figures 3 A–3C and 3G). In these samples, the CR and DS communities were distinct and the CR community more similar to complete fecal microbiomes of healthy US donors, while co-inoculation of CR and DS led to an intermediate final microbiome.
While gnotobiotic adult mice serve as a useful microbial-interaction model, we extended our studies to suckling mice, where the pathology and virulence gene expression observed during V. cholerae infection is closer to that of humans ( Klose, 2000 24. Klose, K.E. The suckling mouse model of cholera Trends Microbiol. 2000; 8 :189-191 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (78) PubMed Google Scholar ). First, we recapitulated the CR and DS resistance phenotypes in suckling GF C57BL/6 animals ( Figure 2 D). We then constructed a more accessible and scalable model of microbiome-pathogen interaction by clearing the native murine flora of CD-1 pups with streptomycin before introduction of human-associated species. Using this system, we observed similar microbiome-dependent infection outcomes; competitive CR/DS transplantation yielded a dominant CR-like phenotype ( Figure 2 E), while CR and DS colonization load did not differ in non- Vibrio- infected animals ( Figure 2 F). This pattern was reflected in 16S sequencing data ( Figures 3 D–3F; Table S3 ). During infection, pups receiving CR microbes had very different community structure (with Vibrio reads filtered) compared to animals with DS microbes, and animals receiving a mixed inoculum (CR+DS) closely resembled CR mice.
Total microbial diversity was not a dominant factor in infection resistance, because we restored colonization resistance in DS mice to almost full CR levels by transplanting only a small subset of CR species (SR). Expression levels of the key colonization factor tcpA were reduced ∼9.7-fold in SR compared to DS animals ( Figure 2 G). We did not observe significant microbiome-dependent differences in cholera toxin gene expression, diarrhea, or fluid accumulation in these animals ( Figure S1 ).
Recent studies have shown type VI secretion system (T6SS) killing of murine commensal E. coli acts to drive increased virulence in infection of suckling mice ( Zhao et al., 2018 47. Zhao, W. ∙ Caro, F. ∙ Robins, W. ... Antagonism toward the intestinal microbiota and its effect on Vibrio cholerae virulence Science. 2018; 359 :210-213 Crossref Scopus (132) PubMed Google Scholar ). As our DS model community contains E. coli , albeit a different strain, we tested the effects of T6SS on V. cholerae colonization and E. coli levels in our experimental system. A T6SS Δ vasK mutant was deficient for colonization compared to wild-type V. cholerae in antibiotic-cleared suckling mice ( Figure 2 H). However, T6SS activity did not significantly alter levels of a co-inoculated streptomycin-resistant K12 E. coli , and we observed E. coli at comparable levels in DS and Mix (DS+CR) communities in the small intestine ( Figure 3 G). These differences may be E. coli strain-specific, or due to the much higher levels of V. cholerae used in previous T6SS studies.
Together, our data suggested that the mechanism for improved colonization resistance of CR/SR microbes lay in T6SS-independent manipulation of V. cholerae virulence gene expression.
Our microbiome transplantation system in suckling mice allowed us to screen numerous intact human fecal microbiomes collected from healthy adult volunteers without malnutrition or recent antibiotic usage or diarrhea for effects on V. cholerae ( Figure 1 B). These complete fecal communities were taxonomically similar to the CR, but not DS microbiomes in both original microbial content and community structure upon transplantation ( Figures 3 D–3F). This was unsurprising, because the CR model community represented up to 73% of genus-level diversity by total relative abundance in these samples, while members of the DS community only represented <1% of the total ( Table S4 ).
We normalized fecal slurries and transplanted these samples into antibiotic-treated suckling mice with V. cholerae ( Figure 4 ), with dramatically different effects on V. cholerae colonization, even though these fecal communities colonized suckling animals at similar efficiencies and density ( Figure 2 F). We observed an ∼1.5-log 10 range of V. cholerae colonization depending on the human donor ( Figure 4 ), suggesting wide variation in infection outcomes based on individual gut microbiome structure. The higher basal microbiome diversity in Bangladesh ( Figure 1 C) suggests that interpersonal variations in infection resistance in endemic areas could be substantially higher.
We hypothesized that the CR species best able to colonize intestines with the DS community might be prophylactic for infection, because transplantation of CR microbes into DS communities reduced V. cholerae colonization. Therefore, we examined gut microbiome structure during V. cholerae infection in GF animals with a mixed CR+DS community ( Figures 3 A and 3G). The CR community in the small intestine was quite distinct from that in feces, but all animals with this community were consistently colonized by Blautia and Bacteroides species. The DS community was consistent in feces and small intestine, and dominated by Streptococci. The lack of generalizability of fecal data to other gut compartments suggested that fecal sampling studies may mask important differences for pathogenesis in the proximal gastrointestinal tract.
In the small intestine, B. obeum maintained its relative abundance in gnotobiotic CR+DS and CR-only animals ( Figure 3 H), suggesting that it may play a role in CR infection resistance and in transmitting this phenotype to DS animals. However, these findings had potentially limited translational applicability given the basal inter-personal diversity in humans; the ability to displace one dysbiotic microbiome and resist V. cholerae colonization may not be representative across diverse individuals and microbial communities. To identify Vibrio- antagonistic microbes across many different microbiome contexts, we generated random, unique, 5-member combinations drawn from CR and DS strains ( Figures 5 A and 5B) and established OD 600 -normalized mixtures of these bacteria in antibiotic-cleared suckling animals with and without Vibrio infection. We reasoned that species whose presence/absence or abundance consistently correlated against V. cholerae colonization in many different communities would be excellent putative targets for anti- Vibrio interventions.
We identified several species consistently associated with pathogen levels across multiple microbiome combinations. Higher levels of B. obeum were significantly associated with reduced V. cholerae colonization ( Figure 5 C), but did not directly correlate with V. cholerae abundance. This is consistent with the effects of the mixed CR/DS microbiome on infection; B. obeum consistently established in the DS small intestine, but high levels were not required to affect V. cholerae . That this effect was seen across numerous randomized communities suggests that the inhibitory activity of B. obeum on V. cholerae infection may be broadly generalizable across many gut microbiomes. Except for B. obeum , we found no statistically significant effects on V. cholerae colonization based on the presence or absence of an SR or CR species. In contrast, levels during infection of DS microbes ( Streptococcus , E. faecalis , and E. coli ) all positively and significantly correlated with higher Vibrio levels ( Figure 5 D). In mice with combinations with both B. obeum and S. thermophilus , V. cholerae colonization was comparable to mice with combinations including B. obeum but not Streptococcus , again supporting the observation that B. obeum ’s effects on pathogenesis are dominant across diverse microbiomes ( Figure 5 C).
Because SR microbes largely recapitulated the colonization resistance of the full CR microbiome, we performed similar analyses looking for whether combinations of different SR microbes with B. obeum yielded lower V. cholerae colonization than when those species were present in isolation. We observed no statistically significant additive effects on V. cholerae colonization of adding either Bacteroides vulgatus or Clostridium scindens to B. obeum in defined communities ( Figure S2 ).
Having identified a candidate driver of V. cholerae infection resistance, we began to search for a molecular mechanism for these effects. Numerous host and some commensal microbial cues regulate V. cholerae gene expression in vivo ( Gupta and Chowdhury, 1997; Kovacikova et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2013 13. Gupta, S. ∙ Chowdhury, R. Bile affects production of virulence factors and motility of Vibrio cholerae Infect. Immun. 1997; 65 :1131-1134 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar 25. Kovacikova, G. ∙ Lin, W. ∙ Skorupski, K. The LysR-type virulence activator AphB regulates the expression of genes in Vibrio cholerae in response to low pH and anaerobiosis J. Bacteriol. 2010; 192 :4181-4191 Crossref Scopus (102) PubMed Google Scholar 45. Yang, M. ∙ Liu, Z. ∙ Hughes, C. ... Bile salt-induced intermolecular disulfide bond formation activates Vibrio cholerae virulence Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2013; 110 :2348-2353 Crossref Scopus (111) PubMed Google Scholar ). Prior studies have identified a role for a B. obeum -produced AI-2 autoinducer in downregulating the expression of TCP biogenesis genes during infection ( Hsiao et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ). Consistent with this finding, we observed reduced tcpA expression during infection of mice with microbiomes containing B. obeum ( Figure 2 G).
In vivo conditions for virulence gene regulation can be mimicked ex vivo using microaerophilic/anaerobic growth of V. cholerae with intestinal tissue from mice ( Yang et al., 2013 45. Yang, M. ∙ Liu, Z. ∙ Hughes, C. ... Bile salt-induced intermolecular disulfide bond formation activates Vibrio cholerae virulence Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2013; 110 :2348-2353 Crossref Scopus (111) PubMed Google Scholar ). We took homogenates of suckling mouse intestine and incubated them anaerobically with a V. cholerae lacZ :P tcpA - sh ble zeocin resistance reporter. As expected, intestinal homogenates induced tcpA expression, while pre-treatment of intestinal homogenates with B. obeum ablated tcpA induction ( Figure 6 A). As a control, we boiled intestinal homogenates that had been incubated with B. obeum cultures in order to remove AI-2, which is heat labile ( Figure S3 ). Strikingly, homogenates incubated with B. obeum remained unable to induce tcpA even after boiling, in contrast to boiled homogenates alone or homogenates incubated with S. salivarius and then boiled ( Figure 6 A). These data suggested that B. obeum can deplete virulence-activating signals within the gut as well as produce virulence-suppressing signals.
One abundant heat-resistant molecule present in the small intestine is bile. In humans and mice, bile acids are synthesized in the liver from cholesterol and stored in the gallbladder. These primary bile acids are then secreted into the duodenum, where they, typically in their sodium salt form, act to aid in the emulsification and absorption of dietary fats. More than 95% of secreted bile acids are actively absorbed by the terminal ileum and sent back to the liver in a process known as enterohepatic circulation ( Di Ciaula et al., 2017 8. Di Ciaula, A. ∙ Garruti, G. ∙ Lunardi Baccetto, R. ... Bile Acid Physiology Ann. Hepatol. 2017; 16 :S4-S14 Crossref Scopus (326) PubMed Google Scholar ). Bile is a highly complex mixture, although bile acids dominate the dry weight of biliary bile ( Muraca et al., 1991 35. Muraca, M. ∙ Vilei, M.T. ∙ Miconi, L. ... A simple method for the determination of lipid composition of human bile J. Lipid Res. 1991; 32 :371-374 Abstract Full Text (PDF) PubMed Google Scholar ). Many prior studies have focused on crude extracts from varying sources, including ruminants, containing poorly defined mixtures of bile molecules. Human bile acids secreted into the small intestine are predominantly conjugated to taurine (taurocholic acid/sodium taurocholate) and glycine (glycocholic acid/sodium glycocholate), while taurine-conjugated forms predominate in mice ( Li and Dawson, 2019; Sayin et al., 2013 28. Li, J. ∙ Dawson, P.A. Animal models to study bile acid metabolism Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 2019; 1865 :895-911 Crossref Scopus (145) PubMed Google Scholar 41. Sayin, S.I. ∙ Wahlström, A. ∙ Felin, J. ... Gut microbiota regulates bile acid metabolism by reducing the levels of tauro-beta-muricholic acid, a naturally occurring FXR antagonist Cell Metab. 2013; 17 :225-235 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1669) PubMed Google Scholar ). Commensal microbial action is important for bile acid metabolism; bacterial enzymes ( bsh , bile salt hydrolases) are able to remove the conjugated amino acids from secreted bile acids in the small intestine, for example converting glycocholate (GC) and taurocholate (TC) to cholate/cholic acid (CA) ( Jones et al., 2008; Ridlon et al., 2006; Song et al., 2019 18. Jones, B.V. ∙ Begley, M. ∙ Hill, C. ... Functional and comparative metagenomic analysis of bile salt hydrolase activity in the human gut microbiome Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2008; 105 :13580-13585 Crossref Scopus (770) PubMed Google Scholar 40. Ridlon, J.M. ∙ Kang, D.J. ∙ Hylemon, P.B. Bile salt biotransformations by human intestinal bacteria J. Lipid Res. 2006; 47 :241-259 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (2051) PubMed Google Scholar 43. Song, Z. ∙ Cai, Y. ∙ Lao, X. ... Taxonomic profiling and populational patterns of bacterial bile salt hydrolase (BSH) genes based on worldwide human gut microbiome Microbiome. 2019; 7 :9 Crossref Scopus (280) PubMed Google Scholar ). Indeed, in GF mice, the bile pool in the small intestine is almost exclusively taurine-conjugated ( Sayin et al., 2013 41. Sayin, S.I. ∙ Wahlström, A. ∙ Felin, J. ... Gut microbiota regulates bile acid metabolism by reducing the levels of tauro-beta-muricholic acid, a naturally occurring FXR antagonist Cell Metab. 2013; 17 :225-235 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1669) PubMed Google Scholar ).
Previous studies have shown that TC, one of the most abundant bile molecules in humans and mice, can induce tcp expression under anaerobic conditions through modulating the structure and activity of the upstream virulence activator TcpP ( Yang et al., 2013 45. Yang, M. ∙ Liu, Z. ∙ Hughes, C. ... Bile salt-induced intermolecular disulfide bond formation activates Vibrio cholerae virulence Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2013; 110 :2348-2353 Crossref Scopus (111) PubMed Google Scholar ). Similarly, we saw that TC activated P tcpA , while CA was not an efficient inducer ( Figure 6 B). Intestinal homogenate effects on tcpA was bile-specific; pre-treatment of homogenates with the bile-sequestering resin cholestyramine ablated their ability to activate P tcpA ( Figure 6 A).
We next screened the DS and CR species for their effects on TC. We incubated TC solutions at a physiologically relevant concentration with pure cultures of these microbes, heat-treated and filter-sterilized the resulting supernatants, and measured their ability to induce P tcpA ( Figure 6 C). We observed dramatic differences in the ability of these strains to affect TC virulence induction, with members of the CR/SR microbiomes in general being better able to prevent tcp activation. The ability to ablate TC-mediated induction of tcp expression varied at genus level, with Blautia torques unable to affect tcp induction by TC in comparison to B. obeum , and Streptococcus infantarius able to process TC in contrast to other DS Streptococci. Of SR species, B. vulgatus , but not C. scindens , showed efficient TC processing.
Because the SR community largely recapitulated the CR colonization resistance phenotype, and B. vulgatus demonstrated high activity against TC in vitro , we wanted to examine the relative contribution of B. obeum and B. vulgatus on TC levels in the distal small intestine. We colonized adult GF mice with CR members, or CR species without B. obeum , and measured TC and CA in the distal third of the small intestine 2 days post-colonization, compared to GF mice ( Figure S4 A). As expected given the absence of microbial bsh , GF distal small intestine showed a high TC/CA ratio, while the presence of CR microbes efficiently processed TC to CA, yielding low TC/CA ratios. Strikingly, the removal of B. obeum restored the TC/CA ratio in the distal small intestine to a level not statistically significantly different from GF animals, although there was a trend toward more TC in GF animals. This suggested that although other CR organisms can contribute to TC processing to CA, B. obeum is particularly well suited to manipulating the level of this bile acid in the distal small intestine. This agrees with our findings that B. obeum efficiently colonizes the small intestine ( Figures 3 and 5 ), and the presence of B. vulgatus and B. obeum together does not significantly improve the ability of a microbiome to exclude V. cholerae ( Figure S2 ).
To determine the molecular basis for B. obeum ’s effect on TC-dependent virulence induction, we examined genetic determinants of bile acid processing. The B. obeum genome encodes for a hypothetical choloylglycine hydrolase (EC 3.5.1.24). Such bile salt hydrolase ( bsh ) enzymes catalyze the removal of the conjugated amino acids of bile salts, for example the removal of taurine from TC to form CA.
Putative bsh genes are broadly distributed across gut microbial species, because the ability to survive the inhibitory effects of bile are extremely important for enteric commensals ( De Smet et al., 1995 7. De Smet, I. ∙ Van Hoorde, L. ∙ Vande Woestyne, M. ... Significance of bile salt hydrolytic activities of lactobacilli J. Appl. Bacteriol. 1995; 79 :292-301 Crossref Scopus (257) PubMed Google Scholar ). A recent study classed bacterial bsh genes into several phylotypes based on sequence similarity and showed that bsh phylotypes have variable and substrate-dependent deconjugation activity ( Song et al., 2019 43. Song, Z. ∙ Cai, Y. ∙ Lao, X. ... Taxonomic profiling and populational patterns of bacterial bile salt hydrolase (BSH) genes based on worldwide human gut microbiome Microbiome. 2019; 7 :9 Crossref Scopus (280) PubMed Google Scholar ). We binned predicted bsh genes in the CR and DS genomes into these phylotypes ( Table S5 ). By sequence alignment and predicted structure, B. obeum encodes for predicted type 1 bsh enzymes, which are highly effective at deconjugating TC, GC, glycodeoxycholate, and taurodeoxycholate ( Song et al., 2019 43. Song, Z. ∙ Cai, Y. ∙ Lao, X. ... Taxonomic profiling and populational patterns of bacterial bile salt hydrolase (BSH) genes based on worldwide human gut microbiome Microbiome. 2019; 7 :9 Crossref Scopus (280) PubMed Google Scholar ), the strongest activators of tcpA expression in V. cholerae ( Figure S5 ). All DS members except S. infantarius lacked annotated bsh genes, while many CR species encoded bsh homologs. Although S. infantarius showed high activity against TC in vitro , despite bearing bsh homologs to phylotypes with poor predicted TC activity, we observed no statistically significant difference in effects on V. cholerae colonization compared to S. salivarius ( Figure S4 B). This suggests that there may be differences in in vivo regulation of these enzymes in S. infantarius . Conversely, B. torques , despite encoding several putative bsh genes, was not able to prevent tcpA induction by TC. B. vulgatus was an efficient TC processor in vitro , but despite encoding, 3 putative bsh genes could not drive significantly lower levels of TC to CA processing in the distal small intestine in the absence of B. obeum ( Figure S4 A), further suggesting that enzyme expression or function may diverge in in vitro versus in vivo .
V. cholerae also encodes a putative bsh enzyme ( VCA0877 ). However, this is a predicted phylotype 6 bsh , which has poor activity against TC but higher activity against rarer bile acids that do not participate in regulation of virulence but may be bacteriostatic in vivo ( Table S5 ). V. cholerae cannot prevent TC-mediated tcp activation in vitro , suggesting that V. cholerae has limited bsh activity against TC in comparison to B. obeum ( Figure S4 C).
We constitutively expressed the B. obeum bsh RUMOBE_000028 by cloning this locus downstream of a constitutive P Ltet-O1 promoter in E. coli , generating strain bsh C . This bsh C strain efficiently reduced levels of TC and tcp activation compared to the isogenic vector control in both pure TC solutions ( Figure 6 D) and intestinal homogenates ( Figure 6 E). Significantly, given the dominant effect of B. obeum on Vibrio resistance, pure cultures of either B. obeum or bsh C reduce tcp activation by TC ( Figure 6 D) and TC levels in intestinal homogenates ( Figure 6 E) in the presence of S. salivarius . The activity of this B. obeum enzyme is able to affect V. cholerae in vivo , because V. cholerae is unable to colonize mice gavaged with bsh C as effectively as mice with the vector control ( Figure 6 F).
To determine the distribution of bsh phylotypes in human gut microbiomes predicted to be dysbiotic or healthy, we re-examined an existing deeply sequenced shotgun metagenomic dataset of human cholera patients in Bangladesh ( Table S2 D) ( David et al., 2015 6. David, L.A. ∙ Weil, A. ∙ Ryan, E.T. ... Gut microbial succession follows acute secretory diarrhea in humans MBio. 2015; 6 e00381-15 Crossref Scopus (124) Google Scholar ). Importantly, data was available from patients at presentation at clinic for cholera (“Diarrhea (d0)”) without any prior antibiotic usage and from patients that received oral antibiotics as part of the standard of care for cholera (“Diarrhea + abx”). These data showed that bsh levels were already affected by diarrhea prior to any clinical intervention. We found that several bsh phylotypes followed diarrhea-dependent patterns in comparison to a healthy Bangladeshi cohort. Phylotypes 1, 3, 4, and 5 were significantly depleted in dysbiotic samples compared to healthy controls ( Figures 7 A and S6 ). Of these, phylotypes 1, 3, and 4 were shown to be highly active against TC ( Song et al., 2019 43. Song, Z. ∙ Cai, Y. ∙ Lao, X. ... Taxonomic profiling and populational patterns of bacterial bile salt hydrolase (BSH) genes based on worldwide human gut microbiome Microbiome. 2019; 7 :9 Crossref Scopus (280) PubMed Google Scholar ) (summarized in Table S5 ). These data suggested that a characteristic of healthy human microbiomes that may modulate V. cholerae susceptibility is their ability to deconjugate TC into non virulence-inducing forms.
We then assayed whether complete healthy US fecal communities were differentially able to convert TC to non- tcp- activating forms. We took the first six healthy US donors and anaerobically cultured bacteria from their fecal samples in vitro and were able to recover species representing 66%–99% relative abundance of the original sample ( Table S4 C). We inoculated these complex fecal specimens in media and used standardized amounts of the resulting mixed cultures to treat TC solutions, which we then used for virulence reporter assays. Strikingly, we observed that microbiomes (subjects B and D) that allowed higher V. cholerae levels when transplanted in suckling animals were also unable to completely remove TC from solution after 24 h, whereas communities exhibiting stronger colonization resistance (A, C, and E) reduced TC to undetectable levels ( Figure 7 B).
Because species in genus Blautia demonstrated differences in bsh activity in vitro , as well as association with cholera patients and uninfected family members ( Midani et al., 2018 32. Midani, F.S. ∙ Weil, A.A. ∙ Chowdhury, F. ... Human Gut Microbiota Predicts Susceptibility to Vibrio cholerae Infection J. Infect. Dis. 2018; 218 :645-653 Crossref Scopus (56) PubMed Google Scholar ), we assayed for the level of the bsh gene of B. obeum specifically in total DNA extracted from human fecal samples by real-time PCR. This also served as a function-specific measure of B. obeum abundance in these complex fecal mixtures. We found that communities associated with higher V. cholerae colonization had lower levels of B. obeum bsh ( Figure 7 C), suggesting that B. obeum abundance and specifically the presence of the bsh activity is associated with resistance to V. cholerae infection.

Section: Discussion

A role for gastrointestinal microbes in resistance to enteropathogens such as V. cholerae has been recognized for some time ( Freter, 1955, 1956 11. Freter, R. The fatal enteric cholera infection in the guinea pig, achieved by inhibition of normal enteric flora J. Infect. Dis. 1955; 97 :57-65 Crossref Scopus (88) PubMed Google Scholar 12. Freter, R. Experimental enteric Shigella and Vibrio infections in mice and guinea pigs J. Exp. Med. 1956; 104 :411-418 Crossref Scopus (90) PubMed Google Scholar ). However, this colonization resistance has often been examined in dichotomous terms, either germfree or conventional, or “normal” and damaged by specific factors such as antibiotics. Our results suggest that beyond extreme fluctuations in structure, such as those due to diarrhea and severe malnutrition, diversity even within otherwise “healthy” human populations can serve as predictive markers for infection resistance.
A key difficulty in identifying taxa that can drive infection susceptibility is the complexity of animal gut microbiomes, compounded by dramatic differences in the taxonomic diversity across host species ( Seedorf et al., 2014 42. Seedorf, H. ∙ Griffin, N.W. ∙ Ridaura, V.K. ... Bacteria from diverse habitats colonize and compete in the mouse gut Cell. 2014; 159 :253-266 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (278) PubMed Google Scholar ). The limited taxonomic and functional resolution of many commonly employed metagenomic techniques is also a barrier for converting observations in large population studies to mechanistic insights on microbial effects on pathogenesis and other phenotypes. Findings in this study and others ( Hsiao et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ), in which single genes encoded by specific microbiome members are able to affect V. cholerae colonization in isolation from other functions, suggest that correlative studies have distinct limits in their abilities to provide mechanistic insights to microbiome-pathogen interactions. For instance, a recent sequencing-based study that sampled gut microbes of cholera patients and healthy household contacts identified microbes from the same genus as associated with both individuals with cholera and individuals with putative exposure but non-progression to disease ( Midani et al., 2018 32. Midani, F.S. ∙ Weil, A.A. ∙ Chowdhury, F. ... Human Gut Microbiota Predicts Susceptibility to Vibrio cholerae Infection J. Infect. Dis. 2018; 218 :645-653 Crossref Scopus (56) PubMed Google Scholar ). Thus, genus-, and possibly even species-level data may be insufficient to identify clear targets for future mechanistic studies in the absence of experimental manipulations.
Recent developments in high-throughput sequencing, anaerobic microbiology, and gnotobiotic animal systems have allowed for mechanistic studies of the interaction of human commensals and human pathogens in animal models of colonization and disease. Specific target taxa identified by multi-omics approaches can be established in animals, with species and gene content defined before introduction of pathogens. These types of approaches allowed us to identify B. obeum as a key member of the human gut microbiome that drove infection resistance and microbial interactions with bile acids as a driver of virulence gene regulation in V. cholerae and a mechanism of protection against infection.
We hypothesize that microbial bile metabolism most affects V. cholerae pathogenesis during early infection. V. cholerae tightly regulates gene expression in response to host environmental signals such as bile. Bile acids are thought to stabilize the structure of the key virulence regulator TcpP ( Yang et al., 2013 45. Yang, M. ∙ Liu, Z. ∙ Hughes, C. ... Bile salt-induced intermolecular disulfide bond formation activates Vibrio cholerae virulence Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2013; 110 :2348-2353 Crossref Scopus (111) PubMed Google Scholar ), which drives the activation of toxT transcription. ToxT then causes full induction of tcp and cholera toxin, with TCP-dependent colonization thought to begin prior to toxin expression ( Lee et al., 1999 27. Lee, S.H. ∙ Hava, D.L. ∙ Waldor, M.K. ... Regulation and temporal expression patterns of Vibrio cholerae virulence genes during infection Cell. 1999; 99 :625-634 Full Text Full Text (PDF) PubMed Google Scholar ). Following colonization, the activity of bile becomes less clear. Some studies have demonstrated that the unsaturated fatty acids in bile are able to modulate the binding of ToxT to target promoters, reducing CT and TCP expression ( Plecha and Withey, 2015 38. Plecha, S.C. ∙ Withey, J.H. Mechanism for inhibition of Vibrio cholerae ToxT activity by the unsaturated fatty acid components of bile J. Bacteriol. 2015; 197 :1716-1725 Crossref Scopus (57) PubMed Google Scholar ). The deconjugated bile salt sodium deoxycholate promotes interaction between the virulence activators ToxR and ToxS and subsequent activity ( Midgett et al., 2017 33. Midgett, C.R. ∙ Almagro-Moreno, S. ∙ Pellegrini, M. ... Bile salts and alkaline pH reciprocally modulate the interaction between the periplasmic domains of Vibrio cholerae ToxR and ToxS Mol. Microbiol. 2017; 105 :258-272 Crossref Scopus (35) PubMed Google Scholar ). However, ToxRS likely does not directly activate toxT , but rather acts to boost the activity of TcpP at the toxT promoter ( Krukonis et al., 2000 26. Krukonis, E.S. ∙ Yu, R.R. ∙ Dirita, V.J. The Vibrio cholerae ToxR/TcpP/ToxT virulence cascade: distinct roles for two membrane-localized transcriptional activators on a single promoter Mol. Microbiol. 2000; 38 :67-84 Crossref Scopus (162) PubMed Google Scholar ). Both conjugated and deconjugated bile acids are also able to induce ToxT-independent activation of cholera toxin dependent on ToxRS ( Hung and Mekalanos, 2005 17. Hung, D.T. ∙ Mekalanos, J.J. Bile acids induce cholera toxin expression in Vibrio cholerae in a ToxT-independent manner Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2005; 102 :3028-3033 Crossref Scopus (127) PubMed Google Scholar ).
Our results suggest a model where, at the initial point of colonization in the small intestine, tcp gene expression and thus TCP biogenesis is determined by the balance of bile acids that is modulated by commensal microbes with differential bsh activity. Differences in early tcp gene expression, and thus colonization, may have disproportionate impact on the progression of V. cholerae infections; variation in microbiome bsh activity may help determine whether infection proceeds to fulminant diarrhea or low or temporary colonization that leads to mild or asymptomatic infections that are common in cholera endemic areas ( King et al., 2008 23. King, A.A. ∙ Ionides, E.L. ∙ Pascual, M. ... Inapparent infections and cholera dynamics Nature. 2008; 454 :877-880 Crossref Scopus (325) PubMed Google Scholar ). Once severe diarrhea has begun, the commensal community and existing lumenal bile is depleted, and any future bile secretion is predominantly conjugated primary species that stimulate virulence.
Although B. obeum bile modification is an important regulator of V. cholerae colonization, there may be additive effects on pathogen behavior of multiple community members and through other mechanisms. Removal of B. obeum was sufficient to raise TC levels in the mouse distal small intestine, but although constitutive expression of B. obeum bsh yielded a 1 log drop in V. cholerae colonization, the full CR microbiome yielded almost 2 log-fold differences in colonization compared to DS microbiomes. In V. cholerae , virulence gene expression is negatively regulated by several different quorum sensing systems involving the sensing of specific autoinducers ( Jung et al., 2015 19. Jung, S.A. ∙ Chapman, C.A. ∙ Ng, W.L. Quadruple quorum-sensing inputs control Vibrio cholerae virulence and maintain system robustness PLoS Pathog. 2015; 11 :e1004837 Crossref Scopus (105) PubMed Google Scholar ). Prior studies identified B. obeum -produced autoinducer AI-2 as a suppressor of tcpA , functioning through a pathway bypassing the canonical AI-2 receptor LuxP and involving the regulator VqmA ( Hsiao et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ). VqmA has been shown to activate the master quorum-sensing regulator HapR, which leads to repression of tcpP ( Liu et al., 2006; Zhu et al., 2002 29. Liu, Z. ∙ Hsiao, A. ∙ Joelsson, A. ... The transcriptional regulator VqmA increases expression of the quorum-sensing activator HapR in Vibrio cholerae J. Bacteriol. 2006; 188 :2446-2453 Crossref Scopus (41) PubMed Google Scholar 48. Zhu, J. ∙ Miller, M.B. ∙ Vance, R.E. ... Quorum-sensing regulators control virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2002; 99 :3129-3134 Crossref Scopus (666) PubMed Google Scholar ). Thus, AI-2 expression and bsh activity by B. obeum may synergize to reduce the level and activity of TcpP during infection. Additional studies will be required to determine how these two inputs exert their effects on regulation of virulence determinants of V. cholerae in vivo. Non- B. obeum CR members may also impact V. cholerae colonization, both at the level of virulence regulation and possibly metabolic competition for colonization niches. Host diet may play a role in colonization; bile is secreted from the gallbladder in response to food ingestion, and this varies by the fat content of the meal ( Marciani et al., 2013 31. Marciani, L. ∙ Cox, E.F. ∙ Hoad, C.L. ... Effects of various food ingredients on gall bladder emptying Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013; 67 :1182-1187 Crossref Scopus (43) PubMed Google Scholar ). Diet is also a potent driver of microbiome structure ( Faith et al., 2011 10. Faith, J.J. ∙ McNulty, N.P. ∙ Rey, F.E. ... Predicting a human gut microbiota’s response to diet in gnotobiotic mice Science. 2011; 333 :101-104 Crossref Scopus (398) PubMed Google Scholar ), but the effect of different dietary compositions on driving the microbiome to infection resistant or susceptible states has not been well studied. Ingestion of food has been shown to dramatically reduce the infectious dose of V. cholerae due to buffering of stomach pH, but also possibly by raising the levels of virulence-activating conjugated bile acids secreted into the small intestine.
Taken together, our results suggest that variation in human gut microbiomes are a significant contributor to V. cholerae infection risk, and this can be modulated through introduction of a human gut commensal with multiple molecular effects on V. cholerae , able to affect levels of both virulence-activating and virulence-suppressing signals at the site of infection. This suggests that targeted microbiome modification can be a promising prophylactic target against cholera.

Section: STAR★Methods

REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Bacterial and Virus Strains Vibrio cholerae C6706 El Tor Hsiao Lab stock C6706 Δ vasK V. cholerae This paper N/A Vibrio harveyi AI-2 bioassay strain Bassler et al., 1994 2. Bassler, B.L. ∙ Wright, M. ∙ Silverman, M.R. Multiple signalling systems controlling expression of luminescence in Vibrio harveyi: sequence and function of genes encoding a second sensory pathway Mol. Microbiol. 1994; 13 :273-286 Crossref Scopus (586) PubMed Google Scholar BB170 lacZ ::P tcpA - sh ble zeocin resistance reporter V. cholerae C6706 El Tor strain Liu et al., 2008 30. Liu, Z. ∙ Miyashiro, T. ∙ Tsou, A. ... Mucosal penetration primes Vibrio cholerae for host colonization by repressing quorum sensing Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2008; 105 :9769-9774 Crossref Scopus (129) PubMed Google Scholar P tcpA - sh ble pZE21 in V. cholerae C6706 This paper C6706-KM R luxS- E. coli strain BW30045 Δ(araD-araB)567 , ΔlacZ4787 (::rrnB-3), λ - , ΔluxS1368 , Δ(rhaD-rhaB)568 , hsdR514 E. coli Genetic Resources at Yale. CGSC, The Coli Genetic Stock Center CGSC#8227 Escherichia coli Hsiao Lab stock DH5α- λpir E. coli expressing B. obeum luxS This paper BW30045_RO_AI-2 Constitutive B. obeum bsh expression strain: E. coli DH5αλpir pZE21-BSH This paper bsh C Vector control for bsh C This paper DH5α-λpir pZE21 Bacteroides caccae ATCC ATCC 43185 Streptococcus salivarius subsp. salivarius ATCC ATCC 13419 Collinsella aerofaciens ATCC ATCC 25986 Dorea formicigenerans ATCC ATCC 27755 Blautia torques ATCC ATCC 27756 Blautia obeum ATCC ATCC 29174 Eubacterium rectale ATCC ATCC 33656 Clostridium scindens ATCC ATCC 35704 Bacteroides vulgatus ATCC ATCC 8482 Bacteroides uniformis ATCC ATCC 8492 Streptococcus infantarius subsp. infantarius ATCC ATCC BAA-102 Dorea longicatena DSMZ DSM 13814 Faecalibacterium prausnitzii DSMZ DSM 17677 Bifidobacterium longum subsp. longum DSMZ DSM 20219 Streptococcus salivarius subsp. thermophilus DSMZ DSM 20617 Enterococcus faecalis Dunny Lab stock (University of Minnesota) OG1RF Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron Hsiao Lab stock VPI-5482 Biological Samples Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject A Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject B Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject C Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject D Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject E Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject F Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject G Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject H Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject I Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject J Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject K Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject L Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject M Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject N Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject O Human volunteer donor fecal sample This paper Subject P Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins Zeocin Research Products International Corporation Cat# 1006-33-0 Sodium taurocholate hydrate Sigma Aldrich Cat# 86339 Sodium glycocholate hydrate Sigma Aldrich Cat# G7132 Cholic acid Alfa Aesar Cat# A1125714 Sodium taurodeoxycholate hydrate Sigma Aldrich Cat# T0557 Sodium glycodeoxycholate Sigma Aldrich Cat# G9910 Deoxycholic acid MP Biomedicals Cat# 0210149610 Tauro-β-muricholic acid Steraloids Inc. Cat# C1899-000 β-muricholic acid Steraloids Inc. Cat# C1895-000 Cholestyramine Sigma Aldrich Cat# C4650 Critical Commercial Assays iQ SYBR Green Supermix Biorad Cat# 170882 Platinum Hot Start PCR Master Mix Thermo Scientific Cat# 13000013 SuperScript IV First-Strand Synthesis System Invitrogen Cat# 18091200 Gibson Master Mix New England Biolabs Cat# E2611S Deposited Data Short-read sequencing data This paper European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) PRJEB31497 Short-read sequencing data for meta-analysis European Nucleotide Archive See Table S2 for accession numbers Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains Mouse: C57BL/6 UCR gnotobiotic facility N/A Mouse: CD-1 IGS Charles River Laboratories N/A Oligonucleotides All primers for study, see Table S6 . This paper N/A Recombinant DNA B. obeum codon optimized LuxS placed downstream of the P Ltet-O-1 constitutive promoter sequence derived from the plasmid vector pZE21 vector (pMK_ B. obeum_luxS ) This paper N/A Plasmid: Constitutive expression construct for B. obeum bsh ( bsh c ) This paper N/A Software and Algorithms QIIME Caporaso et al., 2010 3. Caporaso, J.G. ∙ Kuczynski, J. ∙ Stombaugh, J. ... QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data Nat. Methods. 2010; 7 :335-336 Crossref Scopus (27942) PubMed Google Scholar http://qiime.org/ Phyre2 Kelley et al., 2015 20. Kelley, L.A. ∙ Mezulis, S. ∙ Yates, C.M. ... The Phyre2 web portal for protein modeling, prediction and analysis Nat. Protoc. 2015; 10 :845-858 Crossref Scopus (7220) PubMed Google Scholar http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/∼phyre2/html/page.cgi?id=index Chimera Pettersen et al., 2004 37. Pettersen, E.F. ∙ Goddard, T.D. ∙ Huang, C.C. ... UCSF Chimera--a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis J. Comput. Chem. 2004; 25 :1605-1612 Crossref Scopus (33444) PubMed Google Scholar https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/ HISAT2 Kim et al., 2015 22. Kim, D. ∙ Langmead, B. ∙ Salzberg, S.L. HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements Nat. Methods. 2015; 12 :357-360 Crossref Scopus (13753) PubMed Google Scholar http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat2/manual.shtml Other Lab diet Newco Distributors Cat# 5K52 Open table in a new tab
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Ansel Hsiao ( ansel.hsiao@ucr.edu ).
Unique plasmids, strains, and reagents generated in this study are available from the Lead Contact with a completed Materials Transfer Agreement.
The accession number for the Illumina sequencing data reported in this paper is European Nucleotide Archive (ENA): PRJEB31497.
All human samples were part of a study approved by the UCR Institutional Review Board and followed NIH guidelines. We collected intact fecal samples from a cohort of healthy adult volunteers at the University of California, Riverside. Inclusion criteria were: 1) age between 18 and 40 years, 2) must be able to provide signed and dated informed consent, 3) must be willing and able to provide stool specimen. Exclusion criteria were: 1) systemic antibiotic usage (oral, intramuscular, or intravenous) in the 2 weeks prior to sampling; 2) acute disease at time of enrollment (presence of moderate or severe illness with or without fever); 3) diarrhea (liquid or very loose stools not associated with a change in diet) in the 2 weeks prior to sampling; 4) active uncontrolled GI disorders or diseases including Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, or indeterminate colitis, persistent, infectious gastroenteritis, colitis, or gastritis, and chronic constipation; 5) Major surgery of the GI tract, excluding cholecystectomy and appendectomy, but including major bowel resection at any time. Age inclusion criteria were chosen to avoid age-related microbiome differences, which are strongest in early life ( Yatsunenko et al., 2012 46. Yatsunenko, T. ∙ Rey, F.E. ∙ Manary, M.J. ... Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography Nature. 2012; 486 :222-227 Crossref Scopus (5629) PubMed Google Scholar ). Fecal samples were collected aseptically from each person at UCR and immediately preserved at −80°C until processing for DNA extraction, culturing, and animal colonization. Stocks of fecal slurries for subsequent experiments were prepared by resuspending samples at 1:3 weight/volume in sterile reduced PBS and adding sterile glycerol to a final concentration of 25% volume/volume.
All animal experiments used protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of California, Riverside (UCR) and followed NIH guidelines. All CD-1 suckling animals were purchased from Charles River Laboratories. Suckling and adult germfree C57BL/6 mice were reared at the UCR gnotobiotic facility. No distinction was made between male and female animals for bacterial studies. Adult animals were used at > 3 weeks of age. Germfree suckling mice used at 5-6 days of age. Animals were checked for signs of moribund condition prior to use in experiments, and used for one experimental procedure only. Adult animals were co-housed in cages without mixing sex. Male mice were separated except in cases of littermates.
For the antibiotic-cleared suckling mouse model, 4-day old suckling CD-1 animals were fasted for 1.5 hours, then orally dosed with ∼1mg/g body weight streptomycin using 30-gauge plastic tubing, after which the animals were placed with a lactating dam for 1 day. After 24 hours, mice received microbial communities with V. cholerae in a maximum gavage volume of 50 μl. At 18 hours post-infection, animals were sacrificed, and relevant sections of intestinal tissue dissected and homogenized for CFU numeration and nucleic acid extraction.
Germ-free C57BL/6 mice were bred and maintained in plastic gnotobiotic isolators at University of California, Riverside. Mice were fed an autoclaved, low-fat plant polysaccharide-rich mouse chow (Lab Diet 5K52) and were 5–8 weeks old at time of gavage. Bacterial cultures were prepared as described above. Mice were fasted for 30 minutes prior to introduction of bacteria, and stomach pH was buffered by intra-gastric gavage of 100 μL 1M NaHCO 3 , followed by gavage with 150uL of balanced defined microbial libraries. Fecal samples were collected across the course of the experiment. Mice were sacrificed 4 days post gavage and small intestine collected and cut to three equal (proximal, medial, distal) sections by length. Samples were homogenized and used for CFU enumeration of bacteria on LB agar containing 200 μg/mL streptomycin.
For establishing defined microbiomes prior to V. cholerae infection, germ-free C57BL/6 mice were maintained as mentioned above and used at 6-13 weeks of age. Mice were fasted and given NaHCO 3 as previously described and either given 150 μL of the simple resistant (SR), or dysbiotic (DS) communities. For the Mix group, mice were initially given the DS microbiome embodiment. 10 days after microbiome introduction and 4 days prior to V. cholerae infection, the SR community was introduced into the Mix group animals by gavage. 2 weeks after human commensal colonization, each group was infected with ∼5 × 10 9 CFU V. cholerae O1 El Tor C6706. Fecal samples were suspended in 500 μL of PBS and homogenized using a bead beater (BioSpec) at 1,400 RPM for 30 s. CFU enumeration of V. cholerae was done on LB agar containing 200 μg/mL streptomycin.
We used the antibiotic-treated infant mouse model described above to determine which members of the healthy human microbiome contribute most to resistance to V. cholerae . We made 18 random combinations of human gut microbiome strains and introduced them to suckling mice along with V. cholerae . Each combination included five unique strains, and each gavage contained the equivalent total microbial mass of 300 μL of OD 600 = 0.4 culture, divided evenly across all constituent strains. After introducing human microbiome and V. cholerae to suckling mice, V. cholerae levels in homogenized intestines were determined by plating on selective agar. The absolute abundance of each species was determined with a combination of 16S rRNA gene qPCR and 16S rRNA sequencing.
All human gut commensal strains used are listed in Table S1 . Unless otherwise noted, human gut strains were propagated in LYH-BHI liquid medium (BHI supplemented to 5g/L yeast extract, 5mg/L hemin, 1mg/mL cellobiose, 1mg/mL maltose and 0.5mg/mL cysteine-HCl). Cultures were then propagated in a Coy anaerobic chamber (5% H 2 , 20% CO 2 , balance N 2 ) or aerobically at 37°C.
All V. cholerae strains were derived from the C6706 El Tor pandemic isolate, including the lacZ :P tcpA : sh-Ble zeocin resistance reporter strain ( Liu et al., 2008 30. Liu, Z. ∙ Miyashiro, T. ∙ Tsou, A. ... Mucosal penetration primes Vibrio cholerae for host colonization by repressing quorum sensing Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2008; 105 :9769-9774 Crossref Scopus (129) PubMed Google Scholar ), and propagated in LB media with appropriate antibiotics at 37°C. To construct a strain resistant to kanamycin, the plasmid pZE21 was cloned into V. cholerae C6706 ( C6706-KM R ) and propagated in LB with kanamycin sulfate (Fisher Scientific, 50 μg/ml) and streptomycin sulfate salt (100 μg/ml). Vibrio harveyi BB170 was propagated in LM medium ( Bassler et al., 1994 2. Bassler, B.L. ∙ Wright, M. ∙ Silverman, M.R. Multiple signalling systems controlling expression of luminescence in Vibrio harveyi: sequence and function of genes encoding a second sensory pathway Mol. Microbiol. 1994; 13 :273-286 Crossref Scopus (586) PubMed Google Scholar ) aerobically at 37°C.
To construct bsh C , a strain constitutively expressing a bile salt hydrolase found in B. obeum , the RUMOBE_00028 locus was amplified from B. obeum genomic DNA (primers: 5′-GTCGACGGTATCGATAATGCTTATGTGTACAGCTGC-3′ and 5′-GCAGGAATTCGATATCACTAATTCTGAAAATGAATCTGC-3′). All cloning and amplification primers are listed in Table S6 . This amplicon was then cloned downstream of the constitutive P Ltet-O1 promoter of plasmid pZE21 through digestion of the vector backbone with HindIII followed by Gibson assembly (New England Biolabs). The resulting plasmid was then introduced by electroporation into E. coli DH5αλpir to generate bsh C . Strains were propagated aerobically in LB with kanamycin (50 μg/ml) at 37°C.
A strain overexpressing the AI-2 signal of B. obeum ( BW30045_RO_AI-2 ) was constructed by constitutively expressing the B. obeum luxS AI-2 synthase into E. coli BW30045 (Δ luxS ). The B. obeum luxS coding region (from genome position 33,305-33,784) was codon-optimized for expression in E. coli , placed downstream of the P Ltet-O-1 constitutive promoter sequence derived from the plasmid vector pZE21 vector, and the construct cloned into vector pMK using the GeneArt Subcloning & Express Cloning Service (ThermoFisher). This expression construct was then amplified and inserted into the endA gene of the E. coli genome using primers (forward: 5′-CCAAAACAGCTTTCGCTACGTTGCTGGCTCGTTTTAACACGGAGTAAGTGTTAGAAAAATTCATCCAGCA-3′, reverse: 5′-GGTTGTACGCGTGGGGTAGGGGTTAACAAAAAGAATCCCGCTAGTGTAGGCGGGCAGTGAAAGGAAGGCC-3′).
We used natural transformation ( Dalia et al., 2014 5. Dalia, A.B. ∙ McDonough, E. ∙ Camilli, A. Multiplex genome editing by natural transformation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2014; 111 :8937-8942 Crossref Scopus (136) PubMed Google Scholar ) to construct a Δ vasK V. cholerae . Fragments of flanking genomic DNA upstream (forward: 5′-GAACTTTCGTCACGTAAGTC-3′, reverse: 5′-GTCGACGGATCCCCGGAATCATGAATTGTGTCCTTGTTTAC-3′) and downstream (forward: 5′-GAACTTTCGTCACGTAAGTC-3′, reverse: 5′-GTCGACGGATCCCCGGAATCATGAATTGTGTCCTTGTTTAC-3′) of vasK and an antibiotic resistant gene cassette (forward: 5′-ATTCCGGGGATCCGTCGAC-3′, reverse: 5′-TGTAGGCTGGAGCTGCTTC-3′) were amplified from V. cholerae genomic DNA. Amplicons were then joined by overlapping PCR and introduced into C6706 via natural transformation. Resistant colonies were then selected on trimethoprim-containing agar (10ug/ml) and insertion confirmed via PCR.
For DNA from human fecal samples, ∼200 mg (average wet weight) fecal sample was suspended in 600 μL PBS. For mouse intestinal samples, tissues were dissected, homogenized in 5mL PBS, and 500 μL of the homogenate used for DNA extraction. ∼500 μL 0.1mm glass beads (BioSpec), 210 μL SDS %20, and 500 μL neutral phenol:chloroform:isoamyl-alcohol (24:24:1, Fisher Scientific) were added to each sample, and samples were lysed by bead-beating followed by ethanol precipitation ( Hsiao et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ).
The V4 variable region of bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA genes was amplified in 25 μL total volume reactions comprising 1 μL of extracted DNA as template, 10 μL Platinum Hot Start PCR Master Mix (ThermoFisher), 13 μL PCR-grade water and 0.5 μL of forward and reverse primers (10 μM). Cycling conditions were 94°C for 3 min, followed by 33 cycles (94°C for 45 s, 50°C for 60 s, 72°C for 90 s), and 72°C for 10 min. An equal amount of each amplicon (∼240ng) was pooled into libraries, which were then purified using QIAquick PCR purification columns (QIAGEN) and subjected to sequencing using the Illumina MiSeq platform. Paired-end 150nt reads were assembled, de-multiplexed, rarefied to > 900 reads per sample, and analyzed using the QIIME 1.9.1 software package ( Caporaso et al., 2010 3. Caporaso, J.G. ∙ Kuczynski, J. ∙ Stombaugh, J. ... QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data Nat. Methods. 2010; 7 :335-336 Crossref Scopus (27942) PubMed Google Scholar ). Sequencing run results are summarized in Tables S2 A and S3 .
For the analysis of bacterial composition between the human gut microbial communities and our artificial communities, the sequencing data of the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene from published studies and samples collected for this study. For the different phases of V. cholerae infection, we used the first and last time points of diarrhea, and the last time of recovery ( Hsiao et al., 2014 15. Hsiao, A. ∙ Ahmed, A.M.S. ∙ Subramanian, S. ... Members of the human gut microbiota involved in recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection Nature. 2014; 515 :423-426 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ). The last time point of fecal samples collected from parents of malnourished Bangladesh children were selected as the healthy adult Bangladesh control ( Subramanian et al., 2014 44. Subramanian, S. ∙ Huq, S. ∙ Yatsunenko, T. ... Persistent gut microbiota immaturity in malnourished Bangladeshi children Nature. 2014; 510 :417-421 Crossref Scopus (884) PubMed Google Scholar ). See Table S2 C for sequence accession numbers. Defined community inputs were designed on the basis that all the strains in the specific community are evenly distributed (CR: 1000 reads/species; SR: 3000 reads/species; DS: 2000 reads/species). All of the sequencing data were collected together and analyzed using QIIME as described above.
The protein sequences of the eight representative BSH were obtained from Song et al. (2019) 43. Song, Z. ∙ Cai, Y. ∙ Lao, X. ... Taxonomic profiling and populational patterns of bacterial bile salt hydrolase (BSH) genes based on worldwide human gut microbiome Microbiome. 2019; 7 :9 Crossref Scopus (280) PubMed Google Scholar . Deep metagenomic sequencing data was obtained from David et al. (2015) 6. David, L.A. ∙ Weil, A. ∙ Ryan, E.T. ... Gut microbial succession follows acute secretory diarrhea in humans MBio. 2015; 6 e00381-15 Crossref Scopus (124) Google Scholar (see Table S2 D for sequence accession numbers). The microbial community DNA was aligned to the protein sequences using blastx. For queries that hit multiple protein sequences, the one that had the highest hit score was selected. The relative abundance of each type of the BSHs = the BSH reads count / (total reads count – human reads count). Host reads were determined by mapping metagenomic DNA to Homo sapiens reference genome (assembly GRCh38.p13) using HISAT2 ( Kim et al., 2015 22. Kim, D. ∙ Langmead, B. ∙ Salzberg, S.L. HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements Nat. Methods. 2015; 12 :357-360 Crossref Scopus (13753) PubMed Google Scholar ).
Each human gut bacterium was cultured from glycerol stocks in LYH-BHI media for 48 hours at 37°C, and then diluted (1:50) in fresh LYH-BHI media. After growth for an additional 48 hours, cultures were normalized for density by OD 600 . For inoculation into suckling mice, the equivalent of a total of 300 μL of 0.4 OD 600 culture divided evenly across strains by community was pooled, pelleted by centrifugation, and resuspended in fresh LYH-BHI. Each mouse received this mass of bacterial cells in a maximum gavage volume of 50 μL per pup. In mice containing multiple defined communities, normalized mixtures were prepared so that 300 μL of OD 600 = 0.4 equivalent of each community was represented in the final gavage. In mice receiving V. cholerae , the total resuspension volume of commensal strains was 25 μl, with the remaining 25 μL containing 1x10 4 -1x10 5 CFU V. cholerae in PBS.
Microbial levels in human fecal slurries were estimated via real-time PCR using universal 16S primers as described below, and samples were normalized to so that each suckling animal received slurries containing the equivalent of ∼20 μg of microbial genomic DNA.
Suckling mice were treated as described above. The fluid accumulation ratio percentage was determined as: [weight of intestines (Large and Small) / mouse body weight] x 100.
CD-1 suckling animals were gavaged with antibiotics as described above. 3-5 day old infant mice were orally inoculated with total of ∼1x10 9 CFU E. coli TB1 ( lacZ- ) and ∼1x10 4 CFU V. cholerae ( lacZ+ ) together in 50 μL LB. Animals were sacrificed after 16 hr of infection. Mouse intestines were dissected and homogenized in 5 mL of PBS, and 10 μL of the homogenate used for enumeration of bacteria via serial dilution on LB agar containing streptomycin and X-gal.
Total bacterial load in fecal samples and intestinal homogenates was determined by using real-time quantitative PCR. Reactions comprised 2 μL of extracted DNA (200ng/reaction) as template, 12.5 μL SYBRGreen Master Mix (BioRad), 10 μL PCR-grade water, and 0.25 μL of forward and reverse primers at 10 μM (forward: 5′-CTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-3′, reverse: 5′-TTACCGCGG CTGCTGGCAC-3′). Cycle conditions were 95°C for 3 min, followed by 39 cycles (95°C for 10 s, 55°C for 30 s, 95°C for 10 s, 65°C for 5 s, 95°C for 5 s).
Levels of the B. obeum bsh enzyme ( RUMOBE_00028 ) were determined by real-time PCR as described above, using the primers 5′-GCGATCAGATTACGATCACTC-3′ and 5′-GCCATGCCAACACCTTTTTC-3′. 200ng of purified DNA from intestinal homogenates of CD-1 mice colonized with complex human fecal samples were used as template for each reaction.
Levels of tcpA and ctxA expression in antibiotic-cleared CD-1 suckling animals containing SR and DS microbiomes were measured using real-time PCR ( tcpA : primers 5′-GAAGAAGTTTGTAAAAGAAGAACACG-3′ and 5′-CGCTGAGACCACACCCATA-3′, ctxA : primers 5′-CACTAAGTGGGCACTTCTCA-3′ and 5′-TGATCATGCAAGAGGAACTCA-3′), with recA (primers 5′-ATTGAAGGCGAAATGGGCGATAG-3′ and 5′-TACACATACAGTTGGATTGCTTGAGG-3′) as a control. Templates were generated by Trizol (Ambion) extraction of total RNA from intestines of SR and DS-colonized mice infected with V. cholerae , followed by cDNA synthesis with the SuperScript IV First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen) following manufacturers’ instructions. Real-time PCR was performed using conditions 95°C for 3 min, followed by 39 cycles (95°C for 10 s, 55°C for 30 s, 95°C for 10 s, 65°C for 5 s, 95°C for 5 s).
Fecal slurries of complex human fecal samples were prepared as described above, and spread on LYH-BHI agar and incubated aerobically and anaerobically at 37°C. All colonies recovered were gathered by scraping, and DNA extracted and 16S rRNA genes amplified for sequencing as described.
Cultures of BW30045_RO_AI-2 , BB170 and C6706 were grown overnight. BW30045_RO_AI-2 was subcultured 1:100 into 12ml of LB and grown in a shaker at 37°C for until OD 600 ≈0.22, centrifuged, and the supernatant filter sterilized. Aliquots of supernatant were then heated at 100°C for 30 minutes and cooled to room temperature. AI-2 activity was assessed using the BB170 bioassay ( Bassler et al., 1994 2. Bassler, B.L. ∙ Wright, M. ∙ Silverman, M.R. Multiple signalling systems controlling expression of luminescence in Vibrio harveyi: sequence and function of genes encoding a second sensory pathway Mol. Microbiol. 1994; 13 :273-286 Crossref Scopus (586) PubMed Google Scholar ). Briefly, overnight cultures of reporter strain BB170 in LM medium were diluted at 1:1000 in AB medium, and 10 μL of cell-free supernatant or heat-treated cell-free supernatant were then added to 90μl of BB170 dilution. Luminescence and OD 600 of each sample were measured immediately and after ∼3.5hrs growth at 30°C with agitation.
P tcpA - sh-ble was grown as overnight culture, diluted 1:1000 in fresh LB, and grown for ∼2 hours at 37°C. Each reaction was prepared in 40μl 0.5X pH 8.5 LB medium, with sodium taurocholate hydrate (TC, Sigma-Aldrich), sodium glycocholate hydrate (Sigma Aldrich), cholic acid (CA, Alfa Aesar), sodium taurodeoxycholate hydrate (Sigma-Aldrich), sodium glycodeoxycholate (Sigma Aldrich), deoxycholic acid (DCA, MB Biomedicals), tauro-β-muricholic acid (Steraloids Inc.), or β-muricholic acid (Steraloids Inc.) added to a final concentration of 125μM. 2μl of reporter strain subculture was then added, and samples incubated anaerobically at 37°C for 4hrs. 2μl of each reaction was then added to 200μl of 0.5X LB pH 8.5 ± 10μg/ml of zeocin (Sigma Aldrich), incubated for 30 minutes aerobically at 37°C with agitation, and then serially diluted and plated onto LB agar plates with streptomycin to determine survival rates. Induction represents percentage of P tcpA -sh-ble reporter cells surviving treatment with zeocin after incubation with indicated samples under anaerobic conditions, defined as (zeocin-treated sample survival/average of no-zeocin controls) ∗ 100. Where noted, survival rates were normalized to that induced by 125μM taurocholate.
The potential 3D models of unknown structure were produced by Phyre2 ( Kelley et al., 2015 20. Kelley, L.A. ∙ Mezulis, S. ∙ Yates, C.M. ... The Phyre2 web portal for protein modeling, prediction and analysis Nat. Protoc. 2015; 10 :845-858 Crossref Scopus (7220) PubMed Google Scholar ), based on amino acid sequence alignment to known protein structure. The 3D structure comparison and root-mean-square distance (RMSD) per-column spatial variation among structures were calculated using UCSF developed Chimera (V1.14) ( Pettersen et al., 2004 37. Pettersen, E.F. ∙ Goddard, T.D. ∙ Huang, C.C. ... UCSF Chimera--a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis J. Comput. Chem. 2004; 25 :1605-1612 Crossref Scopus (33444) PubMed Google Scholar ).
Commensal isolate cultures were grown for 48 hr, and then subcultured at 3:100 for 48hrs. Growth was measured by OD 600 and cultures normalized to 1.5mL of OD 600 = 0.4 culture. bsh c and the corresponding vector strain were grown overnight in LB with kanamycin, subcultured at 1:100 for 24hr, and normalized as above. All cultures were clarified, the aqueous layer removed, and the pellets resuspended in sterile PBS with TC to a final concentration of 125uM. Cultures grown with antibiotics were washed one additional time with 1 volume of PBS prior to addition of TC. Samples were then incubated anaerobically for 24hr at 37°C followed by heat treatment at 100°C for 30 minutes, cooled to room temperature, centrifuged and the supernatant filter-sterilized with a 0.22 μm filter. These samples were then used to induce P tcpA - sh-ble , and percent survival following zeocin treatment determined as described above.
Removal of tcp activating signals in the gut was assayed as above, replacing pure TC solution in PBS with homogenate. Tissues were collected from 5-6-day-old CD-1 suckling animals in 2.5ml sterile H 2 O, disrupted with a tissue homogenizer, pooled, and centrifuged to clear tissue debris. The resulting aqueous layer was heat-treated and filter sterilized as described above. The resulting sample was desiccated using a Savant Integrated speedvac system (Fisher Scientific) and resuspended in one-fifth volume of sterile water. Four volumes of acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich) were then added and sample was incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes for deproteinization ( Humbert et al., 2012 16. Humbert, L. ∙ Maubert, M.A. ∙ Wolf, C. ... Bile acid profiling in human biological samples: comparison of extraction procedures and application to normal and cholestatic patients J. Chromatogr. B Analyt. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 2012; 899 :135-145 Crossref Scopus (128) PubMed Google Scholar ). Samples were clarified, with the aqueous layer filter sterilized, desiccated and resuspended in one-fifth original volume sterile H 2 O as described above. To sequester bile salts, 12.5mg of cholestyramine (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to 0.5ml of de-proteinized sample, and the mixture incubated at 1 hour at 37°C with agitation followed by passage through a 3kDa protein concentrator (Pierce PES Protein Concentrators).
Human complex fecal sample TC processing was assayed in vitro . 100 μL of fecal slurries in glycerol prepared as described above was inoculated into 5ml LYBHI and incubated anaerobically for 2 days at 37°C. Cells were then pelleted, normalized to ∼OD 600 = 0.4 in 1.5ml sterile PBS with 125 μM TC, and incubated anaerobically at 37°C for 24hrs. Supernatants were then collected via centrifugation, heat-treated and filter sterilized as described above, and submitted for mass spectroscopy (see below).
The effects of B. obeum bsh on V. cholerae colonization was assayed by introducing bsh C and the isogenic vector control into suckling animals prior to infection with Vibrio . 4-day old CD-1 suckling mice were treated with 50 μL of 75mg/mL kanamycin, then returned to lactating dams. Overnight cultures of bsh C and vector strains were normalized to the equivalent 300 μL of OD 600 = 0.4 culture, and cells pelleted and resuspended in fresh LYH-BHI. 50 μL of this was then introduced via intra-gastric gavage into antibiotic-treated suckling mice that had been fasted for 1.5 hours. Pups were then returned to a lactating dam. After 1 day of pre-infection colonization with E. coli , animals were gavaged with V. cholerae as described above.
All standards (TC, CA, and DCA) were submitted as 10mM solutions. LC-MS analysis of bile acids was performed on a Synapt G2-Si quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Waters) coupled to an I-class UPLC system (Waters). Separations were carried out on a CSH phenyl-hexyl column (2.1 × 100mm, 1.7μM) (Waters). The mobile phases were (A) water with 0.1% formic acid and (B) acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The flow rate was 250 μL/min and the column was held at 40°C. The gradient was as follows: 0min, 1% B; 1min, 1% B; 8min, 40% B; 13min, 58.8% B; 13.5min, 100% B; 15.5min, 100% B; 16min, 1% B; 18min, 1% B. Flow rate was ramped to 600 μL/min at 13.5 min to speed up column flushing and re-equilibration.
The MS was operated in positive ion mode (50 to 1200 m/z) with a 100ms scan time. Source and desolvation temperatures were 150°C and 600°C, respectively. Desolvation gas was set to 1100L/hr and cone gas to 150L/hr. All gases were nitrogen except the collision gas, which was argon. Capillary voltage was 1kV. Injection volume was 1 μL for all samples. The identity of bile acids in samples was confirmed by mass, retention time, and MS/MS as compared to authentic standards. Samples were analyzed in random order and injected in duplicate. Leucine enkephalin was infused and used for mass correction. Data processing (peak integration) was performed using QuanLynx software (Waters). Accuracy of peak integrations was checked manually.
Statistical tests were performed in the GraphPad Prism software package. Results are representative of two independent experiments. Statistical parameters for studies are reported in relevant figure legends and tables.

Section: Acknowledgments

We thank Jun Zhu and Gary Dunny for the kind gifts of V. cholerae and E. faecalis strains, respectively. We thank the Metabolomics Core Facility at University of California, Riverside for mass spectrometry studies. This work was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (R35GM124724 to A.H.).
All authors helped to design and analyze experiments. S.A., J.D.M., J.C.M., R.L., and J.Y.C. performed experiments. S.A., J.D.M., and A.H. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing interests.

Section: Supplemental Information (7)

Download all PDF (103.43 KB) Document S1 Supplemental References PDF (79.40 KB) Table S1 Commensal Strains, Related to STAR Methods Spreadsheet (22.91 KB) Table S2 Sequencing Statistics, Related to STAR Methods Spreadsheet (107.08 KB) Table S3 Relative Abundance of Microbial Taxa by Sample, Related to Figures 1 and 3 PDF (80.14 KB) Table S4 Recovery of Microbial Diversity from Complex Human Fecal Microbiomes by Culturing and Mouse Colonization, Related to Figures 4 and 7 PDF (114.05 KB) Table S5 Bile Salt Hydrolases Found in Genomes of Defined Community Members, Related to Figure 6 PDF (102.90 KB) Table S6 Oligonucleotides Used in This Study, Related to STAR Methods
