Title: Hindbrain Double-Negative Feedback Mediates Palatability-Guided Food and Water Consumption


Abstract: Summary

Hunger and thirst have distinct goals but control similar ingestive behaviors, and little is known about neural processes that are shared between these behavioral states. We identify glutamatergic neurons in the peri-locus coeruleus (periLC VGLUT2 neurons) as a polysynaptic convergence node from separate energy-sensitive and hydration-sensitive cell populations. We develop methods for stable hindbrain calcium imaging in free-moving mice, which show that periLC VGLUT2 neurons are tuned to ingestive behaviors and respond similarly to food or water consumption. PeriLC VGLUT2 neurons are scalably inhibited by palatability and homeostatic need during consumption. Inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons is rewarding and increases consumption by enhancing palatability and prolonging ingestion duration. These properties comprise a double-negative feedback relationship that sustains food or water consumption without affecting food- or water-seeking. PeriLC VGLUT2 neurons are a hub between hunger and thirst that specifically controls motivation for food and water ingestion, which is a factor that contributes to hedonic overeating and obesity.

Section: Introduction

Animal survival depends on neural mechanisms that motivate behaviors for fulfilling essential bodily needs. Classically, motivated behaviors can be deconstructed into three phases ( Figure 1 A; Craig, 1917 15. Craig, W. Appetites and Aversions as Constituents of Instincts Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 1917; 3 :685-688 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ). The preparatory (foraging) phase involves seeking and obtaining a desired outcome, often due to an accumulation of physiological need. This phase is followed by the consummatory phase, which includes sensory, motor, and reward processes associated with consummating the goal of the behavior (e.g., eating or drinking food or water). Satiety develops during the consummatory phase and eventually terminates the behavior, for example by PBN CGRP neurons ( Campos et al., 2016 11. Campos, C.A. ∙ Bowen, A.J. ∙ Schwartz, M.W. ... Parabrachial CGRP Neurons Control Meal Termination Cell Metab. 2016; 23 :811-820 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (175) PubMed Google Scholar , 2018 12. Campos, C.A. ∙ Bowen, A.J. ∙ Roman, C.W. ... Encoding of danger by parabrachial CGRP neurons Nature. 2018; 555 :617-622 Crossref Scopus (194) PubMed Google Scholar ). Elucidating neural mechanisms for these motivated behaviors requires monitoring neuron dynamics to determine the selective involvement of neurons in the preparatory, consummatory, or satiety phases.
Agouti-related protein (AGRP) neurons in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (ARC) are activated by signals of energy deficit ( Cowley et al., 2003 14. Cowley, M.A. ∙ Smith, R.G. ∙ Diano, S. ... The distribution and mechanism of action of ghrelin in the CNS demonstrates a novel hypothalamic circuit regulating energy homeostasis Neuron. 2003; 37 :649-661 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1433) PubMed Google Scholar ). Artificial activation of AGRP neurons in sated mice induces virtual need states that mimic aspects of hunger by leading to food-directed foraging and selectively elicits avid food consumption ( Figure 1 A; Aponte et al., 2011 2. Aponte, Y. ∙ Atasoy, D. ∙ Sternson, S.M. AGRP neurons are sufficient to orchestrate feeding behavior rapidly and without training Nat. Neurosci. 2011; 14 :351-355 Crossref Scopus (845) PubMed Google Scholar ; Krashes et al., 2011 25. Krashes, M.J. ∙ Koda, S. ∙ Ye, C. ... Rapid, reversible activation of AgRP neurons drives feeding behavior in mice J. Clin. Invest. 2011; 121 :1424-1428 Crossref Scopus (1069) PubMed Google Scholar ). AGRP neurons transmit negative valence, promote food seeking, and are rapidly inhibited when food is identified, such that activity is low during eating ( Betley et al., 2015 7. Betley, J.N. ∙ Xu, S. ∙ Cao, Z.F.H. ... Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal Nature. 2015; 521 :180-185 Crossref Scopus (466) PubMed Google Scholar ; Chen et al., 2015 13. Chen, Y. ∙ Lin, Y.C. ∙ Kuo, T.W. ... Sensory detection of food rapidly modulates arcuate feeding circuits Cell. 2015; 160 :829-841 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (434) PubMed Google Scholar ; Mandelblat-Cerf et al., 2015 32. Mandelblat-Cerf, Y. ∙ Ramesh, R.N. ∙ Burgess, C.R. ... Arcuate hypothalamic AgRP and putative POMC neurons show opposite changes in spiking across multiple timescales eLife. 2015; 4 :e07122 Crossref Scopus (183) PubMed Google Scholar ). Thus, AGRP neurons promote the preparatory phase of hunger, but they are not required for the consummatory phase of feeding behavior.
If AGRP neurons do not have a primary role in sustaining food consumption, then other neuron populations must be responsible for this function ( Sternson and Eiselt, 2017 43. Sternson, S.M. ∙ Eiselt, A.K. Three Pillars for the Neural Control of Appetite Annu. Rev. Physiol. 2017; 79 :401-423 Crossref Scopus (185) PubMed Google Scholar ). The rhythmic actions of ingestion are mediated by motor circuits in the hindbrain ( Wiesenfeld et al., 1977 46. Wiesenfeld, Z. ∙ Halpern, B.P. ∙ Tapper, D.N. Licking behavior: evidence of hypoglossal oscillator Science. 1977; 196 :1122-1124 Crossref Scopus (72) PubMed Google Scholar ), but control of ingestion and how long food is consumed are less well understood. Food palatability is associated with food pleasantness (hedonic value) and leads to a transition from “sampling to savoring” that prolongs bouts of consumption ( Yeomans, 1998 48. Yeomans, M.R. Taste, palatability and the control of appetite Proc. Nutr. Soc. 1998; 57 :609-615 Crossref Scopus (111) PubMed Google Scholar ). In humans, hunger increases subjective reports of palatability ( Cabanac, 1971 9. Cabanac, M. Physiological role of pleasure Science. 1971; 173 :1103-1107 Crossref Scopus (1028) PubMed Google Scholar ). Easy access to low-cost, high-palatability food may also contribute to the rising incidence of obesity ( Johnson and Wardle, 2014 23. Johnson, F. ∙ Wardle, J. Variety, palatability, and obesity Adv. Nutr. 2014; 5 :851-859 Crossref Scopus (96) PubMed Google Scholar ). Thus, palatability is a key factor controlling appetite ( Sørensen et al., 2003 41. Sørensen, L.B. ∙ Møller, P. ∙ Flint, A. ... Effect of sensory perception of foods on appetite and food intake: a review of studies on humans Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 2003; 27 :1152-1166 Crossref Scopus (474) PubMed Google Scholar ), but little is known about the relationship between interoceptive sensory neurons and the neural circuits through which hunger shifts palatability and increases consumption.
Hunger is not the only state that influences ingestion. Thirst increases the ingestion of water by nitric oxide synthase 1 (Nos1)-expressing neurons in the suprafornical organ (SFO NOS1 ) that sense physiological dehydration, induce thirst-associated brain state changes, and selectively elicit water seeking ( Allen et al., 2019 1. Allen, W.E. ∙ Chen, M.Z. ∙ Pichamoorthy, N. ... Thirst regulates motivated behavior through modulation of brainwide neural population dynamics Science. 2019; 364 :253 Crossref Scopus (191) PubMed Google Scholar ; Betley et al., 2015 7. Betley, J.N. ∙ Xu, S. ∙ Cao, Z.F.H. ... Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal Nature. 2015; 521 :180-185 Crossref Scopus (466) PubMed Google Scholar ; Oka et al., 2015 35. Oka, Y. ∙ Ye, M. ∙ Zuker, C.S. Thirst driving and suppressing signals encoded by distinct neural populations in the brain Nature. 2015; 520 :349-352 Crossref Scopus (186) PubMed Google Scholar ; Zimmerman et al., 2016 50. Zimmerman, C.A. ∙ Lin, Y.C. ∙ Leib, D.E. ... Thirst neurons anticipate the homeostatic consequences of eating and drinking Nature. 2016; 537 :680-684 Crossref Scopus (198) PubMed Google Scholar ). Hunger and thirst circuits involving AGRP neurons and SFO NOS1 neurons have been considered primarily as discrete interoceptive pathways for distinct physiological states. Less consideration has been given to the shared behavioral mechanisms between these different need states and the potential convergence of hunger and thirst circuits.
To investigate this knowledge gap, we leveraged the molecularly defined and separately localized AGRP and SFO NOS1 neurons as entry points to study the convergence of hunger and thirst circuits. We identified glutamatergic neurons in the anterior peri-locus coeruleus (periLC) as a polysynaptic convergence region in hunger and thirst behaviors. Circuit dynamics and causal perturbations show that periLC neurons control eating and drinking by regulating palatability during the consummatory phase of behavior.

Section: Results

AGRP and SFO NOS1 neuron axon projections overlap in several downstream brain regions ( Figure S1 A). We hypothesized that feeding and drinking circuits converged at some points to mediate shared aspects of these behaviors. We developed a strategy to perform a broad search for anatomically defined and functionally important convergence points by using polysynaptic circuit mapping methods ( Figure 1 B). We looked for intersections of brain regions downstream of AGRP and SFO NOS1 neurons identified by Cre-dependent herpes simplex virus (HSV) anterograde polysynaptic labeling ( Lo and Anderson, 2011 30. Lo, L. ∙ Anderson, D.J. A Cre-dependent, anterograde transsynaptic viral tracer for mapping output pathways of genetically marked neurons Neuron. 2011; 72 :938-950 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (187) PubMed Google Scholar ) with the fluorescent protein tdTomato. We also performed Fos-mapping after optogenetic activation of AGRP neurons or SFO NOS1 neurons in the absence of food and water ( Figures S1 B and S1C) to identify downstream regions that are functionally activated in hunger and thirst. Brains from each group of mice were sectioned, stained, and registered to the Allen Institute Reference Brain Atlas, followed by image segmentation of labeled cells and nuclei and quantification of HSV-mediated tdTomato expression or Fos-immunoreactivity (IR) across multiple brain regions ( Figure 1 C; STAR Methods ). Several subcortical areas contained both HSV-mediated tdTomato expression and Fos-IR, including some of the direct downstream projection targets of AGRP and SFO NOS1 neurons, such as paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus (PVH), lateral hypothalamic area (LHA), and paraventricular thalamus (PVT) ( Figure 1 D; Figures S1 D–S1F), which have been previously emphasized as being crucial for different aspects of hunger and thirst behavior ( Betley et al., 2013 6. Betley, J.N. ∙ Cao, Z.F. ∙ Ritola, K.D. ... Parallel, redundant circuit organization for homeostatic control of feeding behavior Cell. 2013; 155 :1337-1350 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (440) PubMed Google Scholar ; Leib et al., 2017 28. Leib, D.E. ∙ Zimmerman, C.A. ∙ Poormoghaddam, A. ... The Forebrain Thirst Circuit Drives Drinking through Negative Reinforcement Neuron. 2017; 96 :1272-1281.e4 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (83) PubMed Google Scholar ).
We were especially interested in whether this approach could identify poorly characterized brain areas involved in feeding and drinking, and we noticed a hotspot of HSV and Fos labeling within the hindbrain at the dorsolateral portion of the pontine central gray (PCG). In both AGRP and SFO NOS1 groups, we found similar labeling with HSV in the MEV (midbrain trigeminal nucleus), PCG, LC (locus coeruleus), LDT (laterodorsal tegmental area), SLD (sublaterodorsal tegmental area), and scp (superior cerebellar peduncles) ( Figures 1 D and 1E). Fos-IR was observed for both groups in the MEV, Barrington nucleus (B), and LDT ( Figures 1 D and 1F). We also found that cells in dorsolateral PCG showed elevated Fos in food-deprived (FD) mice or water-deprived (WD) mice but not in control mice ( Figures 1 F and S1 G). In addition, we noted and a recent study reported ( Li et al., 2019 29. Li, M.M. ∙ Madara, J.C. ∙ Steger, J.S. ... The Paraventricular Hypothalamus Regulates Satiety and Prevents Obesity via Two Genetically Distinct Circuits Neuron. 2019; 102 :653-667.e6 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (117) PubMed Google Scholar ) that the PVH, which contains second-order neurons in hunger and thirst circuits ( Atasoy et al., 2012 3. Atasoy, D. ∙ Betley, J.N. ∙ Su, H.H. ... Deconstruction of a neural circuit for hunger Nature. 2012; 488 :172-177 Crossref Scopus (728) PubMed Google Scholar ; Leib et al., 2017 28. Leib, D.E. ∙ Zimmerman, C.A. ∙ Poormoghaddam, A. ... The Forebrain Thirst Circuit Drives Drinking through Negative Reinforcement Neuron. 2017; 96 :1272-1281.e4 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (83) PubMed Google Scholar ), projects to the dorsolateral PCG ( Figure 1 G). This area has been defined anatomically as the periLC ( Shipley et al., 1996 39. Shipley, M.T. ∙ Fu, L. ∙ Ennis, M. ... Dendrites of locus coeruleus neurons extend preferentially into two pericoerulear zones J. Comp. Neurol. 1996; 365 :56-68 Crossref Scopus (119) PubMed Google Scholar ) and includes the brain region surrounding the anterior portion of the LC that is flanked laterally by the MEV, medially by the LDT, and dorsally by the fourth ventricle ( Figure 1 G; see STAR Methods for explanation of anatomical terms). Single neuron reconstructions ( Winnubst et al., 2019 47. Winnubst, J. ∙ Bas, E. ∙ Ferreira, T.A. ... Reconstruction of 1,000 Projection Neurons Reveals New Cell Types and Organization of Long-Range Connectivity in the Mouse Brain Cell. 2019; 179 :268-281.e13 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (260) PubMed Google Scholar ) showed inputs to PCG that originated from multiple brain areas associated with ingestive behaviors ( Figures 1 H–1K). Based on these results, we investigated the periLC and surrounding sites for a role in regulating food and water consumption.
The periLC primarily contains glutamatergic ( Vglut2 -expressing) neurons, and they are flanked by GABAergic ( Vgat -expressing) neurons in the LDT and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-expressing noradrenergic neurons in the LC ( Figure S2 A). Moreover, Vglut2 is not expressed in LC noradrenergic neurons ( Figure S2 A). Based on our HSV experiments, we examined non-noradrenergic LC VGLUT2 and periLC VGLUT2 neurons (hereafter referred to as periLC VGLUT2 neurons) using chemogenetic and optogenetic perturbations during eating and drinking.
Chemogenetic inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons by PSAM 4 -GlyR and uPSEM 792 ( Magnus et al., 2019 31. Magnus, C.J. ∙ Lee, P.H. ∙ Bonaventura, J. ... Ultrapotent chemogenetics for research and potential clinical applications Science. 2019; 364 :eaav5282 Crossref Scopus (100) PubMed Google Scholar ) in ad-libitum -fed and -hydrated mice significantly increased consumption of both grain food pellets and sugar pellets during the light period, which is a time during which mice normally eat little ( Figures 2 A–2D, S2 B, and S2C; see STAR Methods ). Chemogenetic inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons did not reliably elicit water consumption ( Figure S2 D). Using a closed-loop place preference assay, we found that inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons conditioned place preference that was sustained in a post-conditioning test in the absence of neuron activity perturbations, and this was not observed in enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) control mice ( Figures 2 E–2G, S2 E, and S2F). Optogenetic activation of periLC VGLUT2 neurons reduced food intake ( Figure 2 H) and elicited avoidance during closed-loop place preference ( Figure 2 I). These gain- or loss-of-function perturbations did not significantly alter locomotion or the number of entries to the light-paired side in archaerhodopsin-expressing (ArchT) mice or channelrhodopsin-2-expressing (ChR2) mice ( Figures S2 G–S2J). However, mice did not readily perform operant self-inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons in a nose-poking task ( Figure 2 J), indicating that this cell population does not reinforce specific actions.
Taken together, these experiments show that inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons increases food intake and is rewarding, whereas activation has the opposite effect. Notably, this is different than the AGRP neurons, which increase food seeking but mediate the unpleasant aspects of hunger ( Betley et al., 2015 7. Betley, J.N. ∙ Xu, S. ∙ Cao, Z.F.H. ... Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal Nature. 2015; 521 :180-185 Crossref Scopus (466) PubMed Google Scholar ).
To determine the natural dynamics of neurons in the PCG during motivated behavior, we developed an approach for in vivo calcium imaging of this brain region in freely moving mice during feeding and drinking by using a head-mounted miniature microscope and an implanted gradient index (GRIN) lens. Areas in the PCG are challenging targets for freely moving deep-brain calcium imaging because they are close to the cerebral ventricle, which is not stable during movement. Also, this area is overlaid by the confluence of the transverse sinus and the sagittal sinus, which is critical for cerebral blood flow and damaging these blood vessels with the GRIN lens is fatal. We developed methods to mechanically displace the confluence during GRIN lens implantation (see STAR Methods ), but we consistently observed large amplitude movement of brain tissue under the GRIN lens during locomotion or other activity ( Figure 3 A), which was incompatible with motion correction such that we were unable to detect reliable changes of individual neuronal calcium signals during behavior ( Video S1 ).
eyJraWQiOiI4ZjUxYWNhY2IzYjhiNjNlNzFlYmIzYWFmYTU5NmZmYyIsImFsZyI6IlJTMjU2In0.eyJzdWIiOiI5YTU1NTRjYjI3ZGI2NjUyYTA0NzUzODAyZmFkMDgzYSIsImtpZCI6IjhmNTFhY2FjYjNiOGI2M2U3MWViYjNhYWZhNTk2ZmZjIiwiZXhwIjoxNzQ5NjA5MjA3fQ.Ip_jQDCbtEoQjUDnFs73shnxVS25kKBm5wiHXsJxaEVpUf_nrwGkjZgZMbzLBhj4XB9La2-N1BxKPHAGhTZ41SG2D-C3uiJt66atwhX-9xn8uQXIG_rB9GwLv-jF00YVFzSvRdXqvZ0nCpTR-TbvEgGi0fAB6ym8YpPQjfEQjpNfBVmJOgNpvn9E2ywQh3dAFHW9NCrIOw6eNRmYJVCm4wHz993BCDbRvnMKmREAxFnrU_Kx9VkdD0f7a-FNEWeq3zEOVSLCmBw2ZrJEYv9eUusaSKxrsYaQbN6xHZEInfCcmx4I1j5yOUl_HlHD8Tq9OYkIfSclSIWhe2uMi0ZZZg Video (2.44 MB) Video S1 Example In Vivo Calcium Imaging of periLC VGLUT2 Neurons in a Freely Moving Mouse without Tungsten Wire Anchoring (3× Speed), Related to Figure 3A Motion correction using procedures described in the STAR Methods did not produce successful alignment across imaging frames for unanchored GRIN lens placements in the periLC.
We overcame this technical challenge by drawing inspiration from optrode recordings. We attached polyimide tubes to the GRIN lens through which we inserted tungsten wires to lock the underlying tissue into place ( Figures 3 B and S3 A). The extended tungsten wires secured the imaging area and improved image stability. The recorded image time series was then suitable for small amplitude motion correction by using image registration ( Figure 3 B; Videos S2 and S3 ; see STAR Methods ). This solution can benefit imaging deep brain targets that were previously unfeasible due to excessive brain movement.
eyJraWQiOiI4ZjUxYWNhY2IzYjhiNjNlNzFlYmIzYWFmYTU5NmZmYyIsImFsZyI6IlJTMjU2In0.eyJzdWIiOiIxZTZlM2RkYjA4ZTQwNjgyN2FjMTE2ZjYxNmU1YzRjYyIsImtpZCI6IjhmNTFhY2FjYjNiOGI2M2U3MWViYjNhYWZhNTk2ZmZjIiwiZXhwIjoxNzQ5NjA5MjA3fQ.Cnj-he5lotjFZmsMXLxhOBnBzm5Xft7MkIIX1usMiK7X4Oi-d8pO5vnitcoD7wcVOVG24YnzxaHPerDIKB8LSDJ1Mh4fcxZYlU0GQPx4E0MFEusN9mHva_f14bg-zRSTAIyi7QhJei6I37mpxpIQdpmKX9bFYcrCYsb6OylB1qLJoLu0SB1YUt7CD_txiaPIh2pLcAn8nImPqG9mkEtRe2l2M2Hzas0vLlHkUMfTU7juzLkeuAweRNFrgknTcYqA02fk23TlrUTHorhvEi9HIbx_uZlOaJsi-5nvsuFvTeIOJa7bGzTEQmmQLL1Hg_ks1gwkEwbjR89vZHwLBK3jpQ Video (17.75 MB) Video S2 Example In Vivo Calcium Imaging of periLC VGLUT2 Neurons in a Freely Moving Mouse with Tungsten Wire Anchoring (3× Speed), Related to Figure 3B No food was delivered from the food port. Motion corrected video is also shown. Air puff delivery (at 20 s in video) startled the mouse and elicited an escape response but did not lead to brain motion.
eyJraWQiOiI4ZjUxYWNhY2IzYjhiNjNlNzFlYmIzYWFmYTU5NmZmYyIsImFsZyI6IlJTMjU2In0.eyJzdWIiOiJjNTQ1NDk3NDFmMjZjNjZjYjBmZjY0MWFiYWVkYjA4NyIsImtpZCI6IjhmNTFhY2FjYjNiOGI2M2U3MWViYjNhYWZhNTk2ZmZjIiwiZXhwIjoxNzQ5NjA5MjA3fQ.rruE-N0gz-JE9PX6zJdwkVljHLPW9P6MOxMCcDfiWy51jDw0ab1UGhYEeBAc-EWGa2ajfOuIuuk06OjW_27DTo0IX2lu5BXlmV5yiydzNn2A5HxTtT5Vwy4yIrw1HZQg5EDgrkSadTd3InyRUtVFQzkkiVnQmw4qzOq1dmVkdkxhN5U4SPW9EC2Za4_vC6TSSfeUXvw_mjS9u8Z0DnsUOPrQmxQGxTZw9Qm4bLvgmV4-U6mTZcpOO66k7C0ZmbN5uKki6JZoxz1MNlmXOzWcojIY7JoUq7GMVQBrUO33iFMlOi6AG5Fs8yoreR8oZFE583pIxnazqXxGj9m3k1U_mA Video (18.96 MB) Video S3 Example In Vivo Calcium Imaging of LDT GAD2 Neurons in Freely Moving Mouse with Tungsten Wire Anchoring (3× Speed), Related to Figure S3E No food was delivered from food port. Motion corrected video is also shown.
We used Vglut2 ( Slc17a6 ) -IRES-Cre ( Figure S3 B) and Gad2-IRES-Cre mice with targeted Cre-dependent AAV injections to label glutamatergic neurons or GABAergic neurons, respectively, in the dorsolateral part of the PCG with GCaMP6f. PeriLC VGLUT2 neurons were modulated by consumption of food pellets or palatable liquid food (Ensure) ( Figures S3 C and S3D). These neurons were selective for consumption and were only weakly modulated by false food (wood block) or social interaction with the opposite sex ( Figures S3 C and S3D).
In contrast, Gad2 -expressing inhibitory neurons, which were in the adjacent LDT (300 μm medial to periLC), were not selective for consumption and decreased activity when FD mice were presented with either a food pellet or a false food ( Figure S3 E). Further investigation indicated that a subset of LDT GAD2 neuron activity was increased during locomotion ( Figure S3 E, bottom), rearing, or grooming ( Figure S3 F). Our imaging results indicate that LDT Fos-IR ( Figure 1 D) was likely an indirect consequence of elevated foraging locomotor activity associated with activating AGRP and SFO NOS1 populations ( Krashes et al., 2011 25. Krashes, M.J. ∙ Koda, S. ∙ Ye, C. ... Rapid, reversible activation of AgRP neurons drives feeding behavior in mice J. Clin. Invest. 2011; 121 :1424-1428 Crossref Scopus (1069) PubMed Google Scholar ). These results highlight the importance of temporally precise in vivo imaging over immediate early gene analysis to establish selective involvement in ingestive behaviors instead of indirect effects such as from locomotor activity. This also restricts consumption-modulated neurons to the periLC region.
Based on these observations, we focused on periLC VGLUT2 neurons across different phases of eating and drinking behavior ( Figure 1 A). We first investigated stimuli that are known to modulate AGRP neurons. To test the effect of hormonal signals of energy deficit, we injected ghrelin, which activates AGRP neurons within 2 min ( Betley et al., 2015 7. Betley, J.N. ∙ Xu, S. ∙ Cao, Z.F.H. ... Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal Nature. 2015; 521 :180-185 Crossref Scopus (466) PubMed Google Scholar ; Chen et al., 2015 13. Chen, Y. ∙ Lin, Y.C. ∙ Kuo, T.W. ... Sensory detection of food rapidly modulates arcuate feeding circuits Cell. 2015; 160 :829-841 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (434) PubMed Google Scholar ), but ghrelin did not significantly affect periLC VGLUT2 neuron activity ( Figures S3 G and S3H).
Next, we examined neural activity during cue-conditioned delivery of a small, fixed volume (3 μL) of palatable Ensure by using a motorized lick spout that was equipped with capacitive lick detection ( Figure 3 C; Video S4 ). In ad-libitum -fed mice, periLC VGLUT2 neurons showed responses during the consumption period (29% significantly inhibited, 25% significantly activated; Figures 3 D and 3G). PeriLC VGLUT2 neurons also responded similarly during ingestion of moderate palatability liquid food by hungry mice (FD) ( Figure 3 E) as well as water consumption in a strong thirst state under water restriction (WR) ( Figure 3 F), with similar proportions of significantly modulated neurons under each condition ( Figure 3 G). Notably, many of the neurons that responded to food in hunger were also significantly modulated by water in thirst ( Figure S3 I; see STAR Methods ). However, periLC VGLUT2 neurons were not modulated by the food-predictive auditory cue ( Figures 3 H and 3I). The lack of robust responding to a conditioned stimulus is different than that for AGRP neurons, which reduce their activity in the presence of food-predicting cues ( Betley et al., 2015 7. Betley, J.N. ∙ Xu, S. ∙ Cao, Z.F.H. ... Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal Nature. 2015; 521 :180-185 Crossref Scopus (466) PubMed Google Scholar ). Instead, the activated or inhibited neural responses of periLC VGLUT2 neurons were typically maintained throughout the consumption period ( Figure 3 J). These responses increased (or decreased) following the first lick and quickly reached a plateau ( Figure 3 K).
eyJraWQiOiI4ZjUxYWNhY2IzYjhiNjNlNzFlYmIzYWFmYTU5NmZmYyIsImFsZyI6IlJTMjU2In0.eyJzdWIiOiJhN2Y0MjJlNjZjOGNhNjEzMzc1OTM3M2FlODU3NmRhYiIsImtpZCI6IjhmNTFhY2FjYjNiOGI2M2U3MWViYjNhYWZhNTk2ZmZjIiwiZXhwIjoxNzQ5NjA5MjA3fQ.UfIDfmO9UOcN4nzeXPsfVJ4u5vP1SrkAZMkh_yIScAH9CBVw4Vjz18GxhgAu2GDj2nIViEnMi2o88kWBcxMsMh_N60vUw15LdfV0ZDnG1xeR6Tkarx7f8mHg8lnZJcK2Pijk2mVMlCF08JPh4UKoEn5QpuFgy0YBIYsdGyjs1GcGtgqJp4rUZGw5_Xo-pnz5zzbjF9cf3Z9xSm67eaw4IsPE8AGNX64SlEXglu1ErWGcv62sUVXl78M7fgG0toOACEQT1045QBnUaIk5BS8vLtVRvamb8H0gygGFfY1QU13gBtoimgVOy9yibO1kk0fwKvfASKA2NYhPVa3FQWTKYg Video (2.96 MB) Video S4 Example In Vivo Calcium Dynamics of PeriLC VGLUT2 Neurons during Ensure Consumption (2× Speed), Related to Figure 3D Motion corrected in vivo imaging video was displayed after rolling-ball background subtraction in the left panel. The right panel is the corresponding CNMF-E analysis of neuronal calcium dynamics false colored to highlight activated and inhibited neuron responses.
We also performed imaging during free-access, self-paced feeding trials without an auditory cue in which the food spout was always available. In these experiments, periLC VGLUT2 neurons were also most responsive during the consummatory phase ( Figure S3 J), but we did observe weak modulation during approach to the food spout ( Figure S3 J). This observation was most evident for the consumption-activated periLC VGLUT2 neurons, which showed a small decrease followed by an increase that preceded the first lick ( Figure S3 J, right). The mean response for consumption-inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neurons showed a slight increase during approach that decreased to the baseline level at the onset of the first lick, but these neurons were primarily modulated during consumption ( Figure S3 J). Thus, periLC VGLUT2 neuron responses were largest during consumption of both food and water, indicating that they are primarily involved in the consummatory phase of ingestive behaviors.
In addition, we considered a potential role for periLC VGLUT2 neurons in short-term termination of consumption. However, during free-access feeding bouts, we did not observe a systematic change in activity before or coinciding with cessation of consumption ( Figure S3 K).
Because periLC VGLUT2 neuron responses track consumption duration in cue-conditioned trials, we also examined the relationship of periLC VGLUT2 neuron responses to consumption duration in self-paced feeding bouts during free-access trials from energy deficit to satiety ( Figure S3 L). In this experiment, we interleaved cue-conditioned small-volume (3 μL) consumption trials for classification of periLC VGLUT2 neurons as “activated” or “inhibited” based on the same criteria used in Figure 3 G (see STAR Methods ). For most inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neurons (64%) and a smaller proportion of activated neurons (42%), the integrated response magnitude increased with consumption bout duration, which is expected for a response that persists during the consumption bout ( Figures 3 L–3N, S3 M, and S3N). However, we found that 20% of the activated neurons had biphasic responses and became inhibited in the long duration bouts ( Figures 3 O and S3 O). Thus, periLC VGLUT2 neurons, especially the inhibited subpopulation, track consumption duration in self-paced feeding bouts.
We investigated the possibility that periLC VGLUT2 neuron activity is related to motor control of consumption in FD-mice by intermingling consumption trials with omission trials, in which mice still licked the spout but did not receive food. Omission trials showed greatly diminished periLC VGLUT2 neuron modulation ( Figures 3 P, 3Q, and S3 P). We also measured the responses of both activated and inhibited subpopulations of periLC VGLUT2 neurons in experimenter-controlled consumption, in which the lick spout delivered food for different access times (5–12 s) in hungry mice ( Figures S3 Q and S3R). Only a few inhibited neuron responses during the consumption window were significantly correlated with lick number (2%) or lick frequency (<1%) ( Figure S3 S), further ruling out a substantial role of periLC VGLUT2 neurons in direct motor-control of consumption. Instead, these experiments consistently showed that the activity of periLC VGLUT2 neurons is tied to food or water ingestion.
Our experiments showed that activation or inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons decreased or increased food intake, respectively, and in vivo calcium imaging revealed that periLC VGLUT2 neurons are subdivided into subpopulations that are selectively activated or inhibited during the consumption bout. This might include multiple potential causal relationships between the measured activity patterns of these functionally defined subpopulations of periLC VGLUT2 neurons and consumption bouts. One possibility was that these two subpopulations of periLC VGLUT2 neurons oppositely regulated consumption bouts (models 1 and 2, Figures 4 A and 4B). Alternatively, both subpopulations of periLC VGLUT2 neurons might regulate consumption bouts similarly, despite being oppositely regulated by consumption (models 3 and 4, Figures 4 C and 4D). Model 4 ( Figure 4 D) could be excluded because activation of the entire periLC VGLUT2 neuron population would be predicted to increase consumption, which is opposite to what we observed experimentally ( Figure 2 H). To consider the remaining possibilities, we performed additional in vivo calcium imaging experiments to characterize how these periLC VGLUT2 neuron subpopulations were modulated by progressive consumption and hunger or thirst.
Model 1 ( Figure 4 A) is a negative feedback model, which would limit consumption and suppress further ingestion. For a negative feedback model, we anticipated that the activated and inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neuron subpopulations would show consumption bout-driven responses that would become progressively larger with food intake in conjunction with the reduction in feeding bout size that is observed from hunger to satiety ( Figure S3 L; Davis and Perez, 1993 17. Davis, J.D. ∙ Perez, M.C. Food deprivation- and palatability-induced microstructural changes in ingestive behavior Am. J. Physiol. 1993; 264 :R97-R103 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ). First, we investigated whether the neuronal dynamics of either subpopulation showed increased response amplitude with successive trials of food or water intake. For FD or WD mice, neither the mean response amplitude nor baseline calcium activity of all periLC VGLUT2 neurons or the inhibited or activated subpopulations were significantly correlated with trial number ( Figures 4 E–4J and S4 A–S4F), although the amount consumed during the sessions was insufficient to lead to satiety. For a small proportion of individual periLC VGLUT2 neurons in FD or WD mice, there was a significant correlation with the consumption response amplitude across trials but not for the baseline activity. However, most of these significantly correlated neurons showed gradually reduced activation or inhibition responses with successive trials ( Figures S4 G–S4J). The unchanged or reduced magnitude of periLC VGLUT2 neuron responses with increased food or water intake is not consistent with progressive integration of consumption bouts to suppress eating or drinking.
Next, we tested how energy-deficit or dehydration states would modulate periLC VGLUT2 neuron responses. When ensemble neural responses to Ensure consumption were compared between an ad - libitum -fed state and FD state on separate days, the amplitude of both the activated and the inhibited responses was significantly larger in FD mice ( Figures S4 K and S4L). To reliably match imaged neurons between hunger or thirst and satiety, we also examined the response of periLC VGLUT2 neurons after refeeding or rehydrating from FD or WD to satiety in experiments in which small-volume (3 μL) consumption trials were interspersed with longer free-access periods (Ensure consumption: 3–4 mL, water consumption: 0.4–0.6 mL) to achieve satiation (assessed by increased “misses” in cue-conditioned consumption trials). For hunger and thirst, we found that both activated and inhibited responses from FD mice and WD mice were reduced in the same neurons after satiation with food ( Figures 4 K–4M) or water ( Figures 4 N–4P). Similar proportions of significantly activated and inhibited neurons were observed during Ensure consumption in hunger and satiety, despite the difference in magnitude for their responses ( Figure S4 M). For WD mice, satiety reduced the proportion of significantly activated and inhibited neurons ( Figure S4 M). These experiments demonstrate that periLC VGLUT2 neuron response magnitudes are larger in hunger and thirst states than in satiety states.
Based on the modulation of periLC VGLUT2 neuron dynamics by hunger or thirst relative to satiety, we could further constrain models of how periLC VGLUT2 neuron activity is causally related to food consumption. Because responses of activated and inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neuron subpopulations are largest in hunger and thirst states, the causal relationships in model 1 ( Figure 4 A) and the left side of model 3 ( Figure 4 C) predict either reduced drive or stronger inhibition of consumption bouts in hunger or thirst relative to satiety, but this is opposite to observations that consumption bout duration is longest in hunger and thirst states ( Figure S3 L; Cabanac, 1985 10. Cabanac, M. Influence of food and water deprivation on the behavior of the white rat foraging in a hostile environment Physiol. Behav. 1985; 35 :701-709 Crossref Scopus (23) PubMed Google Scholar ; Davis and Perez, 1993 17. Davis, J.D. ∙ Perez, M.C. Food deprivation- and palatability-induced microstructural changes in ingestive behavior Am. J. Physiol. 1993; 264 :R97-R103 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ; Spector et al., 1998 42. Spector, A.C. ∙ Klumpp, P.A. ∙ Kaplan, J.M. Analytical issues in the evaluation of food deprivation and sucrose concentration effects on the microstructure of licking behavior in the rat Behav. Neurosci. 1998; 112 :678-694 Crossref Scopus (211) PubMed Google Scholar ). In addition, the left side of model 2, where the consumption-activated subpopulation ( Figure 4 B, left side) promotes consumption, is also not consistent with optogenetic and chemogenetic perturbation data ( Figure 2 ). This leaves the right side of model 2 and 3, in which the inhibited subpopulation shows a double-negative feedback causal relationship (functionally similar to positive feedback) between neuron activity and behavior. The inhibited subpopulation of model 2 and 3 is consistent with the observed data that (1) activation inhibits consumption and inhibition promotes consumption, (2) hunger and thirst increase the amplitude of the inhibited subpopulation’s response, (3) longer consumption bouts are associated with sustained inhibition in a majority of the inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neuron subpopulation, and (4) some activated neurons become inhibited with longer consumption bouts ( Figures 3 L–3O). These data do not rule out a contributing role for the activated subpopulation, but our analysis of the neuronal dynamics and perturbation experiments indicates a dominant effect of the inhibited subpopulation for explaining the causal relationships between neuron dynamics and functional perturbation experiments on eating and drinking.
Because periLC VGLUT2 -neuron-inhibition-promoted food intake, was rewarding, and neural responses were largest during hunger and thirst, we hypothesized that this subpopulation may be related to food palatability. To examine this, we first measured periLC VGLUT2 neuron responses in FD mice to 4-fold-diluted Ensure, which was less avidly consumed than full-strength Ensure by ad - libitum -fed and hydrated mice, indicating reduced palatability (licks within 1 h, Ensure: 1,630 ± 372 licks, diluted Ensure: 813 ± 203 licks). Correspondingly, the response magnitude of periLC VGLUT2 neurons in FD mice is significantly reduced for diluted Ensure even when the same quantity was consumed ( Figures 5 A–5C). Thus, periLC VGLUT2 neuron responses are scaled by food palatability.
Next, we monitored periLC VGLUT2 neuron activity during the consumption of tastants with different palatability. We used cue-conditioned small-volume (3 μL) consumption trials in which the entire tastant solution was consumed for each trial by WR mice, regardless of palatability. The tastants included sucrose (300 mM), quinine (1 mM), citric acid (50 mM), low salt (60 mM), and high salt (500 mM), and each of these tastants elicited activated and inhibited responses of periLC VGLUT2 neurons ( Figure S5 A). Unsupervised k-means clustering of responses to both Ensure and water consumption within the same sessions demonstrated that inhibited or activated neurons were from the same subgroup for each reward ( Figure 5 D). We compared the responses from consumption of palatable Ensure and sucrose solutions and found similar responses ( Figure 5 E). In separate experiments, unpalatable solutions with either citric acid and high salt ( Figure 5 H) or quinine and citric acid ( Figure 5 I) also activated and inhibited similar subgroups of periLC VGLUT2 neurons. However, when neuron responses to palatable Ensure or sucrose were compared to the consumption of bitter quinine, separate sets of periLC VGLUT2 neurons were activated ( Figures 5 F and 5G). Thus, for tastants with opposite valence, such as Ensure and quinine or sucrose and quinine, the activated periLC VGLUT2 neurons segregated by taste valence, although a greater proportion of the activated neurons was associated with palatable tastants. For tastants with the same valence, ensemble response patterns were similar ( Figures 5 D, 5E, 5H, and 5I). We found one exception to this with a comparison of low salt and high salt, which have opposite valence but showed similar responses ( Figures S5 C and S5D), possibly related to a role of some neurons from this region in salt balance ( Geerling and Loewy, 2006 20. Geerling, J.C. ∙ Loewy, A.D. Aldosterone-sensitive neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract: efferent projections J. Comp. Neurol. 2006; 497 :223-250 Crossref Scopus (91) PubMed Google Scholar ; Lee et al., 2019 27. Lee, S. ∙ Augustine, V. ∙ Zhao, Y. ... Chemosensory modulation of neural circuits for sodium appetite Nature. 2019; 568 :93-97 Crossref Scopus (47) PubMed Google Scholar ; Shin et al., 2011 38. Shin, J.W. ∙ Geerling, J.C. ∙ Stein, M.K. ... FoxP2 brainstem neurons project to sodium appetite regulatory sites J. Chem. Neuroanat. 2011; 42 :1-23 Crossref Scopus (39) PubMed Google Scholar ).
The inhibited population of periLC VGLUT2 neurons formed a large proportion of the modulated neurons across multiple tastants. Moreover, the same periLC VGLUT2 neurons were inhibited across different tastants, such that the inhibited neurons did not segregate by taste valence in WR mice ( Figures 5 D–5I). Even opposite valence tastants, such as Ensure and quinine or sucrose and quinine, showed the same group of inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neurons during consumption ( Figures 5 F and 5G), all of which offer a high water content that is valued in the thirst state. Nevertheless, when the response magnitudes of the inhibited clusters were compared across these oppositely valenced tastants within a session, we found that the more palatable tastants showed a greater inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons. The inhibitory response magnitude to Ensure was significantly larger than that for water or quinine ( Figures 5 J and 5L). Moreover, the quinine-inhibited response was also significantly smaller than that for sucrose or citric acid ( Figures 5 M and 5O). There was no significant difference in the responses of the inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neurons to tastants with similar valence, such as between Ensure and sucrose or between citric acid and high salt ( Figures 5 K and 5N). Palatability-scaled responses across different tastants were not observed with the activated periLC VGLUT2 neurons for tastants with similar valence ( Figure S5 B). Thus, in vivo calcium imaging revealed that activated periLC VGLUT2 neurons encode taste valence information, whereas inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neurons were broadly tuned across different tastants and had response amplitudes scalable to the palatability of the consumed solution.
Together, consumption bout lengthening associated with suppression of the inhibited neurons in models 2 and 3 ( Figures 4 B and 4C, right side) was consistent with the enhanced inhibitory response to food deprivation ( Figures 4 K–4M) and to palatable tastes ( Figures 5 J–5O). Although there is a possibility that reduced food intake from periLC VGLUT2 neuron activation was due to the negative taste valence neurons (model 2-alt, Figure S5 E), the suppression of these bitter-activated neurons in Figure S5 E is not expected to be responsible for increased consumption of sweet, palatable (non-bitter) food ( Figure 2 D). Moreover, suppression of periLC VGLUT2 neuron function with tetanus toxin expression did not affect quinine avoidance, indicating that periLC VGLUT2 neurons ( Figure S5 F) are not necessary for suppressing the ingestion of bitter tastants.
Our model (model 2, right side; Figure 4 B) shows a double-negative feedback relationship that predicts periLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition during consumption will potentiate subsequent food consumption similarly to the effects of increased palatability either by hunger or thirst state or by the hedonic value of the consumed items. Chemogenetic inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons increased eating ( Figures 2 A–2D) but does not mimic the consumption-locked neuronal dynamics that we measured in vivo . In light of this finding, we tested whether optogenetic inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons solely during food and water consumption would have behavioral consequences associated with increased palatability. Our hypothesis was that inhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons selectively during ingestion was critical for increasing consumption. To assess the importance of inhibition during consumption (closed loop), we also investigated whether randomly delivered periLC VGLUT2 neuron photoinhibition (open loop) would influence consumption.
We expressed ArchT in periLC VGLUT2 neurons and designed a closed-loop optical inhibition experiment in which photoinhibition was contingent on food consumption and sustained only during ingestion ( Figure 6 A). To avoid a ceiling effect, we used diluted Ensure so that it was only modestly consumed by ad-libitum -fed mice. To assess the temporal properties of the lick-triggered periLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition on self-initiated food intake, we used interleaved blocks (2 min) alternating between lick-contingent photoinhibition blocks and no-laser blocks. For the same animals, we also tested open-loop conditions with noncontingent photoinhibition, in which the number and duration of laser pulses were yoked to the contingent photoinhibition experiments but delivered independently of whether the mouse was licking. In addition, we performed a sham session with no photoinhibition in any of the blocks ( Figure 6 B). These different experimental paradigms were designed to examine the short-term effects of periLC VGLUT2 neuron modulation on the magnitude of consumption.
For blocks with lick-contingent photoinhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons, mice consumed more food than for blocks lacking photoinhibition ( Figure 6 C). In contrast, for noncontingent photoinhibition or no-laser sessions, mice did not consume more between the two alternating blocks ( Figures 6 D and 6E). The cumulative distribution of lick events in contingent perturbation blocks was significantly greater than the interleaved no-laser blocks of the same session for ArchT mice but not EYFP controls ( Figures 6 F and S6 A). Mean lick number per block, lick frequency, and total licks were also significantly increased only during contingent photoinhibition, and there was no significant difference for the two sets of consumption blocks for either noncontingent or the sham perturbation sessions in ArchT mice or in EYFP controls ( Figure 6 G and S6 B). In contrast, mice with injections that mistargeted expression of ArchT in VGLUT2 neurons of the caudal PCG showed the opposite effect, where they reduced food intake under both contingent and noncontingent conditions and also induced conditioned place avoidance ( Figure S6 C), and mistargeting to the cerebral ventricle or LDT showed no significant effects during photoinhibition ( Figure S6 D). These results demonstrate that the effects on consumption were specific to inhibition in the anterior periLC.
We also examined whether consumption changed across trials during the session, but there was no significant difference in consumption in the first half versus the second half of the session under all the conditions ( Figure S6 E). Thus, we did not see evidence of within-session learning to consume more food after repeated pairing with interleaved periLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition.
Next, we also determined the effect of photoinhibition on water consumption by using mildly dehydrated mice (see STAR Methods ). ArchT mice, but not EYFP mice, in the contingent photoinhibition blocks (1 min) increased water consumption ( Figures 6 H and 6I). Notably, this finding was different than our results obtained using chemogenetic inhibition, which failed to significantly increase water intake ( Figure S2 D). There was not a significant difference between blocks for either noncontingent photoinhibition or sham conditions ( Figures 6 H, 6I, and S6 F–S6J). These experiments show that periLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition increased both food and water intake only when inhibition was paired with consumption, which mimics the natural dynamics of periLC VGLUT2 neurons.
Consumption initiation and maintenance are mediated by separate processes ( Figure 1 A; Berridge, 1996 5. Berridge, K.C. Food reward: brain substrates of wanting and liking Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 1996; 20 :1-25 Crossref Scopus (1434) PubMed Google Scholar ; Taha et al., 2009 44. Taha, S.A. ∙ Katsuura, Y. ∙ Noorvash, D. ... Convergent, not serial, striatal and pallidal circuits regulate opioid-induced food intake Neuroscience. 2009; 161 :718-733 Crossref Scopus (37) PubMed Google Scholar ; Wassum et al., 2009 45. Wassum, K.M. ∙ Ostlund, S.B. ∙ Maidment, N.T. ... Distinct opioid circuits determine the palatability and the desirability of rewarding events Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2009; 106 :12512-12517 Crossref Scopus (131) PubMed Google Scholar ). Attraction to a previously reinforced location is a process related to approaching the location of food or water when hungry or thirsty and is sometimes associated with “wanting” ( Berridge, 1996 5. Berridge, K.C. Food reward: brain substrates of wanting and liking Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 1996; 20 :1-25 Crossref Scopus (1434) PubMed Google Scholar ; Wassum et al., 2009 45. Wassum, K.M. ∙ Ostlund, S.B. ∙ Maidment, N.T. ... Distinct opioid circuits determine the palatability and the desirability of rewarding events Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2009; 106 :12512-12517 Crossref Scopus (131) PubMed Google Scholar ). However, periLC VGLUT2 neuron dynamics were consistent with a role in controlling palatability, which is a complementary aspect of motivation associated with increased “liking,” and leads to prolongation of consumption once it is initiated ( Berridge, 1996 5. Berridge, K.C. Food reward: brain substrates of wanting and liking Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 1996; 20 :1-25 Crossref Scopus (1434) PubMed Google Scholar ; Wassum et al., 2009 45. Wassum, K.M. ∙ Ostlund, S.B. ∙ Maidment, N.T. ... Distinct opioid circuits determine the palatability and the desirability of rewarding events Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2009; 106 :12512-12517 Crossref Scopus (131) PubMed Google Scholar ). To distinguish these behavioral mechanisms of periLC VGLUT2 neuron photoinhibition on consumption, we examined the relationship between the initiation and the duration of consumption by analyzing the microstructure of licking events in contingent and noncontingent photoinhibition experiments. This approach has been used previously to deconstruct different aspects of feeding behavior control ( Davis, 1973 16. Davis, J.D. The effectiveness of some sugars in stimulating licking behavior in the rat Physiol. Behav. 1973; 11 :39-45 Crossref Scopus (167) PubMed Google Scholar ; Davis and Smith, 1992 18. Davis, J.D. ∙ Smith, G.P. Analysis of the microstructure of the rhythmic tongue movements of rats ingesting maltose and sucrose solutions Behav. Neurosci. 1992; 106 :217-228 Crossref Scopus (333) PubMed Google Scholar ; Johnson et al., 2010 24. Johnson, A.W. ∙ Sherwood, A. ∙ Smith, D.R. ... An analysis of licking microstructure in three strains of mice Appetite. 2010; 54 :320-330 Crossref Scopus (40) PubMed Google Scholar ; Spector et al., 1998 42. Spector, A.C. ∙ Klumpp, P.A. ∙ Kaplan, J.M. Analytical issues in the evaluation of food deprivation and sucrose concentration effects on the microstructure of licking behavior in the rat Behav. Neurosci. 1998; 112 :678-694 Crossref Scopus (211) PubMed Google Scholar ).
We first determined whether periLC VGLUT2 neurons altered the fundamental lick frequency, which is controlled by hindbrain central pattern generators ( Wiesenfeld et al., 1977 46. Wiesenfeld, Z. ∙ Halpern, B.P. ∙ Tapper, D.N. Licking behavior: evidence of hypoglossal oscillator Science. 1977; 196 :1122-1124 Crossref Scopus (72) PubMed Google Scholar ). The fundamental lick frequency was derived from the first peak (mu1) and the second peak (mu2) of the inter-lick-interval (ILI) histogram and showed no difference between perturbation blocks and no-laser blocks for either contingent or noncontingent inhibition with either Ensure or water consumption ( Figure S7 A). This finding is consistent with expectations from our imaging results, which showed that periLC VGLUT2 neurons were not directly related to the motor control of licking ( Figures 3 P, 3Q, and S3 Q–S3S).
Next, we determined the effect of periLC VGLUT2 neuron photoinhibition on the number and duration of feeding bouts. A feeding bout was defined by an ILI threshold that was derived from the animal’s time within the food zone (FZ) during consumption ( Figures S7 B and S7C; see STAR Methods ). The duration of feeding bouts was significantly increased for photoinhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons that was contingent on consumption but was not significantly increased for noncontingent inhibition or sham conditions ( Figure 7 A) or for EYFP control mice ( Figure S7 D). Similarly, water consumption bouts were prolonged only with contingent photoinhibition ( Figures 7 D and S7 E).
We found that the cumulative distribution of bout duration for both feeding and drinking was best fit by an exponential distribution (see STAR Methods ), indicating that maintaining a consumption state could be described by a Markov process with a fixed transition probability per unit time. The time constant of this exponential was approximately twice as long for contingent photoinhibition than the no-laser blocks ( Figures 7 B and 7E; Table S2 ). The inverse of this time constant is the probability of leaving (P leave ) the consummatory state. The probability of staying in the consummatory state (P stay = 1 − P leave ) was increased in ArchT mice due to periLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition from 91.6%→95.5% per second (food) and 88.7%→92.4% per second (water) but not in EYFP mice (see Table S2 ). These probability shifts were associated with a large cumulative effect on consummatory bout duration ( Figure S7 F) and were statistically significant (p < 0.001) ( Figures S7 G).
The number of consumption bouts represents state transitions from the satiety to the preparatory phase of motivated behavior that brings the animal to the source of food or water. In contrast to the lengthening of feeding and drinking bout duration, the number of bouts was either unchanged (food) or decreased (water) by contingent, noncontingent, and sham photoinhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons ( Figures 7 C and 7F). Moreover, the noncontingent photoinhibition trials further ruled out an alternative role of the inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neuron subpopulation in controlling the transition from satiety→preparatory phase. This would be predicted to increase the number of food ingestion bouts in noncontingent photoinhibition experiments relative to the no-laser blocks, which was not observed.
When a shorter bout threshold (1 s) was used for both feeding and drinking, we also found a significant increase in bout duration for ArchT mice only during contingent photoinhibition, without a corresponding increase in bout number ( Figures S7 H–S7M).
Next, we examined the timescale after cessation of photoinhibition that would continue to influence consumption by analyzing feeding bouts that straddled the contingent photostimulation and no-laser blocks. Consummatory bout duration was significantly longer in the first 15 s of the no-laser blocks following termination of lick-triggered photoinhibition blocks than in the last 15 s of the same blocks ( Figure 7 G), which was not observed for noncontingent or sham paradigms ( Figure S7 N). This difference was not statistically significant with a longer time window (30 s). Thus, the effect of periLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition on consumption extinguishes 15–30 s after cessation of photoinhibition. Consistent with this finding, we did not find a significant difference for the lick-contingent paradigm for which we analyzed consumption duration or initiation of consumption bouts from the first and second half of the sessions ( Figures 7 H and 7I) or from two consecutive sessions ( Figures S7 O and S7P). Thus, we did not detect long-term learning effects when alternating contingent and no-laser blocks, which limits the role of periLC VGLUT2 neurons to a short-term adaptive role associated with palatability during ingestion.
To further evaluate the causal relationship of periLC VGLUT2 neurons to palatability-guided consumption, we performed closed-loop optogenetic inhibition in mice expressing ArchT or EYFP during two bottle preference tests. In the first experiment, a nonnutritive sweetener solution (sucralose, 0.5 mM) was available simultaneously from two bottles ( Figure 7 J). Lick-triggered photoinhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons led to preferential consumption, which was reversible to the other bottle after switching the paired inhibition site in a subsequent session. There was no significant preference for either bottle in an extinction test with no photoinhibition in ArchT mice, nor in EYFP mice during lick-contingent laser stimulation ( Figures 7 K and 7L).
Next, we examined whether consumption preference could be shifted to a low sucralose concentration (0.25 mM) paired with lick-contingent periLC VGLUT2 neuron photoinhibition in the presence of a higher sucralose concentration (0.5 mM) ( Figure 7 M). A significant increase of preference index for the lower concentration sucralose was induced in ArchT but not EYFP mice, and this preference reversed to the higher sucralose concentration for ArchT mice in a photoinhibition extinction session ( Figure 7 N). Thus, lick-contingent photoinhibition of periLC VGLUT2 neurons reversibly upshifts consummatory preferences, further confirming the role for promoting palatability-guided consumption.

Section: Discussion

Here, we report that periLC VGLUT2 neurons selectively control the duration of the consummatory phase of ingestive behaviors by conveying palatability information. PeriLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition response magnitude is scaled by palatability and homeostatic need state. Correspondingly, periLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition increases food and water consumption and shifts taste preference. Inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neurons play a convergent role in hunger and thirst by increasing the probability of staying in a consumption state. This is analogous to the experience of ingesting tasty food or beverages that compels further consumption. These properties reveal a common substrate for hunger and thirst that controls consumption by altering palatability.
Our data indicate that periLC VGLUT2 neurons do not directly control the specific motor actions of consumption, for example periLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition does not elicit fictive ingestive behaviors or alter the fundamental lick frequency. Instead, periLC VGLUT2 neurons have a modulatory role, primarily during the consummatory phase of behavior, for which inhibition increases the probability of maintaining consumption ( Figure 7 O), leading to longer consumption bouts. PeriLC VGLUT2 neuron response magnitude increases with hunger, thirst, and palatability, each of which lengthens consummatory bouts. In satiety, periLC VGLUT2 neurons show a reduced response magnitude, which reduces the probability of maintaining consumption. This complements PBN CGRP neurons, in which the activity during nonconsummatory periods progressively increases and mediates the long-term satiety that accumulates over the course of a meal ( Campos et al., 2016 11. Campos, C.A. ∙ Bowen, A.J. ∙ Schwartz, M.W. ... Parabrachial CGRP Neurons Control Meal Termination Cell Metab. 2016; 23 :811-820 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (175) PubMed Google Scholar , 2018 12. Campos, C.A. ∙ Bowen, A.J. ∙ Roman, C.W. ... Encoding of danger by parabrachial CGRP neurons Nature. 2018; 555 :617-622 Crossref Scopus (194) PubMed Google Scholar ).
Palatability is a property that reflects the hedonic value of food, and it feeds back onto and promotes additional consummatory behavior. The complementary properties of consumption-inhibited periLC VGLUT2 neurons and the rewarding consequence of their inhibition to increase consumption are part of a double-negative feedback relationship, which is functionally analogous to positive feedback. The double-negative feedback relationship between the inhibited subpopulation of periLC VGLUT2 neurons and consumption behavior can account for prolongation of food and water consumption. This mechanism is constrained by the fact that neuron firing rates cannot fall below zero. Therefore, although it has characteristics similar to positive feedback, it is self-limiting, which means that palatability is not able to “lock” an animal into a consummatory state. This is a neural algorithm for controlling consumption duration whereby palatable foods more strongly inhibit periLC VGLUT2 neurons and more reliably sustain bout duration, thus increasing intake. The cellular and circuit implementation of hunger- and thirst-scaled dynamic responses remain to be determined.
The effect of periLC VGLUT2 neuron inhibition on prolonging consumption is short lived (~15 s), which is likely important so that the palatability experienced for one food is not transferred to a subsequently ingested food. Notably, the neuronal dynamics of periLC VGLUT2 neurons do not indicate a role in terminating food ingestion ( Figure S3 K). The self-sustaining feedback cycle is terminated by environmental distractors (e.g., NAc D1R neurons) ( O’Connor et al., 2015 34. O’Connor, E.C. ∙ Kremer, Y. ∙ Lefort, S. ... Accumbal D1R Neurons Projecting to Lateral Hypothalamus Authorize Feeding Neuron. 2015; 88 :553-564 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (186) PubMed Google Scholar ) or respiration ( McElvain et al., 2018 33. McElvain, L.E. ∙ Friedman, B. ∙ Karten, H.J. ... Circuits in the rodent brainstem that control whisking in concert with other orofacial motor actions Neuroscience. 2018; 368 :152-170 Crossref Scopus (41) PubMed Google Scholar ), and eventually meal-satiety circuits (e.g., PBN CGRP neurons) ( Campos et al., 2016 11. Campos, C.A. ∙ Bowen, A.J. ∙ Schwartz, M.W. ... Parabrachial CGRP Neurons Control Meal Termination Cell Metab. 2016; 23 :811-820 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (175) PubMed Google Scholar , 2018 12. Campos, C.A. ∙ Bowen, A.J. ∙ Roman, C.W. ... Encoding of danger by parabrachial CGRP neurons Nature. 2018; 555 :617-622 Crossref Scopus (194) PubMed Google Scholar ).
Double-negative feedback control over ingestion is related to hedonic overeating, sometimes called the “salted-nut phenomenon” (Hebb, 2002 22. Hebb, D.O. The Organization of Behavior Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002 Google Scholar ), for which ingestion is sustained by a palatable taste regardless of the energetic state. Nevertheless, hunger is also well established to shift palatability, which is called alliesthesia ( Cabanac, 1971 9. Cabanac, M. Physiological role of pleasure Science. 1971; 173 :1103-1107 Crossref Scopus (1028) PubMed Google Scholar ). This effect is also familiar from subjective experience, as famously mentioned in Don Quixote : “The best sauce in the world is hunger…” ( de Cervantes, 1615/2015 19. de Cervantes, M. (1615/2015). Don Quixote ( Digireads.com ). Google Scholar ).
Here, we focused on the portion of the periLC surrounding and intermingled with the anterior portion of the LC in the dorsolateral PCG (see STAR Methods ). This population of VGLUT2-expressing neurons includes some preLC PDYN neurons, a subpopulation reported to promote salt seeking ( Lee et al., 2019 27. Lee, S. ∙ Augustine, V. ∙ Zhao, Y. ... Chemosensory modulation of neural circuits for sodium appetite Nature. 2019; 568 :93-97 Crossref Scopus (47) PubMed Google Scholar ). In addition, activation of PVH PDYN neuron projections to the periLC has been shown to reduce food intake, which provides one functionally identified route to this brain area modulation by energy homeostasis circuits, and inhibition of neurons in the LC and periLC region without regard to cell type increases food intake ( Li et al., 2019 29. Li, M.M. ∙ Madara, J.C. ∙ Steger, J.S. ... The Paraventricular Hypothalamus Regulates Satiety and Prevents Obesity via Two Genetically Distinct Circuits Neuron. 2019; 102 :653-667.e6 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (117) PubMed Google Scholar ). Our experiments spatially constrain the area that is associated with increased food and water ingestion because inhibition of VGLUT2 neurons around the caudal portion of the LC suppresses food intake. Notably, the distribution of preLC PDYN neurons extends to these caudal portions of the LC (Allen Brain Atlas), indicating the potential for further subdivision in functional specializations within the areas surrounding the LC.
Palatable food and beverage ingestion are regulated differently from homeostatic needs ( Saper et al., 2002 37. Saper, C.B. ∙ Chou, T.C. ∙ Elmquist, J.K. The need to feed: homeostatic and hedonic control of eating Neuron. 2002; 36 :199-211 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (947) PubMed Google Scholar ), but they do not involve entirely separate circuits. High-palatability food and beverages lead to hedonic overconsumption, which is a major factor contributing to obesity. Our findings emphasize the importance of periLC VGLUT2 neurons for modulating palatability and enhancing both food and water consumption. Further investigation of periLC VGLUT2 neurons may offer new insights for controlling hedonic feeding and its relationship to overeating behaviors.

Section: STAR★Methods

REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies Anti-CFOS Cell signaling Cat# 2250; RRID: AB_2247211 Anti-AGRP Neuromics Cat# GT15023; RRID: AB_2687600 Anti-GFP Invitrogen Cat# A-11122; RRID: AB_221569 Anti-TH Millipore Cat# AB152; RRID: AB_390204 In situ Probes Mm-Slc17a6 ACDbio Cat# 319171-C2 Mm-Slc32a1 ACDbio Cat# 319191-C3 tdTomato ACDbio Cat# 317041-C2 Virus HSV-hEf1α-FLEX-rev-tdTomato Caltech N/A rAAV2/1-Syn-FLEX-rev-GCaMP6f Janelia N/A rAAV2/2-Ef1α-FLEX-rev-ChR2-EYFP UNC Vector Core N/A rAAV2/1-Ef1α-FLEX-rev-ChR2-EYFP UNC Vector Core N/A rAAV2/2-Syn-FLEX-rev-PSAM4-GlyR Janelia Vector Core N/A rAAV2/2-CAG-FLEX-rev-ArchT-EYFP UNC Vector Core N/A rAAV2/2-CAG-FLEX-rev-ArchT-tdTomato UNC Vector Core N/A rAAV2/5-Ef1a-DIO-EYFP UPenn Vector Core N/A rAAV(DJ) CMV-DIO-eGFP-2A-TeNT Stanford Vector Core N/A Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins Isoflurane VEDCO ISOSOL Ketoprofen Zoetis KETOFEN Buprenorphine Reckitt Benckiser Buprenex injection Silicone gel DOW DOWSIL 3-4680 Dental cement Dentsply Caulk Self-adhesive resin cement Silicone Elastomer Word Precision Instruments Kwik-Sil Hardset mounting medium Vectashield H-140, DAPI containing UV glue Norland optical adhesive Cat# NOA-81 uPSEM 792 hydrochloride TOCRIS Cat# 6865 Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains Agrp-IRES-Cre mice Jackson lab Stock 021899 Nos1-IRES-Cre mice Jackson lab Stock 017526 Vglut2-(Slc17a6)-IRES-Cre mice Jackson lab Stock 028863 Gad2-IRES-Cre mice Jackson lab Stock 010802 Sim1-Cre mice Jackson lab Stock 006451 Software and Algorithms MATLAB Mathworks https://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html Jupyter Jupyter https://jupyter.org/ Ilastik Ilastik https://www.ilastik.org/ ANTs registration toolkit Avants et al., 2011 4. Avants, B.B. ∙ Tustison, N.J. ∙ Song, G. ... A reproducible evaluation of ANTs similarity metric performance in brain image registration Neuroimage. 2011; 54 :2033-2044 Crossref Scopus (2970) PubMed Google Scholar https://github.com/ANTsX/ANTs Fiji ImageJ https://imagej.net/Fiji Bigwarp Bogovic et al., 2016 8. Bogovic, J.A. ∙ Hanslovsky, P. ∙ Wong, A. ... Robust registration of calcium images by learned contrast synthesis 2016 IEEE 13th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) IEEE, 2016; 1123-1126 Crossref Scopus (93) Google Scholar https://github.com/saalfeldlab/bigwarp Semi-automatic slice-to-volume Brain Aligner (SBA) This paper https://github.com/gnayuy/braincellcount Inscopix nVista HD Inscopix https://support.inscopix.com/software iSpy iSpy N/A NoRMCorre Pnevmatikakis and Giovannucci, 2017 36. Pnevmatikakis, E.A. ∙ Giovannucci, A. NoRMCorre: An online algorithm for piecewise rigid motion correction of calcium imaging data J. Neurosci. Methods. 2017; 291 :83-94 Crossref Scopus (432) PubMed Google Scholar https://github.com/flatironinstitute/NoRMCorre CNMF-E Zhou et al., 2018 49. Zhou, P. ∙ Resendez, S.L. ∙ Rodriguez-Romaguera, J. ... Efficient and accurate extraction of in vivo calcium signals from microendoscopic video data eLife. 2018; 7 :e28728 Crossref Scopus (335) PubMed Google Scholar https://github.com/zhoupc/CNMF_E Graphic State Coulbourn Instruments N/A LabVIEW National Instruments N/A Cheetah Neuralynx N/A SigmaPlot Systat software https://systatsoftware.com/products/sigmaplot/ Arduino Arduino https://www.arduino.cc/en/main/software Other GRIN lens Inscopix 6.1 mm, diameter: 500 μm Polyimide tubes for GRIN lens Vention Diameter: 100 μm Tungsten wires A-M systems 715000 Miniature microscope Inscopix nVista HD and HD v2 Motorized micromanipulator MPI SU-MPC385 Top-mounted camera Basler acA640-120um - Basler ace (106223) Food pellet dispenser Coulbourn Instruments Grain feeder Behavior chamber Coulbourn Instruments N/A Grain pellets TestDiet 20 mg Sugar pellets TestDiet 20 mg Ensure Abbott Vanilla flavor Fiber launch Thorlabs PAF-X-Z-A TissueFaxs 200 (slide scanner) Tissuegnostics https://www.tissuegnostics.com/ Pannoramic 250 Flash III (slide scanner) Pannoramic N/A Open table in a new tab
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Dr. Scott M. Sternson ( sternsons@janelia.hhmi.org ).
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
The data and custom code that support the findings from this study are available from the Lead Contact upon request. Code used in this paper for 2D registration of the brain slice images from the whole brain are available at https://github.com/gnayuy/braincellcount .
Experimental protocols were conducted according to U.S. National Institutes of Health guidelines for animal research and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and Institutional Biosafety Committee at Janelia Research Campus. Animals were housed on a 12-h light (06:00)/dark (18:00) cycle (except for imaging and closed-looped perturbation experiments, which were housed with reverse light cycle) with ad libitum access to water and mouse chow (PicoLab Rodent Diet 20, 5053 tablets, TestDiet). Both adult (age 8-24 weeks) male and female mice were used in similar numbers from the following Cre recombinase-expressing mouse lines: Agrp-IRES-Cre (Jackson lab stock 012899), Nos1-IRES-Cre (Jackson lab stock 017526), Vglut2-(Slc17a6)-IRES-Cre (Jackson lab stock 028863), Gad2-IRES-Cre (Jackson lab stock 010802), and Sim1-Cre (Jackson lab stock 006451). Mice used in chemogenetic experiments (PSAM 4 -GlyR mice and the corresponding EYFP control mice) were group housed. Mice used in optogenetic perturbation or imaging experiments were singly housed.
Experimental Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice used in chemogenetic neuromodulation for grain pellet consumption were also used for sucrose pellet consumption and water consumption ( Figures 2 C, 2D, and S2 D). The contingent, noncontingent, and sham optogenetic perturbations were performed with the same mice ( Figures 6 , 7 , S6 E–S6J, and S7 ). The two palatability-shift consumption preference experiments in Figures 7 J–7N were performed with the same groups of mice. The same group of mice reported in Figures S6 C and S6D were tested for both place preference and contingent or non-contingent optogenetic perturbation paradigms for diluted Ensure consumption. Mice used for calcium imaging were tested in multiple different consumption experiments reported in Figures 3 , 4 , and 5 .
The periLC is defined as the region within and surrounding the LC in the portion of the dorsolateral PCG that is flanked laterally by the MEV, medially by the LDT, and dorsally by the fourth ventricle ( Figure S1 H). It also includes a subdomain called the pre-locus coeruleus (preLC), which is defined as rostral to the LC, receiving dense axon input from HSD2 neurons from the nucleus of the solitary tract, and including neurons activated by salt deficit ( Geerling and Loewy, 2006 20. Geerling, J.C. ∙ Loewy, A.D. Aldosterone-sensitive neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract: efferent projections J. Comp. Neurol. 2006; 497 :223-250 Crossref Scopus (91) PubMed Google Scholar , 2007 21. Geerling, J.C. ∙ Loewy, A.D. Sodium deprivation and salt intake activate separate neuronal subpopulations in the nucleus of the solitary tract and the parabrachial complex J. Comp. Neurol. 2007; 504 :379-403 Crossref Scopus (64) PubMed Google Scholar ; Shin et al., 2011 38. Shin, J.W. ∙ Geerling, J.C. ∙ Stein, M.K. ... FoxP2 brainstem neurons project to sodium appetite regulatory sites J. Chem. Neuroanat. 2011; 42 :1-23 Crossref Scopus (39) PubMed Google Scholar ). We used the term periLC because it was more general, not being defined as specifically associated with salt deficit ( Geerling and Loewy, 2006 20. Geerling, J.C. ∙ Loewy, A.D. Aldosterone-sensitive neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract: efferent projections J. Comp. Neurol. 2006; 497 :223-250 Crossref Scopus (91) PubMed Google Scholar , 2007 21. Geerling, J.C. ∙ Loewy, A.D. Sodium deprivation and salt intake activate separate neuronal subpopulations in the nucleus of the solitary tract and the parabrachial complex J. Comp. Neurol. 2007; 504 :379-403 Crossref Scopus (64) PubMed Google Scholar ; Shin et al., 2011 38. Shin, J.W. ∙ Geerling, J.C. ∙ Stein, M.K. ... FoxP2 brainstem neurons project to sodium appetite regulatory sites J. Chem. Neuroanat. 2011; 42 :1-23 Crossref Scopus (39) PubMed Google Scholar ). Our study focused on the anterior periLC, and we also included glutamatergic (non-noradrenergic) anterior LC neurons in our definition of this area.
Definitions for brain region abbreviations: OLF olfactory area; HPF hippocampus formation; CTXsp cortical subplate; CNU cerebral nuclei (striatum and pallidum); TH thalamus; HY hypothalamus; MB midbrain; HB hindbrain; PT paratenial nucleus; LGv ventral lateral geniculate; PVH paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus; LHA lateral hypothalamic area; PSTN parasubthalamic nucleus; TU tuberal nucleus; PAG periaqueduetal gray; MEV midbrain trigeminal nucleus; P pons; B Barrington’s nucleus; PCG pontine central gray; LC locus coeruleus; LDT laterodorsal tegmental nucleus; SLD sublaterodorsal nucleus; scp superior cerebellar peduncles; DTN dorsal tegmental nucleus; PBN parabrachial nucleus; CB cerebellum.
Viruses with the following tilters and volumes were injected: HSV- hEf1α -FLEX- rev -tdTomato (Caltech, 100 nL in SFO or 200 nL in ARC), rAAV2/1- Syn -FLEX- rev -GCaMP6f (2.0e12 GC/mL, Janelia, 200 nL in periLC), rAAV2/2- Ef1α -FLEX- rev -ChR2-EYFP (2.6e12 GC/mL, UNC, 100 nL in SFO or 140 nL in periLC), rAAV2/1- Ef1α -FLEX- rev -ChR2-EYFP (6e12 GC/mL, UNC, 500 nL in ARC, 200nl in PVH), rAAV2/1- Syn -FLEX- rev -PSAM4-GlyR (2e12 GC/ml, Janelia, 70 nL in periLC), rAAV2/2-CAG-FLEX- rev -ArchT-EYFP (2e12 GC/mL, UNC, 140 nL in periLC), rAAV2/2-CAG-FLEX- rev -ArchT-tdTomato (2.3e12 GC/ml, UNC, 70 nL in periLC), rAAV2/5- Ef1a -DIO-EYFP (5e12 GC/mL, UPenn, 500 nL in ARC, 100 nL in SFO, 140 nL in periLC), rAAV(DJ) CMV -DIO-eGFP-2A-TeNT (TeNT: tetanus toxin Stanford, 80 nL in periLC).
For the perturbation experiments, the virus injection and optic fiber implantation were carried out as described previously ( Betley et al., 2013 6. Betley, J.N. ∙ Cao, Z.F. ∙ Ritola, K.D. ... Parallel, redundant circuit organization for homeostatic control of feeding behavior Cell. 2013; 155 :1337-1350 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (440) PubMed Google Scholar ). Briefly, virus was injected at two depths in the periLC: A/P lambda −23% distance between bregma and lambda (−0.87 mm to −1 mm), M/L ± 0.8 mm, dorsal surface −2.7 mm/-2.8 mm; ARC: A/P -bregma −1.3 mm, M/L +0.3 mm, dorsal surface −5.95 mm/ −5.85 mm; SFO: A/P bregma −0.55 mm, M/L +0.6 mm, angle 12 degree, dorsal surface −2.35 mm/-2.45 mm; PVH: bregma −0.7 mm, M/L ± 0.15 mm, dorsal surface −4.6 mm. Optical fibers were implanted 200 μm dorsal to the virus injection sites bilaterally (DFC_200/230-0.48_3.2mm_DF1.6-FLT, Doric) in periLC. A single fiber was implanted for ARC or SFO photostimulation.
Cre-dependent herpes simplex virus (HSV) was injected at two depths into the ARC in Agrp-IRES-Cre or SFO in Nos1-IRES-Cre mice in an animal biosafety level 2 (ABSL-2) room using the coordinates: ARC: A/P bregma −1.3 mm, M/L +0.3 mm, dorsal surface −5.95 mm/ −5.85 mm; SFO: A/P −0.55 mm, M/L +0.6 mm, angle 12 degree, dorsal surface −2.35mm/ −2.45 mm.
HSV infection leads to adverse events and mice had limited and variable survival times, so mice were closely monitored post-injection for dehydration, lack of responsiveness, hunched posture, or pain. If an animal appeared to be dehydrated, saline with 5% dextrose was administered (1 to 3 mL, SC). Pain assessment was performed if there were signs of unresponsiveness, hunched posture, or pain. If the pain assessment score reached 4, mice were sacrificed in an ABSL-2 room by transcardial perfusion followed by histology and imaging (procedure below).
The GRIN lenses were modified for imaging in the periLC. Three or four equally spaced polyimide tubes (diameter: 100 μm, length: 4 mm, Vention) were attached to the GRIN lens (length: 6.1 mm, diameter: 500 μm, Inscopix) using UV glue (Norland optical adhesive). The ends of the polyimide tubes were flush with the bottom of the GRIN lens. The modified GRIN lens was put in a 50-degree oven overnight to ensure that the polyimide tubes were firmly adherent. Tungsten wires (diameter: 50 μm, A-M Systems) were prepared with lengths that were of 400 - 600 μm longer than the polyimide tubes ( Figure S3 A and S3B). During the surgery, the GRIN lens was targeted sterotactically (lambda −23% distance between bregma and lambda, M/L +0.8 mm, dorsal surface −2.7 mm), but the GRIN lens position was also adjusted during surgery while monitoring the fluorescence signal from the miniature microscope (nVista HD and HD v2, Inscopix). The confluence of the sagittal sinus and the transverse sinus was above the periLC, and it was fatal if it was damaged. To displace this confluence of blood vessels, the modified GRIN lens was lowered down by motorized micromanipulator (SU-MPC385, MPI) for 500 μm at a position 100-200 μm posterior to the periLC to avoid the confluence. Then the GRIN lens was slowly moved anteriorly by 100-200 μm (60 μm/min), which mechanically pushed the transverse sinus forward without breaking it. The GRIN lens was held in place (10 min) for the tissue to stabilize, after which the GRIN lens was slowly lowered (0.13 mm/min) to the targeted depth (typically an additional 2.2 mm). The slow rate of decent was used to minimize damage to the confluence. At the targeted depth, we made small adjustments (50-200 μm) to GRIN lens position in order to optimize the density of transduced neurons in the field of view (FOV) such that we could identify greater than 10 well-resolved cell bodies (typically more). The tissue under the GRIN lens was then stabilized by the prepared tungsten wires (length: 4.4 - 4.6 mm) ( Figure S3 A). Specifically, the tungsten wires were inserted through the polyimide tubes by forceps until the ends were flush with the top of the tubes. This ensured that the distal ends of tungsten wires extended 400-600 μm beyond the GRIN lens into the underlying tissue, thus stabilizing the brain ( Figure 3 B). To fix the positions of the tungsten wires, UV glue was applied to the space between the tungsten wires and the openings of the polyimide tubes that were above the skull surface. Care was taken to shield the subject’s eyes with metal foil. Once the tissue was stabilized, the following procedures were performed as previously described ( Betley et al., 2015 7. Betley, J.N. ∙ Xu, S. ∙ Cao, Z.F.H. ... Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal Nature. 2015; 521 :180-185 Crossref Scopus (466) PubMed Google Scholar ). Briefly, silicone gel (DOWSIL) was applied to the exposed brain surface. After 15 min, the modified GRIN lens was fixed with white dental cement (Dentsply Caulk). A head bar was added anterior to the GRIN lens with black dental cement (Lang Dental Manufacturing), which also covered the white dental cement to avoid autofluorescence. A silicone adhesive (Kwik-Sil, World Precision Instruments) was applied above the parafilm covering the lens. The field of view (FOV) was checked one month after surgery. Once the FOV was clear and contained at least 20 cells (although typically more), the baseplate was mounted for imaging experiments.
For in vivo ChR2 photostimulation experiments, the pulse protocol was: 10 ms pulses, 20 pulses for 1 s, repeated every 4 s. 473 nm light output at the fiber tip was within 10 – 15 mW.
For closed-loop place preference in ArchT mice, 532 nm light was triggered on at the combined power of 7-14 mW (bilateral) at the fiber tip when mice entered the paired inhibition chamber. For in vivo nose poke and closed-loop consumption experiments, 532 nm light was triggered on for 10 s upon active nose poke or lick respectively at the combined power of 10 – 14 mW (bilateral) at the fiber tip.
Mice with implanted optic fiber and ChR2 expression in ARC or SFO were prepared at least two weeks before the experiments. Agrp-IRES-Cre mice were evaluated for evoked feeding while Nos1-IRES-Cre mice were tested for evoked dinking. We determined the behavioral effect of photostimulation in the light period (1 h for feeding, 0.5 h for drinking) when mice usually eat or drink little. To screen for mice with correct viral targeting and fiber placement, mice that showed evoked food consumption (> 0.6 g within 1 h) or water consumption (> 200 licks within 0.5 h) during photostimulation were selected for the subsequent Fos-mapping experiment.
The selected mice were kept overnight in the same chamber used for optical stimulation with food and water available. The optic fiber was tethered to the mouse at least 3 h before photostimulation to minimize Fos expression associated with manual handling. The food port and water port were disabled, and access was prevented from the experiment room to avoid disturbances (mice did not eat or drink during or after photostimulation for the Fos-mapping experiments). Photostimulation was delivered for 10 or 20 min by remote control (9:00 AM) and mice were sacrificed by transcardial perfusion 1.5 h post-stimulation. EYFP control mice went through the same habituation and photostimulation process as ChR2-expressing mice.
For histology, mice were transcardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer fixative (PFA, pH 7.4). Tissues were post-fixed (3–4 h) and washed overnight in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4). Brain slices were sectioned by vibratome (50 μm, Leica, vt1200s).
For the whole brain mapping, the entire brain was sectioned and slices (1 in every 4) were selected for subsequent processing. Sections from the Fos-mapping groups were incubated (4°C, 48 h) with Fos primary antibodies diluted in PBS supplemented with BSA (1%) and Triton X-100 (0.1%). Brain slices from Nos1-IRES-Cre mice injected with virus rAAV2/2- Ef1α -FLEX- rev -ChR2-EYFP in SFO were incubated for both AGRP and GFP primary antibodies to search for AGRP and SFO NOS1 axon projection regions. For sections with ChR2-EYFP expression in PVH from Sim1-IRES-Cre mice, they were immunostained to amplify the EYFP signals in the projection sites. Selected sections were mounted onto microscope slides with hardset mounting medium (DAPI containing, Vectashield, H-1400). Brain sections were automatically imaged using slide scanner microscopes (Panoramic 250 or TissueFaxs 200).
Primary antibodies used in this study were anti-CFOS (1:1000, Cell signaling, lot-2250), anti-AGRP (1:5000, Neuromics, GT15023), anti-GFP (1:1000, Invitrogen, A-11122), anti-TH (1:1000, Millipore, AB152). Brain sections were incubated with primary antibody (4°C) overnight for all antibodies except anti-Fos. Minimally cross-reactive fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:500, Jackson lab) was used at room temperature (2 h). For in situ hybridization, RNase-free solutions were used. The protocol was from RNAscope FISH protocol in ACDbio. In situ probes used in this study: Mm-Slc17a6 (ACDbio, Lot-319171-C2), Mm Slc32a1 (ACDbio, Lot-319191-C3), tdTomato (ACDbio, Lot-317041-C2). For sections containing both immunostaining and in situ hybridization, in situ hybridization was performed first.
Single neuron reconstruction data were downloaded from http://ml-neuronbrowser.janelia.org/ . Analysis and visualization of these data used the pipeline from https://github.com/MouseLightProject/ ( Winnubst et al., 2019 47. Winnubst, J. ∙ Bas, E. ∙ Ferreira, T.A. ... Reconstruction of 1,000 Projection Neurons Reveals New Cell Types and Organization of Long-Range Connectivity in the Mouse Brain Cell. 2019; 179 :268-281.e13 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (260) PubMed Google Scholar ). Briefly, neurons with axon ends in PCG were selected and imported through custom MATLAB script together with the mask of brain regions (PCG, LDT, LC, B, SLD and MEV). Visualization was performed in Blender (2.8). Neurons shown in Figures 1 H–1K are AA0128 ( Figure 1 H), AA0081 ( Figure 1 I), AA0167 ( Figure 1 J) as well as AA0761, AA0486, AA0779, AA0204, AA0177 and AA0537 ( Figure 1 K).
Mice used in the imaging experiment were kept on a reversed light cycle (12-h light (21:00) / dark (9:00)) starting at least one week before the experiment and were behaviorally tested during the dark phase. Mice with baseplate and attached miniature microscope (nVista 2.0, Inscopix) were acclimated to the imaging behavior chamber (29 cm × 29 cm) at least two days before the imaging sessions. Calcium imaging was performed at 10 Hz frame rate and with LED power as 10%–35%. These parameters were kept the same for each mouse across all sessions. Animal behavior was recorded by a top-mounted camera (30 Hz, Basler). The synchronization signal between the miniature microscope, top-mounted camera, and behavior-related events (cue, lick and pump events) was recorded either by a signal acquisition system (Neuralynx) or by a custom Arduino board.
Grain food pellets (identical to those in the homecage), false food (wood block with similar color and shape as grain pellets), or another mouse (opposite sex) were placed into the chamber 60 - 90 s after onset of imaging sessions in food deprived mice. These items were removed after approximately 1 min. Ghrelin (1 μg/g) or saline (the same volume as ghrelin) were injected (i.p.) in ad libitum fed mice. Neuron dynamics were recorded over multiple imaging trials (around 3 min) with 10-min inter-trial intervals.
For conditioned consumption of liquids (Ensure, liquid food, water), a 200 ms auditory cue (12 kHz) was randomly presented in every 30-40 s after onset of the imaging sessions. The lickometer spout was extended by stepmotor to the food port 800 ms after the auditory cue, which is a time delay that was used previously for identifying cue-dependent modulation of AGRP neurons ( Betley et al., 2015 7. Betley, J.N. ∙ Xu, S. ∙ Cao, Z.F.H. ... Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal Nature. 2015; 521 :180-185 Crossref Scopus (466) PubMed Google Scholar ). Once a lick was detected by the capacitive sensor attached to the lickometer spout, a quantity (3 μL) of liquid food, Ensure. water, or taste solutions was pushed out by a pump that held the liquid-containing syringe ( Figure 3 C). The spout was withdrawn 5 s after extension unless stated otherwise.
For the liquid food, water, or tastant consumption trials, mice went through 24 h food deprivation or water restriction before the imaging sessions ( Figures 3 E and 3F). For the trials with different consumption times, the lickometer spout was extended and withdrawn automatically using the stepmotor ( Figures 3 J and 3K), and every three licks triggered delivery of 3 uL of food within the access time.
For the cell-matched comparison of neurons to Ensure in hunger and water in thirst ( Figure S3 I), FD mice first performed conditioned Ensure consumption, followed by free-access consumption of low hydration grain pellets (1 h) to make them thirsty, and then they performed cue-conditioned water consumption trials.
When comparing the cell-matched responses in mice transitioned from hunger→satiety or thirst→satiety, conditioned consumption trials were interleaved with self-paced consumption trial to allow FD or WD mice to reach a satiated state ( Figures 4 K–4P, see below). We considered mice to be in a satiety state when mice showed a substantial number of misses during the conditioned consumption trials and also showed consistently low bout duration in self-paced consumption trials ( Figure S3 L).
When comparing the ensemble activity changes between energy balance states ( Figures S4 K and S4L), two-successive-day imaging experiments were performed with the first day as mice under ad libitum fed and the second after 24 h food deprivation ( Figures S4 K and S4L).
Mice under FD had free access to Ensure via the lickometer spout for 2-5 min in each self-paced consumption trial. These trials were interleaved with multiple cue-conditioned consumption trials in which mice consumed a small volume (3 μL) of Ensure, as described above ( Figures 3 L–3O). To classify neurons as significantly activated or significantly inhibited, we used the Wilcoxon signed-rank test for the cue-conditioned trials. Each self-paced consumption trial usually contained multiple consumption bouts (defined for this analysis as continuous licking with an inter-lick-interval less than 1 s). The neuronal dynamics of periLC VGLUT2 neurons were then analyzed for their relationship to bout duration.
For consumption of different tastes, three small lickometer spouts (outer diameter: 1.05 mm; inner diameter: 0.5 mm) soldered together replaced the single lickometer spout in Figure 3 C. These three lickometer spouts were separately connected to syringes loaded with either water or one of the two different tastes, which were independently controlled by three pumps. Consumption of two different tastes was examined within each session. Between trials with different tastes, water flushed the lickometer spout-tips (at least 100 μL) to prevent tastant contamination. Each continuous imaging trial was around 5 min and usually contained 3 to 5 cue-conditioned consumption trials. Mice in this study went through 8-20 imaging trials in one session (day) depending on their need state.
Mice were kept on water restriction for the taste consumption trials with daily health monitoring and body weight assessments. Only 3 uL of tastants were given in each cue-conditioned trial for WR mice to guarantee consistent consumption of the volume across tastants. During water restriction, mice received 1 mL water daily, including the solutions received in the imaging sessions and water supplied afterward in the homecage. Restriction was eased if mice fell below 70% of their initial ad libitum fed body weight or failed quantitative health assessment.
Behavioral experiments involving neuron perturbations were performed in sound attenuating chambers.
Mice had ad libitum access to food and water, and test sessions were performed in the light period for food and water intake experiments. For food intake experiments, mice with periLC VGLUT2 neurons expressing PSAM 4 -GlyR-IRES-EGFP or EYFP control mice were acclimatized (12 h) to behavior cages equipped with an automated food pellet dispenser (Coulbourn Instruments). Saline, uPSEM 792 (1 mg/kg in saline), uPSEM 792 (3 mg/kg), and saline were injected (i.p.) over the next four consecutive days. Food and water consumption (2 h) were monitored using Graphic State (Coulbourn Instruments). Standard grain and sugar pellets (20 mg, TestDiet) were used as the food sources. Sugar pellets were much harder than grain, which may account for less consumption than grain pellets in this study.
Ad libitum fed mice expressing ChR2 in periLC VGLUT2 neurons had at least two-day habituation in that chamber to get used to palatable liquid food (Ensure, Abbott) consumption. A customized behavior chamber (29 cm × 29 cm) with a slot for a lickometer spout to be automatically extended by stepmotor was used for the perturbation assay. Ensure contained in a syringe was delivered through tubing connected to the lickometer spout. The capacitive sensor was attached to the lickometer spout and every 3 licks triggered the pump to deliver 3 μL Ensure. Mice had free access to Ensure consumption without any perturbation (30 min) on the first day and received photostimulation (30 min) on the second day. Lick events were recorded continuously by an Arduino board throughout the session.
A two chambered apparatus was used as described previously ( Betley et al., 2015 7. Betley, J.N. ∙ Xu, S. ∙ Cao, Z.F.H. ... Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal Nature. 2015; 521 :180-185 Crossref Scopus (466) PubMed Google Scholar ). Ad libitum fed mice were acclimatized to the apparatus on the first day. On the second day, pre-test preference score was determined after mice were allowed to freely explore in the apparatus. Over the next four days, a 532 nm laser was triggered when periLC VGLUT2 ArchT mice entered the initially less preferred chamber while 473 nm photostimulation was given when periLC VGLUT2 ChR2 mice enter the initially more preferred side. Mice were then given free access to both chambers without any perturbation on the test day. If the time spent in the conditioned chamber reached 100% before the fourth conditioning session, mice were allowed to directly go to the test session on the next day. Each session lasted 15 min and optic fibers were always tethered, even for test days without optical perturbation. A camera installed above the apparatus (30 Hz, Basler) tracked mouse position throughout the session.
A matte white (to avoid reflections) customized apparatus (29 cm × 29 cm) with two identical poke holes (W × H: 1.5 cm × 2.0 cm) separated 4.2 cm apart was used for the nose-poke experiment. PeriLC VGLUT2 ArchT mice tethered with an optical fiber freely explored this apparatus (1 h). Infrared beam sensors were installed at the sides of the poke holes. A beam break detected by the sensor in the active poke hole triggered 532 nm laser. There was no consequence from nose-poking the inactive port. Active and inactive poke holes were randomly determined for each mouse. Mice were given one session to show nose poke behavior. The beam break and laser pulse events throughout the session were monitored by a custom Arduino board.
Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice injected with AAV vectors expressing TetTox-EYFP or EYFP were allowed to express for one month before the consumption experiment. Mice were acclimated to the taste-delivery behavior chamber (29 cm × 29 cm) for at least 2 days. Diluted Ensure (1:4) or quinine (1 mM) were delivered through the lickometer spout (3 μL) with three interleaved sessions for each. Each session was 0.5 h, with one session per day.
Behavior chamber and liquid-food delivery setup were as described above for the closed-loop food and water intake experiment. 532nm laser (SLOC) was aligned to the shutter (Uniblitz), which controlled laser light delivery to the mouse brain via a fiber launch (PAF-X-Z-A, Thorlabs). A relay box controlled the shutter opening, which had two dependencies: information about the experimental block (laser-on or laser-off) from Arduino Board I and lick events (for contingent and sham conditions, see below) or pseudo-events information (for noncontingent photoinhibition, see below) from Arduino Board II ( Figure 6 A). Arduino Board I sent out a signal representing the block identity to the relay box, which determined the laser-on and laser-off blocks. Arduino Board II recorded mouse licks detected by the capacitive sensor. In the noncontingent photoinhibition sessions, Arduino Board II generated pseudo-event signals (see below) to the relay box to randomly open the shutter in the laser-on blocks. In the lick-contingent and sham sessions, licks recorded by Arduino Board II triggered an event signal delivered to the relay box that opened the shutter in laser-on blocks. During the laser-off blocks, signals from the lick-sensor were recorded but did not open the shutter. In sham photoinhibition sessions, the shutter was engaged as with lick-contingent conditions but the laser was not on.
Mice had free access to diluted Ensure (1:4) or water in the chamber during the consumption sessions. The whole session was divided into alternate laser-off blocks and laser-on blocks ( Figure 6 B). For diluted Ensure consumption sessions (2 h), block duration was 2 min. For water consumption sessions (1 h), block duration was 1 min.
Circadian rhythm reversed (light 21:00 / dark 9:00) periLC VGLUT2 ArchT mice that had ad libitum food went through at least five days to acclimate to Ensure consumption before closed-loop perturbation in their dark phase. Over the first two days, mice had free access to undiluted Ensure consumption in the same chamber used for closed-loop perturbation (1 h/day). Mice whose Ensure consumption reached 900 licks/h were then acclimated to diluted Ensure (1:4) consumption over the next three days (1 h/day). For mice with undiluted Ensure consumption less than that criteria, one more Ensure consumption session was given next day. Mice with total licks above 600 licks/h in diluted Ensure consumption were selected for subsequent experiments. Sessions of contingent paradigms, sessions of noncontingent paradigms and sessions of sham paradigms were performed over consecutive days. For each mouse, the noncontingent conditions delivered the same number of shutter openings as were determined in the contingent experiments by preprogramming these as pseudo-events with random inter-event-intervals within the laser-on blocks. In this way, mice experienced the same exposure to photoinhibition, but it was independent of lick events. This is equivalent to open-loop perturbation with the same inhibition time as the lick-contingent closed-loop sessions. In the water intake experiment, mice were under water restriction and 600 μL water was given 15 min before the sessions to reduce thirst, which avoided a ceiling effect for water consumption motivation. The total water received by these mice was 1 mL per day, including water received before the sessions, during the sessions, and supplied in the homecage afterward. Behaviors were recorded by the top camera (30 Hz, Basler) throughout the session and all the lick, block, and inhibition pulse events were recorded synchronously.
A behavior chamber with two water bottles was used (Coulbourn Instruments). Capacitive detectors were linked to the lick spout of the bottle to record lick events and send signals to trigger laser pulses, which was controlled by Labview. For experiments with identical sucralose concentration, two identical bottles containing sucralose solutions (0.5 mM) in water were placed at the left and right sides of the chamber. The starting photoinhibition side was less-preferred side. For experiments with different sucralose concentrations, one bottle contained 0.25 mM sucralose and the other contained 0.5 mM sucralose solutions, which were available simultaneously. Left and right position of the different solutions were counterbalanced across mice.
Circadian rhythm reversed (light 21:00 / dark 9:00) periLC VGLUT2 ArchT or EYFP mice that had ad libitum food and water went through at least two days to acclimate to the behavior chamber using a 300 mM sucrose supply for 1 h each day. Fibers were tethered on the second day. Mice whose sucrose consumption was above 200 licks within the second session were used for the subsequent experiments with non-caloric sucralose consumption.
First, mice went through the preference test using identical sucralose concentrations (0.5 mM). On the first day, preference score calculated as (A - B) / (A + B), (where A and B are the total licks on either side) was determined based on consumption from both spouts in the absence of photoinhibition. On the second day, a 532 nm laser was triggered on for 10 s when mice licked the initially less preferred spout. The third day, the spout that triggered photoinhibition was reversed. On the subsequent extinction day, spout licking did not trigger the laser. Next, mice were tested in a different experiment using two bottles containing 0.25 mM and 0.5 mM sucralose solutions, first with pre-test in the absence of laser followed by a photoinhibition session, in which a 532 nm laser was triggered only when mice consumed the 0.25 mM sucralose solution. On the subsequent day, mice were tested in extinction with both spouts but in the absence of laser triggering. All the sessions were 1 h and performed in the mouse’s dark phase.
We developed a semi-automatic Slice-to-volume Brain Aligner (SBA) to do the registration for C-Fos-IR and HSV labeling counting. The Allen Mouse Brain Reference Atlas (CCF v3.0) ( Kuan et al., 2015 26. Kuan, L. ∙ Li, Y. ∙ Lau, C. ... Neuroinformatics of the Allen Mouse Brain Connectivity Atlas Methods. 2015; 73 :4-17 Crossref Scopus (137) PubMed Google Scholar ) was used as the template. We manually matched selected key pairs of brain slices (1 in every 4) between our experimental brain data (Fos-mapping and HSV-tdTomato mapping) and 2D C CF. These brain slices usually contained landmarks such as anterior commissure, third ventricle or hippocampus structures. Therefore, these selected experimental brain slices and 2D CCF could be manually matched. If experimental brain slices were tilted, 3D CCF was resliced to 2D CCF with the same angle of the experimental data. All the matching pairs between experimental brain slices and 2D CCF were determined by linear curve fit based on the above manually selected key pairs. All these pairs were checked manually to ensure accuracy before the registration. Affine and diffeomorphic registration were applied to find non-rigid transformations between each pair of 2D brain slices using the ANTs registration toolkit ( Avants et al., 2011 4. Avants, B.B. ∙ Tustison, N.J. ∙ Song, G. ... A reproducible evaluation of ANTs similarity metric performance in brain image registration Neuroimage. 2011; 54 :2033-2044 Crossref Scopus (2970) PubMed Google Scholar ). For sections that were broken during immunostaining or mounting, registration was first carried out using Bigwarp (FIJI) ( Bogovic et al., 2016 8. Bogovic, J.A. ∙ Hanslovsky, P. ∙ Wong, A. ... Robust registration of calcium images by learned contrast synthesis 2016 IEEE 13th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) IEEE, 2016; 1123-1126 Crossref Scopus (93) Google Scholar ), followed by ANTs to refine the registration. CCF annotation templates were warped onto experimental slices for labeling quantification ( Figure S1 D). Oppositely, experimental slices were warped to the CCF annotation for visualization ( Figure 1 C). Experimental data here was down-sampled (8-fold in x-y) to avoid heavy computation during registration, and warped results were then up-sampled to original sizes for subsequent quantification.
For counting Fos-IR and tdTomato-expressing somata, rolling ball background subtraction (FIJI) was first carried out to correct background fluorescence in the scanned images. Ilastik was used for probability-based binarization and neuron segmentation ( Sommer et al., 2011 40. Sommer, C. ∙ Straehle, C. ∙ Koethe, U. ... Ilastik: Interactive learning and segmentation toolkit 2011 IEEE international symposium on biomedical imaging: From nano to macro IEEE, 2011; 3099-3107 Crossref Scopus (948) Google Scholar ). Custom MATLAB scripts were used to count the labeled neurons (N) in different brain regions by referring to the corresponding warped CCF annotation templates. Data from all the brain regions was collected except a few regions due to damage during immunostaining or mounting. Relative labeling density (R) was calculated as N/Area. Area was the total pixels of the corresponding brain regions annotated in the warped CCF templates. Data was further normalized as (R - R min ) / (R 98% - R min ) within each brain across 259 brain regions defined by Allen Mouse Brain Reference Atlas (Figure S1D). To simplify visualization, a binarized labeling map was used by applying a threshold (40%) to the relative labeling density ( Figure S1 E). We then took the logical intersection across all the samples from the AGRP and SFO groups ( Figure 1 D).
Analysis of calcium imaging times series was performed in Fiji and MATLAB. The spatially down-sampled imaging data (2-fold in x-y) was first motion-corrected using NoRMCorre ( Pnevmatikakis and Giovannucci, 2017 36. Pnevmatikakis, E.A. ∙ Giovannucci, A. NoRMCorre: An online algorithm for piecewise rigid motion correction of calcium imaging data J. Neurosci. Methods. 2017; 291 :83-94 Crossref Scopus (432) PubMed Google Scholar ), and then further registered with ANTs to remove nonlinear distortions ( Betley et al., 2015 7. Betley, J.N. ∙ Xu, S. ∙ Cao, Z.F.H. ... Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal Nature. 2015; 521 :180-185 Crossref Scopus (466) PubMed Google Scholar ). Registered data was further downsampled (2-fold in x-y) and smoothed by median filter in time (z radius = 5, Fiji). Constrained non-negative matrix factorization (CNMF-E) for microendoscopy was used to extract GCaMP6f fluorescence responses associated with individual neurons from the processed registered data ( Zhou et al., 2018 49. Zhou, P. ∙ Resendez, S.L. ∙ Rodriguez-Romaguera, J. ... Efficient and accurate extraction of in vivo calcium signals from microendoscopic video data eLife. 2018; 7 :e28728 Crossref Scopus (335) PubMed Google Scholar ). Briefly, we estimated the background through the initialized spatial and temporal components of individual neurons at first, and then updated the spatial and temporal components based on the estimated background. We repeated this process to optimize the background, spatial, and temporal component values. Extracted data were manually inspected afterward to remove the obvious non-neural objects that had usually unrealistically small (1- 5 pixels) or large (above 100 pixels) soma sizes. In conventional calcium imaging, fluorescence signals are compared as ΔF/F, where F is the fluorescence level of the neuron in the resting state. For epifluorescence imaging in the brain, F is significantly contaminated by background fluorescence fluctuations in the neuropil, which may be unrelated to the intracellular calcium concentrations of individual neurons. Thus, the inspected raw output of CNMF-E, which we called ΔF, was used for the subsequent analysis.
For analysis of neuronal dynamics across trials within a session, ΔF from all the trials was used to calculate Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (auROC) curve using MATLAB function ‘ROC’. For the false positive rate of the ROC curve, we used the shuffled ΔF within the baseline time period (5 s) before the event (auditory cue or lick), and this was compared to the neuron dynamics response during a behavioral event (bin size 100 ms) ( Figures 3 D–3F, 3I, S3 J, S4 A, and S4D). Cell response examples were represented as z-score of ΔF ( Figures 3 H, 3J, 3P, S4 C, and S4F), and baseline activities (mean response from −5 s to 0 s) were subtracted when time-lapse responses were shown in Figures 3 M–3O, 3Q, 4 L, 4M, 4O, 4P, S4 B, S4E, 5 B, and 5C. For the self-paced consumption trials, short and long bouts were defined according to the distribution of the normalized bout durations: short bouts were the shortest 30% of consumption bouts, and long bouts were the longest 15%. Neuronal dynamics during the short bouts were up-sampled to make the temporal sample sizes match the longest short bouts, while the long bouts were down-sampled to match the shortest long bouts. Mean responses across either short or long bouts were shown as mean z-score ( Figures 3 M–3O). Area under the curve (AUC) for consumption or omission trials was the sum of z-score values after baseline subtraction ( Figures 3 Q, 4 L, 4M, 4O, 4P, 5 J–5O, S5 B, and S5D). The relationship between AUC and bout duration was tested with linear curve fitting ( Figures 3 L and S3 M–S3P). For trials with different access time to Ensure, the mean response was the mean of the z-score within the consumption window after subtracting the baseline. The correlation coefficient between the calcium fluorescence response to Ensure and licks or lick frequency was calculated with MATLAB function ‘corrcoef’ ( Figures S3 Q–S3S). Statistically significant neuron dynamics responses across trials were determined by Wilcoxon signed rank test ( Figures 3 G, S3 S, S4 A, S4D, and S4N). To compare different taste responses within a session, ΔF for each neuron was averaged across multiple trials, then the z-score was calculated from this average response, and the response was displayed after subtracting the baseline values ( Figures 5 D–5I). To report average fluorescence responses across neurons within a session, normalized ΔF was calculated as (ΔF - ΔF min ) / (ΔF max - ΔF min ) (for a range of 0 to 1), or it was calculated as (ΔF - ΔF baseline ) / abs (max (ΔF - ΔF baseline )) (for a range of −1 to 1) ( Figures 3 K, 4 E–4J, and 5 A). Linear regression was used to test normalized mean response or baseline changes across successive trials within a session under FD or WD. For this, the mean value of normalized fluorescence responses from all the neurons, the inhibited subgroup, or the activated subgroups were analyzed. In addition, linear regression was performed on individual neurons across trials ( Figures 4 E–4J and S4 G–S4J).
When comparing the neuron dynamics from different sessions, the extracted ΔF was scaled by system noise level E, calculated through the power-spectrum density method in CNMF-E, instead of the calcium signals in the resting state. This final output was similar to z-score and called ‘scaled ΔF’ in this study (as suggested by the CNMF-E FAQ at https://github.com/zhoupc/CNMF_E/wiki/FAQ ) ( Figures S4 K, S4L, and S3 H). For the Ensure response under as ad lib fed versus FD, the session average of baseline subtracted scaled ΔF across all the trials for each neuron from the two ensembles were compared ( Figures S4 K and S4L). For ghrelin administration, the mean of the scaled ΔF (100 s, 10 min and 20 min post-injection) of individual neurons were compared to that at the same timescale from saline injection ( Figure S3 H).
Response clusters from different tastes were calculated by unsupervised k-means clustering with the mean responses from two tastes as the input. The optimal number of clusters was determined by the MATLAB function ‘evalclusters’ with silhouette value as the evaluation criteria ( Figures 5 D–5I).
For the grain food, false food, and social interaction trials or the ghrelin and saline injection trials, the behavioral events were manually marked from the synchronized behavioral video. For the other cue-conditioned consumption trials, custom MATLAB scripts were used to extract the event time out through the synchronized data collected by Neuralynx or Arduino boards.
All data analysis was performed with custom MATLAB scripts. Lick events in two different blocks were separately grouped to do the further analysis. Average licks / block only included the blocks in which mice initiated licking, and lick frequency was calculated by excluding the time before mice initiated licking within each block ( Figures 6 G and 6I). Bin size (10 s) was chosen to analyze the lick events throughout the sessions ( Figures 6 F, 6H, S6 A, and S6I). Synchronized behavioral recording was used to analyze mouse locomotor trajectory throughout the session and the boundary of the food zone area was defined by video analysis of the mouse position when lick events were recorded and expanding this area by 5% ( Figure S7 B). The duration of the whole lick period within one entry into the food zone was defined as a feeding or drinking bout. To empirically define a feeding or drinking bout threshold based on mouse behavior, we measured the minimum time mice spent in the food zone while there was consumption, which was 16 s ( Figure S7 C). We also analyzed the data with a 1 s inter-lick interval (ILI) used for to define a feeding or drinking bout based on common practice in the literature ( Johnson et al., 2010 24. Johnson, A.W. ∙ Sherwood, A. ∙ Smith, D.R. ... An analysis of licking microstructure in three strains of mice Appetite. 2010; 54 :320-330 Crossref Scopus (40) PubMed Google Scholar ; Spector et al., 1998 42. Spector, A.C. ∙ Klumpp, P.A. ∙ Kaplan, J.M. Analytical issues in the evaluation of food deprivation and sucrose concentration effects on the microstructure of licking behavior in the rat Behav. Neurosci. 1998; 112 :678-694 Crossref Scopus (211) PubMed Google Scholar ). Thus, both 1 s and 16 s ILI were used as the threshold to define the consumption bout in this study. ILIs above 1 s or 16 s indicated an initiation of a new bout. Bout durations in all the laser-on blocks and no-laser blocks from the same session were collected for analysis. When analyzing feeding bouts that straddled laser-on and the following laser-off blocks, we analyzed the first 15 s or 30 s and last 15 s or 30 s of the no-laser blocks that contained feeding bouts ( Figures 7 G and S7 N).
We fit parametric probability distributions to the distribution of bout durations (defined using a 16 s threshold) in each of 12 conditions (all combinations of contingent versus no-laser, non-contingent versus no-laser, sham versus no-laser in feeding and drinking). Bouts that contained only a single lick were removed from the analysis (these can be non-consummatory contact with the spout). In each condition, we used maximum likelihood estimation (via the ‘allfitdist’ in MATLAB) to determine the best-fitting parameters of 16 different parametric distributions: Exponential, Gamma, Weibull, Nakagami, Generalized Pareto, Lognormal, Log-logistic, Birnbaum Saunders, Generalized Extreme Value, Inverse Gaussian, T-Location-Scale, Logistic, Normal, Rayleigh, Rician, and Extreme Value. We ranked fits according to the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), which is a statistic that considers both goodness-of-fit and parsimony. In 8 of 12 conditions, the exponential distribution had the lowest BIC. For the other 4 conditions, the exponential distribution was among the top 3 best-fitting distributions (see Table S3 ). Therefore, the exponential distribution gave the most parsimonious fit to the data. Error bars for the mean value (mean duration cluster) were calculated using the MATLAB function ‘paramci’, which determines the 95% confidence intervals based on a chi-square distribution ( Figures 7 B, 7E, 7H, and S7 O). A mixture of two Gaussian distributions was fit to the distribution of ILIs less than 1 s under contingent and noncontingent conditions ( Figure S7 A). The five parameters that specify the Gaussian mixture distribution fit were calculated using the MATLAB function ‘mle’. The statistical significance of our measured change in P stay was assessed via shuffle tests. We first shuffled bouts across all blocks taken from the contingent photoinhibition session (i.e., shuffling between laser-on and laser-off blocks) and then repartitioned these bouts into two groups, followed by exponential curve refitting for each group and recalculation of ΔP stay (shuffled). We repeated this shuffle procedure 1000 times and compared the distribution of ΔP stay (shuffled) to the measured value (real) ( Figure S7 G). For both feeding and drinking, all shuffled values of ΔP stay were smaller than the true value, and thus p = 0.001 in both cases. To illustrate the impact of the observed shifts in P stay shifts, we also showed the probability of staying in a consumption state for a given duration of time (Δt stay ) by plotting (P stay ) t versus Δt stay for two different values of P stay ( Figure S7 ).
Values were represented as mean ± SD unless otherwise stated. All the statistics were performed using SigmaPlot (Systat) or MATLAB. Pairwise comparisons were calculated by unpaired or paired t test for two samples and one-way repeated ANOVA for multiples samples unless the data violated normal distribution assumption, which were then calculated by nonparametric Wilcoxon signed rank test (two samples) or Friedman repeated-measures analysis of variance on ranks (multiple samples). Bonforroni-Holm (all pairwise) or Dunnett (versus control) were used to do multiple sample comparison correction. Ensemble neuron response distribution and feeding bout distribution were analyzed in the nonparametric two sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. When a large number of statistical comparisons were performed, P values were corrected by false discovery rate (FDR). Pearson correlation coefficient or liner regression were used to test the relationship between neuron response and lick duration, lick frequency or trials numbers respectively. Results of statistical tests were summarized in Table S1 . ns p > 0.05, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001.

Section: Acknowledgments

Research was funded by Howard Hughes Medical Institute (S.M.S.). We thank D. Anderson and L.-C. Lo for Cre-dependent HSV; E. Boyden for ArchT virus; P. Zhou for data processing advice; J. Winnubst and J. Chandrashekar for visualization of single neuron reconstruction; A. Hu and M. Copeland for histology; L. Ryan, C. Lopez, and M. Rose for behavior support; and L. Ryan and S. Lindo for viral injections. D. Stern, M. Ahrens, and Y. Lu commented on the manuscript.
Conceptualization, R.G. and S.M.S.; Experiment design, R.G. and S.M.S.; Data collection, R.G.; Data analysis for Fos and HSV brain mapping, R.G., Y.Y., and S.X.; Calcium imaging setup, R.G. and S.X.; Calcium imaging data analysis, R.G. and S.X.; Behavior control system, R.G. and S.X.; Behavior data analysis, R.G. and A.H. The manuscript was written by R.G. and S.M.S. with input from all authors.
S.M.S. has served on the Scientific Advisory Board of Inscopix, Inc. and owns stock in the company.

Section: Supplemental Information (2)

Download all Spreadsheet (22.77 KB) Table S1 Results of Statistical Analysis, Related to Figures 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7; Figures S2–S7; and STAR Methods PDF (68.72 KB) Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Tables S2 and S3
