Title: Germline Mutations in CIDEB and Protection against Liver Disease


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Exome sequencing in hundreds of thousands of persons may enable the identification of rare protein-coding genetic variants associated with protection from human diseases like liver cirrhosis, providing a strategy for the discovery of new therapeutic targets.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We performed a multistage exome sequencing and genetic association analysis to identify genes in which rare protein-coding variants were associated with liver phenotypes. We conducted in vitro experiments to further characterize associations.

Abstract_Section: Results

The multistage analysis involved 542,904 persons with available data on liver aminotransferase levels, 24,944 patients with various types of liver disease, and 490,636 controls without liver disease. We found that rare coding variants in APOB , ABCB4 , SLC30A10 , and TM6SF2 were associated with increased aminotransferase levels and an increased risk of liver disease. We also found that variants in CIDEB , which encodes a structural protein found in hepatic lipid droplets, had a protective effect. The burden of rare predicted loss-of-function variants plus missense variants in CIDEB (combined carrier frequency, 0.7%) was associated with decreased alanine aminotransferase levels (beta per allele, −1.24 U per liter; 95% confidence interval [CI], −1.66 to −0.83; P=4.8×10 ) and with 33% lower odds of liver disease of any cause (odds ratio per allele, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.57 to 0.79; P=9.9×10 ). Rare coding variants in CIDEB were associated with a decreased risk of liver disease across different underlying causes and different degrees of severity, including cirrhosis of any cause (odds ratio per allele, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.36 to 0.70). Among 3599 patients who had undergone bariatric surgery, rare coding variants in CIDEB were associated with a decreased nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity score (beta per allele in score units, −0.98; 95% CI, −1.54 to −0.41 [scores range from 0 to 8, with higher scores indicating more severe disease]). In human hepatoma cell lines challenged with oleate, CIDEB small interfering RNA knockdown prevented the buildup of large lipid droplets.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Rare germline mutations in CIDEB conferred substantial protection from liver disease. (Funded by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.)

Section: Introduction

Protracted damage to liver cells results in hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis, which account for substantial health care costs, morbidity, and mortality globally. Obesity-related nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis are rapidly becoming the most common conditions leading to liver transplantation, and approved pharmacologic therapies are currently lacking.
In patients with obesity and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, the risk of progression to steatohepatitis and cirrhosis has a high degree of interindividual variability in which genetic factors play a key role. Understanding the genetic basis for this variability could lead to the development of new therapeutic and precision-medicine approaches.
A recent analysis involving approximately 45,000 persons with available data on liver aminotransferase levels identified an association between a common loss-of-function variant in HSD17B13 and protection from liver disease. This finding led to the rapid development of inhibitory small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting HSD17B13 , which are currently being evaluated in early-phase clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT04565717 and NCT04202354 ). The contribution of rare coding variants, which may have a larger effect on these phenotypes, has been comparatively understudied.
Sequencing of the exomes of hundreds of thousands of persons provides an opportunity to find associations between collections of rare coding alleles in single genes (with each collection representing “a burden”) and protection against disease. Mutated genes associated with disease protection are good candidate therapeutic targets.

Section: Methods

Using a multistage approach, we performed exome sequencing in more than 500,000 persons to identify genes for which the burden of rare coding alleles was associated with liver phenotypes ( Figure 1 ). In stage 1, for each gene in the genome, we estimated associations of the burden of rare coding alleles with levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), a biomarker of hepatocellular injury and disease. In stage 2, we corroborated stage 1 associations using another aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase (AST). In stage 3, we estimated associations with liver disease. Using data from electronic health records, histopathological assessment of the liver, liver RNA sequencing, and in vitro experiments involving human HepG2 and HuH-7 hepatoma cell lines (see Supplementary Appendix 1 , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org), we further characterized the associations we found between CIDEB and liver phenotypes.
Authors who are employees of the sponsor designed the study and wrote the first draft of the manuscript; all the authors participated in the collection, analysis, or interpretation of the data; reviewed the manuscript; and agreed to the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The first five authors and last four authors (all of whom are employees of the sponsor) had full access to the data and take complete responsibility for its accuracy and completeness.
Exomewide association analyses were performed in the U.K. Biobank population-based cohort and in the Geisinger Health System MyCode cohort. We included 521,835 participants of European ancestry, 9830 of South Asian ancestry, 8544 of African ancestry, 2108 of East Asian ancestry, and 587 of American ancestry for whom exome-sequencing data and phenotype data were available (Table S1 in Supplementary Appendix 1 [all supplementary figures, tables, and sections are available in Supplementary Appendix 1 ]). Stage 3 association analyses further included 28,948 participants from the Malmö Diet and Cancer Study, 13,418 participants from the University of Pennsylvania Penn Medicine BioBank, and 23,849 participants from the Mount Sinai BioMe BioBank. Histopathological analyses of the liver were performed in 3599 patients from the Geisinger Health System MyCode cohort who had undergone bariatric surgery and were not included in stage 3 of this study (Table S2).
In the U.K. Biobank, aminotransferases were measured at baseline with the use of an AU5800 Series Clinical Chemistry Analyzer (Beckman Coulter). In the Geisinger Health System MyCode cohort, clinical biochemical measurements of aminotransferases were obtained from electronic health records. We used diagnosis or cause-of-death codes from the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth and Tenth Revision, supplemented with surgical procedure codes and data from health-related questionnaires (Table S3), to define liver disease outcomes. For approximately 36,000 U.K. Biobank participants, we derived liver-fat percentages from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Among the patients from the Geisinger Health System bariatric surgery cohort, perioperative wedge biopsies of the liver were scored by two experienced pathologists using the Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical Research Network system.
High-coverage exome sequencing was performed by the Regeneron Genetics Center with the use of Illumina HiSeq 2500-v4 or Illumina NovaSeq instruments, with 75-bp paired-end reads. The GRCh38 human genome reference sequence and Ensembl, version 85, gene definitions were used for variant identification and annotation. We classified variants from most to least deleterious in the following order: frameshift, stop–gain, stop–loss, splice acceptor, splice donor, in-frame insertion or deletion (indel), missense, and other annotations. Frameshift, stop–gain, stop–loss, splice-acceptor, and splice-donor alleles were categorized as predicted loss-of-function variants. We classified missense variants using computer modeling to predict functional effects with five algorithms: SIFT, Polyphen-2 HDIV, Polyphen-2 HVAR, LRT, and MutationTaster. To account for the fact that different genes have different types and frequencies of potentially causative variants, we used the alternative-allele frequency and functional annotation of each variant to generate seven genotypes based on the combined variant burden: predicted loss-of-function variants with an alternative-allele frequency of less than 1%, predicted loss-of-function variants plus missense variants that were predicted to be deleterious by five of five algorithms and had an alternative-allele frequency of less than 1% or less than 0.1%, predicted loss-of-function variants plus missense variants that were predicted to be deleterious by at least one of five algorithms and had an alternative-allele frequency of less than 1% or less than 0.1%, and predicted loss-of-function variants plus any missense variants with an alternative-allele frequency of less than 1% or less than 0.1%.
For secondary analyses of common variants, we used array genotyping data and imputation performed with the use of the TOPMed panel in both the U.K. Biobank and the Geisinger Health System MyCode cohort. We used Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platforms to perform liver RNA sequencing in persons from the bariatric surgery cohort; RNA data were available from 1988 of the 3599 participants in that cohort.
We estimated associations between genotypes and phenotypes by fitting linear regression models (for quantitative traits) or Firth bias-corrected logistic regression models (for binary traits) using REGENIE software, version 2+. Analyses were stratified according to cohort and ancestry and were adjusted for age, age squared, sex, age-by-sex, and age squared–by–sex interaction terms; experimental batch-related covariates; the first 10 common variant–derived genetic principal components; the first 20 rare variant–derived principal components; and a polygenic score generated by REGENIE, which robustly adjusts for relatedness and population structure. To ensure independence of signals generated by rare and common variants, we performed exomewide analyses with adjustment for common variants identified by fine mapping genomewide associations in the same persons (File S1 in Supplementary Appendix 2 and the Supplementary Methods section in Supplementary Appendix 1 ), as described previously. We performed a meta-analysis of association results across cohorts and ancestries with a fixed-effect inverse-variance–weighted approach. In stage 1, we set an exomewide level of significance at a P value of less than 3.6×10 , representing a Bonferroni correction for 20,000 genes, seven variant-burden genotypes per gene, and an alpha level of 0.05, as described previously. In stage 2, the significance threshold of a P value of less than 0.0025 represented a Bonferroni correction for 20 genes identified in stage 1 and an alpha level of 0.05. In stage 3, the significance threshold of a P value of less than 0.0038 represented Bonferroni correction for 13 genes from stage 2 and an alpha level of 0.05. For other analyses, we used a two-tailed P value of 0.05. Further methodologic details are provided in Supplementary Appendix 1 .

Section: Results

In an exomewide analysis involving 542,904 persons from five ancestry groups, the burden of rare coding variants in each of 20 genes was associated with circulating ALT levels (P<3.6×10 ) (Table S4 and Fig. S1), independent of ALT-associated common genetic variants identified in the same persons (listed in File S1 in Supplementary Appendix 2 ). In the exomewide analysis, rare coding variants in genes that are highly expressed in the liver had, on average, stronger associations with ALT levels than did rare coding variants in other genes (Fig. S2).
Of the 20 genes, 5 were also associated with AST levels in a sample of 540,250 persons and with liver disease in an analysis involving 24,944 patients with liver disease and 490,636 controls ( Table 1 , S5, and S6 and Results section S1). All 5 genes had high and specific expression in the liver (Fig. S3).
For APOB , ABCB4 , SLC30A10 , and TM6SF2 , the associations with an increased risk of liver disease ( Table 1 and Results section S1) were consistent with previous evidence and with the roles of these genes in lipoprotein particle formation and secretion into the circulation ( APOB and TM6SF2 ), bile-acid excretion ( ABCB4 ), and metal transport ( SLC30A10 ) (Fig. S4).
We found that the burden of rare coding variants in CIDEB had a protective effect ( Table 1 ); CIDEB encodes a structural protein that is highly and specifically expressed in the liver and, among liver cell types, in hepatocytes (Fig. S5), where it localizes to the surface of lipid droplets and other intracellular membranes (Fig. S4). CIDEB is a member of the CIDE (cell death–inducing DNA fragmentation factor alpha–like effector) family of proteins, which mediate the fusion of smaller lipid droplets into larger ones.
Approximately 1 in 150 persons in our analysis (0.7%) carried rare predicted loss-of-function variants plus missense variants in CIDEB , a variant burden that was associated with lower ALT levels than in noncarriers (beta per allele [i.e., the effect of each additional alternative-allele copy on the phenotype], −1.24 U per liter), as well as with a 33% lower odds of liver disease (odds ratio per allele, 0.67) ( Table 1 ). The burden of rare predicted loss-of-function variants alone (excluding missense alleles) was also associated with lower ALT levels than in noncarriers (beta per allele, −1.57 U per liter) and with a 46% lower risk of liver disease (odds ratio per allele, 0.54) (Figs. S6 through S8 and Table S7), findings consistent with a protective effect conferred by loss of function in CIDEB . Associations of CIDEB variants with decreased levels of ALT and with a decreased risk of liver disease were consistent across cohorts and ancestry groups and were further validated in 32,998 non-European persons not included in the discovery analysis. The per-allele beta values for the effect of rare predicted loss-of-function variants in CIDEB on aminotransferase levels were 2 to 3 times as large as those for the HSD17B13 rs72613567:T/TA splice loss-of-function variant or predicted loss-of-function variants in HSD17B13 , which were used as benchmarks for protective associations.
Among persons carrying rare coding CIDEB variants, the odds of liver disease of different causes and degrees of severity were 31 to 54% lower than among noncarriers, with the odds of cirrhosis of any cause of being 50% lower (odds ratio per allele, 0.50) ( Figure 2 ). On a log-linear scale, the effects of rare coding variants in CIDEB were 3 to 7 times as large as those of the common HSD17B13 rs72613567:T/TA variant ( Figure 2 ). Carriers of rare coding variants in CIDEB also had lower odds of hepatocellular carcinoma than noncarriers (odds ratio per allele, 0.51; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.26 to 1.00) (Table S8).
Among the 3599 patients who underwent bariatric surgery, those carrying rare predicted loss-of-function variants plus missense variants in CIDEB had a 66% lower odds of biopsy-defined hepatic steatosis, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, or fibrosis ( Figure 3A ) than noncarriers, an association driven by the presence of both simple steatosis and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis or fibrosis in lower percentages of carriers than noncarriers (Table S9). We also found an association with lower nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity score at biopsy (beta per allele in score units, −0.98; 95% CI, −1.54 to −0.41; P<0.001 [scores range from 0 to 8, with higher scores indicating more severe disease]) ( Figure 3B ). These associations were independent of body-mass index (BMI), diabetes status, and PNPLA3 genotype and were substantially but not completely attenuated by adjusting for steatosis grade.
Among more than 36,000 persons for whom MRI data were available, those with rare coding variants in CIDEB had numerically lower liver-fat percentages, a difference that appeared to be more pronounced among persons with overweight or carriers of the PNPLA3 148Met risk allele (Table S10). When evaluated in comparison with other steatosis-associated genes, the association between CIDEB variants and protection from liver disease was only partly explained by differences in liver fat measured on MRI (Fig. S9).
We estimated the interactions between rare coding variants in CIDEB and BMI, obesity (the principal epidemiologic risk factor for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis), or type 2 diabetes, as well as between these rare coding variants and PNPLA3 Ile148Met (rs738409) or HSD17B13 rs72613567:T/TA, two variants that are among the most common genetic determinants of liver disease and that have large effect sizes. The association between CIDEB variants and lower levels of ALT was amplified in persons with higher BMIs, obesity, or type 2 diabetes (Figs. S10 and S11 and Table S11). In addition, the difference in the prevalence of liver disease between CIDEB variant carriers and noncarriers was largest among persons with obesity (Fig. S12).
The difference in ALT levels between carriers and noncarriers of CIDEB variants was greater among persons with the risk-increasing PNPLA3 148Met allele (Fig. S11 and Table S11) than among those without this allele. The association between CIDEB variants and ALT levels appeared to be additive to the association between the HSD17B13 rs72613567:T/TA variant and ALT levels.
We did not find significant associations between rare coding variants in CIDEB and lipid, glycemic, or anthropometric traits (Fig. S13), with the exception of a nominal association with a decreased risk of type 2 diabetes (odds ratio per allele, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.79 to 0.97; P=0.01). Estimates of association for cardiometabolic traits were similar in subgroups defined according to obesity status (Fig. S14). There were no significant associations with 105 detailed lipoprotein measures determined by nuclear magnetic resonance in 103,933 persons (Fig. S15). In a phenomewide association analysis including approximately 6000 health-outcome traits, we found no associations other than lower aminotransferase levels and a lower risk of liver disease (Fig. S16).
We found highly consistent associations between missense or predicted loss-of-function variants affecting various protein domains of CIDEB and lower levels of ALT (Fig. S17), and in a backward selection model at least 17 independent variants were found to contribute to this protective signal (Fig. S18, and File S2 in Supplementary Appendix 3 ): 12 missense and 5 predicted loss-of-function alleles with pairwise linkage disequilibrium (r ) of less than 0.0001. We validated the effect of 2 predicted loss-of-function variants that were among the 5 emerging from the backward-selection approach and were present in 1988 patients who underwent bariatric surgery and for whom liver RNA sequencing data were available. We found that these variants resulted in nonsense-mediated decay (Lys153*) and intron retention (c.336+1G→A) (Results section S2 and Fig. S19).
We also tested for associations between rare coding variants in CIDEB and liver messenger RNA (mRNA) expression (transcriptome-wide). The only significant association we found was with lower CIDEB expression (Table S12).
A recent analysis of somatic mutations in liver samples from 29 patients with liver disease identified a recurrence of mutations in CIDEB and five other genes ( FOXO1 , ACVR2A , ALB , GPAM , and TNRC6B ). Accrual of somatic mutations in a diseased organ is consistent with a concomitant enhancement of cell fitness, which may reflect disparate etiologic scenarios (Results section S3 and Fig. S20). We estimated the risk of liver damage and disease in persons carrying rare inherited germline predicted loss-of-function variants in the six genes, which may provide etiologic insights that are robust to confounding and reverse causality. Although rare germline predicted loss-of-function variants in CIDEB and GPAM were associated with lower ALT levels (both genes) and lower odds of cirrhosis ( CIDEB ) ( Table 2 ), we found no significant associations with ALT or liver cirrhosis among carriers of rare germline predicted loss-of-function variants in TNRC6B or FOXO1 or the ultrarare FOXO1 Ser22Trp missense allele ( Table 2 ). In contrast, rare germline predicted loss-of-function variants in ALB or ACVR2A were associated with higher levels of ALT (for ALB ) or a higher risk of cirrhosis (for ACVR2A ) ( Table 2 ).
Given the role of CIDE proteins in the accumulation and fusion of lipid droplets and the hepatocyte-specific expression of CIDEB, we assessed the effect of CIDEB silencing on hepatic lipid-droplet measures. We performed experiments in human HepG2 or HuH-7 cell lines with and without treatment with oleic acid, a monosaturated n−9 fatty acid routinely used to induce steatosis in vitro.
CIDEB protein localized to punctae on lipid-droplet surfaces and at the interfaces of adjacent droplets in both conditions ( Figure 4A and S21). As compared with nontargeting control siRNA, siRNA that targeted CIDEB induced profound decreases in CIDEB mRNA and CIDEB protein (Fig. S22). Under basal conditions, silencing of CIDEB did not affect the mean lipid droplet size or related lipid measures ( Figure 4B, 4C , and S23). Cells were next treated with oleic acid, which induced steatosis. Silencing of CIDEB in oleic acid–treated cells resulted in substantially reduced mean lipid droplet sizes in both HepG2 and HuH-7 cell lines ( Figure 4B and 4C ), and this reduction in droplet size was observed when different siRNAs were used for silencing (Fig. S24).

Section: Discussion

In this large study, we identified an association between rare germline mutations in CIDEB and substantial protection from liver disease; we also showed how exome sequencing at scale can be used to identify large-effect associations between the burden of rare coding alleles and human disease. We have described several lines of evidence that implicate CIDEB, a surface protein of hepatic lipid droplets, as a key driver of liver disease in humans: analyses of circulating biomarkers of liver injury, imaging data, histopathological characteristics, liver outcomes recorded in electronic health records, and interactions with obesity and PNPLA3 genotypes. Moreover, and in a finding consistent with the literature on CIDE proteins in lipid-droplet biology, silencing of CIDEB in oleate-challenged human hepatoma cell lines prevented the accumulation of larger droplets.
Proteins in the CIDE family have been implicated in the buildup and fusion of smaller lipid droplets into larger ones. Impaired formation of the characteristic unilocular lipid droplet of adipocytes has been described in a person with a homozygous protein-truncating mutation in CIDEC an adipose-specific protein in the CIDE family that has a high degree of homology to CIDEB , as well as in Cidec mice. Overexpression of CIDEB in vitro results in fat accumulation into larger lipid droplets, and Cideb mice have hepatocytes with smaller droplets. In this context, our results suggest that the buildup of enlarged hepatic lipid droplets mediated by CIDEB is a key mechanistic step in the pathogenesis of human liver disease.
When fed a high-fat diet, Cideb mice were protected against hepatic steatosis and had lower levels of body fat and circulating triglycerides than Cideb mice. Although the results of our genetic analyses involving humans are broadly consistent with the finding of reduced steatosis in Cideb mice, we did not observe anthropometric or lipid-related phenotypes in human carriers of CIDEB mutations, which suggests that there are interspecies differences in the role of this protein.
In a recent study, recurrent somatic mutations in CIDEB were found in liver cells from patients with liver disease but not in hepatocellular carcinoma cells, which suggests enhanced clonal fitness. Our results are consistent with the interpretation that clonal fitness in hepatocytes with somatic loss of CIDEB function reflects resilience to lipotoxicity and further show that individual persons with germline mutations in CIDEB are substantially protected from the development of liver disease. The same may be true for persons with loss-of-function mutations in GPAM : we observed an association between rare protein-truncating variants in GPAM and lower levels of ALT, and a previous study showed an association between a common missense variant in GPAM and liver disease.
Genetic evidence in humans is a strong predictor of success for drug-development programs, and genetic associations between common genetic variants in PNPLA3 and HSD17B13 and liver disease have helped to catalyze the development of new therapeutics for liver disease ( NCT04565717 , NCT04202354 , and NCT04483947 ). A key implication of our findings is that inhibiting CIDEB represents a potential means of treating nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and other forms of liver disease.
This study has limitations. Although associations with CIDEB variants were consistent across ancestries, persons of non-European ancestry, who may be disproportionately affected by liver disease, were relatively underrepresented in this genetic analysis. The associations with aminotransferase levels cleared stringent statistical thresholds for exomewide significance, but estimates for binary liver outcomes were comparatively less precise, highlighting the need for larger studies estimating the effect of CIDEB variants on progression to advanced liver disease. Further studies are needed to clarify the relative contribution of differences in lipid-droplet function as compared with the amount of intracellular steatosis to the protective phenotype associated with CIDEB loss of function. Although our analysis suggests that lifelong exposure to heterozygous loss of function in CIDEB is associated with halving of the risk of cirrhosis, it is not known whether shorter-term and near-complete pharmacologic inhibition of CIDEB will yield clinically meaningful effects on the risk of liver disease or its progression.
In this human genetics study, persons with rare germline mutations in CIDEB had substantial protection from liver damage and liver disease.
