Title: A Human Pleiotropic Multiorgan Condition Caused by Deficient Wnt Secretion


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Structural birth defects occur in approximately 3% of live births; most such defects lack defined genetic or environmental causes. Despite advances in surgical approaches, pharmacologic prevention remains largely out of reach.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We queried worldwide databases of 20,248 families that included children with neurodevelopmental disorders and that were enriched for parental consanguinity. Approximately one third of affected children in these families presented with structural birth defects or microcephaly. We performed exome or genome sequencing of samples obtained from the children, their parents, or both to identify genes with biallelic pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutations present in more than one family. After identifying disease-causing variants, we generated two mouse models, each with a pathogenic variant “knocked in,” to study mechanisms and test candidate treatments. We administered a small-molecule Wnt agonist to pregnant animals and assessed their offspring.

Abstract_Section: Results

We identified homozygous mutations in WLS , which encodes the Wnt ligand secretion mediator (also known as Wntless or WLS) in 10 affected persons from 5 unrelated families. (The Wnt ligand secretion mediator is essential for the secretion of all Wnt proteins.) Patients had multiorgan defects, including microcephaly and facial dysmorphism as well as foot syndactyly, renal agenesis, alopecia, iris coloboma, and heart defects. The mutations affected WLS protein stability and Wnt signaling. Knock-in mice showed tissue and cell vulnerability consistent with Wnt-signaling intensity and individual and collective functions of Wnts in embryogenesis. Administration of a pharmacologic Wnt agonist partially restored embryonic development.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Genetic variations affecting a central Wnt regulator caused syndromic structural birth defects. Results from mouse models suggest that what we have named Zaki syndrome is a potentially preventable disorder. (Funded by the National Institutes of Health and others.)

Section: Introduction

Structural birth defects are a cause of substantial morbidity and mortality among infants, observed in 1 in 33 births and accounting for 20.6% of infant deaths. Such defects result from complex interactions among the genome, the epigenome, and the environment. Despite the widespread prevalence of structural birth defects, only a minority of such events can be traced to environmental or genetic causes; in most, causes remain unexplained. Structural birth defects commonly involve the neural tube, kidney, heart, facies, and limbs, with 20 to 30% of patients having multiorgan defects. Identifying causal factors is especially challenging for pleiotropic conditions that have disparate or partially penetrant phenotypes. Most structural birth defects occur in early embryogenesis, and treatment generally addresses symptoms or involves surgery rather than being preventive.
Wnt signaling controls both development and homeostasis, and its disruption is implicated in a wide range of human diseases. The human genome encodes 19 Wnt ligands, which have unique and yet partially overlapping expression and functions. Perhaps that explains why loss-of-function mutations in only 8 of the 19 Wnt ligands are associated with distinct conditions (Table S1 in Supplementary Appendix 1 , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). Because previous studies focused on loss of individual Wnts, genetic redundancies remain mostly unexplored. Secretion of all Wnts requires the multitransmembrane protein receptor Wntless (WLS). WLS associates with Wnts in the endoplasmic reticulum after Wnt palmitoleation by an acyl transferase (encoded by the gene PORCN ). WLS–Wnt complexes are then transported to the cell membrane, where Wnts (molecular “cargo”) are released into the extracellular milieu (Fig. S1A in Supplementary Appendix 1 ).
From a total of 20,248 families, approximately one third of which included family members with structural birth defects, we evaluated 5 families with similar pleiotropic conditions using linkage analysis and exome sequencing. After identifying partial loss-of-function mutations in WLS , we studied knock-in mice to determine the effect of patient variants on Wnt signaling, tissue and cell vulnerability, and potential treatment feasibility.

Section: Methods

Five siblings from Family 1 (Patients F1-IV:1 through F1-IV:5) were referred for intellectual disability and dysmorphic features ( Figure 1 , and Fig. S1 in Supplementary Appendix 1 ). The parents are healthy first-degree cousins from the United Arab Emirates. The presence of similar phenotypes in all five siblings and the absence of unaffected siblings were considered unusual but not impossible for a recessive condition ( Figure 1A ). All the children were born after uneventful pregnancies ( Table 1 and Supplementary Appendix 2 ). Delayed global milestones, short stature, and microcephaly were evident by 2 years of age, with head circumference ranging from 2.6 to 5.9 SD below the mean and height ranging from 0.3 to 3.4 SD below the mean. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed in one child (F1-IV:4) and showed cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and an enlarged fourth ventricle ( Figure 1B ). Dysmorphisms, including cupped ears, sparse eyebrows, and partial toe syndactyly, were extremely similar among siblings. Findings on extensive biochemical assessments were normal.
Two patients from Family 2 (F2-IV:1 and F2-IV:4) were referred for the same issues as those in Family 1. The parents are healthy first-degree cousins from Egypt. The affected children were born after uncomplicated pregnancies and showed delayed global milestones, short stature, and microcephaly (head circumference, 4.1 to 5.8 SD below the mean). Visual impairment, iris coloboma, cupped ears, and sparse hair were noted in both. Ectrodactyly (claw-shaped feet with polysyndactyly) was observed in the younger child (F2-IV:4) ( Figure 1B ). MRI of the brain showed corpus callosum hypoplasia in both children and cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in the younger child.
Three patients (F3-II:1, F4-II:1, and F5-II:1) were single affected children from separate families of diverse ancestries ( Figure 1 and Supplementary Appendix 2 ). Bilateral iris coloboma and congenital diaphragmatic hernia resulting in surgery at birth were evident in the child from Family 3. The affected child in Family 4 had hydronephrosis. MRI of the brain showed corpus callosum hypoplasia, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, and an enlarged fourth ventricle. Social and speech development were delayed in the affected children in Families 3 and 4 but normal in the child in Family 5. Microcephaly and short stature were seen in all affected patients for whom data were available; data on head circumference were not available for the affected child in Family 4.
Written informed consent was obtained with the use of consent forms from the University of California, San Diego, and the Genome Institute of Singapore. We performed genomewide single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping to localize the causative locus in Family 1. We sequenced the exomes of two affected members from Families 1 and 2 and of the father, mother, and affected child from Families 3, 4, and 5. Details of the laboratory procedures, bioinformatics pipelines, and variant prioritization are provided in Supplementary Appendix 1 .
We obtained primary dermal fibroblasts from the affected member of Family 3 and generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and then embryoid bodies (three-dimensional aggregates of iPSCs, differentiated through exposure to a defined cell medium); we compared these embryoid bodies with embryoid bodies derived from two unrelated healthy persons. We generated two independent knock-in mouse lines, one with the mutation observed in Family 1 and one with the mutation observed in Families 2 and 3, and bred each line for homozygosity of the relevant mutation. The mouse line carrying the p.Y478C allele was intercrossed with the TCF/Lef:H2B-GFP Wnt reporter line to permit assay of Wnt signaling. Full details regarding the generation of iPSCs, embryoid bodies, and transgenic mice as well as Wnt agonist treatment are provided in Supplementary Appendix 1 .
Continuous variables are presented as means with standard deviations. Comparisons were performed with parametric tests for normally distributed data or nonparametric tests when this criterion was not met. For multiple comparisons, adjusted P values were calculated after Bonferroni or Šídák correction. Details of the statistical methods used for individual assays are provided in Supplementary Appendix 1 .

Section: Results

Linkage analysis in Family 1, in which there were five affected siblings, revealed a single locus on chromosome 1 (Fig. S1B in Supplementary Appendix 1 ). Filtering of the exome sequences identified a homozygous p.Y392C missense variant in WLS (ClinVar accession number, SUB9531807) ( Figure 1 and Supplementary Appendix 2 and Supplementary Appendix 3 ), which segregated with the phenotypes and was located in the linkage locus. This WLS variant altered a residue conserved in all vertebrates (Fig. S1C and S1D in Supplementary Appendix 1 ) and was absent in the Genome Aggregation Database of healthy controls.
In the four other families with similar phenotypes, we identified homozygous WLS mutations likely to impair function ( Figure 1 , Fig. S1 in Supplementary Appendix 1 , and Supplementary Appendix 2 and Supplementary Appendix 3 ). In Families 2 and 3, exome sequencing identified an identical WLS p.Y478C variant (ClinVar accession number, SUB9531807). Families 4 and 5 had independent missense mutations — p.I531T and p.R536C, respectively (ClinVar accession number, SUB9531807). Homozygous variants fell within regions of homozygosity in Families 3 and 4, which suggests distant consanguinity ( Supplementary Appendix 4 ). The implicated variants altered conserved residues either in the transmembrane (p.Y392C and p.Y478C) region of WLS or adjacent to or within the C-terminal endoplasmic reticulum–targeting signal motif ( Figure 1C , and Fig. S2A in Supplementary Appendix 1 ), which met American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics criteria for moderate pathogenicity.
To evaluate the WLS protein, we analyzed cultured primary dermal fibroblasts by means of Western blot testing and found that levels of the protein were more than 90% lower in patient cells (F3-II:1) than in the cells from an unrelated healthy control ( Figure 1D ). Ectopic WLS expression from constructs harboring distinct patient mutations in WLS -deleted HEK293T cells showed protein levels were reduced by half for the two transmembrane mutations but not the two C-terminal mutations ( Figure 1E , and Fig. S2B, S2C, and S2D in Supplementary Appendix 1 ). To confirm protein reduction, we generated two homozygous knock-in mouse lines (p.Y392C and p.Y478C). Cultures of mouse embryonic fibroblasts showed that levels of WLS protein were reduced by approximately 40% in both lines (Fig. S2E and S2F in Supplementary Appendix 1 ).
We next assessed the effect of patient mutations on the secretion of WNT3A and WNT5A in WLS knockout HEK293T cells. Although intracellular Wnt levels were similar across cells, regardless of whether they harbored a WLS mutation, levels of secreted Wnts were reduced by 60 to 80% in cells carrying a mutation ( Figure 2A and 2B , and Fig. S3A and S3B in Supplementary Appendix 1 ), findings that were confirmed in both patient fibroblasts and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (Fig. S3C through S3H in Supplementary Appendix 1 ).
We next assessed the ability of these cells to stimulate Wnt signaling in adjacent cells by coculturing them with cells expressing the TOPFlash Wnt reporter. We observed a 50 to 60% reduction in the luciferase signal in these cells when cocultured with cells expressing mutant WLS, which indicates decreased Wnt signaling ( Figure 2C ).
The effects of WLS p.Y478C on Wnt signaling in vivo were assessed by crossing the Wls p.Y478C mouse line with the TCF/Lef:H2B-GFP reporter line, which resulted in progeny in which green fluorescent protein intensity is a surrogate for Wnt activity. In homozygous mutants, we observed globally reduced Wnt reporter activity across the body, most notably in facial structures, the heart, the spinal region, the tail bud, the metanephros, and neural tissues ( Figure 2D , and Fig. S3I and S3J in Supplementary Appendix 1 ) — many of the same tissues affected in patients.
Heterozygous Wls p.Y392C and p.Y478C knock-in mice were healthy and viable. In contrast, homozygous mutant mice showed perinatal lethality and had phenotypes similar to those of our patients or those previously ascribed to Wnt functions (Table S1 in Supplementary Appendix 1 ). Nearly all mutants in both lines showed defects in caudal neural tube closure, with severely reduced or absent tail buds and reduced numbers of caudal vertebrae ( Figure 3A , and Fig. S4A through S4E in Supplementary Appendix 1 ). Cystic medullary hydronephrosis was observed in both lines ( Figure 3B ), a phenotype seen in the affected child in Family 4. We also found reduced numbers of forelimb and hindlimb digits in mutant mice ( Figure 3C , and Fig. S4F and S4G in Supplementary Appendix 1 ), similar to the foot syndactyly observed in patients. Mutants in both lines also showed a notably reduced brain size, with a severely defective hippocampal dentate gyrus, a decreased number of cortical neurons, and “cobblestone”-like penetration of neurons through the disrupted pial basement membrane ( Figure 3D and 3E , and Figs. S5 and S6 in Supplementary Appendix 1 ). Together, the findings in knock-in mice recapitulated the major defects in patients.
Next, we investigated cellular defects underlying the microcephaly phenotype, present in all our patients but not previously linked to defective Wnt signaling in humans. Using single-nuclei RNA sequencing and immunohistochemical assays, we observed a striking reduction of neurogenesis in the brains of embryonic mutant mice. This was associated with a defective cell cycle of intermediate neural progenitors, which stalled at the S and G2/M phases (Figs. S7, S8, and S9 in Supplementary Appendix 1 ), findings consistent with the role of Wnt signaling in cell cycle and proliferation.
Given the globally reduced Wnt signaling in mutant mouse embryos, we assessed the ability of the Wnt agonist CHIR99021 to prevent WLS -related disease. iPSC-derived embryoid bodies from patient cells have emerged as a clinically relevant model of the pregastrulation embryonic stage. We generated embryoid bodies from the affected child in Family 3 and compared them with those derived from two healthy unrelated controls. Although mutant iPSCs were healthy, embryoid bodies were reduced in size by 50% ( Figure 4A and 4B ). The addition of CHIR99021 to the culture led to restoration of the size of the embryoid bodies, which suggests at least partial restoration of critical Wnt-mediated effects.
This observation prompted us to assess the effect of CHIR99021 on mouse embryogenesis. We administered intraperitoneal CHIR99021 (in dimethylsulfoxide) twice daily to dams of each Wls knock-in line, starting at embryonic day 4.5 and continuing until sacrifice at embryonic day 12.5. We observed near-complete rescue of tail growth in the p.Y478C line (Fig. S10A and S10B in Supplementary Appendix 1 ). In contrast, the p.Y392C line showed only partial rescue, with approximately 25% of treated embryos showing a diminutive tail as compared with absent tail bud in all dimethylsulfoxide-treated mutants. This finding is consistent with a more severe vertebral defect in the p.Y392C line.
To assess potential rescue at later stages, we extended the administration of CHIR99021 and control dimethylsulfoxide only to embryonic day 18.5, focusing on the p.Y478C mouse line. We found that both tail length and the number of caudal vertebrae were increased in the mice receiving CHIR99021 ( Figure 4C and 4D , and Fig. S10C and S10D in Supplementary Appendix 1 ). Moreover, the incidence of hydronephrosis was reduced from 75.0% to 22.7% ( Figure 4E and 4F ). Partial rescue of brain size was also observed, with substantial increases in the dorsoventral axis width (by 16.4%), cortical thickness (by 14.3%), and the number of cortical neurons (by 25.4% for CUX1+ and by 16.0% for CTIP2+) and hippocampal dentate gyrus cells (by 150.3%) ( Figure 4E and 4G , and Fig. S10E through S10I in Supplementary Appendix 1 ), each approaching sizes or cell numbers seen in controls. Altogether, these results suggest that treatment of the mutant mice with the Wnt agonist CHIR99021 can partially rescue pleiotropic developmental defects.

Section: Discussion

In this study, we explored genetic causes and mechanisms leading to structural birth defects, focusing on a pleiotropic multiorgan condition. We were aided by Family 1, which showed consistency in phenotype among siblings and helped to reveal the genetic cause. Through a worldwide recruitment of patients sharing damaging WLS mutations, we uncovered overlapping but not identical features among 10 patients, which suggests a distinct and recognizable disorder that we term Zaki syndrome (Fig. S11 in Supplementary Appendix 1 ). The clinical differences among families may represent genetic modifiers or environmental factors.
Our genetic findings provide evidence of impaired WLS function as a cause for this new condition. Although studies of patients’ cells confirmed defects in Wnt signaling and Wnt-dependent defects in embryoid bodies, introducing these mutations into mice confirmed these findings. We showed global reduction of Wnt signaling in knock-in mice on the basis of reporter activity. Mutant intermediate neural progenitors had a lengthened cell cycle as a likely mechanism, leading to the microcephaly seen in patients. A previous study showed that mice with conditionally deleted Wls in the epidermis had a hair-growth defect, similar to that observed in the affected children. Moreover, mutations in PORCN , which is required for Wnt lipid modification, cause ectrodactyly, a phenotype that we observed in the younger affected child in Family 2.
Some of the features of this new condition implicate specific Wnts. For instance, Wnt7b controls morphogenesis of the renal medulla, and Wnt3a and Wnt5a control somite and tail-bud morphogenesis, both affected in Wls knock-in mice. Similarly, WNT10B is mutated in patients with split-foot malformations, a phenotype seen in one of our patients. Rather than affecting a single Wnt, WLS is required for secretion of all Wnts, so the range of phenotypes probably reflects global or partial depletion across all early Wnt signaling.
Our findings suggest that pharmacologic intervention could be considered for some structural birth defects during gestation. In this study, the availability of CHIR99021 as a potent and cell-permeable Wnt agonist provided the opportunity to assess the degree to which the disease was a result of general depletion of Wnt signaling. CHIR99021 promotes the accumulation of beta-catenin, thus enhancing Wnt-mediated transcriptional signaling. CHIR99021 rescued diminutive size in patient iPSC-derived embryoid bodies, consistent with the roles of Wnt in maintaining cell “stemness.” Administration to pregnant dams also achieved substantial rescue of the brain, vertebrae, tail, and kidney phenotypes in the mutant embryos, without notable toxic effects in the pregnant dams. The safety of proposed therapies should be examined carefully in humans to rule out potential risks to mother and child.
We did not evaluate postnatal use of CHIR99021, but we do not rule out potential benefit, because we suspect that most future diagnoses of this condition will be made after rather than before birth. Differentiating outright structural defects, such as digit malformations, from defects such as microcephaly, short stature, and kidney defects, for which there is the potential to intervene postnatally, will be important. Development of preclinical models for the treatment of amenable structural defects could represent future studies within pediatrics.
