Title: Timing of Initiation of Renal-Replacement Therapy in Acute Kidney Injury


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Acute kidney injury is common in critically ill patients, many of whom receive renal-replacement therapy. However, the most effective timing for the initiation of such therapy remains uncertain.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a multinational, randomized, controlled trial involving critically ill patients with severe acute kidney injury. Patients were randomly assigned to receive an accelerated strategy of renal-replacement therapy (in which therapy was initiated within 12 hours after the patient had met eligibility criteria) or a standard strategy (in which renal-replacement therapy was discouraged unless conventional indications developed or acute kidney injury persisted for >72 hours). The primary outcome was death from any cause at 90 days.

Abstract_Section: Results

Of the 3019 patients who had undergone randomization, 2927 (97.0%) were included in the modified intention-to-treat analysis (1465 in the accelerated-strategy group and 1462 in the standard-strategy group). Of these patients, renal-replacement therapy was performed in 1418 (96.8%) in the accelerated-strategy group and in 903 (61.8%) in the standard-strategy group. At 90 days, death had occurred in 643 patients (43.9%) in the accelerated-strategy group and in 639 (43.7%) in the standard-strategy group (relative risk, 1.00; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.93 to 1.09; P=0.92). Among survivors at 90 days, continued dependence on renal-replacement therapy was confirmed in 85 of 814 patients (10.4%) in the accelerated-strategy group and in 49 of 815 patients (6.0%) in the standard-strategy group (relative risk, 1.74; 95% CI, 1.24 to 2.43). Adverse events occurred in 346 of 1503 patients (23.0%) in the accelerated-strategy group and in 245 of 1489 patients (16.5%) in the standard-strategy group (P<0.001).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among critically ill patients with acute kidney injury, an accelerated renal-replacement strategy was not associated with a lower risk of death at 90 days than a standard strategy. (Funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and others; STARRT-AKI ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02568722 .)

Section: Introduction

Acute kidney injury is a common complication in patients admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) and is associated with a high risk of death or major complications and a high level of resource use. Many patients who are seriously ill undergo renal-replacement therapy; however, the appropriate timing for the initiation of such therapy remains uncertain. When acute kidney injury is complicated by major metabolic disorders (e.g., acidosis, hyperkalemia, and uremia) and fluid disturbances that can be treated with renal-replacement therapy, there is general consensus that such therapy should be initiated. However, when severe acute kidney injury is not accompanied by one of these complications, the benefits of renal-replacement therapy are unclear.
The initiation of renal-replacement therapy before the onset of major complications has conceivable advantages for patients with severe acute kidney injury. Such therapy can restore and maintain acid–base homeostasis, mitigate fluid accumulation, and reduce exposure to the metabolic hazards of untreated acute kidney injury. However, wide adoption of early renal-replacement therapy in these patients may lead to initiation in those who would have survived and recovered kidney function without such therapy. Furthermore, given the risks of renal-replacement therapy, establishing whether earlier initiation can improve outcomes is important for patient care. Randomized trials that have compared early and delayed strategies for starting renal-replacement therapy in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury have shown discrepant findings.
Here, we report the results of a multinational, randomized, open-label, controlled trial (STARRT-AKI [Standard versus Accelerated Initiation of Renal-Replacement Therapy in Acute Kidney Injury]) to compare the effect of two strategies (accelerated initiation vs. standard initiation) in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. We hypothesized that an accelerated strategy for renal-replacement therapy would result in a lower risk of death from any cause at 90 days than a standard strategy.

Section: Methods

We conducted STARRT-AKI at 168 hospitals in 15 countries. A complete list of participating sites is provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. The protocol along with its statistical analysis plan (also available at NEJM.org) was published previously. The investigators designed the trial, wrote the manuscript, and vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and the analyses, for the adherence of the trial to the protocol, and for the complete reporting of adverse events. The funding organizations and partners were not involved in the design, implementation, or management of the trial, in the analysis of the data, or in the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
Approval for the conduct of the trial was obtained from the institutional review board at each participating site. We obtained written informed consent from patients or substitute decision makers unless the requirement for informed consent was waived, according to local standards and legislation. An independent data and safety monitoring board provided trial oversight. Interim analyses to evaluate the primary outcome were performed when enrollment reached 25%, 50%, and 75% of the target (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ).
Patients were eligible if they were 18 years or older and had been admitted to an ICU with kidney dysfunction (serum creatinine level, ≥1.13 mg per deciliter [100 μmol per liter] in women and ≥1.47 mg per deciliter [130 μmol per liter] in men) and severe acute kidney injury that was categorized as stage 2 or 3 of the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) classification (in which stages range from 1 to 3, with higher stages indicating greater severity). This determination of kidney injury was defined by a doubling of the serum creatinine level from baseline, a serum creatinine level of 4 mg per deciliter (354 μmol per liter) or more with an increase of 0.3 mg per deciliter (27 μmol per liter) from baseline, or a urine output of less than 6 ml per kilogram of body weight during the preceding 12 hours. The exclusion criteria were focused on emergency indications, previous renal-replacement therapy, advanced chronic kidney disease, and uncommon causes of acute kidney injury (as detailed in Table S2). The presence of all the inclusion criteria and none of the first eight exclusion criteria established provisional eligibility (Fig. S1).
To confirm full eligibility, patients’ attending physicians were asked to affirm clinical equipoise by noting the absence of any circumstances that would mandate either immediate initiation of renal-replacement therapy or a deferral of such therapy because of clinical judgment regarding the likelihood of imminent recovery of kidney function. After a determination of full eligibility, a 12-hour window was allotted for consent (as applicable), randomization, and the initiation of renal-replacement therapy for patients in the accelerated-therapy group.
At baseline, we evaluated patients using the Simplified Acute Physiology Score (SAPS) II on a scale that ranges from 0 to 163, with higher scores indicating more severe disease and a higher risk of death. Patients were also evaluated with the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) on a scale that ranges from 0 to 24, with higher scores indicating more severe disease and a higher risk of death.
Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive a strategy of accelerated or standard initiation of renal-replacement therapy. Randomization with variable block size (2 and 4) and site stratification were implemented with the use of a centralized Web-based platform.
In the accelerated-strategy group, clinicians were to start renal-replacement therapy as soon as possible and within 12 hours after patients had met full eligibility criteria. In the standard-strategy group, clinicians were discouraged from initiating renal-replacement therapy until the development of one or more of the following criteria: a serum potassium level of 6.0 mmol or more per liter, a pH of 7.20 or less or a serum bicarbonate level of 12 mmol per liter or less, evidence of severe respiratory failure based on a ratio of the partial pressure of arterial oxygen to the fraction of inspired oxygen of 200 or less and clinical perception of volume overload, or persistent acute kidney injury for at least 72 hours after randomization. For patients in the standard-strategy group, clinicians were not obligated to initiate renal-replacement therapy. Similarly, clinicians had discretion to initiate such therapy at any time if they perceived that deferral was no longer in the patient’s best interest.
The protocol provided recommendations for the delivery of renal-replacement therapy that aligned with recognized international guidelines. Discontinuation of renal-replacement therapy occurred at the time of recovery of kidney function, withdrawal of life-sustaining support, or death.
The primary outcome was death from any cause at 90 days after randomization. Key secondary outcomes at 90 days were dependence on renal-replacement therapy; a composite of death or dependence on renal-replacement therapy; and a major adverse kidney event, which was defined as death, dependence on renal-replacement therapy, or a sustained reduction in kidney function (i.e., an estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] of <75% of the baseline value ). Additional prespecified secondary outcomes included death in the ICU at 28 days or during hospitalization; the number of days free of renal-replacement therapy at 90 days; the number of ventilator-free and vasoactive-free days at 28 days ; the length of hospitalization and hospitalization-free days at 90 days; and health-related quality-of-life, as assessed at 90 days by means of the European Quality of Life–5-Dimensions 5-Level questionnaire (EQ-5D-5L; scores range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating a better quality of life).
Adverse events related to renal-replacement therapy and vascular access were reported through 14 days among all the patients who had undergone randomization and remained in the ICU. All serious adverse events were reviewed by the cochairs of the trial and by the chair of the data and safety monitoring board within 48 hours after notification.
We performed all analyses in accordance with the published statistical analysis plan using a modified intention-to-treat principle after the exclusion of patients who had withdrawn consent, had been lost to follow-up, or had undergone randomization but had subsequently been found to be ineligible. On the basis of an assumed 90-day mortality of 40% in the standard-strategy group, we calculated that the enrollment of 2866 patients would provide a power of 90% to detect a 15% relative between-group difference (absolute difference, 6 percentage points) in the primary outcome at a two-sided significance level of 0.05, while allowing for 3% attrition (withdrawal of consent, loss to follow-up, or crossover). To compensate for such attrition, we revised recruitment to 3000 patients. In the United Kingdom, enrollment was extended to meet local recruitment targets. The expansion in recruitment was approved by the data and safety monitoring board.
We evaluated the primary outcome of death at 90 days using a chi-square test, with the results reported as a relative risk and absolute risk difference with 95% confidence intervals. Death at 90 days was also reported in an adjusted logistic-regression analysis as an odds ratio with 95% confidence intervals and in a Kaplan–Meier time-to-event analysis in which data were censored at 90 days and compared with the use of a log-rank test. We performed prespecified exploratory analyses of the primary outcome (Table S3) and conducted prespecified subgroup analyses of the primary outcome for six variables: sex, baseline eGFR, baseline SAPS II, surgical admission, the presence of sepsis, and geographic region.
We reported secondary outcomes — including dependence on renal-replacement therapy, a composite of death or dependence on renal-replacement therapy, and a major adverse kidney event at 90 days — as unadjusted relative risks with 95% confidence intervals and performed between-group comparisons using a chi-square test. We used inverse probability weighting and multinomial regression to account for postrandomization selection bias when evaluating continuing dependence on renal-replacement therapy (Table S3). We used a t-test to compare serum creatinine levels and eGFR values among survivors at 90 days. We calculated medians and interquartile ranges to summarize the number of days that patients were alive and free of renal-replacement therapy, the use of vasoactive drugs or mechanical ventilation, ICU stay, hospital stay, and quality of life according to treatment group. We used linear regression to perform between-group comparisons and reported the results as mean differences and 95% confidence intervals. The statistical analysis plan did not include a provision that secondary analyses would be corrected for multiple comparisons. As such, the 95% confidence intervals have not been adjusted for multiplicity and should not be used to infer definitive treatment effects for secondary outcomes. All statistical analyses were performed with the use of Stata software, version 15, and R software, version 3.6.2.

Section: Results

From October 2015 through September 2019, a total of 11,852 patients met provisional eligibility. Of these patients, 3019 were randomly assigned to receive either an accelerated strategy for the initiation of renal-replacement therapy (1512 patients) or a standard strategy (1507 patients) (Fig. S2). The number of patients who were subsequently determined to be ineligible to participate were 31 (2.1%) in the accelerated-strategy group and 19 (1.3%) in the standard-strategy group (Table S4). In the accelerated-strategy group, 9 patients (0.6%) withdrew consent and 7 (0.5%) were lost to follow-up; the corresponding numbers in the standard-strategy group were 18 (1.2%) and 8 (0.5%). Thus, 2927 patients (1465 in the accelerated-strategy group and 1462 in the standard-strategy group) were included in the modified intention-to-treat analysis.
Baseline characteristics were well balanced in the two groups ( Table 1 and Table S5). In the entire population, chronic kidney disease was present in 1284 patients (43.9%); 965 patients (33.0%) had been admitted to undergo surgery, 1689 patients (57.7%) had sepsis, and the mean (±SD) SAPS II and SOFA scores were 58.8±17.4 and 11.7±3.6, respectively.
In the accelerated-strategy group, renal-replacement therapy was initiated at a median of 6.1 hours (interquartile range, 3.9 to 8.8) after the determination of full eligibility in 1418 of 1465 patients (96.8%). In the standard-strategy group, such therapy was initiated in 903 of 1462 patients (61.8%) at a median of 31.1 hours (interquartile range, 19.0 to 71.8) after the determination of full eligibility (Fig. S3). The characteristics of the patients at the time of renal-replacement therapy and features of the initial prescription are provided in Tables S6 and S7. Among the patients in the standard-strategy group who underwent renal-replacement therapy, 597 of 903 (66.1%) fulfilled at least one prespecified indication for the initiation of such therapy. At the time of initiation, the SOFA score, serum creatinine level, blood urea nitrogen level, and positive fluid balance were higher among the patients in the standard-strategy group than among those in the accelerated-strategy group.
In the modified intention-to-treat analysis, death at 90 days occurred in 643 patients (43.9%) in the accelerated-strategy group and in 639 (43.7%) in the standard-strategy group (relative risk, 1.00; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.93 to 1.09), for an absolute risk difference of 0.2 percentage points (95% CI, −0.3 to 0.4; P=0.92) ( Table 2 , Figure 1 , and Fig. S4). Results were similar in the adjusted analysis (adjusted odds ratio, 1.05; 95% CI, 0.90 to 1.23).
Among the patients who were alive at 90 days, continued dependence on renal-replacement therapy was determined in 85 of 814 (10.4%) in the accelerated-strategy group and in 49 of 815 (6.0%) in the standard-strategy group (relative risk, 1.74; 95% CI, 1.24 to 2.43). This result was robust after inverse probability weighting and in a multinomial analysis (Table S8).
There was no meaningful between-group difference in the composite of death or dependence on renal-replacement therapy, major adverse kidney events at 90 days, death in the ICU at 28 days, or length of hospitalization ( Table 2 ). In addition, there were no substantial between-group differences in the causes of death (Table S9). In each group, patients had a similar number of days free of renal-replacement therapy at 90 days; there were marginally fewer days of renal-replacement therapy among the patients in the accelerated-strategy group than among those in the standard-strategy group (−0.48 days; 95% CI, −0.82 to −0.14). Patients in the accelerated-strategy group had a shorter ICU stay than those in the standard-strategy group, but there was no evidence of large between-group differences in the number of ventilator-free days, vasoactive-free days, or ICU-free days at 28 days. Patients in the accelerated-strategy group had a higher risk of rehospitalization (relative risk, 1.23; 95% CI, 1.02 to 1.49), but there was no evidence of a large between-group difference in the number of hospitalization-free days at 90 days. Among survivors, measures of quality of life and functional domains were similar.
There was no evidence of substantial between-group heterogeneity of treatment effect regarding 90-day mortality across prespecified subgroups ( Figure 2 and Tables S10 and S11). Similarly, there was no evidence of substantial heterogeneity of treatment effect on 90-day mortality across SAPS II scores at the time of enrollment (Fig. S5).
In the as-treated analysis, there was no evidence of a between-group difference in 90-day mortality. Death was reported in 623 of 1418 patients (43.9%) in the accelerated-strategy group and in 659 of 1509 (43.7%) in the standard-strategy group (unadjusted odds ratio, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.87 to 1.17).
Adverse events occurred in 346 of 1503 patients (23.0%) in the accelerated-strategy group and in 245 of 1489 patients (16.5%) in the standard-strategy group (risk ratio, 1.40; 95% CI, 1.21 to 1.62; P<0.001) ( Table 3 ). Hypotension and hypophosphatemia were the most common adverse events with a significant between-group difference. There was no difference in serious adverse events between the two strategies.

Section: Discussion

In this large, multinational, randomized trial, critically ill patients with severe acute kidney injury who received an accelerated strategy for the initiation of renal-replacement therapy did not have a lower risk of death at 90 days than those who received a standard strategy. This finding clarifies a long-standing clinical dilemma regarding the treatment strategy for critically ill patients with acute kidney injury who have no overt complications that would mandate the immediate initiation of renal-replacement therapy. Observational studies using various biochemical thresholds as surrogates for the timing of initiation and a single-center randomized trial that enrolled primarily surgical patients suggested that earlier renal-replacement therapy resulted in a lower mortality than delayed therapy. Conversely, two multicenter, randomized trials, including one that exclusively involved patients with septic shock, did not show a lower risk of death with an early strategy than with a delayed strategy for the initiation of renal-replacement therapy. In these two trials, eligibility was tied to fulfilling consensus-defined serum creatinine levels and urine-output thresholds for severe acute kidney injury, with renal-replacement therapy initiated promptly after this determination in the early-therapy group. In the delayed-therapy group, the initiation of renal-replacement therapy was mandated for patients in whom acute kidney injury persisted for 48 to 72 hours or in whom metabolic or fluid complications developed. In the two trials, a sizable percentage of patients in the delayed-therapy group did not receive renal-replacement therapy because they either recovered kidney function or died.
In our trial, we aimed to enrich our patient population by incorporating clinical equipoise to guide eligibility, rather than relying on defined intervals after the patients fulfilled consensus criteria for severe acute kidney injury. This process excluded more than 7000 patients who had been rated by clinicians as being appropriate candidates for emergency renal-replacement therapy or likely to have imminent recovery of kidney function. Furthermore, triggers for the initiation of renal-replacement therapy in our standard-strategy group were not directed by thresholds for severity of acute kidney injury or defined time intervals. Our trial also provided evidence-informed recommendations for the prescription of renal-replacement therapy and adopted a pragmatic approach to reflect current practice. Similar to our pilot work and previous trials, a substantial percentage of the patients in the standard-strategy group did not receive renal-replacement therapy, which highlights the challenge faced by clinicians in predicting worsening acute kidney injury in critically ill patients. Despite these differences in trial design, we did not observe a lower 90-day mortality with an accelerated strategy, a finding that was robust in adjusted and sensitivity analyses.
A greater percentage of survivors who received the accelerated strategy were dependent on renal-replacement therapy at 90 days and had adverse events. This finding suggests that greater exposure to renal-replacement therapy, possibly modified according to baseline risk (e.g., the presence of chronic kidney disease) or mediated by iatrogenic factors (e.g., hypotension), may compromise kidney repair and the return of endogenous kidney function.
There are noteworthy strengths of our trial. First, our large sample size afforded the ability to detect a clinically important difference in mortality between accelerated and standard initiation of renal-replacement therapy. Second, the recruitment of patients from a wide spectrum of ICUs in several countries enabled broad generalizability. Third, our trial deliberately enrolled patients for whom the decision on the initiation of renal-replacement therapy was genuinely uncertain by excluding those for whom treating clinicians felt a lack of equipoise.
Our trial also has limitations. First, we recognize that equipoise is relatively subjective and that the perception of equipoise may be modified by individual clinician bias. By allowing clinicians to use their judgment in confirming full eligibility, we may have introduced patient heterogeneity into the trial. However, we did not observe evidence of substantial heterogeneity of treatment effect across subgroups, including illness severity and geographic region. Second, although the protocol provided recommendations on when to start renal-replacement therapy in patients in the standard-strategy group, the broad discretion that was afforded to clinicians may have resulted in variable initiation times. Third, adverse events were more frequent with the accelerated strategy, although this result may be partly attributed to the prespecified focus on reporting of events related to renal-replacement therapy and to the larger number of patient-days of such therapy with this strategy.
In conclusion, in critically ill patients with severe acute kidney injury, an accelerated strategy for the initiation of renal-replacement therapy did not result in a lower mortality at 90 days than a standard strategy.
