Title: A Novel Circulating Noncoding Small RNA for the Detection of Acute Myocarditis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

The diagnosis of acute myocarditis typically requires either endomyocardial biopsy (which is invasive) or cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (which is not universally available). Additional approaches to diagnosis are desirable. We sought to identify a novel microRNA for the diagnosis of acute myocarditis.

Abstract_Section: Methods

To identify a microRNA specific for myocarditis, we performed microRNA microarray analyses and reverse-transcriptase–quantitative polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-qPCR) assays in sorted CD4+ T cells and type 17 helper T (Th17) cells after inducing experimental autoimmune myocarditis or myocardial infarction in mice. We also performed RT-qPCR in samples from coxsackievirus-induced myocarditis in mice. We then identified a human noncoding RNA with high sequence similarity to mmu-miR-721 (we infer it to be a homologue) and compared its expression in plasma obtained from patients with acute myocarditis with the expression in various controls.

Abstract_Section: Results

We confirmed that Th17 cells, which are characterized by the production of interleukin-17, are a characteristic feature of myocardial injury in the acute phase of myocarditis. We found that mmu-miR-721 was synthesized by Th17 cells and was present in the plasma of mice with acute autoimmune or viral myocarditis but not in those with acute myocardial infarction. A homologous human small noncoding RNA, designated hsa-Chr8:96, was identified in four independent cohorts of patients with myocarditis. The area under the receiver-operating-characteristic curve for this novel RNA for distinguishing patients with acute myocarditis from those with myocardial infarction was 0.927 (95% confidence interval, 0.879 to 0.975). The association between hsa-Chr8:96 and myocarditis remained after adjustment for age, sex, ejection fraction, and serum troponin level.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

After identifying a microRNA in mice with myocarditis, we found that a novel human noncoding RNA (hsa-Chr8:96) with a similar sequence is associated with myocarditis in patients. (Funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation and others.)

Section: Introduction

Myocarditis is a disease with multiple causes (e.g., infectious pathogens, toxins, drugs, and autoimmune disorders ) that may resolve spontaneously, cause sudden cardiac death, or evolve into dilated cardiomyopathy. The actual prevalence of the disease remains uncertain because of the difficulty of reaching a confirmatory diagnosis in many cases. Myocarditis is a frequent final diagnosis in patients who receive an initial diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA), a clinical entity that occurs in approximately 10 to 20% of patients who meet the criteria for myocardial infarction. The diagnosis of myocarditis is usually established after ruling out coronary artery disease by means of coronary angiography or computed tomography and confirming the presence of Lake Louise criteria on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, cardiac MRI is not available in all centers. The reference standard for diagnosis relies on endomyocardial biopsy, which is usually reserved for severe cases. Therefore, reliable and accessible diagnostic tools for the early diagnosis of acute myocarditis are an unmet clinical need.
The phenotypes of circulating T cells are altered in both myocarditis and myocardial infarction. Cardiac myosin-specific type 17 helper T (Th17) lymphocytes play a central role in the development of myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy and in the production of anti–myocardial antibodies in viral myocarditis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as innovative biomarkers for cardiovascular disease. We sought to identify a human miRNA that might potentially be used to distinguish acute myocarditis from myocardial infarction. We identified an association between a human noncoding RNA and myocarditis.

Section: Methods

By analyzing circulating T cells obtained from mice and humans with myocarditis and myocardial infarction, we confirmed that Th17 cells are a characteristic feature of myocardial injury in the acute phase of myocarditis. Screening of miRNAs that are synthesized by Th17 cells with the use of microarrays and reverse-transcriptase–quantitative polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-qPCR) assays showed that mmu-miR-721 was specific for Th17 cells and plasma in mice with autoimmune or viral myocarditis. Since no human homologue had been described previously, we cloned a putative homologue by means of RT-qPCR from plasma obtained from patients with myocarditis. We sequenced the PCR product. Coimmunoprecipitation and luciferase assays showed that the human small RNA, which we designated hsa-Chr8:96, could potentially be a functional human miRNA, although further research is required to confirm that this is the case. We observed an association between hsa-Chr8:96 and myocarditis in four independent cohorts using RT-qPCR. The animal models and human study participants are described below; details regarding the study methods are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
This multicenter study was approved by the ethics committee of the Carlos III Institute of Health and the research ethics committee at each of the participating hospitals; a list of centers is provided in the Supplementary Appendix . All the participants provided written informed consent for the use of their samples and data.
Wild-type BALB/c mice and CD69 knockout mice were bred at the National Center for Cardiovascular Research (CNIC) animal facility for use in our experimental autoimmune myocarditis model. Mice between the ages of 8 and 12 weeks were immunized subcutaneously on days 0 and 7 with 100 μg per 0.2 ml of cardiac α-myosin heavy-chain peptide (residues 614–629; Ac-RSLKLMATLFSTYASADR-OH), emulsified in a 1:1 ratio in complete Freund’s adjuvant. Severe experimental autoimmune myocarditis was induced in the CD69 knockout mice ; less severe (moderate) experimental autoimmune myocarditis was induced in the wild-type mice. Sex- and age-matched littermates were immunized with complete Freund’s adjuvant and saline as controls. In separate experiments, wild-type BALB/c mice between the ages of 8 and 12 weeks underwent permanent ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery to induce myocardial infarction, with sham-operated mice used as controls, as described in the Supplementary Appendix .
Experimental autoimmune myocarditis was also induced in mice expressing antigen-specific T-cell receptors. We purchased C57BL/6-Tg (TcraTcrb) 425Cbn/J mice (called OT-II) expressing a T-cell receptor specific for peptide 323–339 of ovalbumin in the context of murine major histocompatibility complex class II alleles H-2 I-Ab from the Jackson Laboratory (stock number 004194). Additional OT-II mice were backcrossed with CD69 knockout mice, which are both from the same inbred strain (C57BL/6 background).
The mice were housed under specific pathogen-free conditions at the CNIC animal facility. All procedures involving the mice were approved by the Comunidad Autónoma de Madrid and conducted in accordance with Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of September 22, 2010, on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes.
Wild-type BALB/c or C57BL/6 mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory. Eight-week-old mice were inoculated intraperitoneally with 10 plaque-forming units of coxsackievirus B3 that had been isolated from a patient (Nancy strain) and passaged through Vero cells and then through the heart (i.e., heart-passaged) in saline, as described in the Supplementary Appendix . Control mice received intraperitoneal saline injections. Serum and hearts were collected 10 days after infection, as described previously. Mice were maintained under pathogen-free conditions in the animal facility at Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, and approval was obtained from the Animal Care and Use Committee of Mayo Clinic for all procedures.
The main study cohort included 132 patients with initial clinical suspicion of acute myocarditis and myocardial injury, ventricular dysfunction, or both (Tables S1 and S2 in the Supplementary Appendix ). Of these patients, 42 had a final diagnosis of myocarditis on the basis of cardiac MRI that met the typical Lake Louise diagnostic criteria; 90 patients were diagnosed with myocardial infarction and were included in the analysis as comparators. A total of 80 healthy participants with no abnormal findings on electrocardiography or echocardiography were included as additional controls.
We carried out, in a blinded manner, three additional tests of association (i.e., tests of replication) between hsa-Chr8:96 and myocarditis. Cohort 1 was provided by the Partners Biobank (Boston) and included 34 patients with an established diagnosis of acute myocarditis and 11 patients with myocardial infarction as comparators (Table S3). Cohort 2, which has been described previously, was provided by the Center for Molecular Cardiology of the University Hospital Zurich (Switzerland). This cohort included 35 patients with an established diagnosis of acute myocarditis and 20 patients with MINOCA (Table S4). Cohort 3 included samples from 40 patients selected from a prospective cohort recruited at the University of Padua (Italy) with a biopsy-proven diagnosis of myocarditis. In addition, samples from 49 patients with acute myocardial infarction from the Biobank Regional Platform (Murcia, Spain) were analyzed in parallel as comparators (Table S5). We also assayed has-Chr8:96 in samples obtained from patients in a control cohort: patients with Th17-related immunologic diseases without cardiac involvement (Table S6). A detailed description of the cohorts is provided in the Supplementary Appendix . Blood samples were obtained at the time of diagnosis with the exception of cohort 1 (from Partners Biobank); blood samples from patients in this cohort may have been obtained after the date of diagnosis.
We first evaluated the normality of the distributions using the D’Agostino–Pearson test. If distributions were normal, we used the unpaired Student’s t-test for two-group comparisons and one-way analysis of variance analysis with Tukey’s post hoc test when more than two groups were compared. If distributions were nonnormal, we used the Mann–Whitney U-test for the analysis of two groups and the Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s post hoc test for multiple-group comparisons. In the kinetic experiments, one-way repeated-measures analysis of variance with Dunnett’s multiple comparison post hoc test or two-way repeated-measures analysis of variance with Sidak’s multiple comparison post hoc test were performed. To assess the association of hsa-Chr8:96 with myocarditis, we performed logistic-regression analyses after adjustment for sex, age, troponin level (normalized value), and ejection fraction with or without the addition of hsa-Chr8:96 as an independent variable. We performed analysis of the receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC) curves to evaluate diagnostic performance and DeLong’s test for comparisons. We estimated the best cutoff value for hsa-Chr8:96 (expressed as a relative gene-expression value calculated by the delta–delta Ct [cycle threshold] method for the RT-qPCR analysis) for achieving both a sensitivity and specificity of more than 90% or the value presenting the highest likelihood ratio. Data analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism software, version 7.0, and R software, version 3.6.2.

Section: Results

We assessed myocardial injury and T-cell responses after inducing experimental autoimmune myocarditis or myocardial infarction in mice (Fig. S1). Substantial elevations in levels of cardiac troponin I, creatine kinase MB, and lactate dehydrogenase above the basal level suggested that myocardial injury peaked approximately 21 days after the induction of myocarditis and 3 days after the induction of myocardial infarction ( Figure 1A and Fig. S1A and S1B). The left ventricular ejection fraction dropped promptly after myocardial infarction (>50% reduction at day 3) and also declined in myocarditis (significant decrease at day 21) ( Figure 1B and Fig. S2A). An analysis of circulating T cells showed a significant increase in the number of Th17 cells 14 days after either myocarditis or myocardial infarction ( Figure 1C and Fig. S2B through S2F). The number of Th17 cells was not significantly increased at days 3 or 7 after myocardial infarction (the time of peak biomarker elevation). Therefore, Th17 cells appear to be characteristic of the acute phase of myocardial injury in myocarditis (on day 21) but not the acute phase of myocardial injury in myocardial infarction (on day 3) ( Figure 1C ).
We also assessed T-cell responses in 42 patients with acute myocarditis, in 45 patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), in 45 patients with non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), and in 80 healthy controls. Demographic and clinical data are summarized in Tables S1 and S2. Patients with myocarditis and those with STEMI had significantly greater reductions in the ejection fraction than did healthy controls ( Figure 1D ). T-cell subgroups that were analyzed in blood showed a significant increase in Th17 cells in patients with acute myocarditis ( Figure 1E and Fig. S3A). The prominent role of Th17 cells in patients with myocarditis is highlighted by increased ratios of Th17 cells to both Th1 cells and regulatory T cells (Fig. S3B) and by increased absolute numbers of Th17 cells (Fig. S3C).
We performed miRNA screening of T-cell subgroups obtained from the peripheral blood of mice that had experimental autoimmune myocarditis. The T-cell subgroups that were analyzed included CD4+ T cells, polyclonal Th17 cells, and cultures enriched with ovalbumin antigen-specific Th17 (Th17ag-sp) cells or Th17ag-sp sorted cells (Fig. S4A). Microarray analysis identified 27 miRNAs that were up-regulated in both Th17ag-sp cultures and Th17ag-sp sorted cells ( Figure 2A , Fig. S4B, and Table S7). MiRNA profiling of Th17ag-sp sorted cells obtained from CD69 knockout mice (in which severe myocarditis develops ) as compared with wild-type mice (in which moderate myocarditis develops) showed mmu-miR-721 and mmu-miR-483-5p as the most strongly up-regulated miRNAs (Table S8). Analysis by RT-qPCR showed that mmu-miR-721 expression was specific for Th17ag-sp cells ( Figure 2B and Fig. S4C). Pathway analysis software (Ingenuity) of gene-expression profiles of these Th17ag-sp cells identified roles for the selected miRNAs in T-cell homeostasis and differentiation (Fig. S4D) and identified validated target genes related to Th17-cell function, such as Pparg , Nos2 , Stat3 , Tgfβ , and Cd69 (Fig. S4E).
MiRNA profiling in sorted CD4+ T cells from draining lymph nodes 6 days after the induction of myocarditis or 3 days after coronary artery ligation in mice (Fig. S4F) revealed that mmu-miR-721 and mmu-miR-483-5p were overexpressed in myocarditis-associated CD4+ T cells as compared with myocardial infarction-associated CD4+ T cells ( Figure 2C and 2D and Table S9). Analysis of sorted T cells by RT-qPCR (Fig. S4G) confirmed that mmu-miR-721 was synthesized by Th17ag-sp cells in myocarditis ( Figure 2E ).
We detected expression of mmu-miR-721 in plasma from mice with experimental autoimmune myocarditis and expression of mmu-miR-483-5p in plasma from mice with acute myocardial infarction ( Figure 3A ). The relative expression of mmu-miR-721 increased in CD69 knockout mice ( Figure 3B ). During the development of experimental autoimmune myocarditis, the time course of the rise and fall of circulating Th17 cells was similar to that of circulating mmu-miR-721 ( Figure 3C ). In a murine model of viral myocarditis caused by coxsackievirus B3 infection (Fig. S5), circulating mmu-miR-721 expression at 10 days was significantly higher in C57BL/6 mice, in which severe heart inflammation developed, than in BALB/c mice, in which less severe inflammation developed ( Figure 3D ).
Because a human homologue of mmu-miR-721 had not been identified, we searched the human genome for sequences similar to mmu-miR-721 (Fig. S6A; details are provided in the Supplementary Methods section of the Supplementary Appendix ). We also used the primers previously used to identify mmu-miR-721 to generate PCR products from human plasma (from healthy donors and from patients with myocardial infarction or myocarditis). The yield of amplification product with these primers ( Figure 4A and Fig. S6B) and cloning efficiency ( Figure 4B ) was higher with plasma from patients with myocarditis than with plasma from patients with myocardial infarction or healthy controls. Screening of bacterial colonies harboring the purified PCR product yielded an 18-nucleotide sequence identical to mmu-miR-721 ( Figure 4B ), which was highly conserved across mammalian species (Fig. S6A) and located on chromosome 8 in the human genome (genomic sequence, NC_018919.2) (Fig. S6C), as previously described by Wheeler et al. We postulated that the 3 nucleotides (TCT) at the 5′ end could complete a small RNA with high homology to mmu-miR-721 (TCTTGCAATTAAAAGGGGGAA), which we called hsa-Chr8:96.
MiRNAs are defined by their length and their association with members of the Argonaute protein family. We generated a 350-nucleotide fragment encompassing the hsa-Chr8:96 sequence and flanking sequence from the genomic DNA of human blood leukocytes ( Figure 4C ; information about primers is provided in Table S13) and inserted it into a pCDH-CopGFP vector. We transfected HEK-293 cells with this vector insert and then performed coimmunoprecipitation of RNA with an IgG 1 monoclonal antibody against Argonaute-2 or IgG 1 control antibody, followed by RT-qPCR analysis against hsa-Chr8:96 (TCTTGCAATTAAAAGGGGGAA). The primers designed to amplify hsa-Chr8:96 yielded comparatively robust levels of product, a finding that supports a physical association between this RNA and Argonaute-2. For functional validation, we cloned the reverse-complementary sequence of hsa-Chr8:96 ( Figure 4D ) in a luciferase dual reporter vector. Supernatants from peripheral-blood leukocytes obtained from patients with myocarditis inhibited the luciferase activity, which supports the conclusion that hsa-Chr8:96 is a functionally active small RNA.
We performed RT-qPCR to assay hsa-Chr8:96 and miRNAs in plasma samples from the main cohort (Table S1). We analyzed hsa-miR-483-5p and hsa-miR-21, which are abundant after myocardial injury, and hsa-miR-132-3p and hsa-miR-212-3p, which promote Th17-cell differentiation, together with hsa-Chr8:96. The levels of hsa-Chr8:96 were greater in patients with myocarditis than in either patients with myocardial infarction or healthy controls ( Figure 5A ). The novel circulating hsa-Chr8:96 was specifically synthesized by Th17 cells obtained from patients with myocarditis (Fig. S6D and S6E). ROC curves were generated to determine the extent to which hsa-Chr8:96 can differentiate plasma from persons with myocarditis from that of persons with mycardial infarction or healthy controls. Among the patients with myocarditis, the area under the ROC curve was 0.927 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.879 to 0.975) as compared with patients with myocardial infarction and 0.988 (95% CI, 0.970 to 1.006) as compared with healthy controls ( Figure 5B and Table S10). We analyzed additional patient cohorts with different comparators, which confirmed that hsa-Chr8:96 was specifically expressed in plasma from patients with myocarditis, as compared with those with myocardial infarction ( Figure 5C and Table S3) or MINOCA ( Figure 5D and Table S4). These data were also validated in a cohort of patients with biopsy-proven myocarditis ( Figure 5E and Table S5), along with patients who had other Th17-related diseases (rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthritis, psoriasis, and multiple sclerosis) (Table S6 and Fig. S6F). The ability of hsa-Chr8:96 to distinguish acute myocarditis from myocardial infarction remained significant after adjustment for age, sex, ejection fraction, and serum troponin level ( Figure 5F and 5G and Fig. S6G).

Section: Discussion

In this study, we identified mmu-miR-721 as a marker of myocarditis in murine models (including experimental autoimmune myocarditis and viral myocarditis) and a human circulating small noncoding RNA, which we designated hsa-Chr8:96. We tested for and found associations between plasma hsa-Chr8:96 and myocarditis in four patient cohorts with different comparators, including patients with myocardial infarction, MINOCA, or autoimmune diseases, and healthy volunteers.
Approaches used in previous studies of miRNA expression in the heart during autoimmune or viral myocarditis and of circulating miRNAs in patients with heart failure would not necessarily have identified candidate miRNAs or other types of noncoding RNA in different types of cardiac injury. Here, we investigated the expression of small RNAs by Th17 cells, which play an important role in both myocarditis and myocardial infarction, and detected a novel circulating noncoding RNA associated with myocarditis. Results obtained from experiments involving immunoprecipitation with an anti–Argonaute-2 antibody and assays with a luciferase-reporter construct are consistent with hsa-Chr8:96 having miRNA-like properties. Further investigation (including RNA sequencing) of the properties of hsa-Chr8:96 is warranted.
In clinical practice, the diagnosis of myocarditis remains a challenge because of the lack of easily accessible diagnostic methods that are both sensitive and specific. Endomyocardial biopsy remains the reference standard, but it is not routinely performed owing to its associated risks as an invasive procedure. Although cardiac MRI is noninvasive, it also has limitations, including the lack of availability in many hospitals and in the ambulatory setting; in addition, the sensitivity of cardiac MRI to detect edema and vascular permeability decreases over time. Therefore, there is a need for new diagnostic methods.
Additional work will be necessary to determine whether hsa-Chr8:96 is suitable for use as a diagnostic test for myocarditis. This circulating RNA has not yet been evaluated in other cardiac disorders, such as dilated cardiomyopathy, from which myocarditis must be distinguished in the clinical setting. In addition, in our study, we observed variable levels of hsa-Chr8:96; the source of this variation remains unexplained.
In sum, we identified an miRNA in mice with myocarditis and found that a homologous circulating RNA in humans, hsa-Chr8:96, is associated with myocarditis.
