Title: Overall Survival with Osimertinib in Untreated, EGFR -Mutated Advanced NSCLC


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Osimertinib is a third-generation, irreversible tyrosine kinase inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR-TKI) that selectively inhibits both EGFR-TKI–sensitizing and EGFR T790M resistance mutations. A phase 3 trial compared first-line osimertinib with other EGFR-TKIs in patients with EGFR mutation–positive advanced non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The trial showed longer progression-free survival with osimertinib than with the comparator EGFR-TKIs (hazard ratio for disease progression or death, 0.46). Data from the final analysis of overall survival have not been reported.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this trial, we randomly assigned 556 patients with previously untreated advanced NSCLC with an EGFR mutation (exon 19 deletion or L858R allele) in a 1:1 ratio to receive either osimertinib (80 mg once daily) or one of two other EGFR-TKIs (gefitinib at a dose of 250 mg once daily or erlotinib at a dose of 150 mg once daily, with patients receiving these drugs combined in a single comparator group). Overall survival was a secondary end point.

Abstract_Section: Results

The median overall survival was 38.6 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 34.5 to 41.8) in the osimertinib group and 31.8 months (95% CI, 26.6 to 36.0) in the comparator group (hazard ratio for death, 0.80; 95.05% CI, 0.64 to 1.00; P=0.046). At 3 years, 79 of 279 patients (28%) in the osimertinib group and 26 of 277 (9%) in the comparator group were continuing to receive a trial regimen; the median exposure was 20.7 months and 11.5 months, respectively. Adverse events of grade 3 or higher were reported in 42% of the patients in the osimertinib group and in 47% of those in the comparator group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among patients with previously untreated advanced NSCLC with an EGFR mutation, those who received osimertinib had longer overall survival than those who received a comparator EGFR-TKI. The safety profile for osimertinib was similar to that of the comparator EGFR-TKIs, despite a longer duration of exposure in the osimertinib group. (Funded by AstraZeneca; FLAURA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02296125 .)

Section: Introduction

In patients with advanced or metastatic non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with mutations in the gene encoding epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) that are sensitive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) (exon 19 deletions or L858R point mutations), guidelines recommend treatment with an EGFR-TKI. The clinical practice guidelines of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network recommend osimertinib as the preferred EGFR-TKI option for first-line treatment in such patients.
Osimertinib is a third-generation, irreversible, oral EGFR-TKI that selectively inhibits both EGFR-TKI–sensitizing and EGFR p.Thr790Met (T790M) resistance mutations and has shown efficacy in patients with NSCLC who have central nervous system (CNS) metastases. The FLAURA trial was a double-blind, phase 3 trial involving patients with previously untreated advanced NSCLC with EGFR mutations that compared the efficacy and safety of osimertinib with that of two other EGFR-TKIs, gefitinib or erlotinib (with both drugs included in the comparator group).
The primary analysis (data cutoff on June 12, 2017) showed significantly longer progression-free survival with the osimertinib regimen than with the comparator regimen (median duration, 18.9 months vs. 10.2 months; hazard ratio for disease progression or death, 0.46; P<0.001). At the time of the primary analysis, overall survival data were immature (data maturity, 25%) but showed a trend toward longer overall survival with osimertinib (hazard ratio for death, 0.63; P=0.007). The safety profile of osimertinib was similar to that of the comparator EGFR-TKIs, and the rates of serious adverse events were lower with osimertinib. On the basis of these efficacy and safety data, the indication for osimertinib was extended to include first-line treatment in patients with advanced NSCLC whose tumors have sensitizing EGFR mutations. Here, we report the results of the planned final analysis of overall survival.

Section: Methods

Full details regarding the FLAURA trial have been published previously and are provided in the trial protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. In brief, eligible patients were 18 years of age or older (20 years or older in Japan), had locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with an EGFR mutation (exon 19 deletion or L858R), had not previously received treatment for advanced disease, and were eligible to receive first-line treatment with gefitinib or erlotinib. Patients with known or suspected CNS metastases were eligible to participate if their condition was neurologically stable.
The trial was conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Declaration of Helsinki, Good Clinical Practice guidelines (as defined by the International Conference on Harmonisation), applicable regulatory requirements, and the policy on bioethics and human biologic samples of the trial sponsor, AstraZeneca. All the patients provided written informed consent.
The trial was funded by the sponsor and was designed by the principal investigators (first and last authors) and the sponsor. The sponsor was responsible for the collection and analysis of the data and had a role in data interpretation. All the authors had full access to all the data. The first draft of the manuscript was written by the first and last authors, with medical-writing support funded by the sponsor; all the authors reviewed the manuscript before it was submitted for publication. The authors vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the adherence of the trial to the protocol.
In this double-blind, phase 3 trial, patients were stratified according to EGFR mutational status (exon 19 deletion or L858R) and race (Asian or non-Asian) and were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive either oral osimertinib (at a dose of 80 mg once daily) or a comparator oral EGFR-TKI (gefitinib at a dose of 250 mg once daily or erlotinib at a dose of 150 mg once daily) until disease progression, unacceptable toxicity, or withdrawal of consent. Patients in the comparator group (a combination of those who received either gefitinib or erlotinib) were eligible for crossover to open-label osimertinib after disease progression had been objectively confirmed on blinded independent central review (or by investigator assessment if disease progression occurred after the primary data cutoff) and after post-progression documentation of the presence of a T790M resistance mutation on local or central testing.
Overall survival was a key secondary end point in the trial. According to the protocol, after the analysis of the primary end point of progression-free survival had been performed (data cutoff, June 12, 2017), central collection of progression events, defined according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1, was stopped.
After the primary data cutoff, tumor assessments were performed in accordance with clinical practice, and scans were no longer centrally collected. Assessments for survival were made every 6 weeks after objective disease progression up to the time of the final analysis of overall survival. Overall survival was defined as time from randomization until death from any cause. Adverse events were graded with the use of the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0.
The final analysis of overall survival was planned after approximately 318 deaths had occurred in the full analysis set. We used the Kaplan–Meier method with a log-rank test, stratified according to race (Asian vs. non-Asian) and mutational status (exon 19 deletion vs. L858R), to compare overall survival in the two groups; the Breslow approach was used to handle tied events. The hazard ratio and confidence interval were obtained directly from a stratified log-rank test. Data from patients who had not died at the time of the analysis were censored on the basis of the last recorded date that the patient was known to be alive.
We calculated that the trial would have a power of 72% to determine a hazard ratio of less than 0.75 (indicating a longer duration of median overall survival, from 25.0 to 33.3 months) with a two-sided significance level of 0.05. The Lan–DeMets approach that approximates the O’Brien–Fleming spending function was used to maintain an overall two-sided 5% type I error rate across the interim and final analyses of overall survival. The P value that was observed at the interim analysis of overall survival was not significant. This finding did not preclude further planned testing of overall survival, and according to the Lan–DeMets approach, a two-sided P value of 0.0495 was considered to indicate statistical significance for the final analysis of overall survival. A 95.05% confidence interval for the final analysis of the hazard ratio for overall survival was calculated because of the remaining alpha of 0.0495 after the interim analysis. All other confidence intervals are reported as 95%, since all P values reported for overall survival are nominal and not part of the multiple-testing strategy. The data cutoff for the final analysis was June 25, 2019.
We used a Cox proportional-hazards model to analyze overall survival in predefined subgroups. There had to be at least 20 deaths in a subgroup for it to be included in the analysis. In the subgroup analysis, all hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals were adjusted for trial group, subgroup, and a treatment-by-subgroup interaction term for each subgroup. Additional details regarding the statistical analysis are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.

Section: Results

From December 2014 through March 2016, a total of 556 patients underwent randomization (279 to receive osimertinib and 277 to receive a comparator EGFR-TKI) and received at least one dose of a trial drug. In the comparator group, 183 patients (66%) received gefitinib and 94 patients (34%) received erlotinib as their assigned treatment. The demographic characteristics of the patients at baseline have been reported previously. The enrollment and outcomes in the two groups are presented in Figure S1 in the Supplementary Appendix .
At the time of the data cutoff, the median duration of treatment exposure was 20.7 months (range, 0.1 to 49.8) in the osimertinib group and 11.5 months (range, 0.0 to 50.6) in the comparator group. The number of patients who were continuing to receive the assigned trial drug at the time of the data cutoff was 61 (22%) in the osimertinib group and 13 (5%) in the comparator group.
At the time of data cutoff, 321 deaths had occurred (58% maturity), representing the planned number of events and maturity. All the patients had the opportunity to have a follow-up of 39 months; the median duration of follow-up for overall survival was 35.8 months in the osimertinib group and 27.0 months in the comparator group. The median overall survival was 38.6 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 34.5 to 41.8) in the osimertinib group and 31.8 months (95% CI, 26.6 to 36.0) in the comparator group (hazard ratio for death, 0.80; 95.05% CI, 0.64 to 1.00; P=0.046) ( Figure 1 ). Survival rates and the number of patients continuing to receive the first-line trial drug were consistently higher in the osimertinib group than in the comparator group at months 12, 24, and 36 ( Table 1 ).
The overall survival benefit with osimertinib as compared with the comparator EGFR-TKIs was consistent across most predefined subgroups, with varying magnitude of benefit ( Figure 2 ). The confidence intervals were overlapping within and across all subgroups. The largest numerical between-group differences in the hazard ratios for overall survival were observed between Asian and non-Asian patients. The Kaplan–Meier estimates for the subgroup comparison between Asian and non-Asian patients and between mutational status (exon 19 deletion vs. L858R) are provided in Figure S2.
In total, 133 patients (48%) in the osimertinib group and 180 (65%) in the comparator group started a first subsequent anticancer therapy after the discontinuation of the assigned treatment. Of these patients, 85 of 180 (47%) in the comparator group received osimertinib as the first subsequent therapy ( Figure 3A ); these patients made up 31% of the 277 who had been assigned to the comparator group. Among all the patients who underwent randomization, the number of those who received a second subsequent therapy was 72 of 279 (26%) in the osimertinib group and 92 of 277 (33%) in the comparator group. Among the patients who received a first subsequent therapy, the number of those who received a second subsequent therapy was 72 of 133 (54%) in the osimertinib group and 92 of 180 (51%) in the comparator group ( Figure 3B ). (Additional data regarding the time until the first and second subsequent therapies or death and the subsequent therapies received are provided in the Results section in the Supplementary Appendix and in Fig. S3 and Tables S3 and S4.)
In the analysis of overall survival, the safety profile of osimertinib was consistent with the safety profile in the primary analysis. Overall, 98% of the patients in the two trial groups had at least one adverse event ( Table 2 ). Adverse events that were deemed to be possibly related to the trial drug are listed in Table S5. Adverse events of grade 3 or higher were reported in 42% of the patients in the osimertinib group and in 47% of those in the comparator group (Table S6). Serious adverse events were reported in 27% of the patients in each trial group (Table S7). A decrease in the ejection fraction was reported in 13 patients (5%) in the osimertinib group and in 5 (2%) in the comparator group, with no associated symptoms reported. QT prolongation on electrocardiography was reported in 28 patients (10%) in the osimertinib group and in 12 patients (4%) in the comparator group. There were no new reports of interstitial lung disease, which was reported in 6 patients (2%) in the osimertinib group and in 4 (1%) in the comparator group, or of pneumonitis, which was reported in 5 (2%) and 2 (1%), respectively.
Fatal adverse events were reported in 9 patients (3%) in the osimertinib group and in 10 (4%) in the comparator group. None of the deaths in the osimertinib group and 2 in the comparator group were deemed by investigators to be treatment-related.
In the osimertinib group, dose interruptions occurred in 120 patients (43%), dose reductions in 14 (5%), and permanent discontinuation of treatment because of adverse events in 41 (15%); in the comparator group, the corresponding numbers were 113 (41%), 10 (4%), and 50 (18%). (Additional details regarding adverse events are provided in the Results section in the Supplementary Appendix .)

Section: Discussion

In the FLAURA trial, a double-blind, randomized phase 3 trial involving untreated patients with EGFR mutation–positive advanced NSCLC, those who received osimertinib had significantly longer progression-free survival leading to significantly longer overall survival than those who received a comparator EGFR-TKI (either gefitinib or erlotinib) (hazard ratio for disease progression or death, 0.46 [P<0.001]; hazard ratio for death, 0.80 [P=0.046]). With an opportunity to conduct at least 39 months of follow-up in the two groups, the median overall survival was longer by 6.8 months in the osimertinib group than in the comparator group, with a 20% lower risk of death, even in the presence of crossover from the comparator group to the osimertinib group. Furthermore, at 36 months, three times as many patients were continuing to receive the assigned trial drug in the osimertinib group as in the comparator group. No new safety signals were observed, and adverse events of grade 3 or higher and rates of treatment discontinuation because of adverse events were similar in the two groups, despite the longer duration of exposure to osimertinib.
An overall survival benefit with osimertinib was observed across most of the predefined subgroups. The magnitude of benefit varied, with hazard ratios close to 1.00 among both the Asian and L858R EGFR mutational subgroups. The Kaplan–Meier curve for survival among Asian patients showed an early advantage for osimertinib that remained until approximately 3 years of follow-up. As a secondary end point, the trial and the analysis of the Asian subgroup of patients were not powered for overall survival analysis.
Osimertinib is more effective in pretreated patients in whom the EGFR T790M resistance mutation develops than are other earlier-generation EGFR-TKIs. Therefore, crossover from the comparator group to the osimertinib group probably contributed to the duration of overall survival in the comparator group (31.8 months). Previous clinical trials of first- and second-generation EGFR-TKIs have shown results for median overall survival ranging from approximately 18 to 28 months. More recently, the ARCHER 1050 trial showed a median overall survival of 26.8 months for gefitinib and 34.1 months for dacomitinib. However, unlike the FLAURA trial, the ARCHER 1050 trial excluded patients with CNS metastases, a complication that is associated with shorter survival.
In the FLAURA trial, patients with documentation of a T790M-positive mutation after disease progression were eligible for crossover from the comparator group to receive second-line osimertinib. After disease progression, the EGFR T790M resistance mutation develops in approximately 50% of the patients who are receiving earlier-generation EGFR-TKIs, thus creating a biologically driven limit to the number of patients who are eligible to receive osimertinib as a second-line therapy. In the real-world setting, it has been reported that 25 to 39% of patients who receive first- or second-generation EGFR-TKIs go on to receive osimertinib as a second-line therapy, in line with the crossover rate of 31% (in 85 of 277 patients) observed in all the patients who were assigned to the comparator group in FLAURA (i.e., 85 of 180 patients [47%] who discontinued the comparator EGFR-TKI and received osimertinib as the first subsequent therapy).
Subsequent therapies that were received in each trial group were consistent with expectations on the basis of the treatment guidelines for this patient population. The majority of patients in the osimertinib group received chemotherapy as the first subsequent therapy, whereas crossover to osimertinib was the most common first subsequent therapy in the comparator group. The proportions of patients who received another EGFR-TKI–containing regimen (other than osimertinib) were similar in the two groups. Similar proportions of patients received a second subsequent therapy in the two groups, and the types of therapies that they received were similar.
In the two groups, approximately 30% of the patients discontinued the trial drug and did not receive a first subsequent therapy, owing to death in approximately 70% of these patients. This percentage is consistent with the results from previous studies involving patients with EGFR mutations who received EGFR-TKI therapies. This observation has been the basis for use of the most effective therapies in the first-line treatment for patients with advanced-stage cancers.
Among the patients with NSCLC who have EGFR mutations, CNS metastases are detected in approximately 25% of the patients at the time of diagnosis and develop in approximately 50% of all the patients within 3 years after diagnosis. As we reported in the primary analysis of data from the FLAURA trial, osimertinib also had activity in patients with CNS metastases. Progression-free survival at 18 months among patients with CNS metastases was 58% (95% CI, 40 to 72) in the osimertinib group and 40% (95% CI, 25 to 55) in the comparator group (hazard ratio for disease progression or death, 0.48; 95% CI, 0.26 to 0.86).
Understanding resistance mechanisms after first-line treatment and determining appropriate therapies on the basis of molecular-resistance profiles remain important considerations. Preliminary data suggest that first-line osimertinib resistance mechanisms are similar to those observed in patients with the T790M mutation who are receiving osimertinib as a second-line therapy; such resistance mechanisms are also similar to those associated with less frequent mutations (i.e., other than T790M) that are seen in patients who have resistance to other first- and second-generation EGFR-TKIs. Further research is ongoing in the phase 2 ELIOS trial (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03239340 ). Research to understand the most effective treatment on the basis of resistance patterns after disease progression while patients are receiving first-line osimertinib therapy is also ongoing in two phase 2 studies: the ORCHARD trial ( NCT03944772 ) and the SAVANNAH trial ( NCT03778229 ).
Thus, we found that first-line treatment with osimertinib was associated with significantly longer overall survival than treatment with comparator EGFR-TKIs in patients with EGFR mutation–positive, locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC and had a similar safety profile.
