Title: Vemurafenib plus Rituximab in Refractory or Relapsed Hairy-Cell Leukemia


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Hairy-cell leukemia (HCL) is a CD20+ indolent B-cell cancer in which a BRAF V600E kinase–activating mutation plays a pathogenetic role. In clinical trials involving patients with refractory or relapsed HCL, the targeting of BRAF V600E with the oral BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib led to a response in 91% of the patients; 35% of the patients had a complete response. However, the median relapse-free survival was only 9 months after treatment was stopped.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a phase 2, single-center, academic trial involving patients with refractory or relapsed HCL, we assessed the safety and efficacy of vemurafenib (960 mg, administered twice daily for 8 weeks) plus concurrent and sequential rituximab (375 mg per square meter of body-surface area, administered for 8 doses over a period of 18 weeks). The primary end point was a complete response at the end of planned treatment.

Abstract_Section: Results

Among the 30 enrolled patients with HCL, the median number of previous therapies was 3. A complete response was observed in 26 patients (87%) in the intention-to-treat population. All the patients who had HCL that had been refractory to chemotherapy (10 patients) or rituximab (5) and all those who had previously been treated with BRAF inhibitors (7) had a complete response. Thrombocytopenia resolved after a median of 2 weeks, and neutropenia after a median of 4 weeks. Of the 26 patients with a complete response, 17 (65%) were cleared of minimal residual disease (MRD). Progression-free survival among all 30 patients was 78% at a median follow-up of 37 months; relapse-free survival among the 26 patients with a response was 85% at a median follow-up of 34 months. In post hoc analyses, MRD negativity and no previous BRAF inhibitor treatment correlated with longer relapse-free survival. Toxic effects, mostly of grade 1 or 2, were those that had previously been noted for these agents.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In this small study, a short, chemotherapy-free, nonmyelotoxic regimen of vemurafenib plus rituximab was associated with a durable complete response in most patients with refractory or relapsed HCL. (Funded by the European Research Council and others; HCL-PG03 EudraCT number, 2014-003046-27 .)

Section: Introduction

Hairy-cell leukemia (HCL) is an indolent, mature B-cell neoplasm that is highly responsive to the purine analogues cladribine and pentostatin. However, up to 58% of patients with HCL have a relapse, with the disease becoming progressively less sensitive to purine analogues, which also cause cumulative hematologic and immunologic toxic effects. Therefore, for patients with refractory or relapsed HCL, nonmyelosuppressive therapies that provide a durable complete response, including the eradication of minimal residual disease (MRD), are needed.
We previously found that the BRAF V600E kinase–activating mutation is the causal genetic lesion of HCL that critically drives its pathogenesis ; this finding opened the way to a new targeted therapeutic approach. Besides case reports and a retrospective patient series, two multicenter, phase 2 studies that were performed in Italy and the United States, involving 54 patients with refractory or relapsed HCL, showed activity of the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib, with 91% of the patients having an overall response and 35% having a complete response in the intention-to-treat analysis. However, all the complete responses that were investigated by immunohistochemical testing of bone marrow–biopsy samples showed the persistence of 5 to 10% residual leukemic cells. Relapses were therefore common; the median relapse-free survival from the end of treatment was 19 months after a complete response, 6 months after a partial response, and 9 months after any response.
Vemurafenib-resistant leukemic cells retain strong CD20 expression, which is a potential target for the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab; rituximab frequently induces responses but induces few complete remissions in patients with refractory or relapsed HCL. Because rituximab is not myelotoxic and may complement intracellular BRAF inhibition in killing leukemic cells by means of a different mechanism, we performed a phase 2 clinical trial of vemurafenib plus rituximab in an effort to improve the depth and duration of response in patients with refractory or relapsed HCL.

Section: Methods

We enrolled patients with HCL and mutated BRAF V600E who met any of the following criteria: primary refractoriness to a purine analogue (defined as no response to first-line treatment or relapse within 1 year); early relapse (within 1 to 2 years) after the first course of a purine analogue or at any time after a second or later course; severe side effects from purine analogues; ineligibility for chemotherapy; and previous treatment with a BRAF inhibitor. All the patients had to have cytopenia, defined as a hemoglobin level below 11.0 g per deciliter, a neutrophil count below 1500 per cubic millimeter, or a platelet count below 100,000 per cubic millimeter. Active infection was not an exclusion criterion.
This phase 2, single-group, single-center study (HCL-PG03) was designed, conducted, and managed by the Institute of Hematology, University of Perugia. Study drugs were purchased with research funds that were provided by nonprofit organizations and that were managed by the University of Perugia. The study was designed by the first and the last authors. All the authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the adherence of the study to the protocol (available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). No one who is not an author contributed to the writing of the manuscript.
The treatment plan included a total of 8 weeks of oral vemurafenib (960 mg twice daily) and eight intravenous rituximab infusions (375 mg per square meter of body-surface area) administered over a period of 18 weeks. Patients underwent two induction cycles, each consisting of 4 weeks of vemurafenib treatment and of two rituximab infusions on days 1 and 15, followed by 2 weeks of rest and response evaluation (including a bone marrow biopsy). After the second cycle, four additional doses of rituximab were administered as consolidation therapy 2 weeks apart from one another. The end-of-treatment response evaluation (which included another bone marrow biopsy) was conducted 4 weeks after the last dose of rituximab. Response was then monitored (including bone marrow biopsy) every 6 months. Treatment was to be delivered in an outpatient setting.
The primary end point was a complete response at the end of planned treatment. We also evaluated the time to response, MRD status, survival (progression-free, relapse-free, and MRD-free), and safety.
Complete response was defined as the resolution of cytopenias (hemoglobin, ≥11 g per deciliter; neutrophil count, ≥1500 per cubic millimeter; and platelet count, ≥100,000 per cubic millimeter), no palpable splenomegaly, and no hairy cells morphologically visible in the bone marrow–biopsy and blood-smear samples. Partial response was defined as the resolution of cytopenias and a reduction of at least 50% in splenomegaly and in HCL infiltration in the bone marrow–biopsy sample on immunohistochemical testing. MRD was assessed in bone marrow aspirates and in peripheral blood by means of allele-specific DNA polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) testing for BRAF V600E (sensitivity, ≥0.05% mutant copies). A relapse was defined as the reappearance of HCL-related cytopenia in patients who had previously had a response at the end of treatment. Progression was defined as HCL-related death, relapse, or worsening of cytopenias, whichever occurred first, after the start of treatment.
Toxic effects were graded according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.03. Dermatologic examinations were conducted every 4 weeks of vemurafenib administration; blood counts and chemical tests were conducted every 1 to 2 weeks during treatment and every 3 months thereafter. Further details are provided in the protocol.
The sample size was determined with the use of a Simon’s minimax two-stage statistical design. We hypothesized that at least 60% of the patients would have a complete response at the end of planned treatment, against a null hypothesis that no more than 20% of patients would have a complete response. With the enrollment of 30 patients, the type I error would be 0.005 and the type II error would be 0.02. The duration of survival was assessed with the use of the Kaplan–Meier method. Patients had their data censored when they were found to be free from the event at the last available follow-up. Differences in survival were assessed by a two-sided log-rank test.

Section: Results

From March 2015 through June 2017, a total of 31 patients were enrolled in the study. The median age of the patients was 61 years (range, 35 to 81); 28 patients were men, and 3 were women. The patients had received a median of 3 therapies (range, 1 to 14) previously ( Table 1 ; and Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org). All the patients had received a purine analogue previously, with 11 patients (35%) having disease that was refractory to that agent (including 8 patients who had primary refractory disease) and 2 patients (6%) in late relapse who were ineligible for further chemotherapy owing to side effects from purine analogues (in 1 patient) or atrial fibrillation and little hematopoietic reserve (in 1 patient who was 79 years of age). Fifteen patients (48%) had received interferon. Fourteen patients (45%) had received rituximab previously, with 7 (23%) having disease that was refractory to that agent (either alone [in 5 patients] or in combination with a purine analogue [in 2]). A total of 7 patients (23%) had a relapse after receipt of a BRAF inhibitor (either vemurafenib [in 5 patients] or dabrafenib [in 2]) after having had a complete response (in 2 patients), a short-lived partial response (in 4), or a minor response (in 1). Six patients (19%) had disease that was refractory to the immediately preceding therapy.
All the patients had cytopenias. The median neutrophil count was 686 per cubic millimeter, and the median platelet count was 53,000 per cubic millimeter. A total of 20 patients (65%) had splenomegaly (median spleen diameter, 18 cm; range, 14 to 28).
Three patients started study therapy while having untreated pulmonary aspergillosis (Patient 26) or a probable fungal sinus infection or bacteremia (Patients 10 and 11, respectively) for which antimicrobial treatment had recently been started. Treatment for all patients was delivered in an outpatient setting, with no antimicrobial prophylaxis for herpes zoster or Pneumocystis jirovecii . However, the three patients above started treatment while they were hospitalized for infections; three additional patients had a brief hospitalization to receive one or more doses of rituximab at a slow infusion rate overnight owing to previous grade 2 infusion reactions. The planned vemurafenib dose was 960 mg twice daily, but one patient received vemurafenib at dose of 720 mg twice daily owing to toxic effects during previous vemurafenib monotherapy.
Shortly after the initiation of treatment, 1 patient (Patient 11) was found to have an unclassifiable B-cell neoplasm instead of HCL and was withdrawn from the study. Furthermore, 3 of the remaining 30 patients could not be evaluated for the primary end point (complete response at the end of planned treatment) because they had received only a minor part of the planned therapy. Patient 10 died from a preexisting probable fungal sinus infection after receiving 10 days of treatment with vemurafenib and 1 dose of rituximab. Patient 9 was withdrawn from the study owing to poor adherence after the occurrence of vemurafenib- and rituximab-related grade 2 toxic effects; he had received vemurafenib for 5 weeks and rituximab for 3 infusions, both at partly reduced doses. Patient 8 had persistent cytopenias after receiving 5 weeks of vemurafenib therapy and 3 doses of rituximab (despite clearance of HCL from bone marrow, including MRD negativity) owing to a concomitant myelodysplastic syndrome (retrospectively documented also in the baseline bone marrow sample).
In the intention-to-treat analysis, a complete response occurred in 26 of 30 patients (87%, P=0.005). Data from a representative patient are shown in Figure 1A . Patient 8, who had concomitant myelodysplasia, had MRD negativity after the first cycle of therapy. Therefore, 27 patients (90%) had a complete response or cleared MRD. The 3 patients who could not be evaluated for the primary end point were assumed not to have had a complete response and were thus excluded from the analyses of relapse-free and MRD-free survival.
The 26 patients with a complete response included 2 with a slightly delayed platelet recovery and 2 with an incomplete resolution of splenomegaly, both of whom had an otherwise continuous MRD-negative complete response at 25 months after the end of treatment. After treatment for HCL, residual splenomegaly (even with hypersplenism, although neither of these 2 patients had it) may be observed in the context of a complete response along with post-therapy thickening of the spleen capsule and fibrosis of the red pulp that possibly impede the return to normal organ size.
A complete response occurred in all 10 patients who had disease that was refractory to purine analogues, in all 7 patients who had previously been treated with a BRAF inhibitor, in all 5 patients who could be evaluated and had disease that was refractory to rituximab, in 16 of 17 patients who could be evaluated and had splenomegaly (up to 28 cm), and in the 1 patient who had undergone splenectomy. One patient (Patient 31) had a partial response as the best response during the two induction cycles; the leukemia in this patient quickly relapsed during the subsequent consolidation therapy with rituximab.
Of the 24 patients who could be evaluated after cycle 1 (4 weeks of vemurafenib treatment and 2 doses of rituximab), 15 (62%) had a complete response. Recovery of platelet, neutrophil, and hemoglobin values (defined, respectively, as ≥100,000 per cubic millimeter, ≥1500 per cubic millimeter, and ≥11 g per deciliter) occurred after a median of 2 weeks, 4 weeks, and 4 weeks, respectively. Palpable splenomegaly rapidly resolved in most patients.
One patient who was receiving frequent transfusions owing to long-standing deep cytopenias (including a neutrophil count of <100 per cubic millimeter) had at baseline a probable invasive fungal infection (pneumonia by Aspergillus terreus , which was documented by means of bronchoalveolar sampling and extensive lung involvement on computed tomography). Sepsis due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa developed in this patient the day after treatment was started. Treatment with vemurafenib plus rituximab led to recovery from neutropenia within 4 weeks and, in combination with antibacterial and antifungal therapy, which were started on days 2 and 3, respectively, of cycle 1, led to recovery from pneumonia and sepsis and to a complete response after cycle 2.
MRD, as assessed by means of PCR testing for BRAF V600E, was negative in the bone marrow aspirate and peripheral blood of 17 of the 26 patients (65%) with a complete response. In an analysis involving all 30 enrolled patients, 18 patients (60%) had MRD negativity. MRD negativity occurred by cycle 2 in 9 of these 18 patients (50%). In 7 patients (39%), MRD negativity occurred after subsequent consolidation therapy with rituximab ( Figure 1B ). The remaining 2 patients (11%), who were MRD-positive at the end of treatment, became MRD-negative in all subsequent bone marrow and peripheral-blood evaluations, including the last ones, which occurred at 36.5 months and 38 months after the cessation of therapy. In an unplanned hypothesis-generating exploratory analysis, a complete response after cycle 1 (which occurred in 15 patients) was associated with MRD clearance at the end of treatment, which was observed in 13 of these 15 patients (87%), as compared with 2 of 9 patients (22%) who had a complete response after cycle 2 (in 7 patients) or at the end of treatment (in 2).
Among all 30 enrolled patients (including those who could not be evaluated for a response), progression-free survival from the start of treatment was 78% at a median follow-up of 37 months (range, 0.5 to 54.5) ( Figure 2A ). Relapse-free survival from the end of treatment in the 26 patients who could be evaluated was 85% at a median follow-up of 34 months (range, 13 to 50) ( Figure 2B ). Among the 17 patients who were MRD-negative after the end of treatment, survival free from MRD in both bone marrow and peripheral blood was 100% at a median of 28.5 months (range, 21 to 50) after the MRD-negative status was first observed ( Figure 2C ).
Of the 26 patients with a complete response, the 4 who had a relapse were all MRD-positive after the end of treatment; 3 of these patients had previously received a BRAF inhibitor (and had had a partial response [in 2] or a minor response [in 1]). In unplanned hypothesis-generating exploratory analyses, we found that an absence of previous exposure to a BRAF inhibitor and the occurrence of MRD negativity considerably improved relapse-free survival. In particular, at a median of 34 months, relapse-free survival was 57% among the 7 patients with a complete response who had previously been treated with a BRAF inhibitor, as compared with 95% among the remaining 19 patients with a complete response who had not received a BRAF inhibitor previously ( Figure 3A ). Among patients with a complete response, relapse-free survival was 100% among the 17 patients with MRD negativity and 56% among the 9 patients with MRD positivity ( Figure 3B ). Previous exposure to rituximab did not influence relapse-free survival, which was 89% among the 9 patients who had received rituximab previously and 82% among the remaining 17 patients who had not received rituximab previously ( Figure 3C ). The 5 patients who had rituximab-refractory disease and could be evaluated, all of whom had a complete response (4 were MRD-negative and 1 was MRD-positive), were relapse-free at their last follow-up (19.5 to 49.5 months).
In post hoc hypothesis-generating analyses involving the 7 patients with previous exposure to a BRAF inhibitor (all of whom had a complete response after treatment with vemurafenib and rituximab), the median relapse-free survival after treatment with vemurafenib plus rituximab was considerably longer (the median relapse-free survival was not reached at a median-follow-up of 19.5 months; range, 13 to 38) than that after the previous receipt of BRAF inhibitor monotherapy (median, 4 months) ( Figure 3D ). Furthermore, among the same 7 patients, the cumulative relapse-free survival after BRAF inhibitor monotherapy plus after subsequent treatment with vemurafenib and rituximab was considerably lower than that among the remaining 19 patients with a complete response who had received their first course of vemurafenib directly with rituximab (cumulative relapse-free survival, 57% vs. 95% at a median follow-up of 35 months [range, 17 to 64] from the end of treatment) ( Figure 3E ).
Toxic effects of the study drugs, which were mostly of grade 1 or 2, were all transient and had previously been seen in patients receiving vemurafenib and rituximab as monotherapies ( Table 2 ). Rituximab-related toxic effects were mostly infusion-related reactions (in 29% of the patients) and transient neutropenia (in 16%). Vemurafenib-related toxic effects were similar to those that have been reported in previous trials — cutaneous rash, photosensitivity, warts, fever, hyperkeratosis, arthralgias or arthritis, fatigue, alopecia, and nausea or dyspepsia. We also observed one case of melanoma in situ that was treated by means of surgical excision (the melanoma was possibly preexisting among the hundreds of melanocytic lesions that had been present in this patient at baseline), one case of resected basal-cell carcinoma of no clinical relevance, and two cases of clinically suspected keratoacanthomas that were not excised and that disappeared after study treatment. Liver and pancreatic biochemical abnormalities were frequent but always clinically silent.
Among the 29 patients who received more than 15 of the 56 planned days of vemurafenib treatment, the drug dose (960 mg twice daily) was reduced for at least 2 weeks in 16 instances, involving 14 patients (48%). In particular, the dose was reduced to 720 mg twice daily in 12 patients and to 480 mg twice daily in 2 patients, owing to asymptomatic increase in the amylase or lipase level (in 5 patients), cutaneous rash (in 3), arthralgia (in 3), and hyperbilirubinemia, potential interaction with concomitant antifungal treatment (voriconazole), and hemolytic anemia (in 1 patient each). Because the toxic effects were transient and largely mild, most patients were able to have the dose reescalated to 960 mg twice daily (in 9 patients) or 720 mg twice daily (in 1).
Overall, the median dose intensity of vemurafenib that was actually received by the 29 patients who could be evaluated was 92% (interquartile range, 88 to 100) of the planned schedule. In the 5 patients who either did not have a complete response (1 patient) or had a relapse after a complete response (4 patients), the relative dose intensity was 100%, 88%, 89%, 66%, and 67%. The latter 2 patients had the two lowest relative dose intensities across all 29 patients who could be evaluated, whereas the next higher relative dose intensity in a patient was substantially higher (at 80%). Thus, among the 27 patients who could be fully evaluated for treatment efficacy, the receipt of less than 70% relative dose intensity was more frequent among the patients who had a lack of response to, or relapse after, treatment with vemurafenib plus rituximab (2 of 5 patients [40%]) than in those who had a response and no relapse (0 of 22 patients) (P=0.03 by Fisher’s exact test). We note, however, the caveat represented by the very small number of patients (2) who received less than 70% relative dose intensity; furthermore, 1 of those 2 patients had been previously treated with a BRAF inhibitor, which is a potentially confounding variable that also seemed to negatively affect relapse-free survival in this study.

Section: Discussion

In this study, we found that vemurafenib plus rituximab was a short and safe treatment that was capable of rapidly inducing a deep and durable complete response in the majority of patients with refractory or relapsed HCL. In a comparison with historical data on vemurafenib alone, the addition of rituximab to vemurafenib led to more than double the percentage of patients with a complete response (35% vs. ≥87%) and also halved the median time to a complete response (8 weeks vs. 4 weeks). The median exposure to vemurafenib and to its potential side effects was also halved, from a period of 16 to 18 weeks to 8 weeks, so that patients were able to receive this drug safely at a high dose intensity (median, 92%). A total of 65% of the patients with a complete response were MRD-negative (as compared with none of the patients who had received vemurafenib monotherapy ), which translated into a relapse-free survival of 85% at a median follow-up of 34 months (as compared with a median relapse-free survival of 9 months after vemurafenib monotherapy ). These results were observed in 30 heavily pretreated patients.
In exploratory analyses, and with the caveat of the small numbers, we found that patients who had previously been treated with BRAF inhibitor monotherapy had deeper and longer responses on subsequent treatment with vemurafenib plus rituximab than they had had with the previous monotherapy. However, they seemed to benefit from these two successive treatments for a shorter cumulative time than did patients who had not received a BRAF inhibitor previously and who received vemurafenib directly with rituximab in a single treatment. These findings suggest that, although such a regimen remains a valuable option for patients whose disease progresses after receipt of a BRAF inhibitor, vemurafenib plus rituximab can be offered instead of vemurafenib alone as soon as patients are considered to be eligible for a BRAF inhibitor.
We chose the standard vemurafenib dose (960 mg twice daily) that has been approved for the treatment of BRAF V600E–positive solid cancers and that has already been shown to be effective in clinical trials involving patients with relapsed or refractory HCL. However, in this trial, we found that the duration of treatment could be substantially shortened to improve patients’ ability to take this drug dose. In a retrospective series, lower doses of vemurafenib monotherapy were reported to be active in patients with refractory or relapsed HCL. In our trial, the receipt of a relative dose intensity lower than 70% seemed to be associated with treatment failure; however, treatment failure occurred rarely, and other variables (e.g., previous treatment with a BRAF inhibitor) may confound this association. Therefore, ad hoc prospective comparative clinical studies are necessary to establish (ideally in a randomized manner) whether lower vemurafenib doses, in combination with rituximab therapy, would maintain the same efficacy as the standard dose while further reducing the incidence and severity of toxic effects.
Long-lasting T-cell immunosuppression is well known in patients with HCL that has been treated with purine analogues. We did not perform CD4 T-cell counts in our patients after therapy with vemurafenib plus rituximab because no treatment-related infections were recorded in previous trials of vemurafenib monotherapy, nor were they observed in the current trial. We note that vemurafenib plus rituximab could be safely administered in a patient who had untreated severe active infections (pulmonary aspergillosis and bacterial sepsis) and that this treatment probably contributed to the resolution of the infections (in conjunction with antimicrobial therapy) by quickly increasing the neutrophil count.
The anti-HCL activity of this chemotherapy-free regimen (complete response in 87% of patients, MRD-negative status in 60%, and relapse-free survival of 85% at a median of 34 months) compares favorably with the two most effective alternative treatment options that have been evaluated in patients with characteristics similar to those in this trial (i.e., a median of 3 previous therapies). In particular, myelotoxic therapy with purine analogues plus rituximab in 26 patients with disease that was not refractory to purine analogues (as compared with the 37% of patients with purine analogue–refractory disease in our trial) resulted in a complete response in 88% of the patients with an unknown MRD status and in a relapse-free survival of 87% at a median of 78 months. In another study, which involved 77 patients with HCL, the anti-CD22 immunotoxin moxetumomab pasudotox induced a complete response in 43% of the patients and MRD-negative status in 35% (relapse-free survival was not reported). Previous splenectomy or substantial splenomegaly was associated, respectively, with no or fewer complete responses after moxetumomab pasudotox therapy, whereas splenomegaly or previous splenectomy seemed not to adversely affect the efficacy of vemurafenib plus rituximab therapy. These two chemotherapy-free treatments have distinct toxic effects and share the advantage of not being myelosuppressive.
The clinical relevance of MRD after first-line treatment for HCL is uncertain. Current consensus guidelines regarding HCL do not make specific recommendations regarding where and how to quantify MRD (in bone marrow or peripheral blood; with the use of flow cytometry, immunohistochemical testing, or molecular assays ) or whether to treat MRD. The results obtained with vemurafenib plus rituximab therapy (in this trial) or with moxetumomab pasudotox therapy, although based on different methods to assess MRD, strongly suggest that its clearance from both the bone marrow and peripheral blood is likely to be clinically meaningful in patients with refractory or relapsed HCL. Specifically, the persistence of MRD at the end of treatment correlated with earlier relapse of cytopenias in this trial of vemurafenib plus rituximab (in which MRD was assessed by PCR testing for BRAF V600E) and with the criteria for complete response no longer being met (including, but not limited to, normal blood counts) in the trial of moxetumomab pasudotox (in which MRD was assessed by immunohistochemical testing or flow cytometry ).
This study showed that vemurafenib plus rituximab was a short chemotherapy-free regimen that was active in patients in whom treatment with purine analogues had failed. Owing to the absence of myelotoxic effects, this combination may also be helpful with regard to delivering a definitive treatment in contexts in which highly immunosuppressive chemotherapy is contraindicated, such as in patients who have active infections or are at risk for coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19). A randomized comparison of vemurafenib plus rituximab is warranted against the chemotherapy-based standard of care in the context of first-line therapy to assess whether similar efficacy can be obtained with lower toxicity.
