Title: Weight Loss in Underserved Patients — A Cluster-Randomized Trial


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Evidence of the effectiveness of treatment for obesity delivered in primary care settings in underserved populations is lacking.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a cluster-randomized trial to test the effectiveness of a high-intensity, lifestyle-based program for obesity treatment delivered in primary care clinics in which a high percentage of the patients were from low-income populations. We randomly assigned 18 clinics to provide patients with either an intensive lifestyle intervention, which focused on reduced caloric intake and increased physical activity, or usual care. Patients in the intensive-lifestyle group participated in a high-intensity program delivered by health coaches embedded in the clinics. The program consisted of weekly sessions for the first 6 months, followed by monthly sessions for the remaining 18 months. Patients in the usual-care group received standard care from their primary care team. The primary outcome was the percent change from baseline in body weight at 24 months.

Abstract_Section: Results

All 18 clinics (9 assigned to the intensive program and 9 assigned to usual care) completed 24 months of participation; a median of 40.5 patients were enrolled at each clinic. A total of 803 adults with obesity were enrolled: 452 were assigned to the intensive-lifestyle group, and 351 were assigned to the usual-care group; 67.2% of the patients were Black, and 65.5% had an annual household income of less than $40,000. Of the enrolled patients, 83.4% completed the 24-month trial. The percent weight loss at 24 months was significantly greater in the intensive-lifestyle group (change in body weight, −4.99%; 95% confidence interval [CI], −6.02 to −3.96) than in the usual-care group (−0.48%; 95% CI, −1.57 to 0.61), with a mean between-group difference of −4.51 percentage points (95% CI, −5.93 to −3.10) (P<0.001). There were no significant between-group differences in serious adverse events.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

A high-intensity, lifestyle-based treatment program for obesity delivered in an underserved primary care population resulted in clinically significant weight loss at 24 months. (Funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute and others; PROPEL ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02561221 .)

Section: Introduction

Obesity is a disease with a high prevalence that has a major effect on public health in the United States. Approximately 40% of American adults have obesity, which confers a predisposition to type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and premature death. Health disparities in obesity also exist: the prevalence is higher among Black and Hispanic adults than among White and Asian adults, and the prevalence is highest among adults in some demographic groups with low income and limited education.
The 2013 guideline of the American College of Cardiology, the American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the Obesity Society states that an intensive lifestyle intervention is the centerpiece of effective weight loss. However, primary care practitioners have been slow to adopt this approach. Concomitantly, the prevalence of obesity has increased in the population, while the number of patients with obesity who receive weight counseling from their primary care practitioners has declined substantially. The sole reliance on primary care practitioners to deliver obesity treatment has limitations, in part because of the limited time available during office visits, a lack of training in behavioral therapy among primary care practitioners, and low reimbursement. Thus, the investigation of different models to promote weight loss in primary care, especially in underserved populations at high risk for obesity, is needed. We report the results of a cluster-randomized trial that we conducted in an underserved population to test the hypothesis that patients who receive a high-intensity lifestyle intervention, tailored to the health-literacy level of the population, would have greater weight loss than patients who receive usual care.

Section: Methods

The Promoting Successful Weight Loss in Primary Care in Louisiana (PROPEL) trial was a cluster-randomized, two-group trial conducted in 18 primary care clinics that served racially diverse, low-income populations across Louisiana. Clinics were randomly assigned to provide patients with either an intensive lifestyle intervention or usual care. All the patients provided written informed consent, and the protocol (published previously and available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org) was approved by the institutional review board of the Pennington Biomedical Research Center. Health and Nutrition Technology (Carmel, CA) provided the HealthONE formula, and Nutrisystem (Fort Washington, PA) provided the meal-replacement products for patients in the intensive-lifestyle group. Trial data were collected and managed with the use of Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) tools hosted by the Pennington Biomedical Research Center.
The trial was designed by 13 of the authors, and data were collected by 6 of the authors in collaboration with research coordinators. The first author wrote the first draft of the manuscript, with input from all authors, and vouches for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the adherence of the trial to the protocol. All the authors approved the submission of the manuscript for publication.
The primary inclusion criteria included an age of 20 to 75 years and a body-mass index (the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters) of 30 to 50. Exclusion criteria included current participation in a weight-loss program, use of weight-loss medications, and a history of bariatric surgery or recent weight loss. Full eligibility criteria are provided in the protocol.
Patients were recruited into the intensive-lifestyle group or the usual-care group according to the random assignment of the clinic. Detailed descriptions of the interventions in the two groups have been published previously. In brief, the intensive intervention was adapted from the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), Action for Health in Diabetes (Look AHEAD), and Comprehensive Assessment of Long-term Effects of Reducing Intake of Energy (CALERIE) trials and consisted of weekly sessions (16 conducted in person and 6 conducted by telephone) in the first 6 months, followed by sessions (alternating in-person visits and telephone calls) held at least monthly for the remaining 18 months (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org). Most sessions were conducted individually, although some sessions were conducted in small groups of two to four patients, depending on patient preference and scheduling availability. All the interventions were adapted to be appropriate for the health-literacy level of the trial population through extensive consultation with our patient advisory boards. The intensive intervention was delivered by health coaches embedded in primary care clinics. At a minimum, coaches had academic degrees related to nutrition, physical activity, and behavioral medicine and underwent an initial 1.5-day training session and yearly retraining. Weekly case-conferencing webinars attended by the coaches and the research team were held throughout the trial.
For patients in the intensive-lifestyle group, the personal goal was a 10% loss in body weight; patients received coaching on how to set their own goals and develop action plans for eating and physical activity. Patients were encouraged to increase their physical activity to 175 minutes per week. The initial focus of the intervention was on portion-controlled foods (e.g., bananas, apples, soups, and frozen entrees) and the provision of prepackaged foods and meal-replacement shakes during the first month. After the first month, patients received instruction regarding how to purchase, prepare, and package foods to manage portion size and energy intake in collaboration with their health coaches. A weight-loss calculator was used to calculate personalized energy-intake targets for each patient that would result in 10% weight loss at 6 months and was then used to create a weight graph that showed each patient’s predicted weight loss over time. Patients were provided with an electronic scale (BodyTrace) and were encouraged to weigh themselves daily. The daily weights were automatically plotted onto the weight graph, which was available to patients and their health coaches and allowed the coaches to monitor weight loss and adapt the intensity of the intervention.
Primary care practitioners of patients in the intensive-lifestyle group attended a series of five webinar presentations, which included information on the management of obesity, the management of coexisting conditions such as type 2 diabetes and hypertension, minimization of bias and stigma related to obesity, and principles of health literacy.
Patients in the usual-care group received routine care from their primary care team throughout the trial. In addition, they received six newsletters covering topics related to sitting and health, goal setting, staying safe in the heat, memory health, self care, sleep hygiene, and smoking cessation. Primary care practitioners of patients in the usual-care group attended a seminar and received a brochure, both of which described weight management in primary care and the current Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services approach to reimbursement for obesity treatment.
Outcomes were assessed at baseline and at the visits at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months. The primary outcome was the percent change in weight from baseline at 24 months. Secondary weight-related outcomes included the change in absolute weight (in kilograms) and the change in waist circumference (in centimeters). Additional secondary outcomes included risk factors for cardiovascular disease and patient-reported outcomes. Body weight was measured with a digital scale to the nearest 0.1 kg, and waist circumference was measured to the nearest 0.1 cm with the use of an anthropometric tape placed midway between the lower rib margin and the iliac crest, after gentle expiration.
With an enrollment target of 18 clinics with an average of 45 patients recruited per clinic, we hypothesized that the trial would have a minimum power of 80% to detect a 3.5-percentage-point difference in the primary outcome at 24 months between the intensive-lifestyle group and the usual-care group for the planned subgroup analyses. The total sample size would provide at least 97% power to detect a mean percent weight loss at 24 months in the intensive-lifestyle group that was 3.5 percentage points greater than that in the usual-care group. The type I error rate was 0.05 for two-sided hypothesis testing. All analyses were conducted with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).
The outcomes at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months were analyzed in the context of repeated-measures linear mixed-effects multilevel models, which included random cluster (clinic) effects. In addition to trial group, assessment time, and their interaction terms, the models included age, sex, and race as covariates. We performed intention-to-treat analyses, which included all patients (regardless of the number of assessments obtained) and used the restricted maximum-likelihood method. The model assumed that missing values were missing at random, and all values presented in the tables and figure are model-based estimates. Three subgroup analyses were prespecified to examine the heterogeneity of treatment effects (Black or other race; sex; and younger age [21 to 42 years], middle age [43 to 56 years], or older age [57 to 74 years]). In the intensive-lifestyle group, the associations between the amount of intervention session material received and outcomes were analyzed by assessing data for patients who received less than 80% and for patients who received 80% or more of the materials with the use of models that included age, race, sex, and baseline weight as covariates. The arbitrary cutoff of 80% was prespecified. Finally, categorical weight loss was analyzed by comparing the percentage of patients who had 5% or more weight loss with the percentage of patients who had 10% or more weight loss at each assessment with the use of generalized linear mixed models. Chi-square tests conducted at each time point and overall were used to compare serious adverse events between the groups.

Section: Results

All 18 clinics completed 24 months of participation in the trial from April 2016 through September 2019. The final number of patients enrolled in each clinic ranged from 2 to 89, with a median of 40.5 patients per clinic. A total of 803 adults with obesity were enrolled; 452 patients were assigned to the intensive-lifestyle group, and 351 were assigned to the usual-care group. A total of 540 patients (67.2%) were Black, and 678 (84.4%) were women. The two cluster-randomized groups were well balanced with respect to baseline characteristics; however, there was a greater proportion of Black patients and women in the intensive-lifestyle group ( Table 1 ). There were no differences in the clinical measures at baseline between the usual-care group and the intensive-lifestyle group, although there was a greater proportion of patients with diabetes in the usual-care group. A total of 670 patients (83.4%) in the trial population (362 of 452 [80.1%] in the intensive-lifestyle group and 308 of 351 [87.7%] in the usual-care group) had data available on body weight at 24 months (Fig. S1). A total of 36 patients did not have complete data because of medical reasons: 18 became pregnant (8 in the intensive-lifestyle group and 10 in the usual-care group), 4 had weight-loss surgery (2 in each group), a major medical condition developed in 11 (7 in the intensive-lifestyle group and 4 in the usual-care group), and 3 died (2 in the intensive-lifestyle group and 1 in the usual-care group) during the trial; data for these patients were included up to the time of the medical event. After exclusion of these patients, 87.4% of the patients (670 of 767 patients) had data available for weight measurements at 24 months.
The primary outcome was the percent change from baseline in body weight at 24 months. Patients in the intensive-lifestyle group lost significantly more weight (change in body weight, −4.99%; 95% confidence interval [CI], −6.02 to −3.96) than patients in the usual-care group (−0.48%; 95% CI, −1.57 to 0.61), with a mean difference of −4.51 percentage points (95% CI, −5.93 to −3.10) between the groups (P<0.001). The intraclass correlation for the cluster (clinic) effect on the magnitude of weight loss at 24 months was 0.14. The greatest weight loss in the intensive-lifestyle group occurred at 6 months; however, clinically significant weight loss was maintained at 24 months ( Table 2 ). Similar results were observed for changes in absolute weight and waist circumference. Table S2 provides the results from analyses of unadjusted models and models adjusted for patient-level and clinic-level covariates, including baseline weight. The results from all analyses were similar.
The results of the subgroup analyses are shown in Figure 1 . The percent weight loss in the intensive-lifestyle group tended to be less among Black patients than among patients of other races, and the difference between the two groups across all outcomes was at least 1 percentage point less among Black patients at 24 months (Table S3). Women and men in the intervention group lost a similar amount of weight (Table S4). There appeared to be a dose–response association with age, with younger adults having a smaller magnitude of weight loss than older adults in the intensive-lifestyle group. However, differences in weight loss between the two groups were similar across age categories (Table S5).
A total of 248 of 362 patients (68.5%) in the intensive-lifestyle group who had their weight measured at 24 months attended at least 80% of the intervention sessions. The percent change in body weight among patients who attended at least 80% of sessions in the intensive-lifestyle group was −7.07% (95% CI, −8.58 to −5.56) at 24 months, as compared with −1.93% (95% CI, −3.81 to −0.06) among those who attended less than 80% of the sessions (Table S6).
Categorical weight-loss results are shown in Figure S2. At 24 months, 19.6% of the patients (95% CI, 12.9 to 28.7) in the usual-care group had at least 5% weight loss, and 4.7% (95% CI, 2.6 to 8.4) had at least 10% weight loss. In the intensive-lifestyle group, 50.7% of patients (95% CI, 39.8 to 61.5) had at least 5% weight loss, and 23.2% (95% CI, 16.5 to 31.7) had at least 10% weight loss (the group that had ≥10% weight loss also includes patients who had ≥5% weight loss).
Characteristics with respect to risk factors for cardiovascular disease and other quality-of-life outcomes in the two groups were similar at baseline (Tables S9 and S10). There was more improvement in several quality-of-life measures among patients in the intensive-lifestyle group than among those in the usual-care group, whereas changes from baseline in risk factors for cardiovascular disease were minimal in the two groups (Tables S7 and S8).
A total of 86 patients had at least one serious adverse event during the trial ( Table 3 ); 83 patients reported hospitalizations or other life-threatening conditions, and 3 patients died during the trial. None of the serious adverse events were considered by the investigators to be related to the trial interventions. There were no significant differences in serious adverse events between the groups overall or at any time point.

Section: Discussion

The results of this trial show the effectiveness of a high-intensity, lifestyle-based obesity treatment program, developed to be consistent with the 2013 guideline of the American College of Cardiology, the American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the Obesity Society, in an underserved primary care population. The intensive-lifestyle group had an average weight loss of 5%, and 51% of the patients maintained at least 5% weight loss at 24 months. Our results are similar to those of studies conducted in academic health centers, such as the DPP and Look AHEAD trials, which showed 5.8% and 6.4% weight loss at 24 months, respectively, in their lifestyle-intervention groups. Low-intensity to moderate-intensity interventions used by primary care practitioners have produced minimal weight loss (1 to 2 kg). However, high-intensity interventions conducted in primary care settings can result in greater weight loss (4 to 7 kg). For example, in the Practice-based Opportunities for Weight Reduction (POWER) trials in Baltimore, Boston, and Philadelphia, participants who received lifestyle interventions had average weight losses of 5.2%, 1.7%, and 4.7%, respectively, at 24 months.
Our results showed that Black patients had slightly less weight loss than patients of other races (primarily less than White patients). This is consistent with evidence from several trials, such as the Look AHEAD trial (in which Black patients lost less weight than White patients at 2 years ) and the DPP trial (in which Black women lost less weight than men and women of other races and ethnic groups ). Differences in body composition and metabolism may play a role in the observed differences in weight loss among patients of various races. The smaller weight loss among Black patients may also be the result of less behavioral change and lower engagement with interventional components. Given these factors, and given that psychological predictors of weight loss have been reported to differ according to race, interventions may need to be tailored specifically for Black patients in order to increase weight loss.
Although previous studies have shown greater weight loss among men than among women, we did not identify any differences according to sex. Weight loss among men and women in the intensive-lifestyle group was almost identical. These results also do not support those of the Look AHEAD trial, in which men had greater weight loss than women at 2 years.
The results in the intensive-lifestyle group showed that older adults had greater weight loss than younger adults. These results support those observed in the intensive-lifestyle group in the DPP trial: older patients were more likely than younger patients to meet the 7% weight-loss goal at 2 years. Similarly, in the intensive-lifestyle group in the Look AHEAD trial, successively older age groups had significantly more weight loss than younger age groups. However, in our trial, older adults in the usual-care group also lost more weight than younger adults, so the difference in weight loss between the two groups was not associated with age. Therefore, it is possible that age-related weight loss in the overall cohort of patients (both groups) may explain why older patients lost more weight than younger patients in the intensive-lifestyle group, and that this association was not an age-specific response to the intervention.
Our trial has certain strengths and limitations. A major strength is the diverse sample of clinics and patients from urban and rural regions of Louisiana, which represents an underserved population that has not generally participated in clinical research. The results of the current trial apply broadly to the large underserved, low-income population in the United States, which faces important barriers to receiving effective treatment for obesity. Another strength is the incorporation of a health coach into the collaborative care team, which is a potential model for weight-loss programs in primary care.
A limitation of the trial is the predominance of women in our sample (84%), which limited our ability to study weight loss in subgroups according to sex and race. However, our trial is not unique in this regard — women have made up 73% of the populations in lifestyle-based weight-loss interventions. Weight changes among patients with missing weight measurements also may have been systematically different from those with data for weight measurements, and this could be a potential source of bias. For example, if patients in the intensive-lifestyle group who were missing data at follow-up lost less weight than those who had their weight measured, this would provide an overestimation of the treatment effects. Finally, our analysis of receipt of session materials is equivalent to an observational study with covariate adjustment, and unmeasured variables could explain differences between the groups.
As compared with usual care, a high-intensity, lifestyle-based treatment program for obesity delivered with the addition of a health coach resulted in significant weight loss over 24 months in an underserved primary care population.
