Title: Ozanimod as Induction and Maintenance Therapy for Ulcerative Colitis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Ozanimod, a selective sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator, is under investigation for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a phase 3, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of ozanimod as induction and maintenance therapy in patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis. In the 10-week induction period, patients in cohort 1 were assigned to receive oral ozanimod hydrochloride at a dose of 1 mg (equivalent to 0.92 mg of ozanimod) or placebo once daily in a double-blind manner, and patients in cohort 2 received open-label ozanimod at the same daily dose. At 10 weeks, patients with a clinical response to ozanimod in either cohort underwent randomization again to receive double-blind ozanimod or placebo for the maintenance period (through week 52). The primary end point for both periods was the percentage of patients with clinical remission, as assessed with the three-component Mayo score. Key secondary clinical, endoscopic, and histologic end points were evaluated with the use of ranked, hierarchical testing. Safety was also assessed.

Abstract_Section: Results

In the induction period, 645 patients were included in cohort 1 and 367 in cohort 2; a total of 457 patients were included in the maintenance period. The incidence of clinical remission was significantly higher among patients who received ozanimod than among those who received placebo during both induction (18.4% vs. 6.0%, P<0.001) and maintenance (37.0% vs. 18.5% [among patients with a response at week 10], P<0.001). The incidence of clinical response was also significantly higher with ozanimod than with placebo during induction (47.8% vs. 25.9%, P<0.001) and maintenance (60.0% vs. 41.0%, P<0.001). All other key secondary end points were significantly improved with ozanimod as compared with placebo in both periods. The incidence of infection (of any severity) with ozanimod was similar to that with placebo during induction and higher than that with placebo during maintenance. Serious infection occurred in less than 2% of the patients in each group during the 52-week trial. Elevated liver aminotransferase levels were more common with ozanimod.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Ozanimod was more effective than placebo as induction and maintenance therapy in patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis. (Funded by Bristol Myers Squibb; True North ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02435992 .)

Section: Introduction

Ulcerative colitis is a chronic disease that is characterized by a dysregulated immune response and chronic inflammation in the colonic mucosa. Conventional therapies such as aminosalicylates are modestly effective in patients with moderate, but not severe, disease. Glucocorticoids have been associated with adverse events and long-term adverse health consequences and are not recommended as maintenance therapy. Newer agents, including biologic drugs and Janus kinase inhibitors, are not effective in all patients or can lose efficacy with long-term use, and they have been associated with infections, infusion reactions, and cancers. Thus, the need remains for new oral treatments for ulcerative colitis that are safe and glucocorticoid-sparing and that have durable efficacy.
Ozanimod is a sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) receptor modulator that binds with high affinity to S1P subtypes 1 and 5 (S1P1 and S1P5), leading to internalization of S1P1 receptors in lymphocytes and the prevention of lymphocyte mobilization to inflammatory sites. In a phase 2 trial, treatment with ozanimod showed significant improvements over placebo with regard to endoscopic, histologic, and clinical end points in patients with moderate-to-severe ulcerative colitis. A separate phase 2 trial showed benefits with ozanimod therapy in patients with Crohn’s disease. To date, the safety profile of ozanimod, as characterized on the basis of studies involving more than 4000 patients with ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, or relapsing multiple sclerosis and healthy volunteers, is consistent across populations. Several adverse events of special interest that are known to be associated with S1P receptor modulation (e.g., bradycardia, serious or opportunistic infections, macular edema, and elevated liver-enzyme levels) were monitored in the clinical trials. We report here the results of True North, a 52-week, phase 3 trial to evaluate ozanimod as induction and maintenance therapy in patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis.

Section: Methods

We conducted this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial at 285 sites in 30 countries. The protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org, was approved by the institutional review board at each center. All the patients provided written informed consent.
The members of the steering committee designed the trial in collaboration with the sponsor (Bristol Myers Squibb). Data were compiled by the sponsor; Pharmaceutical Product Development provided assistance with statistical programming. All the authors had full access to the data. The first author wrote the first draft of the manuscript. Editorial assistance was funded by Bristol Myers Squibb. The eighth and ninth authors, both employees of the sponsor, vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data, and the eighth author vouches for the adherence of the trial to the protocol.
Eligible patients were 18 to 75 years of age and had moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis, defined as a total Mayo score of 6 to 12, with an endoscopy subscore of 2 or higher, a rectal-bleeding subscore of 1 or higher, and a stool-frequency subscore of 1 or higher. Each subscore category is rated on a scale from 0 to 3, which was summed to give a total Mayo score between 0 and 12; higher scores indicate greater activity.
Patients were required to have received stable doses of oral aminosalicylates or glucocorticoids (prednisone at a dose of ≤20 mg per day or budesonide) or both for at least 2 weeks before screening endoscopy and to continue receiving the same dose for the duration of the induction period; the glucocorticoid dose had to be tapered once the patient entered the maintenance period. A documented presence of varicella–zoster virus IgG antibody or complete varicella–zoster vaccination at least 30 days before randomization was also required. Patients were excluded from the trial if they had not had a response to induction therapy with at least two biologic agents approved for the treatment of ulcerative colitis, had a clinically relevant cardiac condition, or had a history of uveitis or macular edema. The full enrollment criteria are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.
After a screening period of up to 5 weeks, patients entered a 10-week induction period. First, in cohort 1, patients were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive ozanimod hydrochloride at a dose of 1 mg per day (equivalent to 0.92 mg of ozanimod; referred to hereafter as ozanimod) or matched placebo once daily in a double-blind manner. Randomization was conducted by means of a centralized interactive voice- and Web-based activated response system (IxRS). Once the percentage of patients with previous exposure to a tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antagonist reached 30% in cohort 1, the IxRS assigned patients with TNF antagonist exposure to cohort 2, in which patients received open-label ozanimod at the same daily dose. Patients without previous TNF antagonist exposure continued to undergo randomization in cohort 1 until enrollment was closed, at which time such patients were assigned to cohort 2. The percentage of patients with TNF antagonist exposure was capped at 50% in cohort 2. Cohort 2 was included to increase the number of patients with a response who would be available for randomization in the maintenance phase of the trial. A 7-day period of dose escalation with ozanimod — starting at 0.25 mg on days 1 to 4 and progressing to 0.5 mg on days 5 to 7 and to 1 mg thereafter — was incorporated to minimize the risk of bradycardia that has been reported with some S1P modulators within the first few hours after administration.
Ozanimod-treated patients who had a clinical response (defined as a reduction in the total Mayo score of ≥3 points and ≥30% from baseline or in the three-component Mayo score of ≥2 points and ≥35% from baseline, as well as a reduction in the rectal-bleeding subscore of ≥1 point or an absolute rectal-bleeding subscore of ≤1 point) at week 10 were eligible to undergo randomization again, in a 1:1 ratio, to receive either ozanimod or placebo in a double-blind manner through week 52 (maintenance period). Patients who had a clinical response while they were receiving placebo at the end of the induction period continued to receive double-blind placebo during the maintenance period. Patients without a clinical response during the induction period could enter an open-label extension trial at week 10, whereas patients who were included in the maintenance period could enter the extension trial at week 52 or after disease relapse (defined as a partial Mayo score [i.e., the rectal-bleeding subscore, stool-frequency subscore, and physician’s global assessment subscore] of ≥4 points or a ≥2-point increase from week 10, as well as an endoscopy subscore of ≥2 points) (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ).
Endoscopic and histologic end points were determined by one central reader who used blinded videos of endoscopic procedures and preserved biopsy samples, respectively. Rectal bleeding and stool frequency were reported by patients in an electronic diary. The primary efficacy end point was the percentage of patients with clinical remission at week 10 (for the induction period) and at week 52 (for the maintenance period), assessed on the basis of the three-component Mayo score. Clinical remission was defined as follows: a rectal-bleeding subscore of 0; a stool-frequency subscore of 1 or less, with a decrease of at least 1 point from baseline; and an endoscopy subscore of 1 or less (all on scales from 0 [none] to 3 [most severe]).
The key secondary efficacy end points were assessed in a closed, prespecified hierarchical testing procedure. The ranked secondary end points for the induction period (at week 10) were the percentages of patients with a clinical response (based on the three-component Mayo score; see above), endoscopic improvement (defined as a mucosal endoscopy subscore of ≤1 without friability), and mucosal healing (endoscopic improvement plus histologic remission, defined as a mucosal endoscopy score of ≤1 and a Geboes score of <2.0 [on a scale from 0 to 5.4, with higher scores indicating more severe inflammation ]). The ranked secondary end points for the maintenance period (at week 52) were the percentages of patients with a clinical response, endoscopic improvement, maintenance of clinical remission (remission at week 52 in the subgroup of patients with remission at week 10), glucocorticoid-free remission (remission with no glucocorticoid use for ≥12 weeks), mucosal healing, and durable clinical remission (remission at weeks 10 and 52, assessed in all patients in the maintenance period).
Other prespecified end points included histologic remission and clinical remission in subgroups defined according to demographic and disease-based characteristics. Tables S1 and S2 list the prespecified efficacy end points. The time to disease relapse was examined as an exploratory end point. Reductions in rectal bleeding and stool frequency were assessed in post hoc analyses, and changes in biomarkers such as fecal calprotectin and C-reactive protein levels were examined.
Safety assessments were based on adverse events that occurred during the trial. Bradycardia, cardiac conduction abnormalities (second-degree and higher atrioventricular block), macular edema, cancer, serious or opportunistic infection, pulmonary effects, and hepatic effects were examined as adverse events of special interest on the basis of previous associations with S1P receptor modulation. Clinical laboratory measurements were performed at a central laboratory. Assessment of vital signs, pulmonary-function testing, ophthalmologic examination (including optical coherence tomography), and electrocardiography (before and 6 hours after the first dose) were also performed. Leukocyte counts, including lymphocyte subsets, were not provided to investigators. Additional information about the methods is provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients at baseline were summarized descriptively. Efficacy analyses were based on all patients who underwent randomization and received at least one dose of ozanimod or placebo (modified intention-to-treat population). Statistical comparisons of efficacy end points for the induction period were performed in cohort 1 only. Clinical remission was analyzed with the use of a two-sided Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel test at the 5% significance level, with accounting for stratification according to glucocorticoid use at screening and previous TNF antagonist use for the induction period (week 10) and according to clinical remission status at week 10 and glucocorticoid use at week 10 for the maintenance period (week 52).
The key secondary end points were evaluated with the use of a two-sided Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel test following a closed, prespecified hierarchical testing procedure to control the overall type I error rate for multiple end points (with an alpha of 0.05 allocated for each of the induction and maintenance periods of the trial). If the primary end point in each period was significant, key secondary end points were analyzed in sequence until a 5% significance level was not reached, after which all the subsequent ranked secondary end points were to be considered exploratory. For end points that were not included in the hierarchies, point estimates and 95% confidence intervals are reported, without P values. The confidence intervals were not adjusted for multiple comparisons and should not be used to infer definitive treatment effects. Patients with missing efficacy data were considered as not having had a response. A missing-at-random assumption was not considered to be appropriate for the data. Sensitivity analyses were conducted for the primary and first key secondary end points with the use of an observed-cases analysis (assumption of data missing completely at random) and with the use of multiple imputation (assumption of data missing at random).
We calculated that a sample of 600 patients (randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio in cohort 1 in the induction period) would provide the trial with at least 90% power to detect a between-group difference of 10 percentage points in the incidence of clinical remission during the induction period. Cohort 2 (with a planned sample of 300 patients) was used to ensure that the trial would have an enrollment of 400 patients in the maintenance period, with the trial having 90% power for the primary end point. Additional details regarding the statistical analysis are provided in the Supplementary Appendix . Safety results were summarized descriptively for all patients who received at least one dose of ozanimod or placebo (safety population).

Section: Results

The trial was conducted from May 2015 through June 2020. Of the 1831 patients who underwent screening, 1012 were enrolled in the trial. A total of 645 patients entered cohort 1 and were randomly assigned to receive either ozanimod (429 patients) or placebo (216 patients) in a double-blind manner; 367 patients received open-label ozanimod in cohort 2 ( Figure 1 ). In cohort 1, a total of 401 patients (93.5%) who had been assigned to receive ozanimod and 192 (88.9%) who had been assigned to receive placebo completed the induction period. The most common reasons for discontinuation in the induction period were adverse events (in 11 patients [2.6%] in the ozanimod group) and lack of efficacy (in 10 [4.6%] in the placebo group).
At the completion of the induction period, 233 patients (54.3%) in cohort 1 and 224 (61.0%) in cohort 2 had a clinical response to ozanimod therapy and underwent randomization again to receive either ozanimod (230 patients) or placebo (227 patients) in the maintenance period. A total of 184 patients (80.0%) who had been assigned to receive ozanimod and 124 (54.6%) who had been assigned to receive placebo completed the maintenance period. The most common reason for discontinuation in the maintenance period was disease relapse (in 31 patients [13.5%] in the ozanimod group and in 77 [33.9%] in the placebo group). The demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients were similar in the two groups ( Table 1 ).
At week 10, the percentage of patients with clinical remission was significantly higher in the ozanimod group than in the placebo group (18.4% vs. 6.0%, P<0.001) ( Figure 2A ). Significant improvements with ozanimod as compared with placebo were also observed with regard to the three ranked key secondary end points of clinical response, endoscopic improvement, and mucosal healing (P<0.001 for all comparisons). The percentage of patients with histologic remission (an additional secondary end point) was 10.8 percentage points (95% confidence interval, 5.8 to 15.8) higher with ozanimod than with placebo (Fig. S2). Prespecified subgroup analyses for the primary end point of clinical remission during the induction period are shown in Figure S3. Efficacy results among the patients in cohort 2 were similar to the results among the patients treated with ozanimod in cohort 1 (Table S3).
Among the 457 patients who had a response to ozanimod during the induction period and underwent subsequent randomization in the maintenance period, 37.0% in the ozanimod group and 18.5% in the placebo group had clinical remission at week 52 (P<0.001) ( Figure 2B ). All the ranked key secondary end points were also significantly improved with ozanimod therapy, as compared with placebo, at week 52; improvement in the incidence of histologic remission (an additional secondary end point) also occurred with ozanimod therapy ( Figure 2B and Tables S4 and S6). The time to disease relapse (an exploratory end point) during the maintenance period is shown in Figure S4.
Prespecified subgroup analyses for the primary end point of clinical remission during the maintenance period are shown in Figure S5. Treatment-effect sizes in patients with TNF antagonist exposure were similar to those in patients without such exposure . Results of sensitivity analyses of the primary end point (during both the induction and maintenance periods) were consistent with those of the primary analysis (Table S5).
A post hoc analysis showed decreases in the rectal-bleeding and stool-frequency subscores by week 2 (i.e., 1 week after the completion of dose adjustment during the induction period) in patients receiving ozanimod (Figs. S6 and S7). Greater reductions from baseline in fecal calprotectin levels were also observed with ozanimod than with placebo in both the induction and maintenance periods (Table S7).
The overall incidence of adverse events was higher in the ozanimod group than in the placebo group during the maintenance period and was similar among the groups during the induction period. The overall incidence of nonserious infection with ozanimod therapy was similar to that with placebo during the induction period but was higher than that with placebo during the maintenance period ( Table 2 ). The frequency of serious infections was less than 2% in each group. One death (in cohort 2) occurred in a patient with a history of ischemic cardiomyopathy and prolonged tobacco use, in whom influenza and acute respiratory distress syndrome developed.
In this trial that required patients to have a documented presence of varicella–zoster virus IgG antibody or complete varicella–zoster vaccination, herpes zoster infection occurred in 3 of 796 ozanimod-treated patients (0.4%) during the induction period and in 5 of 230 (2.2%) during the maintenance period (these events did not lead to hospitalization). Herpes zoster infection did not occur in any patient who did not receive ozanimod.
The absolute lymphocyte count decreased by a mean of approximately 54% from baseline to week 10 in patients who received ozanimod. Absolute lymphocyte counts of less than 200 cells per cubic millimeter occurred in 1.1% of the patients who received ozanimod (in cohort 1 or 2) and in no patients who received placebo during the induction period. Throughout the 52-week trial, 17 patients had an absolute lymphocyte count of less than 200 cells per cubic millimeter, which subsequently increased and remained at a level at or above 200 cells per cubic millimeter during ozanimod treatment. No patient with a serious or opportunistic infection had an absolute lymphocyte count of less than 200 cells per cubic millimeter.
Bradycardia occurred more frequently with ozanimod therapy than with placebo during the induction period but not during the maintenance period. No cases of second-degree type 2 atrioventricular block or third-degree atrioventricular block occurred. One patient receiving ozanimod had a hypertensive crisis on day 1 of the induction period; the event was moderate and resolved on the same day without treatment interruption. During the maintenance period, serious adverse events of hypertensive crisis occurred in 1 patient each in the ozanimod group and the placebo group; neither event resulted in discontinuation of the trial regimen.
Elevated liver aminotransferase levels were more common with ozanimod therapy than with placebo. No patients met Hy’s law criteria suggestive of drug-induced liver injury or had severe liver injury. Abnormal liver-function tests led to the discontinuation of ozanimod therapy in 3 of 796 patients (0.4%) in the induction period and in 1 of 230 patients (0.4%) in the maintenance period. Macular edema occurred in 3 patients receiving ozanimod; all cases resolved after treatment discontinuation ( Table 2 ). Cancer was diagnosed in 1 patient who received ozanimod during the induction period (basal-cell carcinoma). In the maintenance period, cancer was diagnosed in 4 patients (basal-cell carcinoma and rectal adenocarcinoma in 1 patient each who received ozanimod during the induction and maintenance periods, and adenocarcinoma of the colon and breast cancer in 1 patient each who received ozanimod during the induction period and placebo during the maintenance period) (see the Supplementary Appendix ).

Section: Discussion

The results of this phase 3 trial showed that a once-daily oral formulation of ozanimod, an S1P receptor modulator, provided clinical efficacy in patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis. Treatment with ozanimod led to significant improvements, as compared with placebo, in the incidence of clinical remission (primary end point) and in all key secondary clinical, endoscopic, and histologic end points at weeks 10 and 52. These results were observed in patients with active disease that had been inadequately controlled by conventional agents, as determined on the basis of required concomitant therapy with aminosalicylates or glucocorticoids at trial entry.
Cancer, opportunistic infection, and macular edema were observed in patients who received ozanimod, but the incidences were low. Patients were excluded from the trial if they had macular edema at baseline or if they did not have immunity to varicella–zoster virus or had not received vaccination against varicella–zoster virus. Nonserious infections were more common with ozanimod than with placebo during the maintenance phase of the trial. The incidences of elevated alanine aminotransferase levels were higher among patients who received ozanimod than among those who received placebo. Liver events were mostly mild or moderate in severity and led to the discontinuation of the trial regimen in less than 1% of the patients. The absence of clinically significant bradycardia or cardiac conduction abnormalities may have been due to mitigation by the 7-day dose-escalation schedule. It should be noted that the eligibility criteria for this trial excluded patients with conditions such as recent myocardial infarction, unstable angina or other clinically significant cardiovascular disease, or active or chronic infection. Overall, our results were consistent with safety findings that have previously been reported regarding ozanimod therapy in phase 3 trials involving patients with multiple sclerosis.
Our trial design was informed by the increasing use of rigorous therapeutic targets beyond symptom control and endoscopic improvement in patients with ulcerative colitis, such as mucosal healing (requiring both endoscopic and histologic improvement) and reduced use of glucocorticoids. For example, we required that the definition of mucosal healing include the absence of mucosal neutrophils, which has been associated with a reduced incidence of colectomy, hospitalization, and glucocorticoid use. We also defined glucocorticoid-free remission as clinical remission at week 52 without glucocorticoid use for at least 12 weeks because relapse within 12 weeks after the discontinuation of glucocorticoid therapy is a defining characteristic of patients with ulcerative colitis in whom the glucocorticoid dose cannot be reduced beyond a certain threshold without relapse occurring.
A potential limitation of this trial is that the trial population may not be representative of the broader patient population in a routine clinical setting. Another limitation is the lack of long-term data; the open-label extension phase of this trial is ongoing.
In this phase 3 trial, we found that ozanimod was more effective than placebo as induction and maintenance therapy in patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis.
