Title: Spermatogonium-Derived Complete Hydatidiform Mole


Abstract: Summary


Section: Introduction

Hydatidiform mole is a trophoblastic proliferative disorder with the potential to develop into gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. On the basis of their histopathological characteristics, hydatidiform moles are categorized as complete hydatidiform mole (CHM) or partial hydatidiform mole (PHM). Nearly all CHMs are androgenetic diploid; some CHMs are biparental diploid. Androgenetic CHMs derive from sperm and are monospermic or dispermic. The genetic origin of a CHM can be estimated by short-tandem-repeat (STR) polymorphism analysis, single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array, or both.
Round spermatid injection is an assisted reproductive technology used in vitro and in the context of azoospermia. It involves the extraction and intracytoplasmic injection of round spermatids (haploid precursors of spermatozoa). The accurate selection of round spermatids is key to success, although the selection criteria have not been fully established. Nonetheless, at least 90 babies have been born through round spermatid injection since 1995. Here, we report on a patient who had an androgenetic CHM with a complete complement of paternal chromosomes, which developed after the patient underwent a procedure that was presumed to have been round spermatid injection.

Section: Case Report

The patient was a 29-year-old woman (gravida 0, para 0) whose husband had been revealed by fertility testing to have azoospermia. They consulted a fertility clinic. Attempts to extract spermatozoa from the husband’s testis were unsuccessful. Histologic examination of the seminiferous tubules revealed maturation arrest and the presence of round spermatids. The Johnsen score was 7 (scores range from 1 to 10, with 1 corresponding to an absence of germ cells and 10 corresponding to the maximal rate of spermatogenesis).
The couple then sought reproductive assistance involving round spermatid injection at the fertility clinic. Putative round spermatids, identified on the basis of morphologic features, were extracted and injected into 12 of the patient’s oocytes. A single blastocyst was obtained and implanted. Ultrasonographic examination performed in another obstetrics clinic 6 weeks after implantation revealed a hydatidiform mole. The woman was then referred to our hospital for treatment ( Figure 1A ).
The following week, the patient visited our hospital after spontaneous expulsion of uterine contents that had occurred 3 days before the visit ( Figure 1A ). Ultrasonographic examination performed in our hospital revealed residual molar tissue in the uterus. She had an elevated level of serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) (46,672 mIU per milliliter) ( Figure 1A ). Pathological analysis revealed a CHM ( Figure 1B and 1C ). We also performed immunohistochemical analysis of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1C (CDKN1C, also known as p57 ), a protein encoded by a paternally imprinted and maternally expressed gene. The negative staining of cytotrophoblasts and stromal cells ( Figure 1D ) was consistent with an androgenetic CHM. We twice evacuated residual molar tissue. Two weeks after the first evacuation, an ultrasonographic examination revealed a hypervascular lesion (25 mm by 25 mm by 31 mm) in the posterior myometrium ( Figure 1A ). The patient’s serum hCG levels had increased rapidly during the 2 weeks since the first evacuation, from 9498 mIU per milliliter to 36,978 mIU per milliliter. Radiologic examination did not show lung metastasis or other distant foci. We made a diagnosis of low-risk gestational trophoblastic neoplasia in accordance with the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics 2000 risk-score system.
The patient underwent 5 days of treatment with methotrexate (20 mg per day) delivered by intramuscular injection as first-line chemotherapy ; however, she had severe oral mucositis after the first cycle. As second-line chemotherapy, dactinomycin (0.5 mg per day) was given by intravenous injection over the course of 5 days, which resulted in a rapid increase in liver enzyme levels. She then received five cycles of treatment with etoposide, with each cycle consisting of 100 mg per day given by intravenous injection over a period of 5 days. She has not had a relapse for more than 5 years. Additional clinical details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.

Section: Methods

The institutional review board of the Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, approved this study. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The patient and her husband provided written informed consent indicating that they understood the purpose of the research. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data presented in this report.
Details of the laboratory methods are provided in the Supplementary Appendix . Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples and molar tissues. We queried STR (also known as microsatellite) polymorphisms at 16 loci in the molar, paternal, and maternal genomes using the PowerPlex 16 HS System (Promega), as described previously.
We performed SNP array analysis of the genomic DNA of the mole, the patient, and the patient’s husband, using the HumanCore-24, version 1.0 (Illumina). Raw scanned data were analyzed with GenomeStudio, version 2011.1 (Illumina). Data including the reference SNP cluster identifier (the rs number), chromosome, physical position, B-allele frequency, and log R ratio were exported to text files. The B-allele frequency plot for the CHM with respect to the parental alleles AA, AB, and BB was separately visualized. Two mitochondrial hypervariable regions were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and directly sequenced by the Sanger method.
Immunohistochemical analysis of CDKN1C was conducted with the use of rabbit polyclonal antibody (p57 Ab-7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was performed with centromere enumeration probe (CEP) X, CEP Y, and CEP 17 (Abbott), followed by counterstaining with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). We evaluated the methylation status of chromosome 11 (11p15), which harbors an imprinted region containing CDKN1C and H19 , using a methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) assay with a methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme.

Section: Results

The results of the STR analysis were consistent with an androgenetic heterozygous CHM ( Figure 2A , and Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). To further investigate the parental genomic contributions to the CHM, peripheral blood DNA from each parent was analyzed with the use of a SNP array, and parental alleles were compared with those of the CHM. By this method, we concluded that the genetic status of the CHM was identical to that of the father. Representative B-allele frequency plots of conventional androgenetic CHM samples are shown in Figure 2B ; a representative monospermic CHM shows homozygosity of every genotyped SNP (all B-allele frequencies are approximately 0 or 1). In contrast, a representative dispermic CHM yields a segmentally mixed homozygous and heterozygous pattern, reflecting chromosomal recombination in meiosis during spermatogenesis.
The B-allele frequency plot for the CHM in this report showed heterozygosity at each genotyped SNP ( Figure 2C ). The heterozygous B-allele frequency plot and the near-0 log R ratio of the CHM suggested that it was biparental diploid, because the plot for its genome was similar to those of the genomes of the patient and her husband (Fig. S2). However, the B-allele frequencies for nearly all SNPs in the CHM were identical to those of the paternal genome ( Figure 2D ). We observed no such matching when we compared the B-allele frequency plots of the genomes of the CHM and the patient (Fig. S3).
To confirm the maternal origin of the CHM cytosol, we compared the mitochondrial DNA of the CHM, the patient, and the patient’s husband. The sequences of the hypervariable regions of the mitochondrial DNA of the CHM were identical to those of the patient but not to those of the husband ( Figure 2E ). Moreover, mitochondrial SNPs of the CHM were identical to those of the patient and not to those of the husband (Fig. S4).
Representative images of a conventional CHM and PHM immunostained with an antibody against CDKN1C are shown in Figure S5. The cytotrophoblasts and stromal cells of the PHM showed positive staining, but those of the conventional androgenetic CHM showed negative staining. Immunostaining of the CHM in our patient was similar to that of the conventional CHM ( Figure 1D ).
Fluorescence microscopic images revealed two signals for CEP 17 and one signal each for CEP X and CEP Y ( Figure 2F ). (Some cells showed one signal for CEP 17, most likely because of truncation artifacts.) Thus, we concluded that the CHM was diploid.
CHMs that are androgenetic have a sex-specific methylation status in the epigenetic control region of chromosomes. The MS-MLPA assay showed that the imprinting statuses of KCNQ1OT1 (a maternally imprinted gene) and H19 (a paternally imprinted gene) of the CHM were the same as those of homozygous and heterozygous androgenetic CHMs, but they differed from those of a PHM and of villous tissue from an aborted pregnancy ( Figures 3A , S6, and S7).

Section: Discussion

We report on an androgenetic CHM with a complete complement of paternal chromosomes, which were nearly identical to the chromosomes in paternal somatic cells. The CHM had the same villous morphologic features and CDKN1C staining as conventional (monospermic or dispermic) androgenetic CHMs. The clinical characteristics of the patient, including hCG production and progression to gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, were consistent with those of patients with conventional androgenetic CHMs.
Our findings support the hypothesis that the gamete used in the in vitro fertilization procedure was not a round spermatid but rather a cell with the diploid chromosomal composition of the husband, probably a spermatogonium. Analysis of a high-density SNP array revealed that the genome of the CHM and the paternal genome had the same B-allele frequencies throughout, indicating that the CHM was most likely derived from a spermatogonium ( Figure 3B ). A primary spermatocyte as the paternal source for a diploid CHM cannot be formally ruled out, but it is highly unlikely, because basic aspects of chromosome organization (the presence of meiosis-specific kinetochores), composition (post–S phase), and integrity (possible presence of meiotic DNA double-strand breaks and repair intermediates) of spermatocytes are difficult to reconcile with the normal regulation of zygote development and the first cleavage division. Furthermore, primary spermatocytes are unlikely to be selected as presumed round spermatids, because primary spermatocytes are even larger than spermatogonia and thus more easily distinguished from round spermatids. Therefore, we hypothesize that the CHM resulted from the injection of a spermatogonium into an oocyte, followed by a loss of oocyte-derived chromosomes ( Figure 3B ). The maternal origin of the mitochondrial DNA and the methylation status of paternally imprinted genes also support this hypothesis.
DNA imprinting in the spermatogonium could explain why the conceptus developed into an androgenetic CHM. Maternal and paternal genomes are imprinted in a sex-specific manner and contribute unequally to embryogenesis. Paternal genome imprints contribute to the development of extraembryonic tissues, whereas maternal genome imprints contribute to the development of the embryo proper. Genome imprinting in primordial germ cells is globally erased during proliferation and relocalization ( Figure 3B ). Paternal de novo DNA methylation during spermatogenesis commences in the mitotically arrested premeiotic cells and is completed before birth. The methylation patterns of human spermatogonia are nearly identical to those of round or elongated spermatids. Thus, intracytoplasmic injection of a spermatogonium into an oocyte yields a cell with two haploid paternally imprinted genomes, potentially leading to the development of a triploid PHM or an androgenetic CHM ( Figure 3B ).
Our data point to a potential risk of round spermatid injection: unintentional injection of a spermatogonium instead of a round spermatid, which in turn may lead to CHM and gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Tanaka et al. reported that they distinguished presumptive round spermatids from other spermatogenic cell types, including spermatogonia and spermatocytes, on the basis of their size and morphologic features under a differential interference contrast microscope and that karyotyping and FISH analysis indicated that they were able to accurately select round spermatids. The selection criteria included size (6 to 8 μm in diameter for a round spermatid, as compared with 8 to 10 μm for a spermatogonium and 10 to 12 μm for a primary spermatocyte), an absence of distinct nucleoli and pseudopodia, and a thick cytoplasmic rim. Although these criteria are useful, some spermatogonia may resemble round spermatids, as noted by Tanaka et al. SNP array analysis of embryonic cells during a frozen embryo transfer cycle could prevent the unintentional intrauterine implantation of a conceptus that is predisposed to the formation of a hydatidiform mole.
In this report, we have described a case of androgenetic CHM with a complete copy of both sets of paternal chromosomes that probably resulted from the injection of a spermatogonium instead of a round spermatid.
