Title: Variant PNLDC1 , Defective piRNA Processing, and Azoospermia


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

P-element–induced wimpy testis (PIWI)–interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are short (21 to 35 nucleotides in length) and noncoding and are found almost exclusively in germ cells, where they regulate aberrant expression of transposable elements and postmeiotic gene expression. Critical to the processing of piRNAs is the protein poly(A)-specific RNase-like domain containing 1 (PNLDC1), which trims their 3′ ends and, when disrupted in mice, causes azoospermia and male infertility.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We performed exome sequencing on DNA samples from 924 men who had received a diagnosis of nonobstructive azoospermia. Testicular-biopsy samples were analyzed by means of histologic and immunohistochemical tests, in situ hybridization, reverse-transcriptase–quantitative-polymerase-chain-reaction assay, and small-RNA sequencing. Research Summary Variant PNLDC1 , Defective piRNA Processing, and Azoospermia

Abstract_Section: Results

Four unrelated men of Middle Eastern descent who had nonobstructive azoospermia were found to carry mutations in PNLDC1 : the first patient had a biallelic stop–gain mutation, p.R452Ter (rs200629089; minor allele frequency, 0.00004); the second, a novel biallelic missense variant, p.P84S; the third, two compound heterozygous mutations consisting of p.M259T (rs141903829; minor allele frequency, 0.0007) and p.L35PfsTer3 (rs754159168; minor allele frequency, 0.00004); and the fourth, a novel biallelic canonical splice acceptor site variant, c.607-2A→T. Testicular histologic findings consistently showed error-prone meiosis and spermatogenic arrest with round spermatids of type Sa as the most advanced population of germ cells. Gene and protein expression of PNLDC1, as well as the piRNA-processing proteins PIWIL1, PIWIL4, MYBL1, and TDRKH, were greatly diminished in cells of the testes. Furthermore, the length distribution of piRNAs and the number of pachytene piRNAs was significantly altered in men carrying PNLDC1 mutations.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Our results suggest a direct mechanistic effect of faulty piRNA processing on meiosis and spermatogenesis in men, ultimately leading to male infertility. (Funded by Innovation Fund Denmark and others.)

Section: Introduction

Worldwide, approximately one third of couples have fertility problems, with 50% arising from a male factor. Men with nonobstructive azoospermia have intact seminal ducts but impaired spermatogenesis, which results in no spermatozoa in the ejaculate. These men have very low chances of fathering a biologic child even after surgical testicular sperm extraction procedures. Known genetic causes of nonobstructive azoospermia include aberrations of sex chromosomes and an increasing number of rare deleterious variants in genes critical for spermatogenesis.
P-element–induced wimpy testis (PIWI)–interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are a subgroup of small noncoding RNAs that are found abundantly in germ cells and are essential for spermatogenesis. The function of pachytene piRNAs, which make up approximately 95% of the piRNAs in the adult testis, is not well understood. It has been proposed that piRNAs promote the translation of repressed messenger RNAs (mRNAs) during differentiation of early postmeiotic spermatids and subsequently eliminate mRNAs in the later spermatid stages. The primary biogenesis of piRNAs is thought to take place in the intermitochondrial cement and chromatoid bodies, and the piRNA-processing protein TDRKH is thought to coordinate multiple steps in the process.
Pachytene piRNAs are derived mainly from approximately 100 intergenic loci under the control of transcription factor MYBL1 and are produced as long single-stranded transcripts, which are then processed into pre-piRNAs (with lengths of approximately 30 to 40 bases) in a complex involving the protein PIWIL1. The 3′ ends of pre-piRNAs are subsequently trimmed by the protein poly(A)-specific RNase-like domain containing 1 (PNLDC1) in an exonucleolytic manner, resulting in mature piRNAs (with lengths of 21 to 35 bases). PNLDC1 is exclusively expressed in spermatocytes, and mice deficient in Pnldc1 have reduced testis size and are infertile. Spermatogenic arrest at meiotic and postmeiotic stages is observed in Pnldc1 mice, together with diminished expression of PIWIL1; these occurrences ultimately lead to longer (24 to 50 bases in length) and fewer piRNAs.
We have identified four men carrying a defective PNLDC1 gene. Here we describe their clinical phenotype, the histologic features of their testicular tissue, and the expression pattern of piRNAs and key piRNA machinery proteins.

Section: Methods

Ethical approval for the Genetics of Male Infertility Initiative (GEMINI) was granted in Denmark by the regional ethics committee, in Portugal by the ethics committee at Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, in the United States by the institutional review board at Weill Cornell Medical College, and in the Netherlands by Commissie Mensgebonden Onderzoek regio Arnhem–Nijmegen. The trial was designed by 10 of the authors, and the experimental procedures were performed by 11. The data were collected by all the authors. The manuscript was written by the first, second, and last authors, and all the authors participated in the review and correction of the manuscript and in the approval of the final version to be submitted for publication. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data.
The semen of the male partner of each infertile couple was analyzed, and his reproductive history was recorded. In the men with azoospermia, a complete history taking, physical examination, and hormonal evaluation were performed. Men with no clinical evidence of obstruction were characterized as having nonobstructive azoospermia. Standard genetic testing, including karyotype and Y chromosome microdeletion analysis, was performed in accordance with the guidelines of the American Urological Association and American Society for Reproductive Medicine (AUA–ASRM) and the guidelines of the European Association of Urology (EAU).
Three men with PNLDC1 mutations were identified in GEMINI (see the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). A total of 924 unrelated patients with nonobstructive azoospermia underwent exome sequencing at the McDonnell Genome Institute at Washington University in St. Louis with the use of an in-house exome targeting reagent at an average coverage of 80×. One additional man with a biallelic PNLDC1 mutation was identified in an independent cohort of trios from the Netherlands. The cohort included 99 subfertile or infertile men, of whom 55 had nonobstructive azoospermia (see the Supplementary Appendix ). Each trio was composed of an affected man and his father and mother. Exome sequencing was performed with the Nextera DNA Exome Capture kit (Illumina) at an average coverage of 72× on the NovaSeq 6000 platform. Alignment of sequencing reads was followed by joint genotype calling of all samples within each cohort in accordance with the best practices of the Genome Analysis Toolkit.
To prioritize the likely deleterious mutations among the sequenced DNA samples from the patients with nonobstructive azoospermia in GEMINI, a modified version of the population sampling probability (PSAP) software was applied. PSAP is a technique that evaluates the probability of sampling a genotype or a set of genotypes on the basis of pathogenicity scores and frequencies of variants observed in the unaffected population. Genotypes with a PSAP P value of less than 0.001 and minor allele frequency of less than 0.01 were selected through subsequent filtering across all populations in the Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD), version 2.1.1 ( https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org ), whereas variants that occurred at a high frequency in the study cohort were excluded. Only genes with loss-of-function mutations or testis-enhanced expression (ProteinAtlas ) or genes known to cause infertility in humans or mice ( http://www.informatics.jax.org ) were considered.
The probands of the Dutch cohort underwent screening for recessive compound heterozygous or homozygous pathogenic variants, which were present heterozygously in both parents, had a minor allele frequency of less than 0.01 in the gnomAD, had no more than one homozygote present in a control cohort (see the Supplementary Appendix ), and were classified as being of uncertain significance, likely pathogenic, or pathogenic according to established guidelines. All genomic coordinates were based on the human genome assembly GRCh37 (hg19).
The ethnic origin of the patients in the GEMINI cohort was determined with the use of EthSeq software applied to variants with a minor allele frequency of greater than 0.2. Long runs of homozygosity (ROH) were detected independently for each ethnic origin with the use of the H3M2 tool. The longest autozygous stretches (class 5), which reflect recent inbreeding, were determined with the use of the mclust, version 5.4.3 (an R package for model-based clustering, classification, and density estimation; R Project for Statistical Computing), in a population-specific manner. Only the class 5 ROH regions (minimal length of 6.7 Mb on average across populations) were used to calculate the fraction of the autosome that was homozygous. In the Dutch patient, homozygosity calling was performed with the use of RareVariantVis (a tool used to analyze genome sequence data for rare variants), and genomic regions longer than 1 Mb with more than 85% homozygosity were classified as ROH. We used the R package masonmd to evaluate whether a protein-truncating mutation is predicted to trigger nonsense-mediated decay of the abnormal transcripts. We mapped identified mutations to structural features of PNLDC1 using VarMap. Protein sequence alignment was performed with Clustal Omega ( https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo/ ). Splice prediction was based on the SpliceSiteFinder-like, MaxEntScan, NNSplice, and GeneSplicer algorithms in Alamut Visual (version 2.13) ( http://www.interactive-biosoftware.com ).
The regions of interest were amplified with the use of primers and conditions as listed in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix . The polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) products were then purified and sequenced.
Fixed testicular tissue samples were obtained from Patients 1, 2, and 4. Immunohistochemical staining was performed, as described previously, in all the samples from these patients at Rigshospitalet with the use of the conditions and antibodies that are listed in Table S2. In addition, biopsy samples in matching fixative from patients with complete spermatogenesis were used as positive controls. Negative controls were serial sections that were exposed to all treatments except the primary antibody. The mitotic index was obtained by inspecting the entire hematoxylin and eosin–stained sections in the samples from Patients 1 and 2 and counting the number of spermatogonia that were observed to be engaged in a mitotic division. The references of the mitotic index in control tissue samples were obtained from Almstrup et al., and the differences were evaluated with the use of the Mann–Whitney test. In situ hybridization was performed on tissue samples from Patient 4 with the use of a custom-made PNLDC1 probe and the RNAscope 2.5 HD Assay-RED kit (Advanced Cell Diagnostics) according to the recommendations of the manufacturer.
RNA was extracted (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix and Table S3), and a reverse-transcriptase–quantitative-PCR (RT-qPCR) assay was performed with the use of the gene-specific primers that are listed in Table S1. Small RNAs were sequenced, and reads mapping to piRNAs were intersected with 205 piRNA genomic regions that had been detected previously in the adult human testis. The amount of detected piRNAs was inferred on the basis of the number of reads mapping to individual piRNA loci normalized to spike-in read count, and the differences between the respective patients and controls were assessed with the use of the Mann–Whitney test. To detect the percentage of piRNA reads arising from pachytene piRNA loci, piRNA reads were intersected with the genomic regions reported in Özata et al. Differences in the amount of pachytene piRNAs between the patients and matched controls were tested with the use of Fisher’s exact test.

Section: Results

We performed exome sequencing on DNA samples from 924 patients with nonobstructive azoospermia in the GEMINI cohort and identified 3 patients from three centers who carried potentially pathogenic variants in PNLDC1 . A fourth patient was identified in an independent Dutch cohort.
Patient 1, a man from Denmark, carried a homozygous stop–gain mutation, p.R452Ter (chr6[GRCh37]:g.160240107C→T; NM_173516.2[PNLDC1]:c.1354C→T; rs200629089), which is rare (minor allele frequency, 0.00004) and represents the first observation of a homozygous carrier in human populations (according to gnomAD). This mutation is predicted to be highly pathogenic (Phred-scaled score [ https://cadd.gs.washington.edu/info ] of 38.0 on the Combined Annotation–Dependent Depletion [CADD] framework, version 1.3, which means that the variant belongs to the top 0.1% of the most pathogenic variants observed in the human genome) and to cause degradation of the abnormal transcripts through a nonsense-mediated decay mechanism, leading to a complete human knockout of PNLDC1 .
Patient 2, a man from the United States, carried a novel homozygous variant, p.P84S (chr6[GRCh37]:g.160225031C→T; NM_173516.2[PNLDC1]:c.250C→T; CADD score, 29.8), which has not been reported in gnomAD. This variant maps to a CAF1 domain common among mRNA deadenylases ( Figure 1A ). Both mutations disrupt a site that is conserved across mammals (Fig. S1A and S1B).
Patient 3, a man from Portugal, carried two compound heterozygous mutations mapping to the CAF1 domain. A likely pathogenic frameshift insertion, p.L35PfsTer3 (chr6[GRCh37]:g.160222146dup; NM_173516.2[PNLDC1]:c.103dup; rs754159168; minor allele frequency, 0.000036; CADD score, 34), may lead to loss of expression from one allele and affects a site highly conserved across mammals; on the other allele, a mildly pathogenic missense variation, p.M259T (chr6[GRCh37]:g.160231083T→C; NM_173516.2[PNLDC1]:c.776T→C; rs141903829; minor allele frequency, 0.00071; CADD score, 15.2), disrupts a partially conserved position (Fig. S1C). In addition, p.M259T is predicted to interact with the ligand guanosine diphosphate according to the VarMap annotation resources.
All mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing ( Figure 1B ). The ClinVar accession numbers for the mutations are SCV001760918 (p.R452Ter), SCV001760919 (p.P84S), and SCV001760920 (p.L35PfsTer3 and p.M259T).
A fourth patient with nonobstructive azoospermia was identified in the Netherlands. Patient 4 carried a novel homozygous change (chr6[GRCh37]:g.160230045A→T; NM_173516.2[PNLDC1]:c.607-2A→T; CADD score, 6.8) in the canonical splice acceptor site of exon 9 (ClinVar accession number, SCV001760921) (Fig. S2). The variant is predicted to disrupt the splicing consensus sequence recognized by the splicing machinery. Both parents of the patient were heterozygous for the variant ( Figure 1C ). None of the five PNLDC1 mutations were found in a Dutch control cohort of 5784 fertile men, except for p.M259T (in 13 heterozygous men), which indicates that these variants are rare.
The homozygous state of the rare pathogenic PNLDC1 mutations p.R452Ter and p.P84S potentially indicates an increased rate of autozygosity in the carriers. In support of this possibility, both changes were found within long stretches of homozygosity (34.4 Mb in Patient 1 and 8.8 Mb in Patient 2). A cumulative burden of the long ROH regions per genome confirmed that both Patients 1 and 2 are descendants of third and fourth degree of consanguinity, with 4.9% and 2.9%, respectively, of autosomes being homozygous.
Patients 1, 2, and 4 descended from populations in the Greater Middle East and, although the ethnic origin of Patient 3 was unknown, his name is consistent with descent from a Middle Eastern population ( Table 1 ). All patients were confirmed to have nonobstructive azoospermia on the basis of physical examination and histologic findings, according to the AUA–ASRM and EAU guidelines. The men had no anamnestic risk factors for obstruction, and they had a normal male phenotype (i.e., no gynecomastia, normal adult pubic hair distribution, no hypospadias, and testicles in the normal low-scrotal position). However, the sizes of the testes were slightly reduced ( Table 1 ), and each patient had nondilated epididymides and palpable vasa deferentia on both sides, as expected in cases of nonobstructive azoospermia. All four men had a normal 46,XY karyotype, no Y chromosome microdeletions, and azoospermia with no sperm detected in repeated evaluations of the ejaculate after high-speed centrifugation. Reproductive hormone levels were within the normal range, except for low total and free testosterone levels in Patient 1 ( Table 1 ).
Fertility treatment was unsuccessful in all patients, and morphologically abnormal spermatozoa were observed only in the testicular sperm extraction sample from Patient 3 ( Table 1 ). At consultation, all the patients appeared to be otherwise healthy, but Patient 1 had previously received a diagnosis of a mild psychotic phenotype (schizophrenia), which has been described before in a patient with heterozygous translocations involving PNLDC1 . The coexisting psychotic condition is of unknown significance in the context of nonobstructive azoospermia.
Testicular-biopsy samples from Patients 1, 2, and 4 showed that all seminiferous tubules had a very similar and homogeneous pattern of spermatogenic arrest at the late pachytene stage, although a few cells made it to diakinesis and metaphase I and through metaphase II to the spermatid stage ( Figure 2 ). Many pyknotic cells were observed in the lumen ( Figure 2C, 2G, and 2I ). In some tubules, a few round spermatids of type Sa were seen ( Figure 2C and 2J ), as well as occasional Sb spermatids, which appeared abnormally formed and pyknotic.
We also observed a slight increase in the number of spermatogonia that appeared abnormal, but with no signs of malignant change, together with an increased number of mitotic divisions ( Figure 2D through 2F ). In accordance with these observations, the mean mitotic index of spermatogonia tended to be slightly increased (Fig. S3) at 0.98%, as compared with the mitotic index of 0.25% (P=0.06) that was reported previously in men with complete spermatogenesis. MAGE-A4 and TNP1 staining confirmed that the number of spermatogonia was similar to that in tissue with complete spermatogenesis, whereas the number of round spermatids was greatly reduced (Fig. S4).
Interrogation of human single-cell RNA sequencing data indicated that PNLDC1 is absent in somatic testicular cells and is specifically transcribed in germ cells, with the highest levels occurring in spermatogonial stem cells and spermatocytes at the leptotene and zygotene stages ( Figure 3A ). RT-qPCR analysis of PNLDC1 expression in testicular tissue showed significantly reduced transcript levels in Patients 1 and 4, as compared with matched controls (P=0.003 and P=0.02, respectively) ( Figure 3C ), a finding that indicates the occurrence of nonsense-mediated decay. In Patient 3, who had compound heterozygous variants, a less pronounced decrease in PNLDC1 expression was observed. RNA was not available for Patient 2. No differences in expression of the housekeeping gene RPS20 were observed between the patients and controls, which indicates that RNA quality was not compromised.
Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue samples with complete spermatogenesis showed major expression of PNLDC1 in pachytene spermatocytes, as expected (Fig. S5). However, an unexpected staining of interstitial cells (peritubular myoid cells, Leydig cells, and blood vessels) was observed even after extensive evaluation of experimental conditions and testing of two other commercial antibodies (Table S2). Negative controls showed no staining (Figs. S6 and S7). The intensity of PNLDC1 staining was, nevertheless, clearly reduced in pachytene spermatocytes of Patients 1 and 2 (Fig. S5), and we believe that the signals in interstitial cells are artifacts. To confirm that PNLDC1 transcription is specific to germ cells, we performed RT-qPCR assays on testicular tissue samples with and without germ cells. PNLDC1 transcripts were observed at high levels in tissue with complete spermatogenesis, but the levels were significantly reduced in tissue devoid of germ cells (Sertoli cell–only pattern) (P<0.001) and were similar to those in ovary tissue and somatic tissue with no piRNA production ( Figure 3D ). Furthermore, in situ hybridization of the control testicular tissue confirmed PNLDC1 expression in the germ cells (primarily spermatogonia and spermatocytes) and showed loss of the expression in Patient 4, findings that are consistent with those from the RT-qPCR assays ( Figure 3B and Fig. S8).
We investigated the effect of PNLDC1 mutations on the expression of several key piRNA-processing components. Although not all proteins were stained in all cases, the combined results indicated a greatly diminished expression of PIWIL1 in pachytene spermatocytes, PIWIL4 in spermatogonia, and transcription factor MYBL in spermatocytes ( Figure 4A and Fig. S9). TDRKH, which is found from the spermatogonia stage to late-stage pachytene spermatocytes, was detected in fewer cells and at lower levels.
The observed changes in protein expression were in general mirrored at the transcript level. RT-qPCR assays of RNA isolated from testicular-biopsy samples from Patients 1 and 4 revealed greatly reduced levels of PIWIL1 , PIWIL4 , MYBL1 , and TDRKH transcripts, whereas a less pronounced decrease was observed for Patient 3 ( Figure 4B and Fig. S10A and S10B).
We performed small-RNA sequencing on testicular RNA from Patients 1, 3, and 4. The results indicated a compromised biogenesis of piRNAs with significantly decreased amounts of piRNAs in all three patients, as compared with RNA in similarly treated tissue obtained from controls with complete spermatogenesis ( Figure 4C and Fig. S10C and S10D). A peak of expected piRNA lengths of 26 to 31 bases was observed in the controls, but this peak was absent in Patients 1 and 4, who had a significant loss of piRNAs (P<0.001) as well as a different piRNA length distribution. With respect to the compound heterozygous variants in Patient 3, a similar but milder effect on piRNA production was observed (P=0.04) (Fig. S10D). In addition to impaired piRNA biogenesis, a significantly (P<0.001) reduced contribution of piRNAs originating from pachytene piRNA loci was detected in all sequenced RNA samples from the three patients as compared with their respective controls (Fig. S11).

Section: Discussion

In our study, loss of the piRNA trimmer PNLDC1 was associated with severe impairment of spermatogenesis and nonobstructive azoospermia in men. Our results largely support the observations in mice with targeted ablation of Pnldc1 . In addition, concomitant loss of PIWIL1 was observed in both men and mice with dysfunctional PNLDC1. We conclude that the three biallelic loss-of-function mutations described here led to a collapse of the piRNA machinery and that the heterozygous frameshift variant in combination with a milder missense variant (in Patient 3) caused a milder phenotype.
In fetal germ cells, piRNAs are important for silencing transposable elements, and defective PNLDC1 could impair adult spermatogenesis because of testicular dysgenesis. However, we observed similar numbers of spermatogonia in the study patients and unaffected men. We therefore speculate that PNLDC1 may be more relevant for processing of piRNAs at the pachytene stage of adult spermatogenesis than during fetal development of the gonads. In accordance with this hypothesis, we observed loss of MYBL1, which is thought to be specifically involved in controlling the expression of more than half of piRNAs during pachytene, and diminished testicular transcription of MYBL1 and PIWIL1 .
Other studies have linked piRNA-processing enzymes to infertility in men. Deletions in the PIWIL4-interacting TDRD9 have been reported in men with cryptozoospermia originating from a consanguineous Bedouin family. Similarly, two patients from unrelated consanguineous families who had nonobstructive azoospermia were found to carry loss-of-function mutations in TDRD7 . Furthermore, evidence from studies in mice suggests that mutations in other piRNA enzymes are likely causes of severe spermatogenic failure in men, because disruption of multiple piRNA-related proteins leads to meiotic arrest and infertility in male mice. Collectively, our findings indicate that mutations in PNLDC1 and other players in piRNA biogenesis are most likely an underlying cause of spermatogenic failure in a subgroup of men with azoospermia.
