Title: Inhaled Molgramostim Therapy in Autoimmune Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Autoimmune pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (aPAP) is a rare disease characterized by progressive surfactant accumulation and hypoxemia. It is caused by disruption of granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) signaling, which pulmonary alveolar macrophages require to clear surfactant. Recently, inhaled GM-CSF was shown to improve the partial pressure of arterial oxygen in patients with aPAP.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, three-group trial, we randomly assigned patients with aPAP to receive the recombinant GM-CSF molgramostim (300 μg once daily by inhalation), either continuously or intermittently (every other week), or matching placebo. The 24-week intervention period was followed by an open-label treatment-extension period. The primary end point was the change from baseline in the alveolar–arterial difference in oxygen concentration (A-aD o 2 ) at week 24.

Abstract_Section: Results

In total, 138 patients underwent randomization; 46 were assigned to receive continuous molgramostim, 45 to receive intermittent molgramostim, and 47 to receive placebo. Invalid A-aD o 2 data for 4 patients (1 in each molgramostim group and 2 in the placebo group) who received nasal oxygen therapy during arterial blood gas measurement were replaced by means of imputation. For the primary end point — the change from baseline in the A-aD o 2 at week 24 — improvement was greater among patients receiving continuous molgramostim than among those receiving placebo (−12.8 mm Hg vs. −6.6 mm Hg; estimated treatment difference, −6.2 mm Hg; P=0.03 by comparison of least-squares means). Patients receiving continuous molgramostim also had greater improvement than those receiving placebo for secondary end points, including the change from baseline in the St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire total score at week 24 (−12.4 points vs. −5.1 points; estimated treatment difference, −7.4 points; P=0.01 by comparison of least-squares means). For multiple end points, improvement was greater with continuous molgramostim than with intermittent molgramostim. The percentages of patients with adverse events and serious adverse events were similar in the three groups, except for the percentage of patients with chest pain, which was higher in the continuous-molgramostim group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In patients with aPAP, daily administration of inhaled molgramostim resulted in greater improvements in pulmonary gas transfer and functional health status than placebo, with similar rates of adverse events. (Funded by Savara Pharmaceuticals; IMPALA ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02702180 .)

Section: Introduction

Autoimmune pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (aPAP) is a disease characterized by alveolar filling that leads to progressive accumulation of surfactant in alveoli, hypoxemia, and in some patients, the development of serious infections or pulmonary fibrosis. Although PAP can be caused by multiple mechanistically distinct diseases, aPAP accounts for 90% of cases of PAP, with a reported prevalence of 7 to 27 per 1 million general population. The pathogenesis of aPAP is driven by autoantibodies that block granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) signaling, which alveolar macrophages require to clear surfactant from alveoli. Disease progression is associated with an increase in the alveolar–arterial difference in oxygen concentration (A-aD o 2 ) due to reduced partial pressure of arterial oxygen (Pa o 2 ), as well as with reduced diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DL co ), restrictive impairment of lung function, ground-glass opacification of the lungs on computed tomography (CT), progressive dyspnea, polycythemia (a systemic manifestation of chronic hypoxemia), and increased serum biomarker levels.
No drugs have been approved as therapy for aPAP in any country; aPAP is treated by whole-lung lavage, a procedure in which excess surfactant sediment is physically removed. Since alveoli are typically well preserved in patients with aPAP, an effective therapy — one that removes the excess accumulated surfactant sediment — would be expected to simultaneously improve measures that reflect multiple disease manifestations. Preclinical studies, case reports, and small open-label trials involving patients with aPAP have all indicated that treatment with inhaled GM-CSF improves lung function, as well as measures that reflect clinical and radiologic manifestations of aPAP. A meta-analysis showed that GM-CSF therapy for aPAP was effective and that administration by the inhaled route was superior to subcutaneous injection. A recent controlled trial showed that the administration of inhaled GM-CSF for 24 weeks improved the Pa o 2 and radiologically measured lung density. However, no controlled trials have reported that inhaled GM-CSF improves measures that reflect clinical manifestations of aPAP.
Inhaled molgramostim, an Escherichia coli –produced recombinant GM-CSF formulated as a nebulizer solution, is pharmacologically active after aerosolization and has an acceptable side-effect profile in healthy people. We report the results of the Inhaled Molgramostim in Autoimmune Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis (IMPALA) trial, a controlled trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of inhaled molgramostim in patients with aPAP.

Section: Methods

Eligible patients were at least 18 years of age and had a diagnosis of aPAP based on the results of chest CT, the results of either lung biopsy or cytologic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and a positive serum test for GM-CSF autoantibodies. Patients were required to have an A-aD o 2 of 25 mm Hg or more, a Pa o 2 of less than 75 mm Hg at rest while breathing ambient air or a decrease in oxygen saturation of more than 4 percentage points during the 6-minute walk test, and unremitting or progressive aPAP as indicated by improvement in the vital capacity of less than 5% or improvement in the DL co of less than 10% within 2 months before enrollment. Patients were excluded from the trial if they were pregnant or breast-feeding, had a PAP-causing disease other than aPAP, or were being treated with carbocysteine or ambroxol currently or had been treated with whole-lung lavage within 1 month before enrollment, GM-CSF within 3 months before enrollment, or plasmapheresis or rituximab within 6 months before enrollment. Patients provided written informed consent. Details regarding eligibility criteria are provided in Section 2 of the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
The trial was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice guidelines, with periodic review by an independent data and safety monitoring committee. The protocol , available at NEJM.org, was designed by the sponsor, Savara Pharmaceuticals, in collaboration with the investigators and was approved by the institutional review board or ethics committee at each participating site. The sponsor collected and analyzed the data. The first and penultimate authors wrote the first draft of the manuscript; all the authors had access to the data, contributed to writing and approval of the manuscript, and vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and the fidelity of the trial to the protocol.
The trial was conducted at 34 sites in 18 countries. It consisted of a 24-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled intervention period during which patients attended a baseline visit and monthly follow-up visits, as well as an open-label treatment-extension period of up to 48 weeks. Patients were randomly assigned, in a 1:1:1 ratio, to receive inhaled molgramostim (300 μg per day) every week (continuously) or every other week (intermittently) or matching placebo. Treatment was administered once daily with the use of a vibrating mesh nebulizer (eFlow, PARI Pharma). During the blinded intervention period, patients who were assigned to receive intermittent molgramostim were given placebo during “off” weeks to maintain blinding. During the open-label treatment-extension period, all patients received molgramostim (300 μg per day) every other week, because previous open-label studies had shown positive results with intermittent administration. Patients were stratified according to receipt or nonreceipt of whole-lung lavage within 2 months before baseline. For ethical reasons, the administration of supplemental oxygen therapy (to maintain adequate blood oxygen levels) and whole-lung lavage (as rescue therapy for PAP progression) were permitted according to the protocol and were administered at the discretion of site investigators. Patients who received such therapy continued to receive the assigned trial drug. Details regarding trial sites, design, and management are provided in Sections 1 through 4 of the Supplementary Appendix .
The primary end point — the mean change from baseline in the A-aD o 2 at week 24 — was chosen on the basis of investigator recommendations and extensive use in previous studies. Key secondary end points that informed direct patient benefit included the mean change from baseline to week 24 in functional health status, measured with the total score on the St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ; scores range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating more severe effects on functional health status) ; the mean change from baseline to week 24 in the distance covered on the 6-minute walk test ; and the time from randomization to the first use of whole-lung lavage. Other end points included the mean change from baseline to week 24 in the DL co SGRQ component scores (activity, impact, and symptoms), number of whole-lung lavage procedures, forced expiratory volume in 1 second, forced vital capacity, vital capacity, score for ground-glass opacification on chest CT (scores range from 0 to 15, with higher scores indicating a higher proportion of the area of the lung parenchyma on a CT scan corresponding to regions affected by ground-glass opacification, an indication of the abnormal accumulation of surfactant sediment in patients with aPAP), and serum biomarker levels (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). These end points permitted evaluation of a range of abnormalities that are driven by the pathogenesis of PAP. Safety was assessed by monitoring adverse events. A list of additional prespecified end points and details regarding trial assessments and data collection, analysis, and interpretation are provided in Sections 3 and 4 of the Supplementary Appendix .
The trial was initially powered to detect a difference of 10 mm Hg between the molgramostim groups and the placebo group in the mean change in the A-aD o 2 . After a meeting with the Food and Drug Administration, the trial was expanded to include U.S. sites, several outcome measures (change in the SGRQ total score, change in the distance covered on the 6-minute walk test, and time from baseline to the first use of whole-lung lavage) were promoted as key secondary end points, and the sample size was recalculated to give the trial 90% power at the 5% significance level to detect a difference of 50 m between the continuous-molgramostim group and the placebo group in the mean change in the distance covered on the 6-minute walk test.
As prespecified in the statistical analysis plan (available with the protocol at NEJM.org), the primary end point was evaluated with the use of an analysis of covariance model that included trial group, status with regard to whole-lung lavage within 2 months before baseline (receipt vs. nonreceipt), and geographic region (Japan vs. other countries) as factors and baseline values as covariates; a P value of less than 0.05, on the basis of a comparison of least-squares means, was considered to indicate statistical significance. To control for type I error, key secondary end points were analyzed with the use of a testing hierarchy (Fig. S1A) in which the continuous-molgramostim and placebo groups were compared first, and if significance was reached in the evaluation of any key secondary end points, then comparison of the intermittent-molgramostim and placebo groups would proceed, first with evaluation of the primary end point, and if significance was reached, then with evaluation of the key secondary end points. The threshold indicating significance for analyses of key secondary end points was adjusted for multiplicity with the use of the truncated Hochberg procedure. Analyses of all other end points were considered to be supportive and were not adjusted for multiplicity, and P values are not reported for these end points.
The full analysis set, which included results for all patients who received at least one dose of the assigned intervention (Fig. S2), was used for the initial analysis of all data. After trial data were unblinded and the prespecified analysis was conducted, a nonphysiologic (large negative) A-aD o 2 value (−42 mm Hg) was identified in one patient. A reexamination of all relevant data revealed that this patient and three others (one in the continuous-molgramostim group, one in the intermittent-molgramostim group, and two in the placebo group) had undergone blood gas analysis while they were receiving supplemental oxygen through a nasal cannula, which precluded calculation of the A-aD o 2 because the fraction of inspired oxygen was unknown. Therefore, a revised full analysis set was established in which the invalid blood gas results for these four patients were treated as missing data, with replacement by means of multiple imputation; the revised set was used for an intention-to-treat analysis of the primary end point. Although not prespecified, for consistency, missing data for the primary end point, key secondary end points, and ground-glass opacification (but not for other end points) during the blinded intervention period were replaced by means of multiple imputation (details are provided in Section 4 of the Supplementary Appendix ). The full analysis set was used for analysis of all other end points. Results are presented as means ±SD, and analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

From February 2016 through May 2019, a total of 235 patients underwent assessment for eligibility, and 138 patients with aPAP underwent randomization; 46 were assigned to receive continuous molgramostim, 45 to receive intermittent molgramostim, and 47 to receive placebo (Fig. S2). Of these patients, 98% in each molgramostim group and 94% in the placebo group completed the blinded intervention period, and 131 were enrolled in the open-label treatment-extension period. One third of the patients received supplemental oxygen therapy during the trial. The baseline characteristics of the patients were similar in the three groups ( Table 1 and Table S2).
The primary end point — the mean change from baseline in the A-aD o 2 at week 24 — was not significantly different between the continuous-molgramostim group and the placebo group when analyzed with the use of the full analysis set (−12.7 mm Hg vs. −7.6 mm Hg; estimated treatment difference, −5.2 mm Hg; P=0.12 by comparison of least-squares means). However, after the invalid data for patients who received supplemental oxygen during blood gas measurement were replaced by means of imputation, the change was greater among patients receiving continuous molgramostim than among those receiving placebo (−12.8 mm Hg vs. −6.6 mm Hg; estimated treatment difference, −6.2 mm Hg; P=0.03 by comparison of least-squares means) ( Figure 1 and Figure 2 , Table 2 , Fig. S3, and Tables S3, S4, and S5). The greater improvement in the A-aD o 2 with continuous molgramostim was supported by results for another prespecified measure of pulmonary gas transfer, the mean change from baseline in the percent of predicted DL co at week 24, which was greater in the continuous-molgramostim group than in the placebo group (12.0 vs. 4.2 percentage points; estimated treatment difference, 7.8 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.3 to 13.3 by comparison of least-squares means) ( Figure 2 , Table 2 , and Table S3), and was also supported by results of sensitivity analyses (Fig. S4).
The mean change from baseline in the SGRQ total score at week 24 was significantly greater in the continuous-molgramostim group than in the placebo group (−12.4 points vs. −5.1 points; estimated treatment difference, −7.4 points; 95% CI, −13.1 to −1.6; P=0.01 by comparison of least-squares means) ( Figure 2 and Table 2 ), as was the mean change in the SGRQ component score for activity and for impact but not for symptoms (Table S3). The odds ratios for response at the 4-point, 8-point, and 12-point thresholds for change in the SGRQ total score among patients receiving continuous molgramostim as compared with those receiving placebo were 3.8 (95% CI, 1.4 to 10.0), 2.9 (95% CI, 1.2 to 7.4), and 1.9 (95% CI, 0.7 to 4.9), respectively (Fig. S5). The mean change from baseline in the distance covered on the 6-minute walk test at week 24 was not significantly different between the continuous-molgramostim group and the placebo group (32.4 m vs. 7.9 m; estimated treatment difference, 24.6 m; 95% CI, −15.3 to 64.4 by comparison of least-squares means) ( Figure 2 and Table 2 ).
The use of whole-lung lavage therapy in the 2 years preceding enrollment was not significantly different among the three groups (Fig. S6). As compared with the rate of use of whole-lung lavage before enrollment (0.80 procedures per patient-year), the rate remained similar in the placebo group after randomization (0.82 procedures per patient-year) but decreased in the continuous-molgramostim group during the blinded intervention period (to 0.42 procedures per patient-year) and decreased further during the open-label treatment-extension period (to 0.06 procedures per patient-year) (Fig. S7A). The time from baseline to the first use of whole-lung lavage therapy was not significantly different between patients receiving continuous molgramostim and those receiving placebo (Fig. S7B).
At week 24, the mean change from baseline in the ground-glass opacification score, reflecting the reduction in alveolar surfactant burden, was −3.6 points among patients receiving continuous molgramostim and −1.1 points among those receiving placebo (estimated treatment difference, −2.5 points; 95% CI, −3.7 to −1.2 by comparison of least-squares means) ( Table 2 ). Improvements in levels of serum aPAP biomarkers among patients receiving continuous molgramostim and among those receiving placebo are shown in Figures S8 and S9.
Because previous uncontrolled studies had evaluated intermittent GM-CSF administration in patients with aPAP, an intermittent-molgramostim group was included in this trial. The mean change from baseline in the A-aD o 2 at week 24 was not significantly different between the intermittent-molgramostim group and the placebo group when analyzed with the use of the revised full analysis set (−10.3 mm Hg vs. −6.6 mm Hg; estimated treatment difference, −3.8 mm Hg; P=0.18 by comparison of least-squares means). For most outcomes, the difference between the continuous-molgramostim group and the placebo group was greater than the difference between the intermittent-molgramostim group and the placebo group (Figs. S10 and S11 and Table S3). The rate of use of whole-lung lavage during the blinded intervention period in the intermittent-molgramostim group is shown in Figure S7B.
During the open-label treatment-extension period, for which there was no control group, improvements in the A-aD o 2 , DL co , SGRQ total score, and distance covered on the 6-minute walk test were observed among patients who had received continuous molgramostim, intermittent molgramostim, or placebo during the blinded intervention period (Fig. S11). The rate of use of whole-lung lavage during the open-label treatment-extension period is shown in Figure S7B.
No deaths occurred during the trial. The percentages of patients with adverse events and serious adverse events were similar in the three groups during the blinded intervention period, except for the percentage of patients with chest pain, which was 22% in the continuous-molgramostim group as compared with 4% in the intermittent-molgramostim group and 2% in the placebo group. No treatment-related serious adverse events were reported during the open-label treatment-extension period (Tables S7 and S8). The serum molgramostim (GM-CSF) autoantibody titer was similar in the three groups at baseline and did not differ markedly during the blinded intervention period (Table S3).

Section: Discussion

This trial showed that, among patients with aPAP, treatment with inhaled molgramostim for 24 weeks had beneficial effects, including greater improvement than placebo in measures of pulmonary gas transfer (A-aD o 2 and DL co ), functional health status (SGRQ scores), and pathologic features (ground-glass opacification score and serum biomarker levels); however, no significant difference was observed in the distance covered on the 6-minute walk test or the use of whole-lung lavage therapy. Molgramostim was not associated with more frequent adverse effects, other than chest pain.
The observation of synchronous greater improvement across multiple outcomes that reflect physiological, clinical, radiologic, and biochemical disease manifestations provides strong support for a treatment effect of molgramostim in patients with aPAP. Further support comes from the consistent trend toward greater efficacy when molgramostim was administered continuously rather than intermittently. Our data regarding SGRQ total scores show an improvement in health status among patients with aPAP in a controlled trial.
Although the minimal clinically important difference, which is a change that patients can perceive, has not been established in relation to aPAP for any outcome variable, the treatment effects of molgramostim in this trial are similar to or greater than the effects observed in previous studies that evaluated GM-CSF as therapy for aPAP. A recent controlled trial involving 64 patients with mild-to-moderate aPAP (the Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis GM-CSF Inhalation Efficacy [PAGE] trial) showed that the administration of inhaled GM-CSF for 24 weeks led to greater improvement than placebo in the A-aD o 2 by −5.7 mm Hg (95% CI, −10.5 to −1.4) and in the percent of predicted DL co by 6.9 percentage points (95% CI, 0.62 to 13.1). We observed similarly favorable results in our trial, with a difference between the continuous-molgramostim group and the placebo group of −6.2 mm Hg in the A-aD o 2 and of 7.8 percentage points in the percent of predicted DL co . In addition, the administration of continuous molgramostim led to greater improvement than placebo in the SGRQ total score by −7.4 points, a difference greater than the minimal clinically important difference of 4 that had been previously determined for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Treatment with molgramostim led to greater improvement than placebo in the ground-glass opacification score; this finding is similar to results of the PAGE trial, in which the use of inhaled GM-CSF improved radiologically measured lung density. Finally, treatment with molgramostim led to greater improvement than placebo in levels of serum PAP biomarkers; these findings are consistent with results for mucinlike glycoprotein KL-6 and monocyte chemotactic protein 1 in the PAGE trial.
The effect of whole-lung lavage therapy, which is known to be efficacious in patients with aPAP, has also been evaluated with regard to several outcome measures. The use of whole-lung lavage improved the mean A-aD o 2 by 18 mm Hg in one study involving 21 patients, by 15.2 mm Hg in another study involving 26 patients, and by 20.7 mm Hg in a third study involving 80 patients. In these uncontrolled studies, the use of whole-lung lavage also improved the percent of predicted DL co , by 8.0, 11.3, and 10.6 percentage points, respectively. These differences are greater than the results we observed during the 24-week blinded intervention period in our trial, although it is noteworthy that improvement continued during the open-label treatment-extension period. Together, these observations suggest that a longer duration of inhaled molgramostim therapy may be needed to reach the maximal treatment benefit.
An important limitation of the trial was that, in 4 patients, measurements related to the A-aD o 2 were obtained while supplemental oxygen was being administered. The protocol-specified use of the same oxygen flow rate for each patient receiving supplemental oxygen during all trial visits proved to be an inadequate remedial measure, and it was necessary to replace the A-aD o 2 data for these patients. Replacement of these data was justified because the data were invalid and there were only a few patients with invalid data (4 of 138 patients), with a balanced distribution among the three groups. The observed improvement in the A-aD o 2 with molgramostim was supported by the results of sensitivity analyses, by concurrent improvement in the DL co (an independent measure of pulmonary gas transfer that is unaffected by supplemental oxygen), and by several previous uncontrolled and controlled studies that reported a treatment benefit of inhaled GM-CSF in patients with aPAP. Another limitation of the trial was the short (24-week) duration of the blinded intervention period; the period was considered to be too short to show an effect on the use of whole-lung lavage, for which the median time between therapeutic procedures is 35 to 60 weeks.
In our small, relatively short trial, daily administration of inhaled molgramostim led to greater improvement than placebo in outcomes that reflect physiological, radiologic, biochemical, and clinical manifestations of aPAP and was more beneficial when administered continuously than on alternating weeks. Further studies are needed to define the duration of treatment required for maximal treatment benefit and to evaluate the potential use of differential dosing for induction and maintenance therapy.
