Title: Thrombectomy for Stroke in the Public Health Care System of Brazil


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Randomized trials involving patients with stroke have established that outcomes are improved with the use of thrombectomy for large-vessel occlusion. These trials were performed in high-resource countries and have had limited effects on medical practice in low- and middle-income countries.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We studied the safety and efficacy of thrombectomy in the public health system of Brazil. In 12 public hospitals, patients with a proximal intracranial occlusion in the anterior circulation that could be treated within 8 hours after the onset of stroke symptoms were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive standard care plus mechanical thrombectomy (thrombectomy group) or standard care alone (control group). The primary outcome was the score on the modified Rankin scale (range, 0 [no symptoms] to 6 [death]) at 90 days.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 300 patients were enrolled, including 79 who had undergone thrombectomy during an open-label roll-in period. Approximately 70% in the two groups received intravenous alteplase. The trial was stopped early because of efficacy when 221 of a planned 690 patients had undergone randomization (111 to the thrombectomy group and 110 to the control group). The common odds ratio for a better distribution of scores on the modified Rankin scale at 90 days was 2.28 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.41 to 3.69; P=0.001), favoring thrombectomy. The percentage of patients with a score on the modified Rankin scale of 0 to 2, signifying an absence of or minor neurologic deficit, was 35.1% in the thrombectomy group and 20.0% in the control group (difference, 15.1 percentage points; 95% CI, 2.6 to 27.6). Asymptomatic intracranial hemorrhage occurred in 51.4% of the patients in the thrombectomy group and 24.5% of those in the control group; symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage occurred in 4.5% of the patients in each group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In this randomized trial conducted in the public health care system of Brazil, endovascular treatment within 8 hours after the onset of stroke symptoms in conjunction with standard care resulted in better functional outcomes at 90 days than standard care alone. (Funded by the Brazilian Ministry of Health; RESILIENT ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02216643 .)

Section: Introduction

At least eight randomized clinical trials have shown the benefit of mechanical thrombectomy in the treatment of strokes due to large-vessel occlusion, when applied in certain time windows or with favorable imaging characteristics. These trials were performed in high-resource countries with health care environments that are configured to widely apply technological advances.
Despite the positive results of the previous trials, the Brazilian government determined that the costs of thrombectomy are high and that its efficacy and cost-effectiveness are unproven in the limited resources of the health care system of that country. However, the government agreed to fund a clinical trial to assess whether the treatment should be incorporated into the Universal Public Health Care System. The aim of the Randomization of Endovascular Treatment with Stent-retriever and/or Thromboaspiration versus Best Medical Therapy in Acute Ischemic Stroke due to Large Vessel Occlusion Trial (RESILIENT) was to determine the safety and efficacy of thrombectomy in conjunction with medical therapy as compared with medical therapy alone in the public health care system of Brazil, as representative of a developing country.

Section: Methods

This was a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label, controlled trial, conducted in Brazil, with blinded central evaluation of outcomes in patients with stroke. Patients were assigned in a 1:1 ratio to be treated with intraarterial thrombectomy and guideline-based care (thrombectomy group) or with guideline-based care alone (control group), including intravenous alteplase for eligible patients within 4.5 hours after the onset of symptoms. The trial protocol was approved by the National Regulatory Agency in Research and the institutional review board at each participating site. Enrolled patients or their surrogates provided written informed consent.
The trial was designed and conducted by a steering committee, composed of independent academic investigators and statisticians. The steering committee had unrestricted access to the data and, together with all the authors, reviewed the analysis and wrote the manuscript. All the authors attest to the completeness and accuracy of the data and the reporting of adverse events and to the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. An independent data and safety monitoring board monitored the trial. An independent clinical-events committee adjudicated safety outcomes, procedure-related complications, and serious adverse events. Neuroimaging was assessed in a blinded manner by a core laboratory.
The trial was funded by an unrestricted grant from the Brazilian Ministry of Health. Thrombectomy devices were donated through unrestricted grants from the manufacturers of the stent retrievers (Medtronic) and thromboaspiration catheters (Penumbra). Automated imaging software was made available at some sites for computed tomographic (CT) perfusion analysis (RAPID, iSchemaView) or noncontrast CT analysis (e-ASPECTS, Brainomix) ; however, their use was optional. In addition, smartphone software platforms were used for the sharing of imaging, teleconsultation (with the use of the Join platform from Allm), and patient triage (FAST-ED, Allm). The trial sponsor and commercial entities were not involved in the design or conduct of the trial or the writing of the manuscript. Information on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, interventions, and assessments has been published previously. The trial protocol and statistical analysis plan are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
A total of 20 sites were initially considered for the trial; 18 were approved after performance assessment in a roll-in phase, and 12 ultimately enrolled and randomly assigned patients. The trial sites were certified stroke centers within the Brazilian Universal Public Health Care System, all with the capability to perform neuroangiographic procedures. Only 1 center had previous experience with endovascular stroke treatment ; however, all the operators were fellowship-trained neurointerventionists, and each had to have performed at least five thrombectomies at the participating center or elsewhere before the start of the trial in order to qualify for participation. Participating sites that had no previous experience with thrombectomy were also required to do at least an additional three to five procedures in the roll-in phase of the trial. Data from patients who had undergone thrombectomy during the open-label roll-in phase were not included in the primary analyses of trial results.
Patients were eligible for inclusion in the trial if they were 18 years of age or older; had an occlusion involving the intracranial internal carotid artery, the first segment of the middle cerebral artery (M1), or both that could be treated within 8 hours after symptom onset (defined as the time when the patient was last seen in a normal state of health); had a prestroke score of 0 or 1 on the modified Rankin scale (range, 0 [no symptoms] to 6 [death]); and had a score of 8 or higher on the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS; range, 0 to 42, with higher values indicating more severe deficit) at presentation. The main imaging exclusion criteria were evidence of recent intracranial hemorrhage; the presence of a large infarct, as defined by an Alberta Stroke Program Early Computed Tomography Score (ASPECTS) of less than 6 (range, 0 to 10, with higher values indicating less infarct burden) on CT or of less than 5 on diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); and the complete absence of leptomeningeal collaterals on CT angiography. If CT or MRI perfusion were performed, patients had to have a baseline infarct volume of less than 70 ml, a ratio of volume of ischemic tissue to baseline infarct volume of 1.8 or more, and an absolute volume of potentially reversible ischemia (penumbra) of 15 ml or more.
Randomization was performed through a real-time, dynamic, Internet-based, randomized minimization procedure to balance the numbers of patients across the two groups with respect to age (≤70 or >70 years), baseline NIHSS score (≤16 or >16), use or nonuse of intravenous alteplase, occlusion site (intracranial internal carotid artery or M1), and participating center. Additional details regarding requirements for enrollment are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.
In the thrombectomy group, thrombectomy was performed with the Solitaire FR (Flow Restoration) stentretriever or Penumbra aspiration system. Angioplasty and stenting of the cervical internal carotid artery could be performed if necessary. Standard medical care, including the use of alteplase, followed the guidelines of the Brazilian Stroke Society and the American Heart Association. Outpatient rehabilitation after the stroke was not generally available.
The primary outcome was disability at 90 days, evaluated by the distribution of scores on the modified Rankin scale. Assessment was based on central adjudication by consensus of two certified neurologists, who were unaware of the treatment assignments and who viewed video recordings of structured patient or family interviews. In cases in which the video recording was unavailable (19 patients [8.6%]), outcomes were determined by local investigators, who were also unaware of the treatment assignments, through in-person assessment (or telephone assessment, if an in-person visit was not possible) with the use of the same structured interview.
Secondary outcomes were the percentage of patients with functional independence (defined as a score of ≤2 on the modified Rankin scale) at 90 days, the difference in infarct growth between the two groups (determined by the change in ASPECTS from baseline to 24 hours on CT or MRI), the percentage of patients with an early dramatic favorable response (defined as an NIHSS score of 0 to 2 or a decrease in the NIHSS score of ≥8 points from baseline at 24 hours), quality of life (measured by the EuroQol Group 5-Dimension Self-Report Questionnaire [EQ-5D, on which scores range from −0.176 to 1, with higher values indicating a better quality of life]) at 3 months, and the percentage of patients with target-vessel recanalization on CT or magnetic resonance angiography at 24 hours. In the thrombectomy group, the imaging core laboratory used postprocedure conventional angiography to adjudicate successful reperfusion, which was defined as a grade of 2b or 3 on the modified Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction scale, which indicates reperfusion of 50% or more of the affected territory. Safety outcomes included the percentage of patients with symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage on CT or MRI performed at 24 hours (allowed as early as 22 hours and as late as 36 hours), as adjudicated by the core laboratory according to the Safe Implementation of Thrombolysis in Stroke–Monitoring Study definition (parenchymal hemorrhage type 2 associated with an increase of ≥4 points in the NIHSS score or leading to death), as well as 90-day mortality.
We used the same statistical assumptions as the Randomized Trial of Revascularization with Solitaire FR Device versus Best Medical Therapy in the Treatment of Acute Stroke Due to Anterior Circulation Large Vessel Occlusion Presenting within Eight Hours of Symptom Onset (REVASCAT). We calculated that the enrollment of 690 patients would provide the trial with a power of 90% to detect a difference in the distribution of scores on the modified Rankin scale with a one-sided significance level of 0.025 in the analysis of the primary outcome, assuming an expected result of an odds ratio of 1.615.
Interim analyses for overwhelming efficacy were planned when the first 174, 346, and 518 enrolled patients had completed their 90-day follow-up. The measure of effect size between the two groups was a common odds ratio obtained in an ordinal logistic-regression model. For the unadjusted analysis, the proportional-odds assumption was not rejected, and the model fit was considered to be adequate with a P value of 0.27. The adjusted model also presented an adequate fit (P=0.90) but with a rejection of the proportional-odds assumption. Because the differences among the odds-ratio point estimates for each of the six dichotomized categories of scores on the modified Rankin scale between groups were small, the initially proposed analysis involving an ordinal logistic-regression model was maintained. The primary analysis was adjusted for the randomization minimization factors — including age (≤70 or >70 years), baseline NIHSS score (≤16 or >16), use or nonuse of intravenous alteplase, and occlusion site (intracranial internal carotid artery or M1) — with the use of ordinal logistic regression.
All analyses were conducted according to the intention-to-treat principle. For a missing outcome at 90-day follow-up, the score on the modified Rankin scale at discharge was used if the patient was known to be alive; if vital status was unknown (after active search of death certificates), the worst outcome (score of 6 on the modified Rankin scale) was assigned. There was only one patient lost to follow-up at 90 days, and his score on the modified Rankin scale was recorded as 6. There were no missing data for covariates used for adjustments, since these data were used during minimization and were complete for all the patients included in the trial. One secondary outcome, dramatic neurologic improvement at 24 hours, had missing information for eight patients (3.6%). No imputation method was used, and those patients were excluded from the analysis involving that variable. Because the statistical plan did not include a provision for correcting for multiple comparisons when tests for secondary or subgroup outcomes were conducted, results are reported as point estimates and 95% confidence intervals only. The widths of the confidence intervals have not been adjusted for multiple comparisons and cannot be used to infer treatment effects.
We used the Kaplan–Meier method to estimate cumulative mortality and the log-rank test to assess the effect of thrombectomy plus medical therapy as compared with medical therapy alone with respect to mortality. Hazard ratios were estimated with the use of Cox proportional-hazards regression. A Lan–DeMets alpha-spending approach that was based on a power function with phi=1 was used to derive stopping boundaries. All analyses were performed with the use of SPSS software, version 25.0 (IBM), and R software, version 3.5.0 (R Development Core Team).

Section: Results

From January 2017 through March 2019, a total of 18 sites enrolled 300 patients, including 79 who had undergone thrombectomy during the open-label roll-in phase (not included in outcome analyses) and 221 who had undergone randomization to one of the two treatment groups (111 to the thrombectomy group and 110 to the control group). The median NIHSS score at the time of stroke was 18, and intravenous alteplase was received by 68.5% and 71.8% of the patients in the thrombectomy and control groups, respectively. One participant in the control group crossed over to undergo thrombectomy, and another was lost to follow-up; missing data for the score on the modified Rankin scale at 90 days in this patient was imputed as 6 (death) ( Figure 1 ). Baseline characteristics were similar in the two groups; however, the percentages of patients with hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or current or past tobacco use were numerically higher in the control group, whereas the percentage of patients with a baseline score of more than 0 on the modified Rankin scale was numerically higher in the thrombectomy group ( Table 1 ).
All procedures were performed with single-plane angiography units. Thrombectomy was performed in all 111 patients in the thrombectomy group. Ipsilateral carotid angioplasty was performed in 12 patients (10.8%). General anesthesia was used during thrombectomy in 24 patients (21.6%). Additional procedural characteristics and workflow metrics are provided in Table 1 and Tables S3 and S4 in the Supplementary Appendix .
The first planned interim analysis was conducted after 174 patients had completed 90 days of follow-up and showed an adjusted common odds ratio for a better distribution of scores on the modified Rankin scale of 2.24 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.30 to 3.88; P=0.004), favoring endovascular thrombectomy (Fig. S3). This result crossed the prespecified stopping boundary for the demonstration of early efficacy, and we followed the recommendations of the steering committee and safety monitoring board to end enrollment.
The results for the primary end point in the 221 patients who had been enrolled in the trial at the time it was stopped and who were included in the final intention-to-treat analysis showed an adjusted common odds ratio of 2.28 (95% CI, 1.41 to 3.69; P=0.001) in favor of thrombectomy ( Figure 2 and Table 2 ). Point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for secondary outcomes were in the same direction as those for the primary outcome; however, no clinical inferences can be drawn from these data because of the lack of a plan for adjustment for multiple comparisons. The percentage of patients with dramatic neurologic improvement at 24 hours did not differ significantly between the two groups ( Table 2 ). The percentage of patients who were functionally independent at 90 days (score on the modified Rankin scale, 0 to 2) was 35.1% in the thrombectomy group and 20.0% in the control group (odds ratio, 2.55; 95% CI, 1.34 to 4.88). In the thrombectomy group, substantial reperfusion (≥50% of the affected territory) was achieved in 91 of the 111 patients (82.0%). The per-patient costs were estimated to be the equivalent of $8,066.85 (U.S. dollars) higher with thrombectomy plus medical treatment than with medical treatment alone.
The incidence of symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage was 4.5% both in the thrombectomy group and in the control group. Asymptomatic intracranial hemorrhage was more common in the thrombectomy group (51.4%, as compared with 24.5% in the control group; odds ratio, 3.24; 95% CI, 1.77 to 6.01). The 90-day mortality was 24.3% in the thrombectomy group and 30.0% in the control group (hazard ratio for death, 0.73; unadjusted 95% CI, 0.45 to 1.19) (Fig. S1). The incidences of other serious adverse events are shown in Table 3 .
Results for the prespecified subgroups are shown in Figure 3 and Figures S4 and S5. The trial was not powered to find differences in these analyses.

Section: Discussion

This trial represented a collaborative effort by the government and academic physicians to study the feasibility, efficacy, and cost-effectiveness of thrombectomy for stroke in the public health care system of a developing country. The trial showed that among patients in the public health care system of Brazil who were treated within 8 hours after a stroke due to a proximal occlusion in the anterior circulation, 90-day functional outcomes were better with thrombectomy plus standard care than with standard care alone. There are differences between the current trial and previous trials of endovascular thrombectomy for stroke, including in prehospital systems of care, hospital resources, and posthospitalization care and rehabilitation. Our patients had higher overall mortality and a lower likelihood of good outcomes than patients in previous trials in higher-income countries (Fig. S6). The between-group differences in outcomes with respect to disability in our trial were generally similar to those in previous trials of endovascular thrombectomy (Fig. S7), although no formal comparisons between trials can be made because of differing statistical methods and inclusion criteria. The percentage of patients in the control group who received alteplase in our trial (71.8%) was somewhat lower than in comparable trials such as REVASCAT (77.7%) and the Multicenter Randomized Clinical Trial of Endovascular Treatment for Acute Ischemic Stroke in the Netherlands (MR CLEAN) (90.6%). This had an uncertain effect on the outcomes in our trial.
The median time from arrival in the emergency department (ED) to the start of intravenous alteplase of 34 minutes in our trial (Table S3) compares favorably with the median times in previous trials. However, our median time from arrival in the ED to arterial puncture was 116 minutes, which is within the same range as that of REVASCAT and the Extending the Time for Thrombolysis in Emergency Deficits — Intra-Arterial (EXTEND-IA) trial but longer than that in MR CLEAN, the Endovascular Treatment for Small Core and Anterior Circulation Proximal Occlusion with Emphasis on Minimizing CT to Recanalization Times (ESCAPE) trial, and the Solitaire with the Intention for Thrombectomy as Primary Endovascular Treatment (SWIFT PRIME) trial.
It has been shown that time-performance metrics in primary thrombectomy centers are shorter for patients who are transferred from other hospitals than for those presenting to the ED of the center performing thrombectomy. Because our system of care was not well prepared to transfer patients from primary to comprehensive stroke centers, more than three quarters of the patients who were involved in the trial arrived directly at a center that could perform thrombectomy, and the lower proportion of transfers in our trial than in previous trials may have contributed to the longer workflow times. However, the main reasons for treatment delays were probably related to logistics and resources. For example, most of the treating hospitals had only one or two angiography suites for multiple specialties, and this might have led to treatment delays. Our trial also showed a higher incidence of asymptomatic intracranial hemorrhages than did previous studies. Because most of our follow-up imaging at 24 hours to determine whether there had been an intraparenchymal hemorrhage was performed with CT, it was difficult to distinguish contrast staining from hemorrhagic conversion, and this may have resulted in the overestimation of the number of minor hemorrhages. However, there were no substantial between-group differences in the incidence of symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage or parenchymal hematoma, with values that closely resembled the findings of MR CLEAN.
Despite its apparent efficacy, the use of thrombectomy has remained limited in many regions of the world or has been delayed in adoption as compared with developed countries, perhaps because its efficacy has not been shown in settings other than high-income countries. For example, alteplase was approved for the treatment of acute ischemic strokes by the Food and Drug Administration in 1996. Five years later, the Brazilian regulatory agency approved the treatment, but its use remained limited to patients who could afford private care. In 2012, more than 15 years after the trial that established the benefit of intravenous thrombolysis for stroke, the Ministry of Health approved a national policy that made intravenous alteplase available to the more than 80% of Brazilians who depended on the public health care system. Our trial showed the feasibility, safety, and efficacy of endovascular stroke treatment in the public health care system of Brazil.
