Title: Higher or Lower Hemoglobin Transfusion Thresholds for Preterm Infants


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Limited data suggest that higher hemoglobin thresholds for red-cell transfusions may reduce the risk of cognitive delay among extremely-low-birth-weight infants with anemia.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We performed an open, multicenter trial in which infants with a birth weight of 1000 g or less and a gestational age between 22 weeks 0 days and 28 weeks 6 days were randomly assigned within 48 hours after delivery to receive red-cell transfusions at higher or lower hemoglobin thresholds until 36 weeks of postmenstrual age or discharge, whichever occurred first. The primary outcome was a composite of death or neurodevelopmental impairment (cognitive delay, cerebral palsy, or hearing or vision loss) at 22 to 26 months of age, corrected for prematurity.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 1824 infants (mean birth weight, 756 g; mean gestational age, 25.9 weeks) underwent randomization. There was a between-group difference of 1.9 g per deciliter (19 g per liter) in the pretransfusion mean hemoglobin levels throughout the treatment period. Primary outcome data were available for 1692 infants (92.8%). Of 845 infants in the higher-threshold group, 423 (50.1%) died or survived with neurodevelopmental impairment, as compared with 422 of 847 infants (49.8%) in the lower-threshold group (relative risk adjusted for birth-weight stratum and center, 1.00; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.92 to 1.10; P=0.93). At 2 years, the higher- and lower-threshold groups had similar incidences of death (16.2% and 15.0%, respectively) and neurodevelopmental impairment (39.6% and 40.3%, respectively). At discharge from the hospital, the incidences of survival without severe complications were 28.5% and 30.9%, respectively. Serious adverse events occurred in 22.7% and 21.7%, respectively.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In extremely-low-birth-weight infants, a higher hemoglobin threshold for red-cell transfusion did not improve survival without neurodevelopmental impairment at 22 to 26 months of age, corrected for prematurity. (Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and others; TOP ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01702805 .)

Section: Introduction

Packed red-cell transfusions are commonly used to treat low hemoglobin levels in anemic infants in neonatal intensive care units (NICUs). Infants with an extremely-low birth weight (<1000 g) are at high risk for anemia because of immaturity, impaired erythropoiesis, and frequent blood sampling.
Thresholds for transfusion vary because evidence from randomized trials is limited. The largest trial to inform our trial protocol (available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org) involved more than 450 neonates. That trial showed no difference between low and high hemoglobin transfusion thresholds with respect to the primary outcome of clinically significant complications in neonates to 36 weeks of postmenstrual age or the risk of death or severe adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes at 18 to 21 months of age, corrected for prematurity. However, a post hoc analysis suggested that the risk of mild-to-moderate cognitive delay was reduced with higher hemoglobin thresholds.
To further examine the effect of transfusion practice on neurodevelopment in extremely-low-birth-weight infants, we conducted the Transfusion of Prematures (TOP) trial to test the hypothesis that a higher hemoglobin threshold for red-cell transfusions, as compared with a lower threshold, would reduce the incidence of death or neurodevelopmental impairment in infants at 22 to 26 months of age, corrected for prematurity. Both transfusion algorithms used in the trial were consistent with those used in current practice.

Section: Methods

This open, multicenter, randomized, controlled trial was designed by the authors and conducted in 19 centers (41 NICUs) participating in the Neonatal Research Network of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), in collaboration with the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI). Infants underwent randomization between December 31, 2012, and April 12, 2017, with follow-up through February 3, 2020.
Four of the authors employed by RTI International, the data coordinating center for the Neonatal Research Network, undertook coordination, monitoring, and data collection, storage, management, and analysis. The authors employed by RTI International had full access to all the data in the trial and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. The first five authors and the last author prepared a draft of the manuscript, which was reviewed and approved by the trial subcommittee and all site investigators. The NICHD and NHLBI staff had input into the trial design, conduct, analysis, and drafting of the manuscript. All the authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the reporting and for the fidelity of the trial to the trial protocol.
Investigators at each center (listed in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org) and RTI International obtained approval of the institutional review board at each participating site and supervised the informed consent process and trial procedures. Written informed consent was obtained from the parent or legal guardian of each child. Independent oversight was provided by the data and safety monitoring committee of the Neonatal Research Network, which included experts in neonatology, bioethics, and biostatistics, as well as a neonatal transfusion specialist appointed for this trial by the NHLBI.
Infants with a birth weight of 1000 g or less, a gestational age between 22 weeks 0 days and 28 weeks 6 days, and a postnatal age of 48 hours or less were eligible to participate in the trial. Infants were excluded if they were considered to be nonviable by the attending neonatologist, had cyanotic congenital heart disease, had parents who were opposed to blood transfusion, had a parent with hemoglobinopathy or congenital anemia, had received a transfusion in utero, had twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome or isoimmune hemolytic disease, or had received a previous red-cell transfusion after the first 6 hours of life. Other exclusion criteria were the likelihood that the infant’s family would not be able to return for follow-up assessment at 22 to 26 months, receipt or planned receipt of erythropoietin, and a congenital condition (other than premature birth) adversely affecting life expectancy or neurodevelopment.
The infants were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to the higher- or lower-threshold group. Randomization was performed centrally by telephone with the data coordinating center. Randomization was stratified according to birth weight (<750 g or 750 to 1000 g) and trial center and balanced within randomly chosen block sizes of two or four patients. Multiple-birth siblings underwent randomization individually.
All routine red-cell transfusions in both groups were guided by algorithms until the infants reached 36 weeks of postmenstrual age or discharge from the NICU of the trial hospital, whichever occurred first (Table S2). Transfusion algorithms were consistent with current practice, including practice at participating Neonatal Research Network sites. We adhered to ethical recommendations regarding trials of dose-adjusted therapies. Hemoglobin transfusion thresholds in both groups were determined according to postnatal age (highest in the first week of life, lower in each of the 2 successive weeks, and stable thereafter) and according to the use of respiratory support (a higher threshold when respiratory support was warranted). Respiratory support was defined as mechanical ventilation, continuous positive airway pressure, a fraction of inspired oxygen (F io 2 ) greater than 0.35, or delivery of oxygen or room air by nasal cannula at a flow of 1 liter per minute or more.
With perfect adherence to these transfusion algorithms throughout the treatment period, the mean between-group difference in the pretransfusion hemoglobin levels was expected to be 2.0 to 2.5 g per deciliter (20 to 25 g per liter). The transfusion volume was 15 ml per kilogram of body weight. All transfusions received by the infants were from ABO-compatible and Rh-compatible donors. The clinicians were permitted to deviate from the applicable algorithm temporarily for reasons specified in the protocol (e.g., if the infant had bleeding or anticipated bleeding during or after surgery, severe hypoxemia, hypotension, or sepsis). All the blood transfusions were recorded and centrally reviewed for consistency with the algorithms; if they were inconsistent, they were deemed to be deviations. All deviations were independently adjudicated as being either justified by the protocol or violations according to agreement of two investigators who were unaware of the treatment assignments.
The primary outcome was a composite of death or neurodevelopmental impairment in infants at 22 to 26 months of age, corrected for prematurity. All the follow-up examiners, including psychologists and psychometrists, were unaware of the treatment assignments.
Neurodevelopmental impairment was defined as one or more of the following components: cognitive delay, moderate or severe cerebral palsy, or severe vision or hearing loss. Cognitive delay was defined as a composite cognitive score of less than 85 (1 SD below the mean of 100) on the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, third edition ; scores range from 55 to 145, with higher scores indicating better performance. Moderate cerebral palsy was defined as level II or III in the Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) (levels range from I [mild impairment] to V [most severe impairment]), and severe cerebral palsy as GMFCS levels IV or V. Severe vision loss was defined as a corrected visual acuity in the better eye of less than 20/200. Severe hearing impairment was defined as bilateral hearing loss for which hearing aids or cochlear implants were warranted, according to a hearing assessment conducted by sound field testing or according to testing of auditory brain-stem responses. We prespecified that infants without moderate or severe cerebral palsy and without vision or hearing loss had to complete the cognitive subtest of the Bayley Scales successfully in order to be counted as unimpaired for the composite primary outcome.
Table S3 lists all the prespecified secondary outcomes to first discharge home and at 2 years of age. Prespecified secondary outcomes at 22 to 26 months of age included death, neurodevelopmental impairment and its four components, and more detailed analyses of the composite cognitive, language, and motor scores on the Bayley Scales. After a protocol change in 2013, the parents or guardians of the infants completed the Child Behavior Checklist instead of the Brief Infant–Toddler Social and Emotional Assessment in order to comply with revised Neonatal Research Network follow-up procedures.
Prespecified secondary neonatal outcomes included survival to initial hospital discharge without severe complications. These complications included grade 3 or 4 intraventricular hemorrhage, cystic periventricular leukomalacia, or ventriculomegaly diagnosed with the use of clinically performed ultrasonographic examination of the head ; stage 3 or greater retinopathy of prematurity or receipt of treatment for that condition ; and bronchopulmonary dysplasia diagnosed at 36 weeks of postmenstrual age on the basis of a documented need for supplemental oxygen (defined as an F io 2 of ≥0.30 or inability to pass the oxygen reduction test if the F io 2 was 0.22 to 0.29). Stage 2 or 3 necrotizing enterocolitis was recorded. The infant’s head circumference, weight, and length at a postmenstrual age of 36 weeks, postmenstrual age at the last use of caffeine therapy, and the number of packed red-cell transfusions were also secondary outcomes. For each transfusion, it was noted whether the administration was according to the trial protocol.
Our main objective was to assess the between-group difference in the composite primary outcome of death or neurodevelopmental impairment at 22 to 26 months of age, corrected for prematurity. On the basis of a previous trial, we hypothesized that there would be an absolute between-group difference of 7 percentage points in the incidence of death or neurodevelopmental impairment. Given a 52% incidence of death or neurodevelopmental impairment (unpublished data) in the Neonatal Research Network in 2005–2008 (with entry criteria that were similar to those in this trial), we assumed outcome rates of 53.5% for the lower-threshold group and 46.5% for the higher-threshold group, centered around a conservative overall event rate of 50% in the two treatment groups. We estimated that with a sample of 1824 infants and 10% loss to follow-up, the trial would have 80% power to detect an absolute difference of 7 percentage points in the incidence of the primary outcome between the trial groups, at a two-tailed type I error rate of 0.05.
The independent data and safety monitoring committee reviewed the incoming data at four time points during the enrollment period, as prespecified by the trial protocol. Because primary outcome data were available only at 22 to 26 months of follow-up, statistical interim monitoring at four intervals focused on a composite safety outcome of in-hospital death, necrotizing enterocolitis, or adverse findings on ultrasonographic examination of the head. The significance of the interim safety analyses with O’Brien–Fleming boundaries was calculated with a Lan–DeMets spending function to preserve an overall type I error rate of 0.05 for the composite safety outcome.
All the analyses were adjusted for stratification according to birth-weight group and center, and all the infants were evaluated according to treatment assignment. The primary outcome was analyzed with robust Poisson regression to obtain adjusted relative risks and 95% confidence intervals. The consistency of the treatment effect across birth-weight strata and sexes and treatment heterogeneity across the various centers were examined by adding suitable interaction terms to the adjusted models. Binary secondary outcomes, including red-cell transfusion outcomes, were analyzed with the use of robust Poisson regression. Linear regression was used for the number of transfusions received. Other secondary outcomes, such as the time to regain birth weight and time to full enteral feeding, were analyzed with Cox proportional-hazards survival regression, and data were censored for deaths. There was no prespecified plan to adjust for multiplicity of testing for the secondary outcomes, and a P value is reported only for the primary outcome (with a two-sided P value <0.05 considered to indicate statistical significance); all the other analyses are exploratory. Analyses were conducted with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

The composite primary outcome at 22 to 26 months of age could be determined for 1692 of the 1824 infants enrolled (92.8%). ( Figure 1 ). Selected characteristics of these infants and their mothers are shown in Table 1 , along with those of the entire trial cohort, according to treatment group. All the baseline characteristics of the 911 infants who were randomly assigned to the higher-threshold group were similar to those of the 913 infants who were assigned to the lower-threshold group, and these characteristics were similar in the two groups of infants in the final analysis cohort for the primary outcome. Additional characteristics of the infants are provided in Table S4.
At the time of randomization, the mean (±SD) hemoglobin levels were similar in the two groups (13.8±2.6 g per deciliter in the higher-threshold group and 13.7±2.6 g per deciliter in the lower-threshold group) ( Table 1 ). Subsequently, the pretransfusion mean hemoglobin levels differed between the groups by 1.9 g per deciliter (19 g per liter) throughout the treatment period (P<0.001) ( Figure 2A ). A comparison of all hemoglobin levels obtained throughout the infants’ hospital stay confirmed separation between the mean hemoglobin levels in the two groups ( Figure 2B ). Of all red-cell transfusions, 3.5% were adjudicated to be protocol violations, and 2.5% of all the transfusions mandated by the respective transfusion algorithms were not administered (Table S5).
Complete data for the primary outcome were available for 1692 of 1824 infants (92.8%). Of the 845 infants with data for this outcome who were assigned to the higher transfusion threshold, 423 (50.1%) died or survived with impairment, as compared with 422 of 847 infants (49.8%) assigned to the lower transfusion threshold (adjusted relative risk, 1.00; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.92 to 1.10; P=0.93). Similar results were obtained in a post hoc sensitivity analysis in which a generalized estimating equation was used to account for any correlation among siblings of a multiple birth (adjusted relative risk, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.92 to 1.10; P=0.88). The incidences of all components of the primary outcome were similar in the two groups ( Table 2 ). In addition, there was no evidence that the effects of the transfusion strategy on the primary outcome differed according to center, birth-weight group, or sex (Fig. S1). In sensitivity analyses accounting for missing primary outcome data, the results were materially unchanged, regardless of whether all missing outcomes were assumed to be events (adjusted relative risk, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.93 to 1.09) or nonevents (adjusted relative risk, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.91 to 1.10).
The incidences of prespecified short-term and long-term secondary outcomes were similar among infants in the higher-threshold group and those in the lower-threshold group ( Table 3 ). The mean (±SD) number of transfusions was 6.2±4.3 and 4.4±4.0, respectively (mean difference, 1.71; 95% CI, 1.37 to 2.05) ( Table 3 ). A total of 885 of 911 infants (97.1%) in the higher-threshold group and 804 of 913 infants (88.1%) in the lower-threshold group received at least one transfusion (adjusted relative risk, 1.10; 95% CI, 1.08 to 1.13). Additional transfusion data are provided in Table S6. Results for other prespecified and post hoc secondary outcomes are provided in Tables S7 and S8. Serious adverse events occurred in 22.7% of the infants in the higher-threshold group and 21.7% of those in the lower-threshold group (adjusted relative risk, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.88 to 1.23) (Table S9).

Section: Discussion

Our trial showed that among extremely-low-birth-weight infants, the risk of death or neurodevelopmental impairment at 22 to 26 months of age, corrected for prematurity, was not significantly lower with a higher hemoglobin transfusion threshold level than with a lower hemoglobin transfusion threshold level during the initial hospital course. Although a post hoc analysis of a previous trial had suggested a moderate cognitive benefit at 18 to 21 months of age in infants who were randomly assigned to maintain a higher hemoglobin level, the current, much larger trial showed no evidence to support an improvement in this or other components of the composite primary outcome or in any other clinically important outcome, whether measured during the initial hospital course or at 22 to 26 months of age. These results are consistent with the failure of erythropoietin to improve cognitive or other neurodevelopmental outcomes despite increasing red-cell mass. Our findings are consistent with the results of a similar but smaller European trial that were published while our manuscript was under review.
Although strategies to individualize red-cell transfusions with the use of physiological measures are promising, further testing is needed. Correspondingly, the use of blood transfusion in NICUs remains high. A Canada-wide study conducted in 2010–2012 showed that 82% of infants with a birth weight between 501 and 750 g received red-cell transfusions. As in our trial, several groups in Europe and North America have shown that the use of transfusions decreases when a strict guideline is adopted. In the intervention in the current trial algorithm, we chose hemoglobin levels that would remain within clinically accepted ranges.
Previous observational data on preterm infants have suggested risks associated with blood transfusions. A large observational cohort study in Brazil involving very-low-birth-weight infants showed an excess cumulative hazard ratio for death in those who received blood transfusions, but this observation may have been explained by the increased severity of illness in these infants. Some observational studies have shown an association between transfusions and necrotizing enterocolitis, but observational data have been inconsistent, and this finding has not been supported by available data from randomized trials. One prospective study showed that necrotizing enterocolitis was not associated with transfusion and was more likely to occur when nadir hemoglobin levels decreased to below 8 g per deciliter (80 g per liter) before transfusion. In other observational studies, transfusions have been linked to retinopathy of prematurity, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and intraventricular hemorrhage. In contrast, other studies have suggested that the risks of hypoxemia and apnea of prematurity are increased among infants who do not receive transfusions. We recorded the postmenstrual age at the last use of caffeine therapy as a proxy for apnea, and the results were similar in the two threshold groups. We found no other effects of transfusions on beneficial or adverse outcomes, including stage 2 or 3 necrotizing enterocolitis. Such discrepancies between associations shown in observational studies and our findings underscore the pitfalls of observational studies. Although our trial was not powered to address these individual adverse outcomes, it was a large trial comparing high transfusion thresholds with low transfusion thresholds in this vulnerable population.
Our trial has some important limitations. Blinding of the trial intervention was not feasible at the bedside. However, follow-up examiners were unaware of the treatment assignments. For ethical reasons, we could not withhold nonalgorithmic transfusions (i.e., those that were not performed according to the randomly assigned transfusion algorithm), so there was an imbalanced violation rate, with more nonalgorithmic transfusions in the lower-threshold group. This imbalance presumably reflected the unease of some physicians with hemoglobin levels in the lower range. Nonetheless, the incidence of violations was low and did not preclude good between-group separation in mean hemoglobin levels. Blood banks at different centers did not have uniform practices; it would not have been feasible to manage this pragmatic multicenter trial with the use of a single blood bank. However, this variation is unlikely to have affected outcomes, since randomization was stratified according to center. Moreover, apart from leukoreduction, other blood-banking practices such as transfusing only fresh red cells have not been shown to have beneficial effects. The usual clinical variation in blood-banking practices enhances the generalizability of our findings.
In our trial, a higher hemoglobin threshold for transfusion was associated with an increase in the number of transfusions administered. However, it did not improve survival without neurodevelopmental impairment at 22 to 26 months of age among extremely-low-birth-weight infants.
