Title: A Pragmatic, Randomized Clinical Trial of Gestational Diabetes Screening


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Gestational diabetes mellitus is common and is associated with an increased risk of adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes. Although experts recommend universal screening for gestational diabetes, consensus is lacking about which of two recommended screening approaches should be used.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We performed a pragmatic, randomized trial comparing one-step screening (i.e., a glucose-tolerance test in which the blood glucose level was obtained after the oral administration of a 75-g glucose load in the fasting state) with two-step screening (a glucose challenge test in which the blood glucose level was obtained after the oral administration of a 50-g glucose load in the nonfasting state, followed, if positive, by an oral glucose-tolerance test with a 100-g glucose load in the fasting state) in all pregnant women who received care in two health systems. Guidelines for the treatment of gestational diabetes were consistent with the two screening approaches. The primary outcomes were a diagnosis of gestational diabetes, large-for-gestational-age infants, a perinatal composite outcome (stillbirth, neonatal death, shoulder dystocia, bone fracture, or any arm or hand nerve palsy related to birth injury), gestational hypertension or preeclampsia, and primary cesarean section.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 23,792 women underwent randomization; women with more than one pregnancy during the trial could have been assigned to more than one type of screening. A total of 66% of the women in the one-step group and 92% of those in the two-step group adhered to the assigned screening. Gestational diabetes was diagnosed in 16.5% of the women assigned to the one-step approach and in 8.5% of those assigned to the two-step approach (unadjusted relative risk, 1.94; 97.5% confidence interval [CI], 1.79 to 2.11). In intention-to-treat analyses, the respective incidences of the other primary outcomes were as follows: large-for-gestational-age infants, 8.9% and 9.2% (relative risk, 0.95; 97.5% CI, 0.87 to 1.05); perinatal composite outcome, 3.1% and 3.0% (relative risk, 1.04; 97.5% CI, 0.88 to 1.23); gestational hypertension or preeclampsia, 13.6% and 13.5% (relative risk, 1.00; 97.5% CI, 0.93 to 1.08); and primary cesarean section, 24.0% and 24.6% (relative risk, 0.98; 97.5% CI, 0.93 to 1.02). The results were materially unchanged in intention-to-treat analyses with inverse probability weighting to account for differential adherence to the screening approaches.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Despite more diagnoses of gestational diabetes with the one-step approach than with the two-step approach, there were no significant between-group differences in the risks of the primary outcomes relating to perinatal and maternal complications. (Funded by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development; ScreenR2GDM ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02266758 .)

Section: Introduction

Gestational diabetes mellitus, one of the most common complications of pregnancy, affects 6 to 25% of pregnant women (depending on diagnostic criteria) and is associated with increased risks of stillbirth and neonatal death, as well as multiple serious conditions in both mothers and babies. Fetal overgrowth, a complication of gestational diabetes, is associated with an increased risk of birth trauma (e.g., brachial plexus injury or clavicular fracture) and of cesarean section to avoid such trauma. Universal gestational diabetes screening is recommended at 24 to 28 weeks of gestation, since data from randomized, controlled trials show that treatment of gestational diabetes improves maternal and perinatal outcomes.
There is no scientific consensus on how best to diagnose gestational diabetes. Expert professional organizations acknowledge two acceptable options: the International Association of the Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups (IADPSG) one-step screening approach (currently preferred by the American Diabetes Association) and the two-step Carpenter–Coustan screening approach (recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists); both organizations note the need for additional evidence related to outcomes.
Each approach has advantages and disadvantages. The one-step approach involves a 2-hour oral glucose-tolerance test for all participants. Although screening and diagnosis can be completed in a single visit, all women must fast before screening and make time for a 2-hour visit. The two-step approach includes an initial nonfasting 1-hour glucose challenge test, which is logistically simpler for women and can easily be performed as part of a scheduled prenatal visit; most women do not require further screening. However, approximately 20% of women who undergo this screening are found to have high blood glucose levels and must return for a 3-hour fasting diagnostic oral glucose-tolerance test.
The two screening methods also have different diagnostic cutoff thresholds. The one-step approach identifies women with milder hyperglycemia as having gestational diabetes. Although there is a clear linear relationship between maternal hyperglycemia and maternal and perinatal outcomes, the effects of identifying and treating milder cases of gestational diabetes on these outcomes are not known.
The National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference on diagnosing gestational diabetes mellitus recommended that a randomized trial compare these approaches with respect to clinically important outcomes. We conducted ScreenR2GDM, a pragmatic, randomized clinical trial involving pregnant women who were receiving care at Kaiser Permanente Northwest and Kaiser Permanente Hawaii to compare the one-step approach with the two-step approach to screening and diagnosis of gestational diabetes with respect to maternal and neonatal outcomes.

Section: Methods

Details regarding the design of the ScreenR2GDM trial and the characteristics of the trial population have been published previously. All pregnant women who were receiving care at Kaiser Permanente Northwest and Kaiser Permanente Hawaii were randomly assigned to undergo either one-step or two-step screening for the diagnosis of gestational diabetes. Institutional review boards at both institutions approved the randomized clinical trial and waivers for individual consent; the rationale was that both screening approaches are associated with minimal risk and are clinically recommended, and thus waiving consent would not adversely affect patients’ rights or welfare, as long as providers could retain clinical judgment to decide whether to adhere to randomization. A data and safety monitoring board provided trial oversight (see Section S2.1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org) and conducted one midtrial data review.
The first and second authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. The statistical analysis plan is provided with the protocol at NEJM.org. Neither the funding source nor the authors’ institutions (where the trial was conducted) had any involvement in the trial design; the collection, analysis, or interpretation of the data; the writing of the report; or the decision to submit the article for publication.
All the women were randomly assigned, in a 1:1 ratio, to the one-step or two-step screening approach at their first prenatal visit with the use of an electronically generated random-assignment procedure. The provider was notified of this assignment in the electronic medical record when gestational diabetes screening was ordered (typically at 24 to 28 weeks of gestation). If screening was ordered more than once, providers were notified of the same assigned test each time. Randomization was conducted independently within the electronic medical record system of each region and was implemented on May 28, 2014, in Kaiser Permanente Northwest (the first woman was enrolled on June 3, 2014) and on July 7, 2014, in Kaiser Permanente Hawaii. Randomization continued in both regions through December 31, 2017; data on outcomes were collected through delivery of neonates (from 2014 through 2018).
Owing to the pragmatic trial design, the providers were aware of the trial-group assignments. All the investigators and trial staff, except the statisticians, were unaware of all the trial data except for the data on overall adherence until all the women had undergone randomization.
The one-step approach consisted of a 2-hour oral glucose-tolerance test (i.e., the blood glucose level was obtained 2 hours after the oral administration of a 75-g glucose load in the fasting state). Women received a diagnosis of gestational diabetes if the fasting blood glucose level was at least 92 mg per deciliter (5.1 mmol per liter), the timed glucose measurement was at least 180 mg per deciliter (10.0 mmol per liter) at 1 hour, or the timed measurement was at least 153 mg per deciliter (8.5 mmol per liter) at 2 hours.
In the two-step approach, the first (screening) step was a 1-hour glucose challenge test in which the blood glucose level was obtained after the oral administration of a 50-g glucose load in the nonfasting state. Women with a blood glucose level of at least 200 mg per deciliter (11.1 mmol per liter) on the challenge test were considered to have gestational diabetes and did not undergo further testing. Women who had a positive glucose challenge test with a blood glucose level below 200 mg per deciliter (and ≥130 mg per deciliter [≥7.2 mmol per liter] at Kaiser Permanente Northwest and ≥140 mg per deciliter [≥7.8 mmol per liter] at Kaiser Permanente Hawaii) underwent a diagnostic fasting 3-hour oral glucose-tolerance test in which the blood glucose level was obtained after the oral administration of a 100-g glucose load. Gestational diabetes was diagnosed if two or more of four glucose thresholds were met: a fasting level of at least 95 mg per deciliter (≥5.3 mmol per liter), at least 180 mg per deciliter at 1 hour, at least 155 mg per deciliter (≥8.6 mmol per liter) at 2 hours, or at least 140 mg per deciliter at 3 hours. Treatment for gestational diabetes was based on the same national practice guidelines, regardless of the screening approach (Section S2.5).
We prespecified five primary outcomes on the basis of previous research. These outcomes, which are not listed in order of importance, were a diagnosis of gestational diabetes, large-for-gestational-age infants (birth weight >90th percentile), a composite measure of perinatal outcomes (stillbirth, neonatal death, shoulder dystocia, bone fracture, or any arm or hand nerve palsy related to birth injury), primary cesarean section, and gestational hypertension or preeclampsia. Definitions of these outcomes are provided in Table S1.
Secondary outcomes were the incidence of macrosomia (birth weight >4000 g), small-for-gestational-age infants (birth weight ≤10th percentile), maternal gestational diabetes for which insulin or oral hypoglycemic treatment was warranted, neonatal respiratory distress, neonatal jaundice for which treatment was warranted, neonatal hypoglycemia, and the individual components of the composite perinatal outcome. Screening practices for neonatal hypoglycemia were consistent with the American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines, which recommend screening neonates with risk factors for hypoglycemia within 24 hours after birth. In both trial regions, newborn screening is performed by a heel stick, with point-of-care glucose testing in the delivery room or nursery. Safety outcomes were neonatal sepsis, admission to a neonatal intensive care unit, preterm birth (at <37 weeks of gestation as well as at <32 weeks of gestation), and induction of labor. Primary, secondary, and safety outcomes were assessed for subgroups of participants with a diagnosis of gestational diabetes (prespecified) and participants who were not screened (post hoc analyses).
We originally estimated that a sample size of 17,626 pregnancies would provide 80% power to detect a relative between-group difference of 20% for all primary outcomes except the composite perinatal outcome, for which the trial would be powered to detect a 40% difference, at a two-sided significance level of 0.05. However, early monitoring of fidelity to the randomized screening revealed that at both sites, a higher percentage of the women who were randomly assigned to one-step screening received two-step screening than the reverse. Providers reported that this imbalance was partly due to efforts to ensure screening by conducting the nonfasting two-step glucose challenge test at a prenatal visit. Given the pragmatic nature of this trial, the research team was unable to enforce strict adherence to randomization. Accordingly, we modified our protocol to continue the trial until an adequate sample size had been achieved among women receiving the one-step approach and to include additional statistical analyses to account for nonadherence (see below and Section S2.11.1).
We estimated the relative risks of each primary outcome between the two trial groups using generalized linear log-binomial models with adjustment for correlated errors owing to multiple pregnancies per woman. The quasi-likelihood information criterion was used to confirm working correlation structure and variable selection.
In planned intention-to-treat analyses, we used an unadjusted model comparing pregnancy outcomes between the randomly assigned groups as well as models adjusted for the diagnosis of gestational diabetes, group-by-diagnosis interaction, and other covariates that may have modified the relationship of the group with each outcome. These covariates included excessive gestational weight gain, as defined according to the National Academy of Medicine guidelines, since this covariate is independently related to several outcomes. The interaction between gestational diabetes and group assignment was not significant for any outcome. Thus, final adjusted models included gestational diabetes, prespecified covariates, and factors related to nonadherence. To further account for nonadherence to the randomized assignment, we conducted intention-to-treat analyses with inverse probability weighting ; in these analyses, pregnancies were assigned stabilized weights that were based on the modeled probability of adherence to the assigned screening approach ( Figure 1 ).
We also conducted sensitivity analyses, including multiple imputation, to account for missing data (Section S2.11.3 and Tables S3 and S4). Our statistical analysis plan prespecified 97.5% confidence intervals for relative risks of primary outcomes; these are reported here. For secondary or other outcomes, we report 95% confidence intervals. Because the widths of the confidence intervals have not been adjusted to account for the multiplicity of outcomes assessed, they should not be used to infer definitive effects of one screening approach over the other. All analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

Overall, 23,792 eligible pregnant women were randomly assigned to one-step or two-step screening for gestational diabetes; women with more than one pregnancy during the trial could have been assigned to more than one type of screening (see Figure 1 ). A total of 94% of the eligible women completed screening, and 66% of the women in the one-step group and 92% of those in the two-step group adhered to the assigned screening approach. The characteristics of the women in the two groups are presented in Table 1 .
Gestational diabetes was diagnosed in 16.5% of the pregnant women who were assigned to the one-step approach and in 8.5% of those assigned to the two-step approach (relative risk, 1.94; 97.5% confidence interval [CI], 1.79 to 2.11). Intention-to-treat analyses showed no significant differences between the one-step group and the two-step group in the incidences or the unadjusted risks of the other primary outcomes. These outcomes were large-for-gestational-age infants (in 8.9% of the pregnancies in the one-step group and 9.2% of those in the two-step group; relative risk, 0.95; 97.5% CI, 0.87 to 1.05); the perinatal composite outcome (in 3.1% and 3.0%, respectively; relative risk, 1.04; 97.5% CI, 0.88 to 1.23); gestational hypertension or preeclampsia (in 13.6% and 13.5%; relative risk, 1.00; 97.5% CI, 0.93 to 1.08); and primary cesarean section (in 24.0% and 24.6%; relative risk, 0.98; 97.5% CI, 0.93 to 1.02). After adjustment for gestational diabetes and other prespecified covariates, including those related to adherence, there were still no significant between-group differences for all the primary outcomes with the exception of the diagnosis of gestational diabetes ( Table 2 ). The results of the analyses with inverse probability weighting were similar to those of the intention-to-treat analyses ( Table 2 ).
The results for the secondary outcomes and the safety outcomes were similar in the two groups ( Table 3 ). In a prespecified analysis that was limited to women with a diagnosis of gestational diabetes, the incidences of the trial outcomes were similar between the groups (Table S7). In 39% of the women assigned to one-step screening for gestational diabetes, the diagnosis was based on the isolated fasting plasma glucose level alone, and half these women met the criteria for gestational diabetes with an isolated fasting plasma glucose level in the range of 92 to 94 mg per deciliter (5.1 to 5.2 mmol per liter); thus, their glucose levels at diagnosis were already within the target range for treatment (fasting plasma glucose level <95 mg per deciliter). Among the women with gestational diabetes, the percentages of those who received insulin or hypoglycemic medication were similar in the one-step and two-step groups (42.6% and 45.6%, respectively) ( Table 3 ). Baseline information and the outcomes of pregnancies in women who did not undergo screening for gestational diabetes (a post hoc subgroup involving 1450 women) are provided in Tables S8 and S9.

Section: Discussion

This pragmatic, head-to-head, randomized clinical trial of the two clinically recommended approaches to screening for gestational diabetes, showed no significant differences in maternal and perinatal outcomes among 23,792 pregnant women who were randomly assigned to undergo one-step screening or two-step screening as part of their clinical care, even though twice as many women in the one-step group received a diagnosis of gestational diabetes. There was lower adherence to screening with the fasting one-step approach, but the results were similar in analyses that accounted for differences in adherence.
Our finding that 16.5% of the women received a diagnosis of gestational diabetes with the one-step approach is consistent with previous research using the same criteria. Data from randomized clinical trials showing a benefit of treatment for gestational diabetes are limited to trials using the two-step approach ; studies to address whether or not the treatment of more women on the basis of the one-step approach yields better outcomes are lacking. Although we did not find increased harms associated with the diagnosis and treatment of gestational diabetes in many more women with the one-step approach, some retrospective observational cohort studies have shown higher incidences of primary cesarean delivery and neonatal hypoglycemia with one-step screening after conversion from two-step protocols, with no substantive improvement in outcomes. Other considerations relevant to one-step screening include the burden on individual women of receiving a diagnosis of gestational diabetes on the basis of these milder criteria and the burden on the system of treating many more women. However, some studies have shown that maternal gestational diabetes may be a risk factor for childhood obesity and metabolic sequelae, so treating more women could have long-term benefits. Other studies have not shown associations between maternal gestational diabetes and long-term child outcomes.
Outcomes of the 6% of pregnancies in women who did not undergo screening appeared to be worse than those in either of the screened groups. However, these findings are probably explained at least in part by other differences between women who adhered to recommended screening and those who did not.
Our trial has some limitations. The lower adherence to the one-step approach biased the findings toward the planned intention-to-treat analyses. To address this, we extended the trial and conducted additional intention-to-treat analyses with inverse probability weighting ; our identification of prognostic factors associated with adherence would be expected to increase the validity of the these analyses. However, these statistical methods may not fully account for potential differences resulting from nonadherence. Another potential limitation of our trial is that the sites used slightly different thresholds for the glucose challenge test to determine whether women in the two-step group should receive an oral glucose-tolerance test; both blood glucose level thresholds (130 mg per deciliter and 140 mg per deciliter) are clinically recommended.
We randomized assignment to a screening approach as part of clinical care. Our research team did not have control over what occurred after the assignment was presented to the clinical provider, including whether the provider would order the test and what clinical care women would receive after screening; however, the same guidelines for the treatment of gestational diabetes were used in both randomized groups. This head-to-head design compared outcomes in a “real-world” clinical setting in which virtually the entire population at these trial sites was included, and we would expect results to be generalizable to similar settings. Owing to the overall racial or ethnic makeup of these regions, Black and American Indian women were not well represented in the trial sample. Given the pragmatic nature of the trial, the providers were aware of the approach to screening and diagnosis, and we cannot rule out the possibility that provider awareness of the approach affected some outcomes. An ongoing randomized trial (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02309138 ) involves 921 women with a diagnosis of gestational diabetes according to either IADPSG or Carpenter–Coustan criteria. That trial, in which providers remain unaware of the criteria used, is under way to provide more information on outcomes according to diagnostic criteria for gestational diabetes.
In our large randomized trial, one-step screening, as compared with two-step screening, doubled the incidence of the diagnosis of gestational diabetes but did not affect the risks of large-for-gestational-age infants, adverse perinatal outcomes, primary cesarean section, or gestational hypertension or preeclampsia.
