Title: Adagrasib in Non–Small-Cell Lung Cancer Harboring a KRAS G12C Mutation


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Adagrasib, a KRAS inhibitor, irreversibly and selectively binds KRAS , locking it in its inactive state. Adagrasib showed clinical activity and had an acceptable adverse-event profile in the phase 1–1b part of the KRYSTAL-1 phase 1–2 study.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a registrational phase 2 cohort, we evaluated adagrasib (600 mg orally twice daily) in patients with KRAS -mutated non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) previously treated with platinum-based chemotherapy and anti–programmed death 1 or programmed death ligand 1 therapy. The primary end point was objective response assessed by blinded independent central review. Secondary end points included the duration of response, progression-free survival, overall survival, and safety.

Abstract_Section: Results

As of October 15, 2021, a total of 116 patients with KRAS -mutated NSCLC had been treated (median follow-up, 12.9 months); 98.3% had previously received both chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Of 112 patients with measurable disease at baseline, 48 (42.9%) had a confirmed objective response. The median duration of response was 8.5 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 6.2 to 13.8), and the median progression-free survival was 6.5 months (95% CI, 4.7 to 8.4). As of January 15, 2022 (median follow-up, 15.6 months), the median overall survival was 12.6 months (95% CI, 9.2 to 19.2). Among 33 patients with previously treated, stable central nervous system metastases, the intracranial confirmed objective response rate was 33.3% (95% CI, 18.0 to 51.8). Treatment-related adverse events occurred in 97.4% of the patients — grade 1 or 2 in 52.6% and grade 3 or higher in 44.8% (including two grade 5 events) — and resulted in drug discontinuation in 6.9% of patients.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In patients with previously treated KRAS -mutated NSCLC, adagrasib showed clinical efficacy without new safety signals. (Funded by Mirati Therapeutics; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03785249 .)

Section: Introduction

Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homologue (KRAS), a membrane-associated guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase), is the most frequently mutated oncogene in human cancer, with mutations occurring in approximately 25% of non–small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs). Mutations in KRAS occur in approximately 14% of adenocarcinomas and in 0.5 to 4% of squamous NSCLCs; this mutation also occurs in 3 to 4% of colorectal cancers and in 1 to 2% of biliary and pancreatic cancers. Enhanced preclinical and clinical understanding of the biologic characteristics of KRAS mutations, including elucidation of feedback loops and resynthesis half-life (approximately 24 hours) suggests that inhibition of KRAS may require sustained inhibition over the entire dosing period.
Adagrasib (MRTX849), a potent, orally available, small molecule covalent inhibitor of KRAS , irreversibly and selectively binds KRAS in its inactive, GDP-bound state. Adagrasib has favorable pharmacokinetic properties, including a long half-life (23 hours), dose dependence, and central nervous system (CNS) penetration. Adagrasib was evaluated in KRYSTAL-1, a phase 1–2 multiple expansion cohort trial involving patients with advanced solid tumors harboring a KRAS mutation. Clinical activity of adagrasib has been shown in patients with KRAS -mutated solid tumors, including colorectal, pancreatic, and biliary tract cancers. In addition, preliminary data from two patients with untreated CNS metastases from a phase 1b cohort had cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of adagrasib above the target cellular 50% inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ), a mean K p,uu (ratio of unbound brain concentration to unbound plasma concentration) of 0.47, and corresponding antitumor activity against CNS metastases as assessed by imaging. Here we describe the results from Cohort A, a phase 2 cohort in which we evaluated adagrasib at a dose of 600 mg orally twice daily in patients with KRAS -mutated NSCLC previously treated with chemotherapy and anti–programmed death 1 or programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) therapy.

Section: Methods

The study was designed by employees of Mirati Therapeutics (the sponsor) and the investigators. The data were collected by the investigators and analyzed by sponsor-employed statisticians. A sponsor-funded medical writer (from Ashfield MedComms, an Ashfield Health Company) provided the first draft of the manuscript and editorial assistance with earlier drafts of the manuscript. All the authors contributed to interpretation of the data and manuscript preparation and vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. The study was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and International Council for Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice guidelines. The protocol was approved by the relevant institutional review boards or ethics committees. All the patients provided written informed consent. Trial oversight was provided by the sponsor, the investigators, local institutional review boards, a specifically commissioned central institutional review board, and an independent data monitoring committee.
Eligible patients were 18 years of age or older with a histologically confirmed diagnosis of unresectable or metastatic NSCLC with KRAS mutation (detected in tumor tissue at a local or central laboratory) who had previously received treatment with at least one platinum-containing chemotherapy regimen and checkpoint inhibitor therapy (in sequence or concurrently, with no restriction on order or number of therapies); who had measurable tumor lesions according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), version 1.1; and who had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance-status score of 0 or 1 (on a 6-point scale, with higher numbers reflecting greater disability). Key exclusion criteria were active CNS metastases (patients were eligible if CNS metastases were adequately treated and neurologically stable), carcinomatous meningitis, receipt of systemic therapy or radiation therapy within 2 weeks before the first dose of adagrasib, and previous treatment with a KRAS inhibitor. Full eligibility criteria are provided in the protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
On the basis of the observed pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and safety of adagrasib in the phase 1–1b dose escalation–expansion component of the study, patients received the recommended phase 2 dose (a 600-mg dose of adagrasib in capsule form twice daily, with the patient in a fasted state). Treatment continued until the occurrence of disease progression, unacceptable adverse events, withdrawal of consent, or death. Patients who had a clinical benefit in the judgment of the investigator could continue therapy beyond RECIST-defined disease progression.
The primary efficacy end point was objective response assessed by blinded independent central review. Secondary efficacy end points were disease control (defined as complete response, partial response, or stable disease, according to RECIST, version 1.1, with a minimum time interval of 6 weeks for determination of stable disease), duration of response, progression-free survival, overall survival, and 1-year survival rate. Safety end points included the type, incidence, severity, timing, and seriousness of adverse events and their relationship to the study drug. End-point definitions are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.
Patients were tested for mutations in tumor tissue with the use of preapproved tests and testing laboratories (see the Supplementary Appendix for details). All patients underwent baseline brain imaging (magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] with and without gadolinium or computed tomography [CT] with contrast), chest CT (with contrast), abdomen and pelvis imaging (CT with contrast or MRI), and bone lesion imaging (whole-body bone scanning, positron emission tomography [PET], or PET–CT). Scanning for disease evaluation was scheduled every 6 weeks during treatment for 1 year (and every 12 weeks thereafter), and the scans were assessed by investigators and the independent review committee according to RECIST, version 1.1. Other assessments included evaluation of disease at all sites identified at baseline or suspected to have developed; bone scanning could be performed every 12 weeks and was to be performed as part of the assessment for confirmation of disease response. Patients who had a tumor response were required to have a confirmatory assessment at least 4 weeks after the initial response. Disease progression was determined by assessment of target and non-target lesions according to RECIST, version 1.1; radiotherapy was not included in the determination of disease progression. Survival status and details of subsequent therapies were obtained during long-term follow-up.
Adverse events were graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (version 5.0). Patients were followed for adverse events for at least 28 days after the last study dose.
Candidate biomarkers (PD-L1 tumor proportion score [the fraction of tumor cells expressing PD-L1] and mutational status of STK11, KEAP1, TP53, and CDKN2A) were evaluated by molecular analysis of tumor-tissue specimens, blood specimens, or both for their association with tumor response. Immunohistochemical evaluation of PD-L1 expression on tumor cells was performed centrally to determine the tumor proportion score (see the Supplementary Appendix for details).
Confirmed objective response was summarized as frequency and percentage, and the Clopper–Pearson 95% confidence interval of the response rate was calculated. A sample size of approximately 105 patients was determined on the assumption that adagrasib would result in a response rate of 35% or higher; thus, this sample size would be sufficient for the lower boundary of the two-sided 95% confidence interval to exclude a response rate of 23%. The median duration of response, progression-free and overall survival, and the 1-year survival rate were estimated with the use of the Kaplan–Meier method. Prespecified subgroup analyses are summarized, and response rates according to mutational status are reported. No statistical adjustment was made to the 95% confidence interval for prespecified secondary end points.

Section: Results

The trial enrollment period was January 2020 through December 2020. As of the data cutoff on October 15, 2021, a total of 116 patients with previously treated KRAS -mutated NSCLC had received at least one dose of adagrasib (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ); 4 patients had measurable disease at baseline according to investigator assessment but not according to the independent committee. The median follow-up was 12.9 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 11.8 to 13.5); the median duration of treatment was 5.7 months (range, 0.03 to 19.6). As of the data cutoff date, 85 patients (73.3%) had discontinued treatment; the most common reasons were disease progression (in 31 patients [26.7%]) and adverse events (in 16 patients [13.8%]). Among the 116 enrolled patients, the median age was 64.0 years (range, 25 to 89), and 111 (95.7%) were current or former smokers ( Table 1 ). All 116 patients (100%) had received previous platinum-based chemotherapy, and 114 patients (98.3%) had received both platinum-based chemotherapy and previous checkpoint inhibitor therapy; 78 patients (67.2%) had received checkpoint inhibitor therapy as their most recent previous line of therapy (single-agent or in combination with chemotherapy). The median number of previous systemic therapies was two; 14 patients (12.1%) had received at least four previous systemic regimens. The population in this trial is considered to be representative of the broader population of patients with relapsed KRAS -mutated NSCLC (Table S1).
The confirmed objective response rate was 42.9% (95% CI, 33.5 to 52.6) among 112 patients with measurable disease at baseline ( Figure 1A and Table 2 ). Tumor shrinkage of any magnitude was observed in 89 patients (79.5%). One patient (0.9%) had a complete response, 47 (42.0%) had a partial response, and 41 (36.6%) had stable disease for a minimum of 6 weeks; progressive disease was the best overall response in 6 patients (5.4%) ( Table 2 ). Seventeen patients (15.2%) could not be evaluated clinically for best overall response: 14 discontinued the study before their first scheduled assessment (5 patients withdrew from the trial, 3 discontinued because of overall deterioration of health, 3 discontinued because of adverse events, 2 died, and 1 discontinued for another reason); for the remaining 3, postbaseline scans were obtained too early for evaluation. Among the 95 patients who were clinically evaluable and had an on-treatment scan obtained at the specified time, the confirmed objective response rate was 50.5%. Forty patients (76.9%) received adagrasib beyond investigator-assessed progression. The median duration of treatment beyond progression was 6.6 weeks.
Among 48 patients with a response, the median time to response was 1.4 months (range, 0.9 to 7.2), and the median duration of response was 8.5 months (95% CI, 6.2 to 13.8) ( Figure 1B ). As of the data cutoff date, 16 patients with a response (33.3%) were still receiving treatment. Among patients with a response, the Kaplan–Meier estimate of the duration of response was 48.4% (95% CI, 32.5 to 62.6) at 9 months.
The median progression-free survival among 112 evaluable patients was 6.5 months (95% CI, 4.7 to 8.4) ( Figure 1C ). The median overall survival was 11.7 months (95% CI, 9.2 to not evaluable); with an updated data cutoff date of January 15, 2022 (median follow-up of 15.6 months), the median overall survival was 12.6 months (95% CI, 9.2 to 19.2) ( Figure 1D ), and the estimated overall survival at 1 year was 50.8% (95% CI, 40.9 to 60.0). Table S2 includes efficacy outcomes for all 116 patients according to local investigator assessment.
Adagrasib showed consistent efficacy across most prespecified subgroups defined according to baseline factors (Fig. S2). After additional data became available indicating CNS penetration with adagrasib, a post hoc evaluation for intracranial response with the use of modified Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology Brain Metastases (RANO-BM) criteria identified 42 patients with CNS metastases at baseline. The median follow up was 15.4 months. Of the 33 patients who could be evaluated radiographically, intracranial confirmed objective response rate as assessed by the independent committee was 33.3% (95% CI, 18.0 to 51.8) ( Figure 2 ), and the median duration of intracranial response was 11.2 months (95% CI, 2.99 to not evaluable). The median intracranial progression-free survival in the 42 patients with CNS metastases at baseline was 5.4 months (95% CI, 3.3 to 11.6). Overall, 27 of 33 radiographically evaluable patients (81.8%) received radiation therapy before adagrasib treatment; of these 27 patients, 59% received that therapy within 3 months before study entry, and 37% at least 6 months before study entry (Fig. S3).
Confirmed objective response rates in patients with co-occurring alterations in STK11, KEAP1, TP53, and CDKN2A were 40.5%, 28.6%, 51.4%, and 58.3%, respectively (Fig. S4A). Further analysis of patients with co-occurring alterations in STK11, KEAP1, or both indicated that responses were observed across genomically defined populations (35.7 to 55.9%) but were lower for those who had STK11 wildtype with a KEAP1 co-mutation (14.3%) (Fig. S4B). Of 86 patients assessed for PD-L1 expression, confirmed objective response rates were similar across PD-L1 expression subgroups (41.7 to 46.8%) (Fig. S4C).
Safety data for all 116 patients are shown in Table 3 (adverse events that occurred during treatment and adverse events regardless of attribution) and Table S3 (treatment-related adverse events). Adverse events, regardless of attribution, were observed in all 116 patients (100%); the most common events were diarrhea (in 82 patients [70.7%]), nausea (in 81 [69.8%]), fatigue (in 69 [59.5%]), vomiting (in 66 [56.9%]), anemia (in 42 [36.2%]), dyspnea (in 41 [35.3%]), increased blood creatinine level (in 40 [34.5%]), and decreased appetite (in 37 [31.9%]). Adverse events that were attributed by the investigators to the treatment were reported in 113 patients (97.4%); the most common were diarrhea (in 73 patients [62.9%]), nausea (in 72 [62.1%]), vomiting (in 55 [47.4%]), fatigue (in 47 [40.5%]), increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level (in 32 [27.6%]), increased blood creatinine level (in 30 [25.9%]), and increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level (in 29 [25.0%]). Most of the frequently observed treatment-related adverse events were grade 1 or 2. A total of 52 patients (44.8%) had grade 3 or higher treatment-related adverse events; the most common were fatigue, nausea, increased ALT level (each in 4.3%), and increased AST level (3.4%). Two grade 5 fatal events (in 1.7% of the patients) were reported (one cardiac failure in a patient with a medical history of pericardial effusion and one pulmonary hemorrhage). Treatment-related adverse events led to dose reduction in 60 patients (51.7%) and dose interruption in 71 patients (61.2%); the most common reasons were gastrointestinal-related events, hepatic events (increased ALT and AST levels), and fatigue (Table S4). Eight patients (6.9%) discontinued adagrasib owing to treatment-related adverse events. Overall, 92.2% of the patients with gastrointestinal-related adverse events (nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea) reported them within the first two cycles, and 94.8% within the first three cycles. After cycle 3, the incidence decreased significantly and few new adverse events of grade 3 or higher were noted. The median time to resolution after an initial occurrence was 2.1 weeks (range, 0.1 to 50.1) for gastrointestinal-related adverse events related to treatment and 1.7 weeks (range, 0.3 to 15.1) for increased ALT and AST levels.

Section: Discussion

Despite advances in the treatment of NSCLC, few effective treatment options are available for patients with KRAS -mutated NSCLC. Historically, KRAS has been considered an “undruggable” target; however, enhanced understanding of KRAS has resulted in the investigation of drug candidates and in the recent approval of sotorasib for patients with metastatic KRAS -mutated NSCLC (on the basis of an objective response rate of 37.1% in 124 patients).
Similar to sotorasib, adagrasib is a selective covalent inhibitor of KRAS ; however, reported pharmacologic differences in the molecules are the drug half-life of 5 hours for sotorasib as compared with 23 hours for adagrasib, dose-dependent extended exposure with adagrasib, and potential CNS penetration of adagrasib. Treatment with adagrasib led to a confirmed objective response rate of 42.9%, a median duration of response of 8.5 months, a median progression-free survival of 6.5 months, and a median overall survival of 12.6 months in patients with advanced KRAS -mutated NSCLC. Adagrasib showed evidence of clinical efficacy across most subgroups defined according to baseline characteristics, including in patients with CNS metastases, and across most molecular correlates. Although 600 mg twice daily was chosen as the phase 2 dose of adagrasib, adverse events resulting in dose interruption or reduction occurred in 61.2% and 51.7% of patients, respectively. Just over half the adverse events were low grade in severity, started early in treatment, resolved quickly, and resulted in a low treatment discontinuation rate (6.9%). Overall, 44.8% of the patients had treatment-related adverse events of grade 3 or higher. Many patients with a tumor response had a dose interruption, reduction, or both during treatment. Evaluations of an additional dose level (400 mg orally twice daily) are ongoing.
Recent studies have shown that the incidence of CNS metastases in KRAS -mutated NSCLC is approximately 27 to 42% at diagnosis and is associated with a poor prognosis. The development of CNS-penetrant tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as osimertinib, alectinib, and lorlatinib, has resulted in better outcomes in certain tumors with specific genetic lesions than outcomes with first-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In preclinical studies, adagrasib was shown to penetrate the CNS, which may be partially mediated by its ability to penetrate tissue as well as its inhibition of P-glycoprotein–mediated efflux, because it is a substrate and inhibitor of P-glycoprotein. A retrospective analysis of data from patients with stable CNS metastases showed clinical activity according to modified RANO-BM criteria, with an intracranial confirmed objective response rate of 33.3%, median duration of intracranial confirmed objective response of 11.2 months, and a median intracranial progression-free survival of 5.4 months. Sotorasib has been evaluated by RANO-BM in 16 patients with KRAS -mutated NSCLC with stable, treated CNS metastases and resulted in an intracranial response rate of 13%. There are several limitations to these data sets: they are retrospective in nature; the CNS metastases were stable and treated, including previous radiation treatment during the study; and the use of RANO-BM criteria may have limitations in solid tumors. To overcome these limitations, a prospective phase 1b cohort evaluating adagrasib in patients with KRAS -mutant NSCLC with active, untreated CNS metastases is ongoing.
Another area of investigation is related to the finding that the observed response rate was lower than the rate with tyrosine kinase inhibitors for other driver mutations. One possibility is that the late line of therapy may have reduced the response rate; evaluation in patients who have not previously received treatment may show higher response rates, similar to those with other tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
In this phase 2 cohort, adagrasib led to durable clinical benefit in patients with previously treated, advanced KRAS -mutated NSCLC. Adagrasib continues to be evaluated as monotherapy and in combination with other therapies in NSCLC and in other advanced solid cancers within the KRYSTAL-1 study. A phase 3 trial evaluating adagrasib as compared with docetaxel is enrolling patients with previously treated KRAS -mutated NSCLC with eligibility criteria similar to those for KRYSTAL-1 (patients previously treated with platinum-based chemotherapy and checkpoint inhibitor therapy) (KRYSTAL-12; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04685135 ), and a phase 2 trial is evaluating adagrasib alone and in combination with pembrolizumab as first-line treatment in patients with advanced KRAS -mutated NSCLC (KRYSTAL-7; NCT04613596 ).
