Title: Pegcetacoplan versus Eculizumab in Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a rare, acquired disease characterized by chronic complement-mediated hemolysis. C5 inhibition controls intravascular hemolysis in untreated PNH but cannot address extravascular hemolysis. Pegcetacoplan, a pegylated peptide targeting proximal complement protein C3, potentially inhibits both intravascular and extravascular hemolysis.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a phase 3 open-label, controlled trial to assess the efficacy and safety of pegcetacoplan as compared with eculizumab in adults with PNH and hemoglobin levels lower than 10.5 g per deciliter despite eculizumab therapy. After a 4-week run-in phase in which all patients received pegcetacoplan plus eculizumab, we randomly assigned patients to subcutaneous pegcetacoplan monotherapy (41 patients) or intravenous eculizumab (39 patients). The primary end point was the mean change in hemoglobin level from baseline to week 16. Additional clinical and hematologic markers of hemolysis and safety were assessed.

Abstract_Section: Results

Pegcetacoplan was superior to eculizumab with respect to the change in hemoglobin level from baseline to week 16, with an adjusted (least squares) mean difference of 3.84 g per deciliter (P<0.001). A total of 35 patients (85%) receiving pegcetacoplan as compared with 6 patients (15%) receiving eculizumab no longer required transfusions. Noninferiority of pegcetacoplan to eculizumab was shown for the change in absolute reticulocyte count but not for the change in lactate dehydrogenase level. Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy–Fatigue scores improved from baseline in the pegcetacoplan group. The most common adverse events that occurred during treatment in the pegcetacoplan and eculizumab groups were injection site reactions (37% vs. 3%), diarrhea (22% vs. 3%), breakthrough hemolysis (10% vs. 23%), headache (7% vs. 23%), and fatigue (5% vs. 15%). There were no cases of meningitis in either group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Pegcetacoplan was superior to eculizumab in improving hemoglobin and clinical and hematologic outcomes in patients with PNH by providing broad hemolysis control, including control of intravascular and extravascular hemolysis. (Funded by Apellis Pharmaceuticals; PEGASUS ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03500549 .)

Section: Introduction

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a rare, acquired, clonal, nonmalignant hematologic disease characterized by complement-mediated hemolysis (with or without hemoglobinuria), fatigue, increased susceptibility to thrombosis, and some degree of bone marrow dysfunction. PNH results from the expansion of abnormal hematopoietic clones that lack cell-surface complement inhibitory proteins attached to the membrane through glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchors. At least two of the missing glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked proteins, CD55 and CD59, are key regulators of the complement pathway and protect host cells from complement-mediated removal. This complement dysregulation leads to chronic hemolysis and thrombosis characteristic of PNH. Manifestations of hemolysis are due directly to the increased sensitivity of PNH cells to complement.
Intravascular hemolysis of CD59-deficient erythrocytes results in the hemoglobinuria after which PNH is named. The development of targeted terminal complement C5 inhibitors has transformed outcomes for patients with PNH by controlling intravascular hemolysis. In addition, C5 inhibitors prevent terminal complement-mediated platelet and white-cell activation and destruction, thereby leading to a marked reduction in thrombosis, which is the main life-threatening complication of PNH. C5 inhibition also ameliorates anemia and reduces the need for transfusions and prevents many PNH complications such as kidney failure and pulmonary hypertension.
PNH erythrocytes also lack CD55, leading to reduction in C3-convertase enzyme dissociation, increase in the production of C3 fragments, and subsequent opsonization. Although eculizumab is effective in preventing C5-dependent intravascular hemolysis mediated by the membrane-attack complex, surviving PNH erythrocytes become opsonized with C3 fragments and are removed by extravascular hemolysis in the liver and spleen. Extravascular hemolysis is observed in most patients with PNH who are being treated with C5 inhibitors and leads to reduced erythrocyte half-life (10 to 13 days). Extravascular hemolysis can manifest as persistent anemia despite C5 inhibitor treatment and may contribute to the need for continued blood transfusions.
Pegcetacoplan is a pegylated pentadecapeptide that targets complement C3 to control both intravascular and extravascular hemolysis. The PEGASUS trial is a 48-week, phase 3, randomized, multicenter, open-label, active-comparator–controlled trial of the efficacy and safety of pegcetacoplan as compared with eculizumab in patients with PNH and a hemoglobin level of less than 10.5 g per deciliter despite treatment with eculizumab. We report here the primary efficacy and safety outcomes from the 16-week randomized, controlled period.

Section: Methods

Adult patients (≥18 years of age) in whom PNH was diagnosed by high-sensitivity flow cytometry and who had hemoglobin levels of less than 10.5 g per deciliter while they were receiving stable doses of eculizumab for at least 3 months before screening were eligible for participation in the trial. Additional information about eligibility criteria, end points, and statistical analyses is provided in the Methods section of the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. All patients provided written informed consent before enrollment.
The trial was conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki, and the protocol (available at NEJM.org) was approved by the relevant institutional review board or ethics committee at each site. The trial was designed by the sponsor (Apellis Pharmaceuticals) and the academic authors. The sponsor conducted trial oversight and provided the pegcetacoplan; eculizumab was provided to sites where it was not part of the standard of care. Trial investigators collected the data, which were analyzed by the sponsor. The first author and senior industry author wrote the first draft of the manuscript; medical writing assistance was paid for by the sponsor. The authors vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. The sponsor reviewed and provided feedback on the manuscript. Full editorial control of the manuscript was maintained by the authors, all of whom provided their final approval of the manuscript submitted for publication. Confidentiality agreements were in place between all the authors and the sponsor.
The trial treatment period consisted of three parts ( Figure 1 ). During a 4-week run-in phase, all the patients continued to receive their current dose of eculizumab with the addition of twice-weekly pegcetacoplan (1080 mg), which the patients administered themselves subcutaneously. After the run-in phase, patients were randomly assigned, in a 1:1 ratio, to monotherapy with pegcetacoplan or eculizumab for 16 weeks (randomized, controlled period). This period was followed by a 32-week period in which all patients received open-label pegcetacoplan. Randomization was stratified according to the number of packed red-cell transfusions patients had received during the 12 months before screening (<4 or ≥4) and the platelet count at screening (<100,000 or ≥100,000 cells ×10 per liter).
The primary end point was the change in hemoglobin level from baseline to week 16 during the randomized, controlled period. Key secondary end points were the proportion of patients who did not require a transfusion during the randomized, controlled period and the change from baseline to week 16 in absolute reticulocyte count, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level, and score on the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy–Fatigue (FACIT-F) scale (scores range from 0 to 52, with higher scores indicating less fatigue). Additional end points are described in the Supplementary Appendix .
Safety end points included the incidence and severity of adverse events that occurred during the run-in phase or beyond, the incidence of thromboembolic events, and the changes from baseline in laboratory and electrocardiographic variables.
The between-group comparison for the primary end point was performed with the use of a mixed-effect model for repeated measures (MMRM), with baseline hemoglobin as a continuous variable, time point as a categorical variable, and treatment group, stratification variables, and time-by-treatment interaction as fixed effects. Transfusions were considered to be intercurrent events that could confound the results, and data after the first transfusion were censored. To control for a type 1 error, the key secondary end points were tested for noninferiority in the following hierarchical manner if superiority was declared for the primary end point: the proportion of patients who did not require a transfusion during the randomized, controlled period, followed by change from baseline to week 16 in absolute reticulocyte count, LDH level, and FACIT–F score. Analyses were also conducted with all observed data considered (with no censoring of post-transfusion data). Additional details are shown in the Methods section of the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Results

Of 102 patients screened, 80 (49 women and 31 men) met the entry criteria and were enrolled across 44 centers; 41 patients were randomly assigned to receive pegcetacoplan and 39 to receive eculizumab during the 16-week randomized, controlled period (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). All 39 patients assigned to receive eculizumab completed the 16 weeks of therapy; 3 of the 41 patients in the pegcetacoplan group discontinued therapy before week 16 owing to breakthrough hemolysis. The trial was conducted from June 2018 through November 2019.
Demographic and baseline characteristics were generally balanced between the two groups ( Table 1 ). The mean time from diagnosis of PNH to the first day of the 4-week run-in phase was 10.18 years overall and was longer in the eculizumab group than in the pegcetacoplan group (11.68 years vs. 8.74 years), although this difference was not statistically significant. The duration of previous eculizumab treatment was similar in the two groups. In the overall trial population, 25 patients (31%) had a history of thrombosis and 20 (25%) had a history of aplastic anemia. Twenty-four patients (30%) were receiving eculizumab doses higher than 900 mg every 2 weeks. Additional details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
Pegcetacoplan was superior to eculizumab with respect to the change in hemoglobin level from baseline to week 16 ( Figure 2 ). The adjusted (least squares) mean change from baseline was 2.37 g per deciliter with pegcetacoplan and –1.47 g per deciliter with eculizumab, for a mean difference between treatments of 3.84 g per deciliter (95% confidence interval [CI], 2.33 to 5.34; P<0.001) at week 16 ( Figure 2B ). The results of a supportive analysis of the primary end point that included all available data (not censored for transfusions) were consistent with the results of the primary analysis; the adjusted mean change from baseline to week 16 with inclusion of all available data was 2.66 g per deciliter with pegcetacoplan and −0.03 g per deciliter with eculizumab, for a mean difference between treatments of 2.69 g per deciliter (95% CI, 1.99 to 3.38; P<0.001).
Increased hemoglobin levels in patients receiving pegcetacoplan monotherapy, as compared with patients receiving eculizumab monotherapy, were seen as early as week 2 of the 16-week randomized, controlled period and were maintained throughout the 16-week period ( Figure 2A ). In a subgroup analysis according to pretrial transfusion requirements, improvements from baseline in hemoglobin level in the pegcetacoplan group (2.97 g per deciliter among patients with <4 transfusions in the 12 months before screening and 2.11 g per deciliter among patients with ≥4 transfusions) were consistent with the improvements in the overall cohort; however, in the eculizumab group, patients with fewer than 4 transfusions in the 12 months before screening had a decrease in hemoglobin of 0.01 g per deciliter, and patients with 4 or more transfusions in the 12 months before screening had a decrease in hemoglobin of 4.02 g per deciliter ( Figure 2B ). When all observed data were considered, the results of all primary and key secondary analyses were consistent with the MMRM analyses in which post-transfusion data were censored.
Over the 16-week randomized, controlled period, 35 patients (85%) in the pegcetacoplan group were transfusion-free, whereas only 6 (15%) in the eculizumab group were transfusion-free (P<0.001) ( Figure 3 ). Consistent effects regarding freedom from transfusion were seen regardless of the transfusion stratum in the 12 months before trial initiation (Table S1).
The absolute reticulocyte count decreased with pegcetacoplan and slightly increased with eculizumab (adjusted mean [±SE] changes, −136±7×10 per liter and 28±12×10 per liter, respectively), a finding that showed the noninferiority of pegcetacoplan to eculizumab ( Figure 3 and Fig. S2A). Noninferiority was not shown for the change from baseline in LDH level ( Figure 3 ); the adjusted mean change from baseline was −15±43 U per liter in the pegcetacoplan group and −10±71 U per liter in the eculizumab group. Additional information is provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
FACIT–F scores increased with pegcetacoplan by 9.2 points and decreased with eculizumab by 2.7 points (Fig. S2C), resulting in an adjusted mean difference of 11.9 points (95% CI, 5.49 to 18.25) at week 16 ( Figure 3 ). This difference was considered to be clinically significant, but noninferiority was not assessed because of the prespecified statistical hierarchical testing rules. Furthermore, 73% of patients in the pegcetacoplan group had at least a 3-point increase in FACIT–F scores at week 16, as compared with 0% in the eculizumab group; a 3-point change is considered clinically significant.
A greater percentage of patients in the pegcetacoplan group than in the eculizumab group had normalization of key hematologic variables — hemoglobin level (34% vs. 0%), reticulocyte count (78% vs. 3%), LDH level (71% vs. 15%), and total bilirubin level (63% vs. 8%). (Additional information on FACIT–F scores and hematologic variables is available in Table S2.)
Adverse events that occurred during treatment were recorded in 36 patients (88%) receiving pegcetacoplan and in 34 (87%) receiving eculizumab ( Table 2 ). The most common adverse events in the pegcetacoplan and eculizumab groups were injection-site reactions (37% vs. 3%), diarrhea (22% vs. 3%), breakthrough hemolysis (10% vs. 23%), headache (7% vs. 23%), and fatigue (5% vs. 15%). The majority of injection-site reactions were mild and occurred early in the trial; none resulted in discontinuation. Diarrhea events were mostly mild single episodes. The incidence of serious adverse events was also similar in the two groups, with events reported in 7 patients (17%) receiving pegcetacoplan and in 6 (15%) receiving eculizumab ( Table 2 ).
Infections were reported in 12 patients (29%) in the pegcetacoplan group and in 10 (26%) in the eculizumab group ( Table 2 ). Meningitis was not reported in either treatment group. One case of sepsis was reported during the run-in period and was considered by the principal investigator to be unrelated to the initiation of pegcetacoplan treatment. No patient had a thrombotic event, and no deaths occurred during the trial.
Breakthrough hemolysis was reported in 4 patients (10%) receiving pegcetacoplan and in 9 (23%) receiving eculizumab. All four pegcetacoplan-treated patients who had breakthrough hemolysis had an elevation of LDH level to more than 3 times the upper limit of the normal range. The breakthrough hemolysis was associated with a rapid increase in LDH level indicating intravascular hemolysis, occurred without identifiable triggers or detectable anti-pegcetacoplan antibodies, and resulted in three patients discontinuing treatment with pegcetacoplan and switching back to treatment with eculizumab. One patient had a hemolysis event with a maximum severity of “severe” on trial days 47 through 53, one patient had a moderate hemolysis event on trial days 49 through 56, and one patient had a moderate hemolysis event on trial days 36 through 39. All 39 patients in the eculizumab group crossed over to the open-label pegcetacoplan monotherapy group for a 4-week run-in period during which they received eculizumab and pegcetacoplan, followed by 28 weeks of monotherapy (full patient data are provided in the Supplementary Appendix and Table S4).

Section: Discussion

The primary finding of this trial is that pegcetacoplan treatment, which targets C3, was associated with a significantly greater increase in hemoglobin level than that observed in patients treated with the C5 inhibitor eculizumab. Despite treatment with eculizumab for an average of 5 years, with 30% receiving doses that were higher than the doses approved for PNH, the trial population remained severely anemic (mean baseline hemoglobin level, 8.7 g per deciliter), continued to be transfusion-dependent (with 75% requiring at least one transfusion during the previous year), and reported considerable fatigue, with a mean baseline FACIT–F score of 32 (with a score of 43.6 considered normal for a healthy adult). In addition to the increase in hemoglobin level, more than one third of the patients treated with pegcetacoplan showed normalized levels of hemoglobin at week 16 and most (85%) did so without receiving a transfusion, whereas only 15% in the eculizumab group were transfusion-free during the 16-week randomized period. Furthermore, the effect on freedom from transfusion was consistent regardless of the transfusion burden during the previous year.
Markers of extravascular hemolysis such as reticulocytosis and hyperbilirubinemia were normalized in most patients in the pegcetacoplan group at week 16. Markers of intravascular hemolysis, notably LDH level, were relatively well controlled at baseline, as expected with treatment with a C5 complement inhibitor, and remained well controlled at week 16 in both treatment groups. These results show that inhibition of complement C3 was adequate to maintain control of intravascular hemolysis and also prevent extravascular hemolysis. Our data show that 71% of patients receiving pegcetacoplan had normalization of LDH levels at week 16, as compared with 15% of patients receiving eculizumab. Of note, reduction of mean LDH level to within the normal range was seen by the end of the run-in period and was maintained in patients receiving pegcetacoplan throughout the randomized, controlled period.
The effect of improvements in hemoglobin levels and control of underlying hemolysis translates not only to clinical variables such as freedom from transfusion but also to improvements in patient-reported outcomes. Fatigue is the most commonly reported symptom in patients with PNH and can have a tremendous adverse effect on quality of life. Patients receiving pegcetacoplan had an improvement of 11.9 points on the FACIT–F scale (an increase of >3 points is generally considered clinically meaningful in other disease states). These improvements and differences between pegcetacoplan and eculizumab were evident irrespective of whether data after transfusions were included in analyses (Fig. S2); however, the open-label trial design does not exclude the potential for bias, and these improvements must be interpreted carefully.
A potential concern with broad complement inhibition is the possibility of increased risk of encapsulated bacterial infections. The inhibition of the terminal complement leads to a well-defined risk of neisseria infection. In the PEGASUS trial, no cases of meningococcal infection were noted in either group, and no difference in the incidence of infections was discerned between the two groups, with 29% and 26% of patients in the pegcetacoplan and eculizumab groups, respectively, reporting infections. Although these findings are encouraging, longer-term data on the incidence of infection with proximal complement inhibition are needed. Overall, safety and the side-effect profile were similar in the pegcetacoplan and eculizumab groups. As expected with the introduction of patients to frequent subcutaneous infusions that they administered themselves, injection-site reactions were the most common adverse events reported by patients in the pegcetacoplan group, but most events were mild, occurred early in the trial, and did not lead to any discontinuations.
Breakthrough hemolysis was reported more often in patients who received eculizumab than in those who received pegcetacoplan; however, three patients discontinued treatment with pegcetacoplan owing to a recurrence of intravascular hemolysis. Pharmacokinetic factors or underlying disease severity (details provided in the Supplementary Appendix ) may have played a role and suggest that a small subgroup of patients may require dose adjustments of pegcetacoplan after cessation of eculizumab; this warrants further study. Lack of adherence to the trial drug was not observed in the three patients who discontinued pegcetacoplan.
Clinical data from the three patients who discontinued the trial were not collected after the time these patients stopped treatment with pegcetacoplan, and this may have had some effect on the differences observed between the treatment groups after the point of discontinuation. However, the extent of the effect would be difficult to assess, and data from these three patients before they stopped treatment with pegcetacoplan are included in the primary MMRM analysis.
The PEGASUS trial showed that in patients with persistent anemia despite eculizumab therapy, the C3 inhibitor pegcetacoplan was superior to the C5 inhibitor eculizumab with respect to the change from baseline to week 16 in hemoglobin level and provided improvements in key hematologic and clinical variables, such as freedom from transfusion. Adverse effects included mainly injection-site irritation and mild diarrhea. In this population, treating intravascular hemolysis as well as preventing extravascular hemolysis by proximal complement inhibition with pegcetacoplan may result in better control of disease than treatment with eculizumab.
