Title: Efficacy and Safety of Itepekimab in Patients with Moderate-to-Severe Asthma


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Monoclonal antibodies targeting IgE, interleukin-4 and -13, and interleukin-5 are effective in treating severe type 2 asthma, but new targets are needed. Itepekimab is a new monoclonal antibody against the upstream alarmin interleukin-33. The efficacy and safety of itepekimab as monotherapy, as well as in combination with dupilumab, in patients with asthma are unclear.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a phase 2 trial, we randomly assigned, in a 1:1:1:1 ratio, adults with moderate-to-severe asthma receiving inhaled glucocorticoids plus long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs) to receive subcutaneous itepekimab (at a dose of 300 mg), itepekimab plus dupilumab (both at 300 mg; combination therapy), dupilumab (300 mg), or placebo every 2 weeks for 12 weeks. After randomization, LABA was discontinued at week 4, and inhaled glucocorticoids were tapered over weeks 6 through 9. The primary end point was an event indicating a loss of asthma control, assessed in the itepekimab group and the combination group, as compared with the placebo group. Secondary and other end points included lung function, asthma control, quality of life, type 2 biomarkers, and safety.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 296 patients underwent randomization. By 12 weeks, an event indicating a loss of asthma control occurred in 22% of the patients in the itepekimab group, 27% of those in the combination group, and 19% of those in the dupilumab group, as compared with 41% of those in the placebo group; the corresponding odds ratios as compared with placebo were as follows: in the itepekimab group, 0.42 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.20 to 0.88; P=0.02); in the combination group, 0.52 (95% CI, 0.26 to 1.06; P=0.07); and in the dupilumab group, 0.33 (95% CI, 0.15 to 0.70). As compared with placebo, the forced expiratory volume in 1 second before bronchodilator use increased with the itepekimab and dupilumab monotherapies but not with the combination therapy. Itepekimab treatment improved asthma control and quality of life, as compared with placebo, and led to a greater reduction in the mean blood eosinophil count. The incidence of adverse events was similar in all four trial groups.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Interleukin-33 blockade with itepekimab led to a lower incidence of events indicating a loss of asthma control than placebo and improved lung function in patients with moderate-to-severe asthma. (Funded by Sanofi and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03387852 .)

Section: Introduction

Currently available biologic therapies targeting IgE, interleukin-4 and -13, and interleukin-5 are effective in treating moderate-to-severe type 2 asthma. However, many patients with type 2 or non–type 2 asthma continue to have symptoms, exacerbations, and reduced lung function. Therefore, new therapies targeting alternative pathophysiological pathways are needed.
Genomewide association studies indicate a genetic association between interleukin-33 and asthma susceptibility. When interleukin-33 binds to its cognate receptor (ST2) and engages the coreceptor interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein to initiate downstream signaling, cells of both the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org), resulting in type 2 and non–type 2 inflammation that may contribute to airway diseases such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Mouse models suggest that interleukin-33 blockade modifies both type 2 and non–type 2 inflammation and that inhibiting both the interleukin-4 and -13 and interleukin-33 cytokine pathways may have additive effects.
Itepekimab is a new human IgG4P monoclonal antibody against interleukin-33. The objective of this trial was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of itepekimab treatment, as compared with placebo, in adults with moderate-to-severe asthma. Dupilumab was added as an active comparator in the trial because its efficacy has been shown in this population and it was previously evaluated in a similarly designed proof-of-concept study. We also investigated whether combination therapy with anti–interleukin-33 (itepekimab) and anti–interleukin-4 and -13 (dupilumab) would result in additive effects.

Section: Methods

We conducted this multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group (four groups), phase 2, proof-of-concept trial at 70 sites. The trial comprised a 4-week screening period, followed by a 12-week intervention period that incorporated the withdrawal of background medication, and a 20-week post-intervention follow-up period ( Figure 1A ). The full protocol is available at NEJM.org.
Data were collected by the investigators and analyzed by the sponsors (Sanofi and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals) and the investigators. The trial was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki, the Good Clinical Practice guidelines of the International Council for Harmonisation, and applicable regulatory requirements. The local institutional review board or ethics committee at each trial center oversaw trial conduct and documentation. All the patients provided written informed consent.
All the authors participated in data interpretation and provided input for the drafting of the manuscript, critical feedback, and final approval for the submission of the manuscript for publication. The authors vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the adherence of the trial to the protocol. All the investigators had confidentiality agreements with the sponsors, which did not restrict the publication of the results. Drafts of the manuscript were prepared with the assistance of a medical writer who was paid by the sponsors.
Eligible patients were 18 to 70 years of age, had had physician-diagnosed asthma for at least 12 months on the basis of the Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) 2017 guidelines, and had been receiving medium-to-high-dose inhaled glucocorticoids (≥250 μg of fluticasone propionate twice daily or equivalent to a maximum of 2000 μg per day) in combination with a long-acting beta-agonist (LABA) for at least 3 months; the dose had to be stable for at least 1 month before the screening visit. The diagnosis of asthma was substantiated by bronchodilator reversibility (defined as an increase in the forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV 1 ] of at least 12% and an absolute change of at least 200 ml after the administration of albuterol) during screening or a documented history of a 20% reduction in the FEV 1 in response to a provocative concentration of inhaled methacholine of less than 8 mg per milliliter within 12 months before screening. Additional inclusion criteria were an FEV 1 of 50 to 85% of the predicted value before bronchodilator use at randomization and at least one severe asthma exacerbation, defined as treatment with systemic glucocorticoids or as hospitalization or emergency medical care, within 12 months before screening. The trial enrolled patients across a broad spectrum of baseline blood eosinophil counts. The full eligibility criteria are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1:1 ratio to receive subcutaneous injections of itepekimab monotherapy (at a dose of 300 mg), itepekimab plus dupilumab (both at 300 mg; referred to as the combination group), dupilumab monotherapy (at 300 mg), or placebo every 2 weeks for 12 weeks. Randomization was stratified according to blood eosinophil count at screening and according to country (see the Supplementary Appendix ). During the first 4 weeks of the intervention period ( Figure 1A ), all patients continued pretrial maintenance therapy with an inhaled glucocorticoid and LABA. The LABA was discontinued at week 4, and the inhaled glucocorticoid was then tapered over a period of 2 to 3 weeks (depending on the starting dose) starting at week 6. No background therapy was permitted during weeks 9 through 12, after which patients returned to their original background therapy and entered the 20-week follow-up period.
The primary efficacy end point was an event indicating loss of asthma control during the intervention period. Loss of asthma control was defined as a reduction of at least 30% from baseline in the morning peak expiratory flow on 2 consecutive days; at least six additional puffs (as compared with baseline) of short-acting β 2 -agonists, as reported by the patient in a electronic diary, in a 24-hour period on 2 consecutive days; an asthma exacerbation leading to systemic glucocorticoid treatment; an increase by a factor of at least four in the most recent dose of inhaled glucocorticoids; or an asthma-related hospitalization or emergency department visit. If a patient had a loss of asthma control at any time during the intervention period, the active trial drug or placebo was discontinued and the patient returned to receiving maintenance LABA and inhaled glucocorticoids, with monitoring for adverse events.
Secondary end points were the change from baseline at week 12 in the FEV 1 assessed both before and after bronchodilator use. Other efficacy end points included the change in asthma control as assessed with the five-item Asthma Control Questionnaire (ACQ-5; scores range from 0 to 6, with higher scores indicating less control) and in asthma-related quality of life as assessed with the Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire with Standardized Activities (AQLQ[S]; scores range from 1 to 7, with higher scores indicating better quality of life). For the ACQ-5 and AQLQ(S), the minimal clinically important difference as proposed by the developers is an improvement (i.e., a decrease on the ACQ-5 and an increase on the AQLQ[S]) of at least 0.5 points. The Standardized Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire (RQLQ[S]) was assessed in patients with coexisting allergic rhinitis.
Pharmacodynamic assessments included the interleukin-33 level, blood eosinophil count, and interleukin-4 and -13 pathway-specific biomarkers. Safety was evaluated on the basis of the incidence of adverse events, changes in vital signs, physical examination, clinical laboratory testing, and 12-lead electrocardiography.
Efficacy analyses were conducted in the modified intention-to-treat population, which included all the patients who underwent randomization and received at least one dose of active trial drug or placebo. Analyses were based on randomly assigned groups. The primary comparisons were itepekimab monotherapy as compared with placebo and combination therapy as compared with placebo. We calculated that approximately 60 patients per group would be needed for the trial to have 80% power (at a two-tailed alpha of 0.05) to detect an absolute difference of 26 percentage points in the percentage of patients with loss of asthma control in the itepekimab or combination group as compared with the placebo group, assuming that 15% of the patients would withdraw. An incidence of 40% was assumed in the placebo group. Primary and secondary end points were also assessed in subgroups defined according to baseline eosinophil count (<300 cells per cubic millimeter [low] or ≥300 cells per cubic millimeter [high]).
For the primary end point, a logistic-regression model was used to compare the trial groups. The model included terms for trial group, baseline eosinophil strata, geographic region, background dose level of inhaled glucocorticoids at randomization, and number of exacerbation events within 1 year before screening. For each pairwise comparison, the odds ratio and 95% confidence interval were derived from the logistic-regression model. P values were derived for the two primary comparisons and were tested at an alpha level of 0.025 with the use of a post hoc Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.
The time to loss of asthma control after randomization was analyzed with the use of a Cox regression model with trial group, baseline eosinophil strata, geographic region, background dose level of inhaled glucocorticoids at randomization, and number of exacerbation events within 1 year before screening as covariates. Continuous efficacy end points were analyzed with the use of a mixed-effect model with repeated measures. The model included the change from baseline values up to week 12 as a response variable and included factors (fixed effects) for trial group, baseline eosinophil strata, geographic region, background dose level of inhaled glucocorticoids at randomization, visit, trial group–by–visit interaction, baseline value, and baseline-by-visit interaction as covariates; for spirometric end points, sex and baseline height were additional factors. The inclusion of data followed the rules listed in Table S1. No imputations for missing data were performed. The widths of confidence intervals for the secondary and other end points have not been adjusted for multiplicity, and inferences drawn may not be reproducible. Descriptive statistics were used for demographic and clinical characteristics and for biomarker and safety variables.

Section: Results

The trial was conducted from March 2018 through August 2019. Of the 499 patients with moderate-to-severe asthma who underwent screening, 296 were enrolled. One patient who was assigned to the dupilumab group underwent randomization in error and was not treated, so the modified intention-to-treat population included 295 patients ( Figure 1B ).
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients at baseline were generally balanced across the trial groups ( Table 1 ). At baseline, most patients (66%) were receiving high-dose inhaled glucocorticoids and had a mean fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (F e NO) between 24 parts per billion (ppb) and 33 ppb, with the lowest value being observed in the combination group. Discontinuation occurred more frequently in the placebo group (in 45% of the patients) but was otherwise similar across the three active treatment groups. The most common reason for discontinuation was loss of asthma control ( Figure 1B ).
In the modified intention-to-treat population, the percentage of patients with an event indicating a loss of asthma control was lower in all three active treatment groups than in the placebo group: 22% in the itepekimab group, 27% in the combination group, and 19% in the dupilumab group, as compared with 41% in the placebo group. The corresponding odds ratios as compared with placebo were as follows: in the itepekimab group, 0.42 (95% CI, 0.20 to 0.88; P=0.02); in the combination group, 0.52 (95% CI, 0.26 to 1.06; P=0.07); and in the dupilumab group, 0.33 (95% CI, 0.15 to 0.70) ( Table 2 ). The odds ratio for the comparison of combination therapy with itepekimab monotherapy was 1.23 (95% CI, 0.57 to 2.65), and the odds ratio for the comparison with dupilumab monotherapy was 1.59 (95% CI, 0.72 to 3.49) (Table S2). The percentages of patients with specific causes of loss of asthma control are reported in Table S3. In time-to-event analyses, the hazard ratios for an event indicating a loss of asthma control, as compared with placebo, were as follows: in the itepekimab group, 0.46 (95% CI, 0.25 to 0.85); in the combination group, 0.58 (95% CI, 0.32 to 1.03); and in the dupilumab group, 0.38 (95% CI, 0.20 to 0.72) ( Figure 2A ).
Among patients with a high eosinophil count, the odds ratios as compared with placebo were as follows: in the itepekimab group, 0.39 (95% CI, 0.14 to 1.05); in the combination group, 0.30 (95% CI, 0.10 to 0.87); and in the dupilumab group, 0.17 (95% CI, 0.05 to 0.58). Among patients with a low eosinophil count, the odds ratios as compared with placebo were as follows: in the itepekimab group, 0.46 (95% CI, 0.15 to 1.41); in the combination group, 0.92 (95% CI, 0.33 to 2.56); and in the dupilumab group, 0.62 (95% CI, 0.22 to 1.77) ( Table 2 ).
At week 4, before LABA withdrawal, the improvements in the FEV 1 before bronchodilator use, as compared with placebo, were similar in all three active-treatment groups. These improvements were maintained for the remainder of the intervention period in the two monotherapy groups but not in the combination group (Fig. S2A). At week 12, monotherapy with itepekimab or dupilumab increased the FEV 1 before bronchodilator use, as compared with placebo (least-squares mean difference vs. placebo, 0.14 liters [95% CI, 0.01 to 0.27] and 0.16 liters [95% CI, 0.03 to 0.29], respectively); no improvement as compared with placebo was seen with combination therapy (least-squares mean difference, 0.10 liters; 95% CI, –0.03 to 0.23) ( Table 2 ).
At week 12, among patients with a high eosinophil count at baseline, the least-squares mean differences in the FEV 1 as compared with placebo were as follows: with itepekimab, 0.22 liters (95% CI, 0.02 to 0.41); with combination therapy, 0.19 liters (95% CI, –0.01 to 0.40); and with dupilumab, 0.34 liters (95% CI, 0.14 to 0.54). No effect on the FEV 1 before bronchodilator use was observed in the subgroup of patients with a low baseline eosinophil count in any of the trial groups. Details are provided in Table 2 and Figure S2B and S2C.
Itepekimab monotherapy did not lead to an increase, as compared with placebo, in the FEV 1 after bronchodilator use at week 12; by contrast, the combination therapy and dupilumab monotherapy each showed an increase as compared with placebo at week 12 (Table S4). The effects of itepekimab, dupilumab, and combination treatment on lung function during the follow-up period are shown in Figure S3.
At week 12, all active treatments in the modified intention-to-treat population showed improved asthma control, as indicated by a greater decrease in the ACQ-5 score than was observed with placebo. The least-squares mean differences in the ACQ-5 score as compared with placebo were as follows: in the itepekimab group, –0.42 (95% CI, –0.73 to –0.12); in the combination group, –0.32 (95% CI, –0.63 to –0.01); and in the dupilumab group, –0.46 (95% CI, –0.76 to –0.15) ( Table 2 and Fig. S4A). At week 12, a total of 56% of the patients who were treated with itepekimab and 38% of those who received placebo met or exceeded the threshold for the minimal clinically important difference in the change in the ACQ-5 score (odds ratio vs. placebo, 2.19; 95% CI, 1.11 to 4.35). The corresponding values were 46% in the combination group (odds ratio vs. placebo, 1.44; 95% CI, 0.73 to 2.86) and 55% in the dupilumab group (odds ratio vs. placebo, 2.10; 95% CI, 1.06 to 4.16) (Table S5).
At week 12, all active treatments improved asthma-related quality of life, as shown by a substantially greater increase in the AQLQ(S) score than was observed with placebo. The least-squares mean differences as compared with placebo were as follows: in the itepekimab group, 0.45 (95% CI, 0.14 to 0.77); in the combination group, 0.43 (95% CI, 0.11 to 0.75); and in the dupilumab group, 0.42 (95% CI, 0.11 to 0.73) ( Table 2 and Fig. S4B). A total of 49% of the patients who were treated with itepekimab and 28% of those who received placebo met the threshold for the minimal clinically important difference in the change in the AQLQ(S) score (odds ratio vs. placebo, 2.38; 95% CI, 1.19 to 4.78). The corresponding values were 38% in the combination group (odds ratio vs. placebo, 1.59; 95% CI, 0.78 to 3.22) and 45% in the dupilumab group (odds ratio vs. placebo, 2.15; 95% CI, 1.06 to 4.34).
In the subgroup of 192 patients who had coexisting allergic rhinitis, neither itepekimab nor dupilumab monotherapy led to a greater decrease (indicating improvement) in the RQLQ(S) score at week 12 than was observed with placebo (Table S6). Prespecified pairwise comparisons for all primary, secondary, and other end points, including the peak expiratory flow in the morning and evening, the forced vital capacity, a forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% of the forced vital capacity, asthma symptom scores in the morning and evening, the number of nocturnal awakenings, and the number of inhalations per day of albuterol or levalbuterol for symptom relief, are presented in Table S2.
Itepekimab monotherapy and combination treatment resulted in an increase from baseline in the mean total interleukin-33 level throughout the intervention period ( Figure 2B ). Itepekimab monotherapy and combination treatment also resulted in a reduction from baseline in the mean blood eosinophil count, whereas dupilumab treatment was associated with an expected, as previously described, transient increase in the mean eosinophil count ( Figure 2C ). Many pharmacodynamic biomarkers of type 2 asthma that are reduced by dupilumab therapy were also reduced by treatment with itepekimab, although the magnitude of the reduction tended to be less than that with combination therapy or dupilumab monotherapy, including the F e NO and serum total IgE, periostin, plasma eotaxin-3, and serum pulmonary and activation-regulated chemokine (PARC) levels ( Figure 2D and 2E and Table S7). The mean serum levels of the interleukin-33 receptor sST2 (the soluble isoform of ST2) remained stable throughout the trial in all the trial groups.
The incidence of adverse events was similar in the four trial groups (70% in each of the itepekimab, combination, and placebo groups and 66% in the dupilumab group) ( Table 3 ). The most common adverse events, defined as those that occurred in at least 5% of the patients and at a higher incidence among patients who received itepekimab than among those who received placebo, were nasopharyngitis, allergic rhinitis, nausea, and back pain ( Table 3 ). The incidence of injection-site reaction was lower in the itepekimab group (1 patient [1%]) than in the other groups (4 [5%] in each of the placebo and dupilumab groups and 5 [7%] in the combination group). Most adverse events were of mild-to-moderate severity. Across the four trial groups, 11 patients had serious adverse events, none of which were considered by the investigator to be related to an active trial drug or placebo (Table S8).

Section: Discussion

This phase 2, proof-of-concept trial showed that blockade of interleukin-33 resulted in beneficial effects in patients with moderate-to-severe asthma. Itepekimab therapy led to a significantly lower incidence of events indicating a loss of asthma control (odds ratio vs. placebo, 0.42) and a greater increase in the FEV 1 before bronchodilator use than placebo. A higher percentage of patients in the itepekimab group than in the placebo group met the threshold for a minimal clinically important difference in assessments of asthma control and quality of life. The incremental improvement in lung function that was observed by week 4 in combination with background inhaled glucocorticoid and LABA use was also seen at week 12 after those background therapies had been discontinued.
One of the objectives of the trial was to investigate whether itepekimab would be effective both as monotherapy and in combination with an active comparator. Dupilumab was chosen as the active comparator because of its demonstrated efficacy in reducing severe asthma exacerbation rates and improving lung function in patients with moderate-to-severe asthma and because it was previously studied in a similarly designed phase 2 trial.
The itepekimab and dupilumab monotherapies each showed efficacy with regard to asthma control and FEV 1 . Although the effects of dupilumab therapy were generally greater than those observed with itepekimab therapy, particularly in patients with type 2 asthma, this trial was not powered to detect such differences. It is possible that the design of this trial regarding withdrawal from inhaled glucocorticoid and LABA use is advantageous for a type 2–specific inhibitor. Dupilumab therapy may have been more effective in this context because it inhibits more of the type 2 inflammation that is elicited by withdrawal from inhaled glucocorticoids and LABA therapy, whereas interleukin-33 blockade with itepekimab may alter additional inflammatory pathways but not as completely as a specific type 1 or type 2 inhibitor.
The hypothesis that blocking interleukin-33 and downstream interleukin-4 and -13 cytokines would be more beneficial than monotherapy in patients with asthma was not substantiated by this trial design because no beneficial effects were observed as compared with placebo when itepekimab and dupilumab were used in combination. The biologic reason for this finding is unclear and warrants further evaluation. Pharmacodynamic biomarker data indicate that the findings in the combination group were similar to those in the itepekimab and dupilumab monotherapy groups, which suggests that each component of the combination therapy continued to result in expected pharmacodynamic effects. A more complex interaction between interleukin-33 and the more downstream products of type 2 inflammation is also possible, but the design or duration of this trial may have been insufficient for the evaluation of other, potentially important, long-term effects. Further work is needed to better understand the interplay of these mechanisms.
The key differences between itepekimab and dupilumab were observed in the pharmacodynamic effects on downstream biomarkers. The use of itepekimab as monotherapy, and in combination with dupilumab, resulted in increased levels of measured interleukin-33, which is reflective of a longer half-life of interleukin-33 when it is bound to itepekimab. All three active treatments tended to reduce the F e NO and the IgE level, biomarkers that reflect interleukin-13 and interleukin-4 activity, whereas only itepekimab, as monotherapy or in combination with dupilumab, reduced the blood eosinophil count, a biomarker that is associated with interleukin-5 activity. In contrast, blood eosinophil counts increased with dupilumab monotherapy. This effect of dupilumab has been noted before and reflects a transient accumulation of eosinophils in the vascular compartment as a result of continued interleukin-5 activity in the face of inhibition of production of interleukin-13– and interleukin-4–dependent chemokines and cytokines. The reduction in the plasma eotaxin-3 level that was seen after dupilumab treatment is consistent with this mechanism.
Itepekimab therapy did not reduce the blood eosinophil count as completely as has been seen with anti–interleukin-5 monoclonal antibodies, and it had a lesser effect than dupilumab therapy on the interleukin-13 product eotaxin-3. This finding may reflect incomplete inhibition of type 2 inflammation, most likely because other alarmins (molecules produced by damaged tissue that activate inflammation), such as thymic stromal lymphopoietin, are still active. Further studies are needed to better understand the complex physiology involved in asthma and to find predictive biomarkers for response to anti–interleukin-33 blockade.
In this trial, we found that itepekimab monotherapy led to a lower incidence of events indicating loss of asthma control and to improved lung function, findings that are consistent with a role for interleukin-33 in the pathogenesis of exacerbations and airflow limitation in asthma.
