Title: Randomized Trial of Closed-Loop Control in Very Young Children with Type 1 Diabetes


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

The possible advantage of hybrid closed-loop therapy (i.e., artificial pancreas) over sensor-augmented pump therapy in very young children with type 1 diabetes is unclear.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this multicenter, randomized, crossover trial, we recruited children 1 to 7 years of age with type 1 diabetes who were receiving insulin-pump therapy at seven centers across Austria, Germany, Luxembourg, and the United Kingdom. Participants received treatment in two 16-week periods, in random order, in which the closed-loop system was compared with sensor-augmented pump therapy (control). The primary end point was the between-treatment difference in the percentage of time that the sensor glucose measurement was in the target range (70 to 180 mg per deciliter) during each 16-week period. The analysis was conducted according to the intention-to-treat principle. Key secondary end points included the percentage of time spent in a hyperglycemic state (glucose level, >180 mg per deciliter), the glycated hemoglobin level, the mean sensor glucose level, and the percentage of time spent in a hypoglycemic state (glucose level, <70 mg per deciliter). Safety was assessed.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 74 participants underwent randomization. The mean (±SD) age of the participants was 5.6±1.6 years, and the baseline glycated hemoglobin level was 7.3±0.7%. The percentage of time with the glucose level in the target range was 8.7 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI], 7.4 to 9.9) higher during the closed-loop period than during the control period (P<0.001). The mean adjusted difference (closed-loop minus control) in the percentage of time spent in a hyperglycemic state was −8.5 percentage points (95% CI, −9.9 to −7.1), the difference in the glycated hemoglobin level was −0.4 percentage points (95% CI, −0.5 to −0.3), and the difference in the mean sensor glucose level was −12.3 mg per deciliter (95% CI, −14.8 to −9.8) (P<0.001 for all comparisons). The time spent in a hypoglycemic state was similar with the two treatments (P=0.74). The median time spent in the closed-loop mode was 95% (interquartile range, 92 to 97) over the 16-week closed-loop period. One serious adverse event of severe hypoglycemia occurred during the closed-loop period. One serious adverse event that was deemed to be unrelated to treatment occurred.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

A hybrid closed-loop system significantly improved glycemic control in very young children with type 1 diabetes, without increasing the time spent in hypoglycemia. (Funded by the European Commission and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03784027 .)

Section: Introduction

Management of type 1 diabetes is challenging in very young children, owing to high variability of insulin requirements, marked insulin sensitivity, and unpredictable eating and activity patterns. Caregiver fear of hypoglycemia, particularly overnight, is common and, coupled with young children’s unawareness that hypoglycemia is occurring, contributes to children not meeting the recommended glycemic targets or having difficulty maintaining recommended glycemic control unless caregivers can provide constant monitoring. These issues often lead to a high management burden and reduced quality of life for the whole family.
The use of continuous glucose-monitoring devices and insulin-pump therapy is increasing in very young children. Although the use of continuous glucose monitoring has been associated with decreases in the incidence of severe hypoglycemia and episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis, as well as with a reduction in the overall time spent in a hypoglycemic state, it has not been shown to improve glycemic control in this age group. The use of sensor-augmented pump therapy with low-glucose suspend features (in which the pump stops insulin delivery when an algorithm predicts that sensor glucose levels are likely to drop below the prespecified low-glucose threshold) is accompanied by modest improvements in glycemic control in children, but the burden of management remains high.
Hybrid closed-loop systems (also called an artificial pancreas), in which an algorithm automatically adjusts insulin delivery on the basis of real-time sensor glucose levels, may address ongoing challenges in this age group. Closed-loop systems have been shown to improve glycemic control and reduce the burden of management of type 1 diabetes in older children and adolescents. However, evaluation studies involving very young children have been small and of short duration. The efficacy and safety of longer-term use of a closed-loop system, as compared with standard therapy, is unclear. In the present trial, we hypothesized that use of the Cambridge closed-loop algorithm for 16 weeks in children 1 to 7 years of age with type 1 diabetes would improve glycemic control, as compared with sensor-augmented pump therapy, and have an acceptable safety profile.

Section: Methods

In this trial, we used an open-label, multicenter, randomized, crossover design to compare the use of hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery for 16 weeks, followed by the use of sensor-augmented pump therapy for 16 weeks, or vice versa (in random order). Participants were recruited from outpatient clinics at diabetes centers in Austria (Graz, Innsbruck, and Vienna), Germany (Leipzig), Luxembourg (Luxembourg), and the United Kingdom (Cambridge and Leeds) (see the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org).
Approval of the trial protocol (available at NEJM.org) was received from relevant ethics committees and national regulatory bodies (see the Supplementary Appendix ). Safety aspects were overseen by an independent data and safety monitoring board.
The authors vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. Dexcom supplied continuous glucose-monitoring devices at a discount, and Dexcom representatives read the manuscript before submission, but Dexcom had no other role in the trial.
Key inclusion criteria were a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes at least 6 months before enrollment, receipt of insulin-pump therapy for at least 3 months before enrollment, and a glycated hemoglobin level of no more than 11.0% (97 mmol per mole) at the screening (baseline) visit. Participants were 1 to 7 years of age. Key exclusion criteria were current use of closed-loop therapy and concomitant disease affecting metabolic control or interpretation of the glycated hemoglobin level (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ).
Eligible participants were identified by clinical teams at each trial center. All the parents or guardians (caregivers) of the participants provided written informed consent. When possible, written assent was obtained from participants.
The hybrid closed-loop system comprised an unlocked smartphone (Galaxy S8, Samsung) hosting the proprietary CamAPS FX application (CamDiab), which ran the Cambridge proprietary model predictive control algorithm (version 0.3.71). The smartphone communicated wirelessly with both the Dana Diabecare RS insulin pump (Sooil) and the Dexcom G6 transmitter (Dexcom) (Fig. S1). This algorithm automatically adjusts insulin delivery by the insulin pump on the basis of real-time sensor glucose readings and provides alarms if the glucose level is below or above user-specified thresholds.
The CamAPS FX application was used during each trial period. During the sensor-augmented pump therapy period, closed-loop functionality was disabled.
Participants were screened for eligibility, including measurement of glycated hemoglobin. After enrollment, caregivers were trained in the use of the trial glucose sensor, the trial insulin pump, and the CamAPS FX application. The application was used in open-loop mode for 2 to 4 weeks during the run-in period. Investigators were free to adjust insulin therapy according to clinical judgment before randomization. Children were eligible to undergo randomization if sensor data for at least an 8-day period and safe use of the trial devices had been demonstrated.
Eligible participants underwent randomization with the use of central randomization software. Randomization was conducted in a 1:1 ratio with a permuted block design (random block sizes of two and four), with stratification according to trial site.
The trial flowchart and visit schedules are provided in Figure S2 and Tables S2 and S3. After randomization, the caregivers of the participants who had been assigned to initial use of closed-loop insulin delivery were trained in the use of the closed-loop system; the caregivers of participants who had been assigned to initial use of sensor-augmented pump therapy received refresher training. Participants received their assigned initial treatment for 16 weeks and then crossed over to the second trial treatment after a washout period of 1 to 4 weeks, during which the application was in the open-loop mode, with training as described above.
After two initial contacts by telephone or email in the first week of each treatment period, caregivers were contacted monthly to allow staff to record adverse events, device deficiencies, and other relevant information. Caregivers and members of the clinical team were free to adjust insulin therapy according to usual clinical practice throughout the trial, but no active treatment optimization was undertaken by the research team. All the participants and caregivers had access to a 24-hour telephone helpline to the local research team. Glycated hemoglobin was measured locally at baseline and at the end of each trial period with the use of an International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine–aligned method and following the guidelines of the National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program.
There were three types of end points in this trial. The primary end point was the between-treatment difference in the percentage of time spent in the target glucose range (70 to 180 mg per deciliter [3.9 to 10.0 mmol per liter]) during each 16-week period. Key secondary end points included the percentage of time spent in a hyperglycemic state (defined as a glucose level of >180 mg per deciliter), the glycated hemoglobin level, the mean glucose level according to the device sensor, and the percentage of time spent in a hypoglycemic state (defined as a glucose level of <70 mg per deciliter); these end points were tested with the use of a hierarchical gatekeeping procedure to control the type I error. Additional secondary end points included the coefficient of variation and standard deviation of the glucose level; the percentages of time spent with glucose levels of less than 54 mg per deciliter (3.0 mmol per liter), of less than 63 mg per deciliter (3.5 mmol per liter), and of more than 300 mg per deciliter (16.7 mmol per liter); and insulin metrics. All the glycemic end points were based on sensor glucose data.
All the end points were calculated over the whole trial period. For a subset of end points, calculations were made separately for daytime (8:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m.) and nighttime (midnight to 7:59 a.m.). Device use was assessed in both trial periods. The safety evaluation comprised the frequency of severe hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis events and other adverse events.
We determined that a sample of 65 participants who had undergone randomization would provide the trial with 90% power to detect a between-treatment difference in the percentage of time spent in the target glucose range, assuming a treatment effect of 5 percentage points, a standard deviation of 10.3 percentage points for individual measurements, and a correlation of 0.3 between the periods. The sample size was increased to 72 to account for withdrawals.
Analyses were performed on an intention-to-treat basis. All the participants who underwent randomization and had at least 168 hours of continuous glucose-monitoring data in at least one trial period were included in the primary analysis. The treatment interventions were compared with the use of a repeated-measures linear mixed model with adjustment for period as a fixed effect and site as a random effect and with accounting for the baseline value as a separate period. A 95% confidence interval was reported for the difference between interventions on the basis of the linear mixed model. For highly skewed data, a ranked normal score transformation was used. Missing data were not imputed for the primary analysis.
All the P values are two-sided at an alpha level of 0.05. For the primary end point and other key secondary end points, the familywise type I error rate (the probability of making at least one type I error) was controlled with the use of a gatekeeping strategy (see the Supplementary Appendix ). Analyses were conducted with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

Between May 17, 2019, and June 16, 2020, a total of 81 children were enrolled. Seven participants withdrew during the run-in period, so 74 children underwent randomization (Fig. S3). The mean (±SD) age of the participants was 5.6±1.6 years, and the baseline glycated hemoglobin level was 7.3±0.7% (56.6±7.2 mmol per mole) ( Table 1 ). After randomization and the initiation of sensor-augmented pump therapy in the first period, one participant withdrew because of difficulties accessing trial consumables (e.g., infusion sets, batteries, and insulin reservoirs) at the local clinic; therefore, no data are available for the closed-loop period for this participant.
The results of the primary, key secondary, and secondary end-point analyses, which included all the participants who underwent randomization, are shown in Table 2 . The percentage of time in the target glucose range (70 to 180 mg per deciliter) was higher by 8.7 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI], 7.4 to 9.9) during the 16-week closed-loop period than during the 16-week sensor-augmented pump period (P<0.001) (Fig. S4). The result was similar in a per-protocol analysis that used data from all the participants who had undergone randomization and had at least 60% of continuous glucose-monitoring data available for the sensor-augmented pump period and had used the closed-loop system for at least 60% of the time during closed-loop period (Table S4).
The mean adjusted difference (closed-loop minus control) in the percentage of time spent in a hyperglycemic state (>180 mg per deciliter) was −8.5 percentage points (95% CI, −9.9 to −7.1) (P<0.001). The mean adjusted between-treatment difference in the glycated hemoglobin level was −0.4 percentage points (−3.9 mmol per mole; 95% CI, −0.5 to −0.3 percentage points [−4.9 to −2.9 mmol per mole]), with a significantly lower glycated hemoglobin level at the end of the closed-loop period than at the end of the sensor-augmented pump period (P<0.001). The mean sensor glucose level was significantly lower during the closed-loop period than during the sensor-augmented pump period (mean adjusted difference, −12.3 mg per deciliter [−0.7 mmol per liter]; 95% CI, −14.8 to −9.8 mg per deciliter [−0.8 to −0.5 mmol per liter]; P<0.001). Figure 1 shows the 24-hour glucose profiles. The final key secondary end point that was tested in the hierarchy was the percentage of time spent in a hypoglycemic state (<70 mg per deciliter), which did not differ significantly between the interventions (P=0.74).
The percentages of time with glucose levels of less than 63 mg per deciliter and of less than 54 mg per deciliter did not differ significantly between the two interventions ( Table 2 ). The percentage of time spent in a hyperglycemic state (>300 mg per deciliter) was 1.0 percentage point (95% CI, 0.6 to 1.6) lower during the closed-loop period than during the sensor-augmented pump period. The median glucose variability as measured by the standard deviation of the glucose level was lower during the closed-loop period (58.6 mg per deciliter [3.3 mmol per liter]) than during the sensor-augmented pump period (64.2 mg per deciliter [3.6 mmol per liter]) (difference, −6.2 mg per deciliter [−0.3 mmol per liter]; 95% CI, −7.6 to −4.8 [−0.4 to −0.3 mmol per liter]). However, there was no meaningful difference in the coefficient of variation of the glucose level between the closed-loop period and the sensor-augmented pump period.
Although the total daily insulin dose was similar in the two treatment periods, the basal insulin dose (i.e., the amount of insulin delivered by preset pump basal rates during sensor-augmented pump therapy or the amount of insulin delivered automatically by the closed-loop algorithm during closed-loop therapy) was higher, and the bolus insulin dose lower, during the closed-loop period than during the sensor-augmented pump period ( Table 2 ). Tight glucose control was more prominent with the closed-loop system during nighttime than during daytime, with a percentage of time in the target glucose range of 82%, a mean sensor glucose level of 136.2 mg per deciliter (7.6 mmol per liter), a median standard deviation of the glucose level of 46.6mg per deciliter (2.6 mmol per liter), and a median percentage of time spent in a hypoglycemic state of 2.8%. The total amount of insulin used overnight was low, with predominantly basal insulin delivered during the closed-loop period, as compared with a roughly even split between the basal and bolus insulin doses during the sensor-augmented pump period ( Table 3 and S5).
Glucose sensor use was high during both treatment periods. The median use was more than 99% (interquartile range, 99 to >99) during the closed-loop period and 96% (interquartile range, 94 to 97) during the sensor-augmented pump period. During the closed-loop period, the system was in the closed-loop mode for 95% (interquartile range, 92 to 97) of the time (Table S6).
One serious adverse event of severe hypoglycemia occurred in the closed-loop period; details of the event are provided in Table 4 . There were no episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis. One serious adverse event that was considered by the investigators and the data and safety monitoring board to be unrelated to the treatment (hospital admission for gastroenteritis) occurred during the sensor-augmented pump period. A total of 75 other adverse events (27 during the closed-loop period, 27 during the sensor-augmented pump period, 18 during the run-in period, and 3 during the washout period) were reported. Safety-related events are summarized in Table 4 .
There were 380 unscheduled contacts (178 during the closed-loop period, 119 during the sensor-augmented pump period, 69 during the run-in period, and 14 during the washout period) (Table S7). The reasons for such contacts were related mostly to device issues (63 during the closed-loop period and 47 during the sensor-augmented pump period), which encompassed any sensor-, pump-, or application-related issues; and to diabetes-management queries (76 during the closed-loop period and 52 during the sensor-augmented pump period) (Table S8).

Section: Discussion

In the present trial, we found that the Cambridge hybrid closed-loop algorithm significantly improved glycemic control over a period of 16 weeks, as compared with sensor-augmented pump therapy, in very young children with type 1 diabetes. The closed-loop system appeared to have an acceptable safety profile. The reduction in the glycated hemoglobin level of 0.4 percentage points (3.9 mmol per mole) is important in a population of patients who had tight glycemic control at baseline. This result was observed without an increase in the time spent in a hypoglycemic state.
Our result of 71.6±5.9% of the time being spent in the target glucose range (70 to 180 mg per deciliter) in the closed-loop group is similar to findings in other studies involving very young children and was sustained over a 16-week period of at-home use. The difference of 8.7 percentage points in the percentage of time spent in the target glucose range translates to a clinically meaningful 125 minutes per day. A previous study that compared diluted insulin with standard insulin in the Cambridge hybrid closed-loop system for a 3-week period in the same pediatric age group showed that the percentages of time spent in the target range were 72±8% with diluted insulin and 70±7% with standard-strength insulin, with similar glycated hemoglobin levels at baseline.
We observed a higher incidence of hypoglycemia in this trial than was observed in a trial involving older children. This finding may reflect the stringent treatment targets in European centers, as evidenced by the lower mean glycated hemoglobin levels observed in the Diabetes Patienten Verlaufdokumentation registry for this age group, as well as the higher incidence of hypoglycemia at baseline and during the sensor-augmented pump therapy period in our trial.
The present trial was of sufficient duration to report glycated hemoglobin outcomes in very young participants who used the hybrid closed-loop therapy, and the results were similar to those that have been reported in studies of commercially available closed-loop systems in older children and adolescents. Given the low glycated hemoglobin levels at baseline, the improved levels in our trial are noteworthy, because higher baseline glycated hemoglobin levels are associated with a greater reduction in the level when hybrid closed-loop therapy is used. The time that the system was in the closed-loop mode in this trial was consistently high (median, 95% of the time), a finding that supports longer-term usability in this age group. This observation compares well with the use of the closed-loop system over a 26-week period in older children (median, 93% of the time). Consistently high time with the system in the closed-loop mode has been associated with lower glycated hemoglobin levels in older children.
Children who receive a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes at a young age may be at greatest risk for neurocognitive deficits. A longitudinal study that compared brain growth and cognitive function in young children with type 1 diabetes with those in age-matched controls over a period of 6 years showed that children with type 1 diabetes had lower IQ scores and slower brain growth than the controls. These changes were negatively correlated with measures of hyperglycemia. Our findings showed reductions in the amount of time in a hyperglycemic state with hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery, without an increase in the time spent in a hypoglycemic state, which leads us to speculate that closed-loop therapy may be particularly beneficial for young children during this vulnerable stage of brain development.
Poor sleep quality is a major challenge for families of young children with type 1 diabetes, because variability in insulin requirements and parental fear of hypoglycemia are highest overnight. In the present trial, we observed that more than 80% of the overnight sensor readings were within the target range, with less than 3% of the time spent in a hypoglycemic state (<70 mg per deciliter). Accordingly, we hypothesize that hybrid closed-loop therapy may address the nighttime problem more effectively than sensor-augmented pump therapy, which would confer associated quality-of-life benefits.
The strengths of our trial include its international, randomized, crossover design, as well as a longer trial duration than previous trials of closed-loop systems in this age group, with no restriction on the enrollment of participants on the basis of previous severe hypoglycemia or diabetic ketoacidosis. There was near-100% retention of the participants who had undergone randomization and consistently high use of the closed-loop system, findings that suggest high acceptability of the hybrid closed-loop therapy in this vulnerable population.
Our trial had certain limitations. Although the eligibility criteria were broad, the trial population may not have been representative of the general population (Table S9). Insulin-pump use was a prerequisite for trial participation, because it represents the standard of care in this age group in the countries of enrollment. However, access to insulin-pump therapy is not ubiquitous worldwide. Sensor use at enrollment was higher than average. In addition, children from ethnic minorities were underrepresented. A glycated hemoglobin level of less than 11.0% (97 mmol per mole) was required for trial participation, which potentially limited access to enrollment. The observed low baseline glycated hemoglobin level was consonant with reported epidemiologic data in this age group in Europe, although the mean glycated hemoglobin level is higher in other regions of the world. Investigators were free to adjust insulin therapy according to clinical judgment before randomization, which may have affected baseline characteristics.
Research participants in closed-loop studies tend to be highly motivated, which may also limit generalizability. The consistently high use of the closed-loop system (>90%) in a population that was not previously familiar with closed-loop therapy signifies high treatment adherence, but further research is warranted to confirm our findings. Finally, the crossover design may limit the generalizability of our findings, because growth and development are rapid in very young children and may have affected trial results. Additional exclusion criteria that were unrelated to diabetes applied to participants at sites in Germany, which potentially affected the reported treatment effect. We recorded a higher number of unscheduled contacts than has been observed in closed-loop studies in other age groups, but these were reasonably balanced across the treatment periods and are reflective of a population that requires higher input from health care professionals than older children or adults. Furthermore, other studies have had more frequent prespecified trial contacts, such as a similar trial involving children 6 to 13 years of age in which planned contacts occurred every 2 weeks, rather than monthly, as was done in our trial.
In this trial, hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery with the use of a proprietary Cambridge algorithm led to significant improvements in glycemic control, as compared with sensor-augmented pump therapy, in very young children with type 1 diabetes over a period of 16 weeks.
