Title: Amoxicillin for 3 or 5 Days for Chest-Indrawing Pneumonia in Malawian Children


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Evidence regarding the appropriate duration of treatment with antibiotic agents in children with pneumonia in low-resource settings in Africa is lacking.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a double-blind, randomized, controlled, noninferiority trial in Lilongwe, Malawi, to determine whether treatment with amoxicillin for 3 days is less effective than treatment for 5 days in children with chest-indrawing pneumonia (cough lasting <14 days or difficulty breathing, along with visible indrawing of the chest wall with or without fast breathing for age). Children not infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) who were 2 to 59 months of age and had chest-indrawing pneumonia were randomly assigned to receive amoxicillin twice daily for either 3 days or 5 days. Children were followed for 14 days. The primary outcome was treatment failure by day 6; noninferiority of the 3-day regimen to the 5-day regimen would be shown if the percentage of children with treatment failure in the 3-day group was no more than 1.5 times that in the 5-day group. Prespecified secondary analyses included assessment of treatment failure or relapse by day 14.

Abstract_Section: Results

From March 29, 2016, to April 1, 2019, a total of 3000 children underwent randomization: 1497 children were assigned to the 3-day group, and 1503 to the 5-day group. Among children with day 6 data available, treatment failure had occurred in 5.9% in the 3-day group (85 of 1442 children) and in 5.2% (75 of 1456) in the 5-day group (adjusted difference, 0.7 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], −0.9 to 2.4) — a result that satisfied the criterion for noninferiority of the 3-day regimen to the 5-day regimen. Among children with day 14 data available, 176 of 1411 children (12.5%) in the 3-day group and 154 of 1429 (10.8%) in the 5-day group had had treatment failure by day 6 or relapse by day 14 (between-group difference, 1.7 percentage points; 95% CI, −0.7 to 4.1). The percentage of children with serious adverse events was similar in the two groups (9.8% in the 3-day group and 8.8% in the 5-day group).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In HIV-uninfected Malawian children, treatment with amoxicillin for chest-indrawing pneumonia for 3 days was noninferior to treatment for 5 days. (Funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02678195 .)

Section: Introduction

Each year, approximately 920,000 children die from pneumonia before the age of 5 years. Providing greater access to appropriate and effective treatment is an important goal. Treatment of bacterial pneumonia requires an effective antibiotic agent administered in adequate doses for an appropriate duration. Determining the appropriate duration of antibiotic therapy is key to ensuring effective treatment while maximizing adherence and minimizing adverse drug effects, costs, and antimicrobial resistance.
The World Health Organization (WHO) uses clinical signs to classify the severity of pneumonia (classifications of pneumonia and trial definitions are provided in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The WHO recommends a 5-day course of amoxicillin, administered orally twice daily at a minimum of 40 mg per kilogram of body weight per dose (for a total of 80 mg per kilogram per day), as first-line treatment for chest-indrawing pneumonia (cough lasting <14 days or difficulty breathing, along with visible indrawing of the chest wall with or without fast breathing for age) in immunocompetent children younger than 5 years of age. However, whether a 5-day course is necessary or a shorter duration of treatment would be as effective is unclear. On the basis of studies of 3-day oral antibiotic treatment as compared with 5-day treatment for fast-breathing pneumonia (cough lasting <14 days or difficulty breathing, along with fast breathing for age), the WHO recommends a 3-day course of oral amoxicillin for treatment of fast-breathing pneumonia in immunocompetent children younger than 5 years of age. A Cochrane review identified no qualifying randomized, controlled trials that compared a 2-day or 3-day regimen with a 5-day regimen of intravenous antibiotics for chest-indrawing or more severe pneumonia. Few data exist to inform duration of treatment for pneumonia, and data are lacking from studies comparing 3-day oral antibiotic treatment with 5-day treatment for chest-indrawing pneumonia. International and national pneumonia treatment guidelines rely on expert opinion and limited and weak evidence. In light of the global threat of increasing antimicrobial resistance, evidence-based recommendations are needed to guide the proper duration of antibiotic treatment for pneumonia. Given the paucity of data from Africa, African-specific research in settings in which malaria is endemic is needed to establish the appropriate treatment in children with chest-indrawing pneumonia.

Section: Methods

The primary objective of this prospective, double-blind, randomized, controlled, noninferiority trial was to determine whether 3-day treatment with amoxicillin in children 2 to 59 months of age, not infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), who have chest-indrawing pneumonia and who are residing in a region of Malawi in which malaria is endemic is substantively less effective than 5-day treatment (the null hypothesis). A noninferiority design was chosen on the basis of the hypothesis that a 3-day regimen of amoxicillin would not be more beneficial than a 5-day regimen with respect to the primary outcome of treatment failure by day 6, but it might be only slightly less beneficial than a 5-day regimen (alternative hypothesis).
Children 2 to 59 months of age who presented to the outpatient departments of Kamuzu Central Hospital (KCH) or Bwaila District Hospital (BDH) in Lilongwe, Malawi, and who met the WHO criteria for the case definition of chest-indrawing pneumonia were screened by trial staff to determine eligibility (Table S2). Screening included testing for malaria, HIV, and anemia. No diagnostic testing for viruses, bacteria, or tuberculosis was performed (Section S4).
The trial was conducted in accordance with the International Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice guidelines and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The trial was approved by the Western Institutional Review Board (United States); the College of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (Blantyre, Malawi); and the Malawi Pharmacy, Medicines, and Poisons Board. All the authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and analyses and for the adherence of the trial to the protocol (available at NEJM.org).
On day 1, eligible children were enrolled and were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to either a 3-day regimen of amoxicillin or a 5-day regimen. High-dose oral amoxicillin was provided in 250-mg dispersible tablets (tablets dissolved in liquid) in two divided doses daily. Children in the 3-day group received amoxicillin tablets for 3 days and placebo tablets for 2 days. Children in the 5-day group received amoxicillin tablets for 5 days. The total dose was determined on the basis of age group (children 2 to 11 months of age received 500 mg per day, children 12 to 35 months of age received 1000 mg per day, and children 36 to 59 months of age received 1500 mg per day), according to the current WHO-recommended therapy for HIV-uninfected children. The amoxicillin and placebo were identical in appearance, smell, taste, dispersion activity, and packaging. Randomization was stratified according to age group (2 to 11 months, 12 to 35 months, or 36 to 59 months) and trial phase (phase 1 [KCH site] or phase 2 [BDH site]) with the use of block sizes of 2, 4, and 6. Other than the biostatisticians, pharmacists, trial monitors, and members of the data and safety monitoring board, no members of the trial team were aware of the treatment assignments.
Enrollment was initially conducted solely at KCH (phase 1) and was then transitioned (on September 20, 2016) to BDH (phase 2), after KCH introduced user fees that reduced patient volumes. BDH enrollees were transferred to KCH for additional evaluation and admission. For safety reasons, most enrollees were hospitalized for 2 days and discharged on day 3 if no criteria for treatment failure had been met.
Children were evaluated on day 2 (while hospitalized) and on days 4, 6, and 14 in the clinic or at home. During follow-up, all children were assessed at all scheduled and unscheduled visits for treatment failure or relapse and for adherence to the trial regimen. Most children who had treatment failure or relapse were hospitalized and were treated with intravenous antibiotics. Once they received intravenous or other second-line antibiotics, children were considered to have had treatment failure.
The primary outcome was treatment failure by day 6. Secondary outcomes included relapse (occurring any time from day 7 through day 14 among children who did not have treatment failure on or before day 6) and treatment failure by day 6 or relapse by day 14. Treatment failure was assessed in prespecified subgroups according to age group (2 to 11 months, 12 to 35 months, or 36 to 59 months), malnutrition status (as assessed by mid–upper-arm circumference <11.5 cm, 11.5 to 13.5 cm, or >13.5 cm), malaria status (positive or negative), and very fast breathing for age (yes or no).
All adverse events were documented and were assessed and managed according to KCH standard clinical practice; children were followed and treated until resolution of the event or stabilization of the child’s condition. All serious adverse events were reported to the trial safety team for review within 24 hours.
The relative noninferiority margin for treatment failure in the 3-day group — 1.5 times the incidence of treatment failure in the 5-day group — was chosen on the basis of anticipated treatment failure in 8% of the children in the 5-day group. This noninferiority margin, which represented a 50% higher incidence of treatment failure in the 3-day group than in the 5-day group, was chosen after extensive discussions among the investigators and with external experts regarding the level of treatment failure in the 3-day group as compared with the 5-day group that might be an acceptable margin to clinicians, considering the anticipated treatment failure in the 5-day group and the potential enrollment size in the trial. With initial adjustment for two formal interim analyses (with an O’Brien–Fleming boundary for early noninferiority and a Pocock boundary for early inferiority ), we determined that enrollment of 2000 children (1000 per group) would provide the trial with 88.1% power to show noninferiority of the 3-day regimen to the 5-day regimen if treatment failure occurred in 8% of the children in each group and 64.8% power if treatment failure occurred in 4% of the children in each group. A potential increase in sample size was considered during planning of the trial in the event that the overall incidence of failure was much lower than the anticipated 8%. After the second formal interim analysis, it was clear that the overall incidence of failure was less than 6%. To maintain a power (with equal incidence of failure in the two groups) of 80% or higher, the maximum sample size was increased to 3000 children (1500 per group), and a third formal interim analysis was performed after slightly more than 2000 children had been enrolled. The decision to increase the sample size was made by trial investigators who were unaware of the treatment assignments, and the decision was made after consultation with the funding agency. With the increase in the maximum sample size (and assuming an equal incidence of failure in each group), the trial had 84.8% power to detect 5% treatment failure in each group and 89.8% power to detect 6% treatment failure in each group. Power calculations took into account 5% dropout and assumed a one-sided alpha level of 0.025 for a test of the between-group difference in the percentage of children who had treatment failure.
Primary analyses were performed according to the intention-to-treat principle but included only children with complete data; analyses used linear regression (adjusted for age group, trial phase, and sex) and robust standard errors based on the Huber–White sandwich estimator. Because the sample size was sufficiently large, linear regression was used for this binary outcome to model differences in the incidence of treatment failure. Estimates of between-group differences in the incidence of treatment failure in prespecified subgroups are reported with 95% confidence intervals, without adjustment for multiple comparisons. No per-protocol, as-treated, or post hoc subgroup analyses were performed (Section S5). The independent data and safety monitoring board considered formal stopping boundaries during their interim reviews but decided not to follow them and rather to treat them as a guide only (Section S6). Therefore, the primary analysis was not adjusted for interim monitoring. Sensitivity analyses were performed with the use of multiple imputations and tipping-point analyses. For multiple imputations, a hot-deck approach (20 imputations) was used, with matching for at least three of the following five factors: age group (2 to 11 months, 12 to 35 months, or 36 to 50 months), sex, mother’s education level (none, primary, or secondary or higher), number of children in the home (1, 2, 3, or ≥4), and number of amoxicillin or placebo doses taken (≤4, 5 to 7, 8 or 9, or 10). Analyses of secondary outcomes used robust standard errors unadjusted for interim analyses or other factors. Six prespecified subgroup analyses were performed, of which four are reported here. Prespecified subgroups of children with low oxygen saturation (10 children) and of children with wheezing (49 children) are not reported because of the small numbers.

Section: Results

Enrollment started on March 29, 2016. Formal interim analyses were performed after one third, two thirds, and slightly more than the original maximum planned number of children had been enrolled, and the last visit was completed on April 14, 2019. In total, 3336 children were screened ( Figure 1 ). A total of 265 children were ineligible, and consent was declined for 82. However, 11 children were enrolled in error (5 in the 3-day group and 6 in the 5-day group). Thus, 3000 children were enrolled and underwent randomization: 1497 were assigned to the 3-day regimen of amoxicillin, and 1503 were assigned to the 5-day regimen. Primary-outcome data were available for 1442 children (96.3%) in the 3-day group and 1456 (96.9%) in the 5-day group. Primary-outcome data were missing primarily because of loss to follow-up. Baseline characteristics were similar in the two groups ( Table 1 and Table S3).
By day 6, among children who were included in the analysis and had complete outcome data, 5.9% of the children (85 of 1442) in the 3-day group and 5.2% (75 of 1456) in the 5-day group had treatment failure, which resulted in an adjusted absolute difference of 0.7 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI], −0.9 to 2.4 [with a noninferiority margin for an upper limit of the 95% confidence interval of 2.6]) ( Table 2 ). Among children who did not have treatment failure by day 6, a total of 91 of 1326 (6.9%) in the 3-day group, as compared with 79 of 1354 (5.8%) in the 5-day group, had relapse by day 14 — an absolute difference of 1.0 percentage point (95% CI, −0.8 to 2.9 [with a noninferiority margin for an upper limit of the 95% confidence interval of 8.7]).
Before day 4, both groups were receiving amoxicillin, and as such, we would expect the incidence of treatment failure before day 4 to be the same in the two groups. In a post hoc, descriptive, unadjusted analysis, 2.3% (33 of 1442 children) in the 3-day group and 2.3% (33 of 1456 children) in the 5-day group had treatment failure before day 4. On days 4 and 5, the 3-day group was receiving placebo, whereas the 5-day group was continuing to receive amoxicillin. In the analysis of days 4 through 6, the percentage of children with treatment failure was 3.6% (52 of 1442 children) in the 3-day group and 2.9% (42 of 1456 children) in the 5-day group.
A total of 176 of 1411 children (12.5%) in the 3-day group and 154 of 1429 (10.8%) in the 5-day group had either treatment failure before or on day 6 or relapse by day 14 (absolute difference, 1.7 percentage points; 95% CI, −0.7 to 4.1). Additional results regarding secondary outcomes are provided in Table 2 . The incidence of treatment failure was generally consistent across prespecified subgroups defined according to age group, malnutrition status, malaria status, and very fast breathing for age. Most 95% confidence intervals associated with outcomes in the subgroups included the noninferiority margin, and any adjustment for multiple comparisons would have resulted in the upper limit of all 95% confidence intervals being larger than the noninferiority margin. The amount of missing primary-outcome data was low. Overall, data were missing for 102 of 3000 children (3.4%): 55 of 1497 children in the 3-day group and 47 of 1503 in the 5-day group. Estimates derived from multiple imputations for missing outcome data were similar to those derived from the analysis of complete cases. When we performed a tipping-point analysis, we failed to show noninferiority only when among the children with missing data, at least 3 more children in the 3-day group than in the 5-day group had treatment failure. If the same incidence of treatment failure observed in the analysis that included children with complete data (5.9% in the 3-day group and 5.2% in the 5-day group) were applied to an analysis with imputation of missing data (5.9%×55 in the 3-day group and 5.2%×47 in the 5-day group), the expected average difference in the number of children with treatment failure would be 0.8. As such, we would have needed to observe a larger difference among the children with missing data (e.g., treatment failure in 3 of 55 children in the 3-day group and 0 of 47 children in the 5-day group) to fail to conclude noninferiority. If the results of the primary analysis had been adjusted for sequential monitoring, the conclusion of noninferiority would have remained the same.
The percentage of children with at least one serious adverse event from the time of enrollment to day 14 was 9.8% in the 3-day group and 8.8% in the 5-day group ( Table 3 ). There was one death (from pneumonia) in the 3-day group (<0.1% of the children), and two deaths (one from pneumonia and one from acute gastroenteritis) in the 5-day group (0.1% of children). In the 3-day group, 91.6% of children received all doses, and in the 5-day group, 91.8% of children received all doses, with adherence reported by caregivers.

Section: Discussion

We evaluated a 3-day regimen as compared with a 5-day regimen of oral amoxicillin treatment in 3000 HIV-uninfected children 2 to 59 months of age who presented with chest-indrawing pneumonia in a region of Malawi in which malaria is endemic. Our results showed that 3 days of amoxicillin treatment was noninferior to 5 days of treatment with respect to treatment failure on or before day 6. The criterion for noninferiority continued to be met through day 14, but there was no prespecified plan to adjust for multiple comparisons; therefore, definitive conclusions should not be drawn regarding secondary outcomes.
The results of this trial suggest that a 3-day regimen of amoxicillin is not substantively worse than a 5-day regimen for the treatment of chest-indrawing pneumonia among HIV-uninfected children. Keeping in mind the benefits to both patients and the health care system of a shorter course of antibiotic therapy and the fact that the WHO already recommends 3 days of amoxicillin for treatment of fast-breathing pneumonia, it appears that a 3-day regimen of amoxicillin in children with chest-indrawing pneumonia might be sufficient. Currently, the WHO recommends a 5-day course of twice-daily, high-dose oral amoxicillin to treat chest-indrawing pneumonia in children with cough or with difficulty breathing. However, the findings of this trial may allow for harmonization and simplification of treatment courses to 3 days for both fast-breathing and chest-indrawing pneumonia in HIV-uninfected children. A study from Pakistan showed that in cases of chest-indrawing pneumonia in patients without underlying complications, home treatment with a short course of high-dose oral amoxicillin was preferable to parenteral treatment because of the associated reduction in referral, admission, and treatment costs. Home treatment of chest-indrawing pneumonia with oral amoxicillin is effective across communities and geographic regions. In contrast to criteria in low-resource settings, criteria for the diagnosis of pneumonia in high-resource settings often require confirmation on chest radiography, especially in hospitalized children. Yet little evidence exists to dictate duration of treatment. Of note, in a very small study from Israel, a 3-day course of high-dose oral amoxicillin was associated with a high incidence of treatment failure (40% [4 of 10 children]) among children with radiographically confirmed pneumonia.
Poor adherence to antibiotic treatment has been associated with treatment failure in WHO-defined clinical pneumonia. Improving adherence to a shorter course of treatment could improve outcomes among children with chest-indrawing pneumonia while also minimizing adverse drug effects, costs, and the emergence of antimicrobial resistance.
Limitations of our trial included strict inclusion and exclusion criteria, lack of laboratory or radiologic testing, and close monitoring and follow-up — factors that limit the generalizability of our results to routine programmatic care settings. It is important to note that children with severe disease were excluded; therefore, the results of the trial have limited applicability in this group. Pneumonia is frequently considered a single entity, rather than a clinical syndrome that encompasses several underlying factors, so interpretation of the results of this trial is challenging. A multicountry case–control study that evaluated the causes of chest-indrawing pneumonia in children younger than 5 years of age across a range of geographic and epidemiologic settings showed that viruses accounted for 61.4% of cases, bacteria for 27.3%, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis for 5.9% of cases. Without etiologic information, including ascertainment of viral as compared with bacterial causes, we could note the effect of the intervention only on the clinical syndrome of pneumonia. This approach is consistent with nontrial conditions relevant to pediatric care in low-resource settings, but it blunts the ability to detect a difference between a 3-day course and a 5-day course.
Follow-up care and monitoring of enrolled children generally exceeded local standards of care; therefore, the incidence of treatment failure may have been affected both by the high quality of care that was provided and by the high awareness of and vigilance for detecting treatment failure. It may be that the children in whom treatment failure was identified would have recovered without a longer course of antibiotics if we had used a watchful waiting approach and not intervened with antibiotic treatment. However, opportunities for follow-up and access to care are often challenging in low-resource settings. In addition, treatment approaches vary widely among countries and regions. The routine pediatric HIV testing included in this trial protocol, although recommended, is not rigorously implemented during routine care in low-resource settings in which HIV is endemic. In areas where pneumococcal immunization coverage is lower, where HIV endemicity is high, or where severe acute malnutrition or other conditions that confer a predisposition to bacterial disease are common, it may be reasonable to expect a higher incidence of treatment failure among patients who are not treated with a longer course of antibiotics. As such, our results might not be generalizable across different regions, settings, or nontrial conditions. Specifically, the percentage of children who had treatment failure or relapse that was observed in this trial might underestimate the true incidences of treatment failure and relapse that occur in nontrial conditions.
Although pneumonia is a common and deadly illness, the duration of antibiotic treatment for community-acquired pediatric pneumonia has not yet been clearly defined. In this population in Malawi, a 3-day regimen of amoxicillin was noninferior to a 5-day regimen in HIV-uninfected children with chest-indrawing pneumonia. In considering policy changes regarding duration of amoxicillin treatment for chest-indrawing pneumonia, further research may be needed to determine whether these results can be replicated in other low-resource regions and pediatric populations.
