Title: Artificial Intelligence to Detect Papilledema from Ocular Fundus Photographs


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Nonophthalmologist physicians do not confidently perform direct ophthalmoscopy. The use of artificial intelligence to detect papilledema and other optic-disk abnormalities from fundus photographs has not been well studied.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We trained, validated, and externally tested a deep-learning system to classify optic disks as being normal or having papilledema or other abnormalities from 15,846 retrospectively collected ocular fundus photographs that had been obtained with pharmacologic pupillary dilation and various digital cameras in persons from multiple ethnic populations. Of these photographs, 14,341 from 19 sites in 11 countries were used for training and validation, and 1505 photographs from 5 other sites were used for external testing. Performance at classifying the optic-disk appearance was evaluated by calculating the area under the receiver-operating-characteristic curve (AUC), sensitivity, and specificity, as compared with a reference standard of clinical diagnoses by neuro-ophthalmologists.

Abstract_Section: Results

The training and validation data sets from 6779 patients included 14,341 photographs: 9156 of normal disks, 2148 of disks with papilledema, and 3037 of disks with other abnormalities. The percentage classified as being normal ranged across sites from 9.8 to 100%; the percentage classified as having papilledema ranged across sites from zero to 59.5%. In the validation set, the system discriminated disks with papilledema from normal disks and disks with nonpapilledema abnormalities with an AUC of 0.99 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.98 to 0.99) and normal from abnormal disks with an AUC of 0.99 (95% CI, 0.99 to 0.99). In the external-testing data set of 1505 photographs, the system had an AUC for the detection of papilledema of 0.96 (95% CI, 0.95 to 0.97), a sensitivity of 96.4% (95% CI, 93.9 to 98.3), and a specificity of 84.7% (95% CI, 82.3 to 87.1).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

A deep-learning system using fundus photographs with pharmacologically dilated pupils differentiated among optic disks with papilledema, normal disks, and disks with nonpapilledema abnormalities. (Funded by the Singapore National Medical Research Council and the SingHealth Duke–NUS Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Academic Clinical Program.)

Section: Introduction

Examination of the optic nerves is a fundamental component of the clinical examination, but direct ophthalmoscopy is usually avoided or poorly performed by general physicians and nonophthalmic specialists. Detection of papilledema, defined as optic-nerve edema from intracranial hypertension, and the ability to determine that the optic disk is normal are valuable in the evaluation of patients with headache and other neurologic symptoms. The findings on ophthalmoscopy influence diagnostic strategy and treatment options. Failure to detect papilledema may result in visual loss and neurologic complications.
Digital ocular fundus photography has been used to obtain optic-disk images for the purpose of detecting papilledema and other optic-disk abnormalities in a variety of clinical settings, including emergency departments, urgent care centers, and neurologic and general adult and pediatric clinics. In one study conducted in an emergency department, 8.5% of patients presenting with headache had abnormal findings on fundus photographs. However, these photographs need to be interpreted by physicians on-site at the time of photography or sent through tele-ophthalmology platforms for assessment by ophthalmologists or other experts.
Artificial intelligence and deep learning have been developed for the automated detection of diabetic retinopathy and glaucomatous optic neuropathy from ocular fundus photographs. We investigated whether a deep-learning system could aid in the diagnosis of optic-nerve abnormalities, particularly papilledema, from fundus photographs. We trained, validated, and externally tested a deep-learning system to identify and classify normal optic disks, disks with papilledema, and disks with other abnormalities from digital ocular fundus photographs collected from a large, international, multiethnic population.

Section: Methods

We conducted a training, validation, and external-testing study on an artificial intelligence–based deep-learning system using digital color ocular fundus photographs, retrospectively collected by an international consortium (BONSAI: Brain and Optic Nerve Study with Artificial Intelligence) composed of neuro-ophthalmologists. (For details on study group organization and participating centers, see Section S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.)
We first trained and validated the deep-learning system using 14,341 fundus photographs obtained at 19 sites in 11 countries; we then externally tested the system on 1505 photographs obtained at 5 other centers in 5 countries. The study was approved by the centralized institutional review board of SingHealth, Singapore, and at each contributing institution and was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent was exempted, given the retrospective nature of the data collection and the use of deidentified ocular fundus photographs.
Retrospectively collected fundus photographs were obtained from one or both eyes after pharmacologic pupillary dilation, with the use of various commercial digital fundus cameras. (For details on the cameras used in the study, see Section S2b and Table S1.) Images were centered on either the macula or the optic disk, but always including the optic disk, at various fields of view (subtending 20 to 45 degrees). Deidentified, unaltered images (size, 0.5 to 2 megabytes per image) were transferred to the Singapore Eye Research Institute for inclusion in the study.
The study included patients with optic-nerve disorders and healthy persons of multiple ethnic groups from 24 centers in 15 countries. The ocular fundus photographs, including those of normal optic nerves and a variety of common neuro-ophthalmic conditions affecting the optic nerves, were collected in each center by neuro-ophthalmologists who routinely obtain fundus photographs and who had access to the patients’ medical records (principal investigators from each of these centers are authors of this article). In addition, photographs of normal optic disks were randomly selected from 3 centers, including Indian, Asian, and non-Asian patients, which provided large sets of photographs of normal optic disks, as determined by general ophthalmologists. (For patient characteristics, see Section S2a, Fig. S1, and Table S2.)
Neuro-ophthalmologists provided a specific diagnosis, gathered retrospectively from medical records, for each fundus photograph at the time of clinical evaluation, considered for the purposes of this research to be the reference standard, on the basis of the appearance of the optic-nerve head as well as the medical evaluation, ancillary testing, and follow-up visits. All the patients seen by neuro-ophthalmologists underwent neuro-ophthalmologic evaluations, including visual-field and other tests, in order to obtain a final clinical diagnosis pertaining to each photograph, according to standard diagnostic criteria that could include brain imaging and lumbar puncture in some cases. (For details on the diagnostic process and reference standards, see Section S2a.) Patients from the three centers that provided photographs of normal fundi also underwent comprehensive evaluations by ophthalmologists.
Fundus photographs were classified by the study steering committee into three groups, consistent with the original reference diagnosis: normal optic disk; disk with papilledema due to proven intracranial hypertension; and disk with other abnormalities, including other visible abnormalities of the optic-nerve head such as anterior ischemic and inflammatory optic neuropathies, optic-disk drusen, optic atrophy, and congenital optic-nerve abnormalities. Patients with normal optic nerves were included only in the absence of any ocular conditions such as substantial media opacities, retinal disorders, or glaucoma. These three groups were considered reference standards for training, validation, and external testing.
Our system consisted of a segmentation network (U-Net) to detect the location of the optic disk from fundus photographs and a classification network (DenseNet) to classify the optic disk into one of the three classes: normal disk, disk with papilledema, and disk with other abnormalities. To visualize optic-nerve abnormalities, we used a class-activation map (Fig. S2). A fivefold cross-validation was performed on the primary data set to differentiate among normal optic disks, disks with papilledema, and disks with other abnormalities (Fig. S3). With the use of the same thresholds as on the primary data set, the diagnostic performance of the three-class classification model was then assessed on the five independent external-testing data sets. (For details of the deep-learning system, see Section S2c, Fig. S4, and Table S3. )
To determine performance characteristics, we used the one-versus-rest strategy and calculated the area under the receiver-operating-characteristic curve (AUC), sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for the following three cases according to the results of our classification model: normal as compared with abnormal optic disks (including disks with papilledema and disks with other abnormalities), disks with papilledema as compared with those without papilledema (including normal disks and disks with nonpapilledema abnormalities), and disks with nonpapilledema abnormalities as compared with normal disks and disks with papilledema. Predictive values for the classification of papilledema and other optic-disk abnormalities were also calculated for each external-testing site. Bootstrapping was used to estimate 95% confidence intervals of the performance metrics, with the patient as the resampling unit. (For details on statistical and bootstrapping procedures, see Section S2d.)

Section: Results

A total of 15,846 photographs (from 7532 patients [71.0% with photographs of both eyes, 17.6% with photographs of one eye, and 11.4% with repeat photographs during follow-up visits]; mean age, 48.6 years [range, 3 to 98]; 43.4% men or boys) were used to train, validate, and externally test the performance of the deep-learning system, after the exclusion of 153 photographs because of poor quality or poor centration of the photograph, with the optic disk being cut off at the edge. (For details on the inclusion and exclusion of photographs, see Section S2 and Fig. S1.)
The system was trained and validated on 14,341 photographs collected from 6779 patients in the first 19 sites of the BONSAI consortium, including 9156 images of normal optic disks, 2148 of disks with confirmed papilledema from proven intracranial hypertension, and 3037 of disks with other abnormalities. The percentage of images classified as being normal ranged across data sets from 9.8 to 100%; the percentage classified as having papilledema ranged across data sets from zero to 59.5%. A separate set of 1505 photographs that were collected from 5 other centers, including 613 images of normal disks, 360 of disks with papilledema, and 532 of disks with other abnormalities, was used for the external testing ( Table 1 ).
In the validation data set, the system discriminated normal from abnormal optic disks (including disks with papilledema and disks with other abnormalities) with an AUC of 0.99 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.99 to 0.99) and discriminated disks with papilledema from all other optic disks (normal disks and disks with nonpapilledema abnormalities) with an AUC of 0.99 (95% CI, 0.98 to 0.99), a sensitivity of 93.2% (95% CI, 91.8 to 94.5), and a specificity of 95.1% (95% CI, 94.7 to 95.6). The system also discriminated disks with nonpapilledema abnormalities from normal disks and disks with papilledema with an AUC of 0.97 (95% CI, 0.97 to 0.97) ( Table 2 and Fig. S3).
In the external-testing data sets, the AUCs were 0.98 (95% CI, 0.97 to 0.98), 0.96 (95% CI, 0.95 to 0.97), and 0.90 (95% CI, 0.88 to 0.92) for the classification of normal disks, disks with papilledema, and disks with other abnormalities, respectively ( Table 2 and Figure 1 ). Across the five external-testing data sets, the AUCs ranged from 0.96 to 0.99 for the discrimination of normal from abnormal optic disks and from 0.93 to 0.98 for the discrimination of disks with papilledema from all other optic disks. (For details on the classification performance of the system on the individual external-testing data sets, see Table S4.)
The overall accuracies of our deep-learning system for the detection of normal disks, disks with papilledema, and disks with other abnormalities in the external-testing data sets were 91.8% (95% CI, 90.3 to 93.3), 87.5% (95% CI, 85.5 to 89.3), and 81.1% (95% CI, 78.8 to 83.3), respectively. In the five external-testing data sets, the trained system had an overall sensitivity and specificity of 96.4% (95% CI, 93.9 to 98.3) and 84.7% (95% CI, 82.3 to 87.1), respectively, for the detection of papilledema ( Table 2 ). The mean estimated prevalence of papilledema in all the sets of data was 9.5% (Table S6), which resulted in an overall positive predictive value of the system for papilledema of 39.8% (95% CI, 36.6 to 43.2) and a negative predictive value of 99.6% (95% CI, 99.2 to 99.7) ( Table 3 ). (The predictive values of the deep-learning system across a full prevalence range for the detection of normal discs, discs with papilledema, and discs with other abnormalities are provided in Fig. S5.)
In a post hoc analysis, four expert neuro-ophthalmologists who were not involved in the original analyses and who were unaware of the initial reference-standard classification reviewed the 177 fundus photographs (11.8% of the 1505 photographs) in the external-testing data sets that had discordant findings between the reference standard by site expert neuro-ophthalmologists and the classification by the deep-learning system. This analysis showed that of the 360 disks with papilledema, 15 (4.2%) were misclassified by the system as disks with other abnormalities but never as normal optic disks. (For details on the 177 misclassified fundus photographs, see Sections S3a and S3b and Fig. S6A through S6C.) A review by the same neuro-ophthalmologists of the misclassified papilledema images at a patient level (i.e., both eyes of a patient viewed as a pair) disclosed only one patient with papilledema in both eyes missed by the system in the external-testing data sets. In 10 of the 177 fundus photographs for which the system provided a classification that differed from the reference standard, the four neuro-ophthalmologists, after review of the fundus photographs, agreed with the deep-learning system.
Subsequently, arbitration was performed by contacting the neuro-ophthalmologists at the applicable external-testing sites and requesting that they reevaluate their initial reference-standard diagnosis. In these 10 discordant cases, the classification of the deep-learning system was considered accurate, and the discrepancies were found to be the result of labeling errors by the site investigators. We performed a post hoc reanalysis of the corrected external-testing data set with the 10 reclassified images, which resulted in a slightly improved average AUC for the overall classification performance of the system, from 0.941 to 0.948. Subsequently, we requested that the neuro-ophthalmologists at each of the five centers used for the external-testing data sets recheck all diagnoses in their respective series of patients; this led to the identification of an additional 3 mislabeled photographs. However, all 3 remained in the category of disks with nonpapilledema abnormalities and therefore did not change our results.

Section: Discussion

Our objective was to assess the performance of a deep-learning system to detect papilledema from fundus images taken at many international centers, from patients with a variety of ethnic backgrounds, types of fundus pigmentation, and ages and using a variety of commercially available digital fundus cameras. Our main finding was that an artificial-intelligence algorithm using deep-learning neural networks could discriminate among normal optic disks, disks with papilledema, and disks with other abnormalities. In our external-testing data sets, the sensitivity for detecting papilledema was 96.4% and the specificity was 84.7%. Negative predictive values were high, but positive predictive values were lower and varied considerably depending on the prevalence of papilledema and other optic-nerve conditions.
Several studies have suggested that direct ophthalmoscopy can be replaced by more user-friendly ocular fundus digital cameras that provide high-quality photographs of the optic nerve and retina, even without pharmacologic dilation of the pupils, although our study used photographs taken after pupillary dilation. Most deep-learning research in ophthalmology has been for screening of retinal disorders and glaucoma. Previous studies using fewer images than ours showed that deep-learning systems could recognize right from left optic disks in the presence of optic-nerve abnormalities on fundus photographs, could discriminate disks with papilledema from normal disks with an average accuracy of 93% (similar to the value in our study), and could differentiate true optic-disk swelling from pseudo-swelling with an accuracy of approximately 95%.
Our study has limitations. First, it was retrospective, since the photographs were collected retrospectively over a period of several years from a large number of centers. This resulted in an imbalance in class distribution among groups (i.e., differing prevalence of different optic-disk conditions), a mix of consecutive series of patients and convenience samples, and labeling errors.
Second, we chose as a reference standard the final diagnosis of the appearance of the normal optic-nerve head given by an expert neuro-ophthalmologist at each center, based on the clinical examination and other findings, including brain imaging and lumbar puncture when appropriate for patients with suspected papilledema and follow-up data. The final diagnosis of the appearance of the optic-nerve head in healthy persons was determined by neuro-ophthalmologists or ophthalmologists, on the basis of comprehensive ophthalmologic evaluations. A total of 10 labeling errors by the investigators were discovered and correctly identified by our deep-learning system. Relabeling the 10 of 1505 images in the external-testing data set improved the overall performance of the deep-learning system only slightly. Although our deep-learning system misclassified 15 of 360 photographs of disks with papilledema (4.2%), it labeled them as disks with other abnormalities and never as normal disks.
Third, the abnormal photographs were obtained after pharmacologic dilation of the pupils and may not reflect general practice. Fourth, our network was trained and calibrated primarily to identify normal optic nerves and those with papilledema. Therefore, the threshold for diagnosing papilledema was low, in order to avoid false negatives. Whether the results will be reproducible under other circumstances is not known.
We found that an artificial-intelligence, deep-learning algorithm that was trained on ocular fundus photographs had high sensitivity and specificity for discriminating between papilledema and normal optic nerves. Negative predictive values were high, but positive predictive values varied depending on the prevalence of papilledema in the population being studied. Further investigation is required in order to prospectively validate the use of deep-learning systems in various settings, which may have different prevalences of optic-disk abnormalities from those in our study.
