Title: A Randomized Trial of Intravenous Alteplase before Endovascular Treatment for Stroke


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

The value of administering intravenous alteplase before endovascular treatment (EVT) for acute ischemic stroke has not been studied extensively, particularly in non-Asian populations.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We performed an open-label, multicenter, randomized trial in Europe involving patients with stroke who presented directly to a hospital that was capable of providing EVT and who were eligible for intravenous alteplase and EVT. Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive EVT alone or intravenous alteplase followed by EVT (the standard of care). The primary end point was functional outcome on the modified Rankin scale (range, 0 [no disability] to 6 [death]) at 90 days. We assessed the superiority of EVT alone over alteplase plus EVT, as well as noninferiority by a margin of 0.8 for the lower boundary of the 95% confidence interval for the odds ratio of the two trial groups. Death from any cause and symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage were the main safety end points.

Abstract_Section: Results

The analysis included 539 patients. The median score on the modified Rankin scale at 90 days was 3 (interquartile range, 2 to 5) with EVT alone and 2 (interquartile range, 2 to 5) with alteplase plus EVT. The adjusted common odds ratio was 0.84 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.62 to 1.15; P=0.28), which showed neither superiority nor noninferiority of EVT alone. Mortality was 20.5% with EVT alone and 15.8% with alteplase plus EVT (adjusted odds ratio, 1.39; 95% CI, 0.84 to 2.30). Symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage occurred in 5.9% and 5.3% of the patients in the respective groups (adjusted odds ratio, 1.30; 95% CI, 0.60 to 2.81).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In a randomized trial involving European patients, EVT alone was neither superior nor noninferior to intravenous alteplase followed by EVT with regard to disability outcome at 90 days after stroke. The incidence of symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage was similar in the two groups. (Funded by the Collaboration for New Treatments of Acute Stroke consortium and others; MR CLEAN–NO IV ISRCTN number, ISRCTN80619088 .)

Section: Introduction

In areas where endovascular treatment (EVT) is available, the procedure has become the standard of care for patients with acute ischemic stroke due to intracranial large-vessel occlusion in the anterior circulation. Because EVT was shown to provide benefit when given in addition to best medical management, including intravenous alteplase, guidelines recommend administration of alteplase before EVT in eligible patients. Intravenous alteplase may increase the incidence of early reperfusion or lyse distal emboli after thrombectomy. However, alteplase alone infrequently recanalizes large-vessel occlusions before EVT and has been associated with an increased risk of intracerebral hemorrhage.
Two trials in China showed that EVT alone was noninferior to alteplase followed by EVT. A smaller trial in Japan showed similar disability outcomes with EVT alone and EVT combined with treatment with a lower alteplase dose than that used in the Chinese trials but did not show noninferiority of EVT alone. A study-level meta-analysis of these trials showed similar outcomes for the two treatment strategies. Differences in populations, stroke types, and health care organizations may explain these disparate findings and limit generalizability of these results to non-Asian countries. The aim of our trial, MR CLEAN (Multicenter Randomized Clinical Trial of Endovascular Treatment for Acute Ischemic Stroke in the Netherlands)–NO IV, was to determine whether EVT alone would be more effective, or noninferior, as compared with intravenous alteplase followed by EVT in European patients with acute ischemic stroke due to an intracranial anterior-circulation stroke who present to EVT-capable centers.

Section: Methods

This was an investigator-initiated, international, multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label trial with blinded end-point assessment. The trial protocol was approved by the Dutch, Belgian, and French central ethical committees and by research boards at each participating center. The final versions of the trial protocol and statistical analysis plan (both available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org) were completed on July 15 and November 18, 2020, respectively. Final patient enrollment and database closure were on October 28, 2020, and February 5, 2021, respectively. The trial was conducted in accordance with the revised Helsinki guidelines.
The trial was funded by the Collaboration for New Treatments of Acute Stroke consortium, which is funded by the Netherlands Cardiovascular Research Initiative (an initiative of the Dutch Heart Foundation), the Brain Foundation Netherlands, Medtronic, Cerenovus, and Stryker. There was no commercial involvement in the design or planning of the trial or in the analysis or reporting of the data by any of the parties providing funding. The trial used a deferred-consent procedure in accordance with national legislation in the participating countries. Patients or their legal representatives were asked to provide written informed consent as soon as possible after treatment. Patient eligibility was assessed by the treating physician. Members of the executive and steering committees designed the trial and protocol, collected the data, met monthly to oversee the trial, and wrote the manuscript. The authors vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol.
The trial was carried out in 20 hospitals in the Netherlands, Belgium, and France (listed in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org). Patients were 18 years of age or older, had acute ischemic stroke due to an intracranial proximal occlusion of the anterior circulation, were eligible for EVT and intravenous alteplase administration within 4.5 hours after symptom onset according to local guidelines, and were admitted directly to a center that performed EVT. Symptom onset was defined as the witnessed time of onset of stroke-related neurologic symptoms or the time at which the patient was last seen well. Patients were eligible if they had a score of 2 or more on the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS; range, 0 [no symptoms] to 42 [most severe deficits]). Proximal anterior-circulation occlusion was defined as occlusion of the intracranial internal carotid artery, the first segment of the middle cerebral artery (M1), or the proximal second segment of the middle cerebral artery (M2), as assessed by computed tomographic angiography (CTA) or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). The protocol allowed active lowering of blood pressure to facilitate the safe administration of alteplase. Detailed inclusion criteria are provided in the trial protocol. We did not keep an eligibility screening log.
Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive either EVT alone or intravenous alteplase followed by EVT (usual care). Randomization was performed by means of a Web-based system with the use of permuted blocks stratified according to center and whether they were included in the Multicenter Randomized Trial of Acute Stroke Treatment in the Ambulance with a Nitroglycerin Patch. That trial investigated treatment with a nitroglycerin patch in the ambulance for patients with suspected stroke (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ); only nine patients were included in both trials (Table S2). Patients, local investigators, and treating physicians were aware of the trial-group assignments.
Patients who were assigned to the usual-care group received intravenous alteplase before EVT (0.9 mg per kilogram of body weight [maximum, 90 mg]; 10% as bolus and 90% as 1-hour infusion), and the initiation of EVT before the end of alteplase infusion was permitted, as advised in current guidelines. Patients in the EVT-alone group underwent EVT without preceding alteplase administration. Rescue intravenous alteplase (0.9 mg per kilogram) was permitted in the EVT-alone group if there was incomplete reperfusion after EVT (defined as a score of 0, 1, or 2A on the extended Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction [eTICI] scale; range, 0 [no reperfusion] to 3 [complete reperfusion]) within 4.5 hours after stroke onset. EVT was performed with any Conformité Européenne–approved stent retriever. Suction catheters (Conformité Européenne–approved) were allowed as a rescue approach after these devices came into common use. Intraarterial application of alteplase was permitted at the discretion of the interventionist (maximum dose, 30 mg).
Primary end-point data were collected through standardized telephone interviews (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ) by trained research nurses who were unaware of the trial-group assignments. Independent committees, whose members were unaware of the trial-group assignments, adjudicated serious-adverse-event reports and primary end-point data on the basis of the interview reports. Imaging was assessed with standardized case-report forms by an imaging committee whose members were unaware of clinical data except for the side of the body with stroke symptoms. An independent data monitoring board monitored safety and performed prespecified efficacy analyses after inclusion of the 100th, 250th, and 400th enrolled patient; the board used a Haybittle–Peto stopping boundary and determined at each analysis that the trial should continue. Investigators were unaware of the results of the interim analyses.
The primary end point was functional outcome on the modified Rankin scale (range, 0 [no disability] to 6 [death]) at 90 days (±14 days) after randomization, analyzed for superiority and then for noninferiority. There were eight secondary end points: recanalization on the first intracranial angiogram (absence of treatable occlusion by the time of EVT); successful reperfusion on the final intracranial angiogram (eTICI score of 2B, 2C, or 3); recanalization on CTA or MRA at 24 hours (modified Arterial Occlusive Lesion score of 2 to 3, with scores ranging from 0 [no recanalization] to 3 [complete recanalization]); the NIHSS score at 24 hours and at 5 to 7 days or discharge (if earlier); the final lesion volume on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 24 hours or on noncontrast computed tomography (CT) at 5 or 7 days or at discharge (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ); a comparison within three dichotomized groups with respect to the score on the modified Rankin scale (0 or 1 vs. 2 to 6, 0 to 2 vs. 3 to 6, and 0 to 3 vs. 4 to 6) at 90 days; the score on the EuroQol Group 5-Dimension 5-Level Self-Report questionnaire (EQ-5D-5L; range, −0.446 to 1.00, with higher scores indicating better quality of life) at 90 days; and the score on the Barthel Index (dichotomized as 0 to 94 vs. 95 to 100, with 95 to 100 indicating no interference with daily activities) at 90 days. Safety end points were any intracranial hemorrhage and symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage according to the Heidelberg Bleeding Classification, postprocedure femoral-artery aneurysm or groin hematoma, embolization to new cerebral territory, infarction in new cerebral vascular territory on noncontrast CT at 5 to 7 days or discharge or on diffusion-weighted MRI at 24 hours, and death from any cause within 90 days.
The statistical analysis plan was published previously with the trial protocol. Sample-size calculations used the distribution of scores on the modified Rankin scale in the intervention group of the Multicenter Randomized Clinical Trial of Endovascular Treatment for Acute Ischemic Stroke in the Netherlands as a reference. We assumed a treatment effect with a common odds ratio of 1.54, corresponding to an absolute difference of approximately 8 percentage points between the trial groups in the percentage of patients with a score on the modified Rankin scale of 0 to 2, and we used Monte Carlo simulations with 5000 runs. After covariate adjustment, a sample of 540 patients would provide 91% power to detect a true treatment effect with a two-sided alpha level of 0.05. We specified a noninferiority margin with a lower boundary of the 95% confidence interval of the common odds ratio of 0.8. With the use of a two-sided confidence interval, a noninferiority boundary of 0.8 constitutes 97.5% certainty that EVT alone does not differ more than approximately 5 percentage points in the percentage of patients with a modified Rankin score of 0 to 2 in favor of standard treatment.
The primary analysis assessed the superiority of EVT alone over alteplase with EVT according to the assigned trial group in the modified intention-to-treat population, which consisted of all the patients who provided consent, followed by assessment of noninferiority of EVT alone. Secondary and safety end points were compared between the trial groups. We performed sensitivity analyses in the as-treated population; details are provided in the statistical analysis plan.
The primary effect was determined by the common odds ratio, with a 95% confidence interval, for a shift in the direction of better outcome on the modified Rankin scale; this ratio was estimated with ordinal logistic regression. Assessment of proportionality by the Harrell graphical method did not show visually significant departures from proportional odds. Binary logistic regression was used for dichotomous end points to estimate odds ratios. Continuous end-point data were log transformed if necessary, to satisfy assumptions for linear regression, resulting in beta coefficients with 95% confidence intervals. The primary and secondary analyses were adjusted for age, baseline NIHSS score, collateral status, prestroke score on the modified Rankin scale, and time from symptom onset to randomization. Treatment effect was assessed in prespecified subgroups defined according to age, baseline NIHSS score, time from symptom onset to randomization (all by thirds), occlusion location (terminal internal carotid artery, M1, or M2), internal carotid artery tandem lesion (intracranial occlusion combined with flow-limiting cervical internal carotid artery lesion), collateral status, and atrial fibrillation with multiplicative interaction terms. For secondary analyses, there was no prespecified plan for adjustment of confidence intervals for multiplicity, and no definite inferences can be drawn from these data.
For regression analyses, missing data were imputed with the use of multiple-imputation methods, except that patients who died during the trial period received the worst score for all missing clinical outcomes. No alpha was expended as a result of interim analyses. All analyses were performed by an independent statistician using R software, version 4.0.3 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, www.r-project.org).

Section: Results

From January 24, 2018, to October 28, 2020, a total of 547 patients underwent randomization. There were no screening logs to determine the number of patients who were eligible for enrollment and may have been treated outside the trial. Of the 547 patients, 539 provided deferred consent for participation and were included in the modified intention-to-treat analysis ( Figure 1 and Fig. S1); 273 patients were assigned to receive EVT alone and 266 to receive intravenous alteplase followed by EVT. No patients were lost to follow-up, but data for the main covariates were missing for 7 patients ( Table 1 ).
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients at baseline were similar in the two trial groups, except for a higher percentage of patients with atrial fibrillation or terminal internal carotid artery occlusions and a slightly higher age in the EVT-alone group ( Table 1 and Table S2). Overall, the median age of the patients was 71 years (interquartile range, 61 to 79), and 56.6% were men. The median time from stroke onset to alteplase administration in the usual-care group was 98 minutes (interquartile range, 75 to 156). Of the 273 patients assigned to receive EVT alone, 10 (3.7%) received intravenous alteplase before EVT ( Figure 1 and Table S3); 19 of 261 patients with available data (7.3%) received rescue intravenous alteplase (Table S4). In total, 26 of 539 patients (4.8%) did not undergo groin puncture ( Figure 1 and Table S5). Aspiration was used as the first-line EVT approach in 54 of 247 patients (21.9%) in the EVT-alone group and 48 of 229 patients (21.0%) in the alteplase-plus-EVT group.
The median score on the modified Rankin scale at 90 days was 3 (interquartile range, 2 to 5) in the EVT-alone group and 2 (interquartile range, 2 to 5) in the alteplase-plus-EVT group; the adjusted odds ratio for a shift in the score on the modified Rankin scale at 90 days comparing EVT alone with alteplase plus EVT was 0.84 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.62 to 1.15; P=0.28) ( Figure 2 and Table 2 ). These findings indicate that EVT alone was not superior to alteplase followed by EVT and was not noninferior, because the lower boundary of the 95% confidence interval included 0.8. The as-treated sensitivity analysis yielded similar results (adjusted odds ratio, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.61 to 1.16) (Table S7).
The incidence of recanalization on the first angiogram (preceding EVT) was similar in the two trial groups (2.8% with EVT alone and 3.7% with alteplase plus EVT; adjusted odds ratio, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.42 to 1.47) ( Table 2 ). Successful reperfusion occurred in 192 of 244 patients (78.7%) in the EVT-alone group and in 196 of 236 (83.1%) in the alteplase-plus-EVT group (adjusted odds ratio, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.47 to 1.13). Recanalization on follow-up imaging occurred in 78.2% in the EVT-alone group and in 84.7% in the alteplase-plus-EVT group (adjusted odds ratio, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.52 to 1.28). The median NIHSS score at 5 to 7 days or discharge was 4 in the EVT-alone group and 3 in the alteplase-plus-EVT group (adjusted beta coefficient, 0.21; 95% CI, 0.03 to 0.38). The follow-up lesion volume was slightly higher in the EVT-alone group (adjusted beta coefficient, 1.22; 95% CI, 0.92 to 1.63). Results for dichotomizations of the 90-day score on the modified Rankin scale as well as EQ-5D-5L and Barthel Index scores were similar in the two groups. Because of the lack of a prespecified plan for adjustment of confidence intervals for multiple comparisons, no conclusions can be drawn from these secondary outcome data; however, all confidence intervals for odds ratios included 1. Results of the prespecified subgroup analyses are shown in Figure S3.
Mortality at 90 days was 20.5% in the EVT-alone group and 15.8% in the alteplase-plus-EVT group (adjusted odds ratio, 1.39; 95% CI, 0.84 to 2.30) ( Table 3 ). The percentage of patients with symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage was 5.9% and 5.3%, respectively (adjusted odds ratio, 1.30; 95% CI, 0.60 to 2.81). The incidence of any intracranial bleeding was approximately 35% in both groups. The results regarding other safety end points and procedural complications were similar in the two groups (Table S8).

Section: Discussion

In contrast to some previous trials involving Asian patients with anterior-circulation stroke, we did not find that EVT alone was noninferior or superior to intravenous alteplase combined with EVT with regard to functional outcome at 90 days. Our trial population was European and was limited to patients presenting directly to centers providing EVT, similar to the populations in some previous trials (DIRECT-MT [Direct Intraarterial Thrombectomy in Order to Revascularize Acute Ischemic Stroke Patients with Large Vessel Occlusion Efficiently in Chinese Tertiary Hospitals: a Multicenter Randomized Clinical Trial], DEVT [Direct Endovascular Thrombectomy versus Combined IVT and Endovascular Thrombectomy for Patients with Acute Large Vessel Occlusion in the Anterior Circulation], and SKIP [Direct Mechanical Thrombectomy in Acute LVO Stroke]), and our trial did not include patients who were given alteplase at one hospital and transferred to another hospital for EVT. The mortality was slightly higher in the EVT-alone group but did not differ substantially between the two groups, and the incidence of symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage was similar in the two groups.
The incidence of functional independence and endovascular reperfusion grades in both groups in our trial were similar to those in the DIRECT-MT, DEVT, and SKIP trials. Yet in our trial, patients had shorter times from stroke onset to administration of alteplase and shorter times from stroke onset to groin puncture for EVT. These findings may be attributable to our use of deferred consent and to shorter travel distances to hospitals (than, for instance, in China), prehospital triage systems, and in-hospital logistics. Furthermore, our trial population differed from those in the other trials in that there were fewer patients with atrial fibrillation or intracranial atherosclerosis, and we included patients with proximal M2 occlusions who were infrequently included in the previous trials. In addition, we allowed for rescue intravenous alteplase in the EVT-alone group if reperfusion did not occur; this was administered to 19 patients in our trial.
The current trial was partly based on the hypothesis that omitting intravenous alteplase before EVT would reduce the risk of intracerebral hemorrhage and thereby improve outcomes. The difference in mortality between the groups in our trial cannot be explained by differences in the incidences of intracerebral hemorrhage.
Our trial had limitations. First, our results apply only to patients presenting directly to a center capable of EVT. In addition, times from stroke onset to hospital arrival were relatively short, which limits the generalizability of our results to care settings with longer times to hospital arrival. Second, our enrolled population had small between-group differences with respect to atrial fibrillation, age, and occlusion location, with more prognostically unfavorable values in the EVT-alone group. These differences may have affected the trial results in favor of the alteplase-plus-EVT group. Third, our trial protocol initially defined stent-retrievers as first-line techniques for EVT because they were considered to be the approach supported by evidence at the time. During the trial, aspiration devices were increasingly used in clinical practice and were adopted. Fourth, our trial had an open-label design, which may have influenced postprocedural patient care. Fifth, we used deferred consent in order to not delay alteplase infusion or EVT treatments for stroke, which made an intention-to-treat analysis difficult (this applied to only eight patients).
In this European trial of anterior-circulation stroke, EVT alone was neither superior nor noninferior to intravenous alteplase followed by EVT with respect to functional outcomes at 90 days in patients presenting directly to centers capable of providing both treatments.
