Title: Inhibition of Prekallikrein for Hereditary Angioedema


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Hereditary angioedema is characterized by recurrent and unpredictable swellings that are disabling and potentially fatal. Selective inhibition of plasma prekallikrein production by antisense oligonucleotide treatment (donidalorsen) may reduce the frequency of attacks and the burden of disease.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this phase 2 trial, we randomly assigned, in a 2:1 ratio, patients with hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency to receive four subcutaneous doses of either donidalorsen (80 mg) or placebo, with one dose administered every 4 weeks. The primary end point was the time-normalized number of investigator-confirmed angioedema attacks per month (attack rate) between week 1 (baseline) and week 17. Secondary end points included quality of life, as measured with the Angioedema Quality of Life Questionnaire (scores range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating worse quality of life), and safety. Research Summary Inhibition of Prekallikrein for Hereditary Angioedema

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 20 patients were enrolled, of whom 14 were randomly assigned to receive donidalorsen and 6 to receive placebo. The mean monthly rate of investigator-confirmed angioedema attacks was 0.23 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.08 to 0.39) among patients receiving donidalorsen and 2.21 (95% CI, 0.58 to 3.85) among patients receiving placebo (mean difference, −90%; 95% CI, −96 to −76; P<0.001). The mean change from baseline to week 17 in the Angioedema Quality of Life Questionnaire score was −26.8 points in the donidalorsen group and −6.2 points in the placebo group (mean difference, −20.7 points; 95% CI, −32.7 to −8.7). The incidence of mild-to-moderate adverse events was 71% among patients receiving donidalorsen and 83% among those receiving placebo.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among patients with hereditary angioedema, donidalorsen treatment resulted in a significantly lower rate of angioedema attacks than placebo in this small, phase 2 trial. (Funded by Ionis Pharmaceuticals; ISIS 721744-CS2 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04030598 .)

Section: Introduction

Hereditary angioedema is a rare genetic disorder that leads to unpredictable, disabling, and potentially fatal swellings. These angioedema attacks result from uncontrolled activity of contact system components factor XIIa and plasma kallikrein, which leads to excessive bradykinin release and subsequent locally increased vascular permeability. The majority of hereditary angioedema cases are caused by either decreased levels (type I) or reduced functionality (type II) of C1 esterase inhibitor; these two types are clinically indistinguishable. In rare cases, the disease occurs in the presence of normal functional and antigenic C1 inhibitor levels. The key contribution of kallikrein to the formation of a hereditary angioedema attack renders both it and its precursor, plasma prekallikrein, targets for prophylaxis.
Donidalorsen (IONIS-PKK-L Rx ) is a 2′- O -methoxyethyl–modified antisense oligonucleotide conjugated to a triantennary N -acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc 3 ) moiety. Donidalorsen was designed to inhibit the production of plasma prekallikrein by means of ribonuclease (RNase) H1–mediated degradation of plasma prekallikrein messenger RNA (mRNA). The GalNAc 3 conjugation to the antisense molecule facilitates uptake into hepatic parenchymal cells, the main site of plasma prekallikrein production. This conjugation strategy increases potency up to 30 times that observed with unconjugated antisense oligonucleotides, a finding that supports the use of lower doses and less frequent administration, with consequent reductions in systemic exposure.
In a phase 1 trial involving 32 healthy volunteers and a compassionate-use pilot study involving 2 patients with hereditary angioedema conducted over a period of 7 to 8 months, donidalorsen therapy was shown to inhibit plasma prekallikrein effectively in a dose-dependent manner without safety concerns. Here, we report the results of a phase 2 trial of the efficacy and safety of monthly administration of 80 mg of donidalorsen in patients with hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency. (Data from an exploratory, parallel-group, open-label study involving patients with hereditary angioedema with normal functional and antigenic C1 inhibitor levels are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.)

Section: Methods

We carried out a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial (ISIS 721744-CS2) to investigate the efficacy and safety of monthly administration of donidalorsen in patients with hereditary angioedema. The trial was conducted, at seven sites in the United States and one site in the Netherlands, in accordance with the protocol (available at NEJM.org) and with international ethics guidelines, including the Declaration of Helsinki, as well as other relevant local ethical and legal requirements. All the trial participants provided written informed consent. An independent data and safety monitoring board provided oversight, including review and assessment of unblinded trial data.
The trial sponsor, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, designed the trial in collaboration with the first, second, and last authors. The sponsor funded the trial, provided the trial drug and placebo, and analyzed the data. The first and last authors wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. All the authors had access to the data and vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. All the drafts of the manuscript were reviewed and approved by the authors.
Eligible patients were 18 years of age or older at screening and had a documented diagnosis and clinical history consistent with hereditary angioedema. The diagnosis of hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency was confirmed by a functional C1 inhibitor activity of less than 40% in combination with decreased levels of C4. The full inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed in the protocol.
All the patients had received a clinical diagnosis of hereditary angioedema that had been confirmed by means of central laboratory testing, and they had had at least two investigator-confirmed attacks during a run-in period that lasted a maximum of 8 weeks. Patients who had two or more attacks before the end of the 8-week period were permitted to transfer from the run-in period to the treatment period early. The attack rate was reported as the number of attacks per month. Because patients may have had their run-in period shortened, noninteger values were possible.
Patients were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio by means of an interactive response-technology system to receive donidalorsen or placebo. Each patient received four doses of donidalorsen or placebo in a blinded manner, with one dose administered every 4 weeks, during on-site trial visits at weeks 1 (baseline), 5, 9, and 13 (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). The primary end point (see below) was assessed at week 17. All the patients, investigators, and site and sponsor personnel were unaware of the trial-group assignments. At the end of the treatment period, all the patients were offered enrollment in a separate open-label extension study (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04307381 ).
During the treatment period, donidalorsen (80 mg) or placebo was administered at the clinical site once every 4 weeks. A dose of 80 mg was the highest dose tested in the phase 1 trial, in which it caused the greatest reduction in the plasma prekallikrein level without arousing safety concerns. Donidalorsen or placebo was provided as a ready-to-use injection set. Injections were administered subcutaneously in the abdomen, thigh, or outer area of the upper arm. Patients were permitted to use on-demand therapy at any time during the trial in accordance with their usual treatment plan.
Patients used a paper diary containing the Angioedema Activity Score to record the frequency, duration, and functional effect of hereditary angioedema attacks. Patients were instructed to report the details of any attack to the investigator within 72 hours, including its location on the body, its course, and use of any on-demand treatment. In addition, the investigators contacted all the patients weekly by telephone to ask about any unreported attacks.
Samples for pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic analyses (to assess prekallikrein activity, the cleaved high-molecular-weight kininogen level, and the plasma concentration of donidalorsen) were obtained during the trial visits (see the Supplementary Appendix ). Quality of life was assessed by means of the Angioedema Quality of Life Questionnaire, which is a validated, angioedema-specific, patient-reported outcome measurement consisting of 17 items in four domains (functioning, fatigue and mood, fears and shame, and nutrition). Each item has five answer options (scored 1 to 5), with higher scores indicating a more adverse effect. Raw scores are calculated for each domain and for the total score, and these raw scores are transformed into a linear scale that ranges from 0 to 100, with a score of 100 indicating the worst possible impairment of quality of life. The minimal clinically important difference is defined as a change of 6 points.
The primary efficacy end point was the time-normalized number of investigator-confirmed angioedema attacks per month (attack rate) between week 1 (baseline) and week 17. Secondary efficacy end points were assessed from week 5 to week 17 and included the time-normalized numbers of all angioedema attacks per month and of only moderate or severe angioedema attacks per month, the numbers of patients with a clinical response (defined as a reduction from baseline of ≥50%, ≥70%, or ≥90% in the angioedema attack rate), and the number of angioedema attacks per month leading to on-demand therapy. Other secondary end points were prekallikrein activity and cleaved high-molecular-weight kininogen levels at weeks 9 and 17, quality of life, and safety. Exploratory end points included the number of patients who were free from an angioedema attack from week 5 to week 17 and pharmacokinetic measures.
Baseline angioedema attack rates, expressed as the number of investigator-confirmed angioedema attacks per 28 days, were calculated over the period from screening to the receipt of the first dose of donidalorsen or placebo (i.e., the run-in period). Angioedema attacks were considered to be new-onset after a 24-hour attack-free interval. The safety profile of donidalorsen was monitored throughout the entire run-in, treatment, and post-treatment periods of the trial. The number, type, and severity of adverse events were determined, as was the relation of the adverse events to the use of donidalorsen or placebo.
We estimated that a sample of 18 patients with hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency would provide the trial with at least 90% power to detect a treatment effect of a −60% difference in the monthly rate of hereditary angioedema attacks with a Poisson model and an alpha level of 0.05, assuming that 10% of the patients would have missing data or would withdraw from the trial. The total number of angioedema attacks over a 4-month period was estimated to be 2.8 in the group receiving donidalorsen and 6.8 in the group receiving placebo.
All the efficacy analyses were performed in the intention-to-treat population, which included all the patients who had undergone randomization. The efficacy analyses were conducted without imputation for missing data. A sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness of the efficacy analysis was planned to be performed in the per-protocol population, which included all the patients in the intention-to-treat population who had been treated according to the protocol without any major deviations. Safety analyses included all the patients in the intention-to-treat population who received at least one dose of donidalorsen or placebo.
The primary efficacy end point and the time-normalized number of all angioedema attacks and of only moderate or severe angioedema attacks from week 5 to week 17 were analyzed with a Poisson regression model with trial group as a fixed effect and the number of baseline angioedema attacks as a covariate; the logarithm of exposure in months was used as the offset. The remaining secondary and exploratory efficacy end points were summarized according to trial group with the use of descriptive statistics. Categorical variables were analyzed with the use of a Pearson’s chi-square test or a Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel test. The 95% confidence intervals were not adjusted for multiple testing and should not be used to infer definitive treatment effects. The P value and confidence intervals are two-sided. Statistical analyses were conducted with the use of SAS software, version 9.4. A detailed description of all the prespecified analyses in the statistical analysis plan is provided in the protocol .

Section: Results

A total of 23 patients were screened, of whom 20 met the eligibility criteria and underwent randomization between January 7, 2020, and October 12, 2020 (Fig. S2). A total of 14 patients were assigned to receive donidalorsen and 6 patients to receive placebo. One patient who had been assigned to the donidalorsen group voluntarily withdrew during week 13 because of long commutes; the patient’s data were included in the intention-to-treat analyses (except for the analysis of clinical response) and in the safety analyses.
The characteristics of the patients are shown in Table 1 . The mean age of the patients was 38 years (range, 21 to 66), and 18 patients (90%) had type I hereditary angioedema. The majority of the patients were women (65%), and all the patients were White except for 1 Black patient in the placebo group. Table S1 provides background information on the representativeness of our patient population with regard to race, ethnic group, age, sex, and gender in the broader population of patients with hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency.
Table 2 and Figures 1 and Figure 2 summarize the trial findings with respect to the primary and secondary end points. During the run-in period, the monthly mean attack rate was 2.70 (range, 1.01 to 5.60). The mean time-normalized number of investigator-confirmed angioedema attacks per month from week 1 to week 17 was 0.23 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.08 to 0.39; range, 0.25 to 1.00) in the donidalorsen group and 2.21 (95% CI, 0.58 to 3.85; range, 0.50 to 4.75) in the placebo group (mean difference, −90%; 95% CI, −96 to −76; P<0.001).
The mean monthly attack rate between weeks 5 and 17 was 0.07 (95% CI, −0.08 to 0.23) in the donidalorsen group and 2.06 (95% CI, 0.41 to 3.72) in the placebo group (mean difference, −97%; 95% CI, −100 to −69). In the analyses of moderate or severe attacks, during both the period from week 1 to week 17 and the period from week 5 to week 17, the between-group percentage differences in the monthly attack rates were similar to that in the primary analysis. With regard to the number of attacks per month leading to on-demand therapy during the period from week 5 to week 17, the mean percentage difference was −95% (95% CI, −99 to −52).
At the end of the treatment period, prekallikrein activity was reduced from baseline by 61%, and the cleaved high-molecular-weight kininogen level by 58%, in the donidalorsen group (Fig. S3). Figure S4 shows the correlation between prekallikrein levels and clinical outcome. The mean change from baseline to week 17 in the total score on the Angioedema Quality of Life Questionnaire was −26.8 points in the donidalorsen group, as compared with −6.2 points in the placebo group (mean difference, −20.7 points; 95% CI, −32.7 to −8.7) ( Figure 3 and Table S2).
No deaths or serious adverse events occurred during the trial. The incidence of mild-to-moderate adverse events was higher among the patients receiving placebo than among those receiving donidalorsen (83% vs. 71%) (Table S3). During the treatment period, the most common adverse events that were reported in patients receiving donidalorsen were headache (in 14%) and nausea (in 7%), both of which occurred at a higher incidence in the placebo group than in the donidalorsen group. None of the patients discontinued donidalorsen or placebo owing to adverse events. No coagulation abnormalities or reduced platelet counts were observed in any patient (Fig. S5). All the adverse events that occurred during the treatment period resolved by the end of the trial. There were no clinically relevant changes in the laboratory variables (e.g., renal function and hemoglobin level). Electrocardiographic results, including QTc intervals, remained unchanged throughout the trial.
A total of 17 of 20 patients (85%) were enrolled in the open-label extension study. Of the 3 patients who refrained from participation in the open-label extension study, 2 had been assigned to the donidalorsen group and 1 to the placebo group.
During the period from week 5 to week 17, a total of 12 of 13 patients (92%) receiving donidalorsen were attack-free, as compared with none of the 6 patients receiving placebo ( Table 2 ). A summary of the pharmacokinetic findings is provided in the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Discussion

Among patients with hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency, the monthly administration of 80 mg of donidalorsen resulted in a monthly attack rate that was 90% lower than the rate observed with placebo. No serious adverse events occurred in patients in either trial group.
Antisense oligonucleotides act by promoting, through sequence-specific binding and recruitment of RNase H1 activity, the degradation of a target mRNA in order to decrease the amount of target mRNA available for translation and, subsequently, the amount of target protein synthesized. The hybridization of donidalorsen to the cognate mRNA results in degradation of the prekallikrein mRNA in hepatocytes, specifically inhibiting the production of plasma prekallikrein, a key contact system mediator that is ultimately responsible for the formation of bradykinin and the downstream clinical manifestations of hereditary angioedema. Any prekallikrein that is produced before the administration of donidalorsen remains bound to high-molecular-weight kininogen in the systemic circulation, with a plasma half-life of approximately 5 days. We therefore propose that efficacy data starting 4 weeks (approximately 5 half-lives) after the first dose of donidalorsen are more representative of the clinical effects of the drug at steady state than data obtained at earlier time points. During the period from the second injection (week 5) and the end of the trial (week 17), the monthly rate of angioedema attacks was 97% lower among patients treated with donidalorsen than among those who received placebo. Furthermore, during this period, 92% of the patients treated with donidalorsen were attack-free, as compared with none of the patients who received placebo.
Because the exposure to donidalorsen in this trial was limited to four doses, we designed an open-label extension study to assess safety over a period of 156 weeks. The study is ongoing, and on the basis of medical monitoring and safety reviews, no safety signals have been observed to date.
Current guidelines recommend the use of lanadelumab, plasma-derived C1 inhibitor concentrate, or berotralstat as first-line prophylaxis in patients with hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency. Lanadelumab therapy, the treatment prescribed for the patient in the Case Record in this issue of the Journal has been shown to reduce disease burden, with a total of 76.9% of patients being attack-free during the steady-state period and 80.8% of the patients treated with the licensed dose of 300 mg, administered subcutaneously once every 2 weeks, meeting the minimal clinically important difference in the total Angioedema Quality of Life Questionnaire score. Prophylactic treatment with C1 inhibitor concentrate twice weekly reduced the number of angioedema attacks by 50% after intravenous administrations of 1000 units and reduced the attack rate by 95% after subcutaneous administrations of 60 international units per kilogram of body weight, with 40% of the patients being attack-free. Quality of life was improved with both administration routes of therapy. Daily administration of 150 mg of berotralstat resulted in a mean attack rate that was 44% lower than that with placebo and did not lead to a significant improvement in total scores on the Angioedema Quality of Life Questionnaire. An advantage of donidalorsen over these therapies is the lower frequency of administration. The racial and ethnic group composition of our patient population does not reflect the equal distribution of hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency across racial and ethnic groups in the United States or Europe and is thus a limitation of the trial.
Unlike for hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency, there are no currently approved prophylactic treatments for hereditary angioedema with normal functional and antigenic C1 inhibitor levels, and prospective trial data of effective therapeutics are limited. As reported in the Supplementary Appendix , we enrolled an additional group of three patients with hereditary angioedema with normal functional and antigenic C1 inhibitor levels in a parallel-group, open-label study. The attack frequency was reduced from baseline in all three patients, and one patient was attack-free from week 1 to week 17. This observation should be interpreted with caution, however, given the small sample size and lack of a control group. Moreover, the application of the threshold-stimulated kallikrein activity assay that had been used in the identification of patients with bradykinin-mediated hereditary angioedema with normal functional and antigenic C1 inhibitor levels warrants further validation.
This phase 2, placebo-controlled trial involving 20 patients with hereditary angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency showed that four monthly administrations of 80 mg of donidalorsen led to a lower rate of angioedema attacks.
