Title: Rilzabrutinib, an Oral BTK Inhibitor, in Immune Thrombocytopenia


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Rilzabrutinib, an oral, reversible covalent inhibitor of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase, may increase platelet counts in patients with immune thrombocytopenia by means of dual mechanisms of action: decreased macrophage (Fcγ receptor)–mediated platelet destruction and reduced production of pathogenic autoantibodies.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In an international, adaptive, open-label, dose-finding, phase 1–2 clinical trial, we evaluated rilzabrutinib therapy in previously treated patients with immune thrombocytopenia. We used intrapatient dose escalation of oral rilzabrutinib over a period of 24 weeks; the lowest starting dose was 200 mg once daily, with higher starting doses of 400 mg once daily, 300 mg twice daily, and 400 mg twice daily. The primary end points were safety and platelet response (defined as at least two consecutive platelet counts of ≥50×10 per cubic millimeter and an increase from baseline of ≥20×10 per cubic millimeter without the use of rescue medication).

Abstract_Section: Results

Sixty patients were enrolled. At baseline, the median platelet count was 15×10 per cubic millimeter, the median duration of disease was 6.3 years, and patients had received a median of four different immune thrombocytopenia therapies previously. All the treatment-related adverse events were of grade 1 or 2 and transient. There were no treatment-related bleeding or thrombotic events of grade 2 or higher. At a median of 167.5 days (range, 4 to 293) of treatment, 24 of 60 patients (40%) overall and 18 of the 45 patients (40%) who had started rilzabrutinib treatment at the highest dose met the primary end point of platelet response. The median time to the first platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter was 11.5 days. Among patients with a primary platelet response, the mean percentage of weeks with a platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter was 65%.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Rilzabrutinib was active and associated with only low-level toxic effects at all dose levels. The dose of 400 mg twice daily was identified as the dose for further testing. Overall, rilzabrutinib showed a rapid and durable clinical activity that improved with length of treatment. (Funded by Sanofi; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03395210 ; EudraCT number, 2017-004012-19 .)

Section: Introduction

Immune thrombocytopenia is an acquired autoimmune disease that is characterized by immune-mediated platelet destruction and impairment of platelet production, leading to a decrease in the platelet count to less than 100×10 per cubic millimeter. In most cases, immune thrombocytopenia is primary, with no underlying disease. Regardless of cause, a transient or persistent decrease in platelet count can predispose patients to increased risks of bleeding, hospitalization, death, fatigue, and an impaired quality of life.
In adults with immune thrombocytopenia, first-line therapies (e.g., intravenous immune globulin, glucocorticoids, and anti-D, an antibody against the Rh factor on red cells) generally focus on minimizing bleeding by interfering with platelet destruction, thereby rapidly increasing the platelet count. Although these therapies typically result in an initial response, long-term durable remission is not common, which leads to the use of continuous or alternative treatment methods. In patients with relapsing immune thrombocytopenia, subsequent treatments with thrombopoietin-receptor agonists, rituximab, fostamatinib, and immunosuppressive therapies (e.g., vincristine, mycophenolate mofetil, and cyclosporine), as well as splenectomy in patients with refractory disease, may elicit adequate responses. However, it is challenging to predict response to particular therapies, and neither durable responses nor long-term remissions are guaranteed. Despite the range of available therapies, a need remains for safer therapy that results in durable increases in platelet counts, prolongs remission, eliminates glucocorticoid use and related long-term toxic effects, and improves quality of life.
As our understanding of the underlying pathophysiology of immune thrombocytopenia has expanded, it has become clear that it is a disorder of increased immune platelet destruction and inefficient thrombopoiesis. Although the binding of IgG autoantibodies to platelet glycoprotein surface antigens on megakaryocytes promotes their apoptosis, it also targets the platelets for phagocytosis by Fcγ receptors on macrophages in the spleen and liver and possibly the Ashwell–Morell receptor on hepatocytes. Current therapies increase the platelet count by increasing megakaryocyte viability or by decreasing antibody-mediated platelet destruction.
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) is widely expressed in many cells and plays a critical role in B-cell maturation, antibody production, and Fcγ receptor–mediated signaling pathways. BTK inhibition has the potential to reduce Fcγ receptor–mediated macrophage function and reduce autoantibody production. Rilzabrutinib (PRN1008) is an oral, reversible, potent BTK inhibitor that was designed for the treatment of immune-mediated diseases. The covalent binding of rilzabrutinib contributes to long BTK-target engagement and durable inhibition with limited drug exposure, a clinical advantage that is accompanied by rapid systemic clearance, which reduces the potential for off-target toxic effects. A preclinical study identified simultaneous mechanisms of rapid antiinflammatory effects, neutralization of pathogenic autoantibody signaling, and prevention of new autoantibody production. The high specificity of rilzabrutinib is thought to decrease the risk of off-target toxic effects (e.g., atrial fibrillation) by means of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)–AKT signaling pathway, which is associated with other BTK inhibitors.
An early clinical study involving healthy volunteers showed rapid, sustained, and high BTK occupancy (the level of drug binding to BTK) with no evidence of the clinically significant adverse events that have been reported with other BTK inhibitors. In contrast to the known effects that have been observed with other BTK inhibitors, rilzabrutinib use did not alter platelet aggregation in healthy volunteers or in patients with immune thrombocytopenia. We conducted a phase 1–2 trial to identify a safe and effective rilzabrutinib dose in patients with immune thrombocytopenia to be tested in phase 3 trials.

Section: Methods

We designed this trial and conducted it with adherence to the Good Clinical Practice guidelines of the International Council for Harmonisation E6 requirements and in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The trial protocol , which is available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org, and informed-consent documents were reviewed and approved by the ethics committee at each participating institution. All the patients provided written informed consent.
The sponsor (Sanofi) and first author designed the trial in collaboration. The conduct of the trial was overseen by the sponsor. Data were collected by the investigators and analyzed by the sponsor. The first draft of the manuscript was written by the first author, and medical writing assistance was paid for by the sponsor. The authors reviewed the manuscript, provided feedback on drafts, and approved the final manuscript for submission for publication. All the authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data, for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol, and for the complete reporting of adverse events.
Patients with immune thrombocytopenia were eligible for trial participation if they were 18 to 80 years of age (or 18 to 65 years of age in the Czech Republic and Norway) and had platelet counts of less than 30×10 per cubic millimeter on two occasions no less than 7 days apart within the 15 days before trial entry. Patients were required to have had a response to at least one previous therapy for immune thrombocytopenia (including splenectomy) but to not have had a response to the previous or concomitant therapy maintained at baseline. Details of the eligibility criteria are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.
This adaptive, open-label, dose-finding, phase 1–2 clinical trial of oral rilzabrutinib was conducted in eight countries. Rilzabrutinib was administered with intrapatient dose escalation with the use of a 3+3 design (see the Supplementary Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ). The initial dose could be 200 mg once daily, 400 mg once daily, 300 mg twice daily (i.e., 600 mg per day), or 400 mg twice daily (i.e., 800 mg per day; the highest dose). Intrapatient dose escalation was allowed every 28 days, according to the investigator’s judgment, to improve response. A data and safety monitoring committee reviewed safety and efficacy data before doses were escalated in any patient. The initial trial protocol specified a treatment period of 12 weeks; this was subsequently extended to a 24-week treatment period followed by a 4-week safety follow-up period.
Only stable concomitant therapy with a glucocorticoid or thrombopoietin-receptor agonist with no more than a 10% change in the dose within the 2 weeks before the initiation of rilzabrutinib was allowed throughout the treatment period. Eligible patients (defined as those with a platelet count of ≥50×10 per cubic millimeter or with a platelet count of ≥30×10 per cubic millimeter plus a doubling of the baseline count for ≥50% of the patient’s final 8 weeks of rilzabrutinib therapy) could continue in a long-term extension study at a dose of 400 mg twice daily. Treatment was discontinued if a dose-limiting toxic effect occurred, rescue medication was used, or concomitant medication for immune thrombocytopenia was changed beyond the 10% level as defined above (see the Supplementary Methods section). Rescue medication was used for deterioration in the platelet count that, in the investigator’s opinion, put the patient at risk for a serious adverse event.
The primary end points were safety and platelet response. Safety was graded according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0, of the National Cancer Institute. Platelet response was defined as at least two consecutive platelet counts (separated by ≥5 days) of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter and an increase from baseline of at least 20×10 per cubic millimeter without the use of rescue medication for immune thrombocytopenia in the 4 weeks before the latest elevated platelet count.
The secondary efficacy end points were the percentage of weeks with a platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter, the percentage of patients who had a platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter at four or more of the final eight platelet counts, the change from baseline to the mean of the post–day 1 platelet counts among patients who had received more than 4 weeks of treatment, the number of weeks with a platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter, the number of weeks with a platelet count of at least 30×10 per cubic millimeter, and the time to the first platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter. Secondary safety end points included rescue medication use, the percentage of patients with a bleeding event of grade 2 or higher, and bleeding scale scores (according to an immune thrombocytopenia–specific bleeding assessment tool ) at the end of the treatment period. Post hoc analyses of secondary efficacy end points were conducted in patients with a response. We also conducted post hoc subgroup analyses of the primary efficacy end point to evaluate the potential effect of patient and disease characteristics at baseline. Trends in the platelet counts over time are provided, with stratification according to response status on the basis of the primary efficacy outcome.
The safety population included all the patients who received at least one dose of rilzabrutinib. The intention-to-treat population included all the patients who were enrolled in the trial. We calculated that an initial sample size of 24 and an expected efficacy of 40% (i.e., a platelet response in 15 patients with evaluable data) would provide the trial with 80% confidence that the true efficacy would be at least 24% (i.e., the 80% confidence interval for 40% would be 24 to 56%) using normal approximation methods. The sample size was later increased in order to better evaluate outcomes at the highest dose (400 mg twice daily). We estimated that the enrollment of 60 patients would result in approximately 15 patients completing 24 weeks of rilzabrutinib treatment and in at least 10 patients completing 24 weeks of treatment at the highest starting dose.
Descriptive data and frequency tabulations were summarized both overall and according to dose level. The primary efficacy end point and binomial confidence intervals were analyzed by means of the Clopper–Pearson method. Kaplan–Meier analysis was used for time-to-event estimates.

Section: Results

The trial was initiated on March 22, 2018, and the data-cutoff date was May 4, 2021. The reported results include all 60 patients who enrolled in the trial; eligible patients subsequently had the option to continue in the long-term extension study (Fig. S1). Three of the 60 patients completed the original protocol for 12 weeks of treatment; their data are also included in this report.
The median age of the patients was 50 years (range, 19 to 74), and 57% of the patients were women ( Table 1 ). The median baseline platelet count was 15×10 (range, 2×10 to 33×10 ) per cubic millimeter. The median duration of immune thrombocytopenia was 6.3 years (range, 0.4 to 52.5), and patients had received a median of 4 different therapies (range, 1 to 17) for immune thrombocytopenia previously. The most common previous therapies were glucocorticoids (in 92% of the patients), thrombopoietin-receptor agonists (in 58%), intravenous immune globulin (in 43%), and rituximab (in 40%); 25% of the patients had undergone splenectomy. Patients who had been receiving glucocorticoids or thrombopoietin-receptor agonists at enrollment and had an inadequate platelet count (<30×10 per cubic millimeter) were allowed to continue stable doses of these medications.
Patients received rilzabrutinib for a median of 167.5 days (range, 4 to 293). Nine patients started treatment at a dose of 200 mg once daily; over the treatment period, 2 continued receiving this dose, 1 had the dose escalated to a maximum of 400 mg once daily, 3 had the dose escalated to a maximum of 300 mg twice daily, and 3 had the dose escalated to a maximum of 400 mg twice daily (Fig. S2). One patient started rilzabrutinib treatment at a dose of 400 mg once daily and had the dose escalated to a maximum of 400 mg twice daily. Of the 5 patients who started rilzabrutinib treatment at a dose of 300 mg twice daily, 2 continued receiving this dose, and 3 had the dose escalated to a maximum dose of 400 mg twice daily. All 45 patients who started rilzabrutinib treatment at the highest dose (400 mg twice daily) continued at that dose with no dose reductions or interruptions due to adverse events and no dose-limiting toxic effects.
Overall, 40 patients received concomitant medication (not including rescue medication). The most frequently used concomitant medications were thrombopoietin-receptor agonists (in 24 patients) and glucocorticoids (in 23). Of the 24 patients who met the primary efficacy end point (see below), 4 patients received only concomitant thrombopoietin-receptor agonists, 8 only glucocorticoids, 3 both thrombopoietin-receptor agonists and glucocorticoids, and 9 neither. These patients were considered to have had an inadequate response to previous therapy at baseline.
During the treatment period, 31 patients (52%) had at least one treatment-related adverse event; all these events were of grade 1 or 2 and were transient ( Table 2 and S2). The most common treatment-related adverse events of any grade were diarrhea (in 32% of the patients), nausea (in 30%), and fatigue (in 10%). One patient had a treatment-related grade 1 contusion (bleeding), and 1 had treatment-related grade 2 erysipelas (infection) that resolved with treatment. There were no treatment-related bleeding or thrombotic events of grade 2 or higher. No treatment-related adverse events of grade 3 or higher or serious adverse events were observed. There were no other signs or symptoms of adverse events that have been typically associated with BTK inhibitors (i.e., neutropenia, treatment-related infection, bleeding, thrombotic events, fungal infection, or atrial fibrillation).
One death occurred, which was considered by the investigator to be unrelated to treatment. This patient had discontinued rilzabrutinib at a dose of 400 mg twice daily on day 8 owing to exacerbation of preexisting Evans syndrome (a combination of immune thrombocytopenic purpura, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and immune neutropenia) and died more than 4 months after discontinuing the trial.
Rescue medication was used in seven patients (12%; in one patient receiving 200 mg once daily, in one receiving 300 mg twice daily, and in five receiving 400 mg twice daily) (Table S1). The use of rescue medication was the cause of trial discontinuation (as required by the protocol) in four patients. Two additional patients received rescue medication but discontinued treatment owing to adverse events unrelated to rilzabrutinib treatment. One patient received rescue medication after discontinuing the trial because of a lack of response.
The bleeding scale scores, as assessed with the immune thrombocytopenia–specific bleeding assessment tool, within each domain showed no increase in bleeding from baseline through the end of the treatment period (Fig. S3). Scores improved at skin and oral sites.
All 60 patients could be evaluated for efficacy in this 24-week trial. The primary end point of platelet response was met in 24 patients (40%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 28 to 53) ( Table 3 ). According to the dose level at any time during the trial (patients could have had a response at more than one dose level), 1 of 9 patients (11%) met the primary end point at a dose of 200 mg once daily, 2 of 8 (25%) at a dose of 400 mg once daily, 4 of 12 (33%) at a dose of 300 mg twice daily, and 20 of 52 (38%) at a dose of 400 mg twice daily (the highest dose). Of the 45 patients who had started rilzabrutinib at the highest dose, 18 (40%) met the primary end point of platelet response ( Table 3 and S3).
Among all the patients, the mean percentage of weeks with a platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter was 29%; post hoc analyses involving patients who met the primary end point showed that the mean percentage of weeks with this platelet count was 65%. On the basis of a safety profile that was low-grade and with consistent efficacy observed at the highest evaluated dose, the minimum effective dose of rilzabrutinib was identified as 400 mg twice daily. No dose escalations beyond 400 mg twice daily were tested.
Overall, 17 of 60 patients (28%) had a platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter at four or more of the final eight platelet counts; this end point was met in 14 of the 45 patients (31%) who had started rilzabrutinib treatment at the highest dose ( Table 3 ). A platelet count of more than 400×10 per cubic millimeter did not develop in any patient. The mean (±SD) changes from baseline to the mean of the post–day 1 platelet counts among patients who completed more than 4 weeks of treatment were 29×10 (±40×10 ) per cubic millimeter among all the patients and 31×10 (±43×10 ) per cubic millimeter among the patients who had started rilzabrutinib at the highest dose. In the overall trial population, a platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter was maintained for a median of 1 week and a platelet count of at least 30×10 per cubic millimeter for a median of 5 weeks. Among patients with a response, 24 in the overall trial population had a platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter maintained for a median of 16 weeks and 18 who had started rilzabrutinib treatment at the highest dose had this platelet count maintained for a median of 14 weeks; in each of these two groups, a platelet count of at least 30×10 per cubic millimeter was maintained for a median of 21 weeks (Fig. S4).
The median time to a first platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter was 11.5 days among all the patients and 12.5 days among the patients who had started rilzabrutinib treatment at the highest dose ( Figure 1 and Table 3 ). Primary platelet responses were similar across subgroups that were defined according to immune thrombocytopenia type (chronic [duration of disease, >12 months]), receipt of at least four previous therapies, receipt of rilzabrutinib monotherapy or concomitant immune thrombocytopenia therapy, or splenectomy status ( Figure 2 ).

Section: Discussion

This clinical trial showed that BTK inhibition with rilzabrutinib was effective at suppressing immune-mediated platelet destruction in patients with immune thrombocytopenia, thus providing evidence of a new mechanism for targeting the underlying pathologic characteristics of immune thrombocytopenia. Patients had had immune thrombocytopenia for a median duration of 6.3 years and had received a median of four different therapies previously. Eligibility was based on an inability to maintain an adequate response to previous or concomitant therapies (including splenectomy) and on the basis of ongoing indication for treatment. Treatment with oral rilzabrutinib was associated with only low-grade toxic effects across all the dose levels tested, in alignment with an early clinical study involving healthy volunteers and with projected doses from a preclinical study. There was no evidence of infections, thrombotic events, cardiac arrhythmias, liver-related toxic effects, or increased bleeding typically associated with BTK inhibitors and thrombopoietin-receptor agonists, although the follow-up was limited. In addition, a platelet count of more than 400×10 per cubic millimeter did not develop in any patient.
Rilzabrutinib therapy led to rapid platelet responses and to clinically significant platelet responses (≥50×10 per cubic millimeter) in 40% of the patients. Important treatment factors for patients with immune thrombocytopenia are the attainment of a rapid increase in the platelet count to a level preventing bleeding and the maintenance of this response over time. The median time to a first platelet count of at least 50×10 per cubic millimeter was 11.5 days; this level was maintained in patients with a response for a mean of 65% of the weeks during the 24-week treatment period. Platelet responses were consistent across subgroups defined according to baseline characteristics.
No standard treatment recommendations currently exist for patients with immune thrombocytopenia who have multiple relapses. Treatment and trial comparisons are further complicated by a range of time points and platelet-response end points. Recent American Society of Hematology treatment guidelines for immune thrombocytopenia lasting at least 3 months recommend thrombopoietin-receptor agonists, rituximab, or splenectomy. Immunomodulators for the treatment of relapsed immune thrombocytopenia include the spleen tyrosine kinase inhibitor fostamatinib and the anti-CD20 antibody rituximab. Although the percentage of patients with durable remission is high with splenectomy (approximately 60 to 70%), this treatment is generally viewed less favorably than nonsurgical therapies owing to potential surgical complications, higher risks of infection or thromboembolic events, and a lifelong increased risk of sepsis with capsuled microorganisms. Generally, the choice of treatment is individualized on the basis of the patient’s age, characteristics, coexisting conditions, disease duration, bleeding frequency, treatment availability, and various other preferences. Despite considerable advances in therapeutic options for immune thrombocytopenia over the past 15 years, some patients have disease that remains refractory to existing therapies, and durable remission remains elusive in these patients. Because the majority of the patients in our trial had been heavily pretreated and many were viewed by the investigators as having limited treatment options, the inhibition of BTK by rilzabrutinib provided a new therapeutic approach by targeting immune-mediated platelet destruction and impaired platelet production.
This phase 1–2, dose-finding clinical trial established a role for BTK inhibition in the treatment of immune thrombocytopenia. Overall, treatment with oral rilzabrutinib led to rapid and durable clinical activity in 40% of these patients with immune thrombocytopenia, who had received multiple therapies previously. Rilzabrutinib also had a low-grade safety profile. The 400-mg twice-daily dose of rilzabrutinib was shown to be safe and effective. A randomized, double-blind, phase 3 trial comparing rilzabrutinib with placebo in adults and adolescents (≥12 years of age) with persistent or chronic immune thrombocytopenia (LUNA3; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04562766 ) is ongoing to assess the magnitude and durability of clinical benefit with rilzabrutinib treatment.
