Title: Macrolide and Nonmacrolide Resistance with Mass Azithromycin Distribution


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Mass distribution of azithromycin to preschool children twice yearly for 2 years has been shown to reduce childhood mortality in sub-Saharan Africa but at the cost of amplifying macrolide resistance. The effects on the gut resistome, a reservoir of antimicrobial resistance genes in the body, of twice-yearly administration of azithromycin for a longer period are unclear.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We investigated the gut resistome of children after they received twice-yearly distributions of azithromycin for 4 years. In the Niger site of the MORDOR trial, we enrolled 30 villages in a concurrent trial in which they were randomly assigned to receive mass distribution of either azithromycin or placebo, offered to all children 1 to 59 months of age every 6 months for 4 years. Rectal swabs were collected at baseline, 36 months, and 48 months for analysis of the participants’ gut resistome. The primary outcome was the ratio of macrolide-resistance determinants in the azithromycin group to those in the placebo group at 48 months.

Abstract_Section: Results

Over the entire 48-month period, the mean (±SD) coverage was 86.6±12% in the villages that received placebo and 83.2±16.4% in the villages that received azithromycin. A total of 3232 samples were collected during the entire trial period; of the samples obtained at the 48-month monitoring visit, 546 samples from 15 villages that received placebo and 504 from 14 villages that received azithromycin were analyzed. Determinants of macrolide resistance were higher in the azithromycin group than in the placebo group: 7.4 times as high (95% confidence interval [CI], 4.0 to 16.7) at 36 months and 7.5 times as high (95% CI, 3.8 to 23.1) at 48 months. Continued mass azithromycin distributions also selected for determinants of nonmacrolide resistance, including resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics, an antibiotic class prescribed frequently in this region of Africa.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among villages assigned to receive mass distributions of azithromycin or placebo twice yearly for 4 years, antibiotic resistance was more common in the villages that received azithromycin than in those that received placebo. This trial showed that mass azithromycin distributions may propagate antibiotic resistance. (Funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02047981 .)

Section: Introduction

Worldwide, 5.4 million children under 5 years of age died in 2017, with the highest childhood mortality occurring in sub-Saharan Africa. Mass distributions of oral azithromycin twice a year to children 1 to 59 months of age reduced childhood mortality by 18% over 2 years in Niger, which suggests that this simple intervention could be a promising strategy for combating childhood mortality. The same intervention, however, resulted in an increase in the prevalence of macrolide resistance in Streptococcus pneumoniae colonizing the nasopharynx, as well as an increase in genetic determinants of macrolide resistance in the gut of children who lived in the communities that received azithromycin. Resistance to nonmacrolide antibiotic agents was not observed after four twice-yearly rounds of azithromycin in Niger.
The emergence of antibiotic resistance observed after 2 years of treatment calls into question the long-term effectiveness of such an intervention to reduce childhood mortality and arouses concern about the potential contribution of the intervention to the growing global burden of antibiotic resistance. In this trial, mass azithromycin distributed twice yearly over a longer term was evaluated for its effects on the gut resistome, a reservoir of antimicrobial-resistance genes in the body.

Section: Methods

We initiated an ancillary cluster-randomized trial in the Niger site of the MORDOR (Macrolides Oraux pour Réduire les Décès avec un Oeil sur la Résistance) trial in December 2014, concurrent with the main MORDOR trial. A group of 30 communities was randomly selected from the larger pool of communities participating in the main MORDOR trial and randomly assigned, in a 1:1 ratio, to the same interventions implemented in the MORDOR trial: twice yearly mass administration of either azithromycin or placebo to children 1 to 59 months of age. Changes in antibiotic-resistance determinants were the prespecified outcomes assessed at annual monitoring visits.
We obtained ethical approval for the trial from the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), Committee for Human Research and the ethics committee of the Niger Ministry of Health. The trial was undertaken in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Given the low literacy rate in Niger, we obtained oral informed consent from the children’s guardians before distribution of placebo or azithromycin and before swab collection.
The first and last authors and four other authors vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the study to the protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. (A list of author contributions is provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.) Pfizer provided all trial drugs but had no role in the study design, interpretation of the data, or preparation of the manuscript.
The trials took place in the Loga and Boboye departments of Niger from December 2014 through June 2019. Only nonurban communities were included.
The randomization unit was the grappe , which is the smallest government health unit in Niger. Grappes , termed “villages” or “communities” in this report, were eligible for inclusion if the most recent government census documented a population between 200 and 2000 inhabitants. All children who were 1 to 59 months of age and weighed at least 3800 g were eligible to receive azithromycin or placebo. One village withdrew from participation after four rounds of distributions.
Randomization and interventions were performed at the community level. The trial biostatistician generated the randomization sequence using R software, version 3.5.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing). We concealed the assignments by offering treatment to all children in the community. The packaging was labeled with one of six letters (i.e., three letters assigned to azithromycin and three letters to placebo), but otherwise the packaging and appearance were identical for the two groups. All field workers, trial coordinators, investigators (except for the biostatistician), and laboratory personnel were unaware of the link between the letters and the treatment assignments.
All children 1 to 59 months of age were identified in censuses performed twice each year. Trained personnel directly observed the administration of azithromycin or placebo. A single dose of oral azithromycin suspension (corresponding to a height-based target dose of at least 20 mg per kilogram of body weight) or placebo suspension was offered at months 0, 6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, and 42. Children known to be allergic to macrolides were excluded.
For the monitoring visits at 0, 36, and 48 months, we randomly selected 50 children (or all children in communities where there were fewer than 40 children) from the census, with the goal of sampling 40 children per village. Separate random samples were selected at each monitoring visit; individual children were not followed longitudinally. Children could be born into and age out of eligibility. The baseline visit took place before any treatments were distributed, the 36-month visit occurred approximately 6 months after the sixth round of treatment, and the 48-month visit took place approximately 6 months after the eighth round of treatment. For each sample, a flocked rectal swab (FLOQSwab, Copan Diagnostics) was inserted approximately 2 cm into the child’s anus and twisted 180 degrees, then removed and stored in a Stool Nucleic Acid Collection and Transport Tube containing Norgen Stool Preservative (Norgen). A new pair of surgical gloves was worn for each trial participant. The samples were placed on ice in the field, stored at −20°C in a freezer in Niger, and then shipped to UCSF, where they were stored at −80°C until they were processed.
Up to 40 total rectal samples from each village were pooled for sequencing; if more than 40 samples were collected from a community, a simple random sample of 40 was chosen and processed. Each pool contained 500 μl of each of the rectal samples collected from a village. DNA was extracted from 350 μl of each pooled sample with a Stool DNA Isolation Kit (Norgen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The DNA concentration of each pooled sample was quantified with the Qubit DNA HS Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) and normalized to 5 ng per microliter for sequencing library preparation. With the use of 5 μl of the pooled DNA samples, DNA libraries were prepared with the NEBNext Ultra II DNA Library Prep Kit (New England Biolabs) and then amplified with 10 polymerase-chain-reaction cycles. Library size and concentration were determined with the use of High Sensitivity DNA Chips (Agilent Technologies) and the Qubit DNA HS Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific), respectively. Libraries were then pooled and sequenced with the use of the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 with 150-nucleotide paired-end sequencing.
All paired-end reads were subjected to three rounds of human sequencing read removal. In an initial removal step, all paired-end reads were aligned to the human reference genome 38 (hg38) and the Pan troglodytes genome (panTro4, 2011, University of California, Santa Cruz) with the use of the Spliced Transcripts Alignment to a Reference (STAR) aligner, version 2.5.4b. Unaligned reads were quality filtered with the use of PriceSeqFilter, version 1.2, with the “-rnf 90” and “-rqf 85 0.98” settings. Reads that were at least 95% identical were compressed by CD-HIT-DUP (CD-HIT), version 4.7. Read pairs with a compression score of less than 0.45 on the Lempel–Ziv–Welch algorithm were discarded because of low complexity. Another round of human reads removal was performed with the very-sensitive-local mode of Bowtie2, version 2.3.4.1, with the same hg38 and panTro4 reference genomes described above. The remaining reads were subject to taxonomic classification with the Centrifuge taxonomic classifier engine, version 1.0.3-beta, with the use of an index (updated on March 3, 2018) created from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) nucleotide nonredundant sequences. Any reads classified under NCBI taxonomy identification numbers 7711 (Chordata), 6340 (Annelida), 6656 (Arthropoda), 2157 (Archaea), 33090 (Viridiplantae), and 81077 (artificial sequences) were also removed.
Nonhost reads were then aligned to the MEGARes reference antimicrobial database, version 1.0.1, with the use of the Burrows–Wheeler Aligner (BWA) with default settings. Only antibiotic-resistance determinants with a gene fraction of greater than 80% were identified as present in the sample and included for further analyses. Each identified antibiotic-resistance determinant was categorized at the class level with the Resistome Analyzer ( https://github.com/cdeanj/resistomeanalyzer ).
For the comparison of resistomes between the two groups, we anticipated that the study would have approximately 80% power to detect a between-group difference in macrolide-resistance determinants of 16% — a difference of a factor of 1.16. We determined the effect of azithromycin on resistance determinants by using the ratio of the antibiotic-resistance determinants in the azithromycin group to those in the placebo group; we calculated the ratio by dividing the mean normalized read count of combined antibiotic-resistance determinants categorized at the class level in the azithromycin group by the corresponding mean quantity in the placebo group. The primary outcome was the ratio of macrolide-resistance determinants at the 48-month visit. The ratios of macrolide-resistance determinants at the 36-month visit and of all other classes of resistance determinants at both visits were secondary analyses. A 95% confidence interval for each effect size was estimated by permutation testing. Specifically, we estimated the confidence interval for each ratio of treated to untreated read counts by permutation-testing (500 permutations) treated counts scaled by a factor of 1/ f (with f ranging from 0.3 to 30) against unscaled untreated counts and using as the confidence interval the range of values of f for which there is no significant difference between groups. The 95% confidence intervals have not been adjusted for multiple comparisons and should not be used to infer definitive treatment effects. To account for clustering, all statistics were performed at the level of the randomization unit (the community). All analyses were performed with the R program, version 3.6.2, for Linux.

Section: Results

Thirty villages were randomly assigned to receive twice-yearly mass administration of oral azithromycin or placebo for 48 months. One village withdrew from participation after the 24-month time point owing to a combination of internal politics and trial fatigue ( Figure 1 ). Children 3 to 59 months of age in all communities in the trial area received between 2 and 4 monthly distributions of seasonal malaria chemoprevention with sulfadoxine, pyrimethamine, and amodiaquine in the 2018 malaria season (July and August 2018, approximately 8 months before the 48-month sample collection). Mean (±SD) azithromycin and placebo coverage over the eight twice-yearly distributions was 83.2±16.4% for azithromycin and 86.6±12.0% for placebo. Across the baseline, 36-month, and 48-month visits, 37±6 children per village provided rectal samples. After a cap of 40 swabs per village was imposed, a total of 3232 samples were processed, sequenced, and analyzed ( Figure 1 ). In total, 546 samples from the placebo group and 504 samples from the azithromycin group were included in the 48-month analysis. At 36 months, 554 and 513 samples were included from the placebo and azithromycin groups, respectively. The characteristics of participants from whom swabs were obtained are shown in Table 1 .
At baseline, before any trial administration of azithromycin or placebo, the abundance of genetic resistance determinants for macrolides was similar in the two groups ( Figure 2 ). At 48 months (i.e., after eight twice-yearly distributions), the macrolide-resistance determinants (the primary outcome) were 7.5 times as high (95% confidence interval [CI], 3.8 to 23.1) in villages treated with azithromycin as in villages that received placebo. Resistance determinants at 36 months (a secondary outcome) were 7.4 times as high (95% CI, 4.0 to 16.7) ( Figures 3 and Figure 4 ). These findings are consistent with the increase in macrolide-specific resistance detected after four distributions at earlier points in the trial.
In results that contrast with previous findings, an additional two rounds of mass azithromycin distribution caused a notable increase in resistance determinants to several nonmacrolide antibiotics ( Figures 3 and Figure 4 ), including a greater abundance — by 2.1 times (95% CI, 1.2 to 4.0) — of beta-lactam–resistance determinants. For the nonmacrolide antibiotics that were elevated at 36 months, point estimates of the magnitude of the relative difference at 48 months (after eight distributions) were slightly lower, and in all cases the unadjusted 95% confidence intervals include 1. As noted above, an increase in macrolide-resistance determinants persisted at 48 months, 6 months after the eighth distribution ( Figure 4 ).

Section: Discussion

We showed previously that mass distribution of azithromycin to children in Niger twice a year for 2 years resulted in an increase in macrolide-resistance determinants in the gut. We now found, perhaps as expected, that additional azithromycin distributions appeared to be associated with perpetuation of the increase in macrolide resistance, as seen here at the 36-month and 48-month time points.
In this trial, we also detected an increase in nonmacrolide resistance with mass azithromycin distribution, an increase that we had not seen at the 2-year time point. Notable were the increases in resistance determinants identified in four antibiotic classes (aminoglycosides, beta-lactams, trimethoprim, and metronidazole), each of which belongs to the World Health Organization (WHO) Access group of antibiotics owing to their effectiveness against a wide range of commonly encountered pathogens. Of particular interest are genetic determinants of resistance to beta-lactams, since this class of antibiotics is widely used in sub-Saharan Africa.
The increase in antibiotic resistance between the fourth and sixth distributions in the same communities is suggestive of a cumulative effect of azithromycin on the collective gut microbiome of a community. Although azithromycin preferentially reduces susceptible pathogens, such as campylobacter species, it may also affect the abundance of other species in the gut. Thus, under the selection pressure of azithromycin, not only are gut bacteria harboring macrolide-resistance determinants potentially selected for, but bacteria carrying nonmacrolide-resistance determinants may also be selected for sometimes if they reside in the same bacterial lineages. The selection of plasmid-encoded resistance genes, such as the erm class methylated genes, also may have implications for horizontal gene transfer. Previous studies in other populations have shown associations between treatment with one drug class and increases in resistance to other drug classes. In general, co-occurrence of resistance mechanisms in different, unrelated drug classes is far more common than would be expected from chance alone.
The potential implications of the increase in the community gut resistome with repeated mass azithromycin distributions are numerous. Resistant bacteria may mitigate the beneficial effects of azithromycin, although we have not observed this effect in the main MORDOR study. Indeed, the efficacy of azithromycin in reducing childhood mortality actually increased as macrolide resistance was accumulating over the first 2 years of treatment in the MORDOR I trial. From a public health standpoint, more worrisome would be the potential for the propagation of nonmacrolide- and macrolide-resistance genes to areas in which the population has not been treated with azithromycin. However, mass azithromycin distribution continues to be effective, despite the distribution of more than 860 million doses of azithromycin worldwide for the elimination of trachoma alone. The WHO continues to recommend mass azithromycin distribution for trachoma control. In addition, the prevalence of antibiotic resistance has been shown to predictably decline when mass drug distributions are discontinued, at least for certain antibiotics, such as azithromycin.
Although we also detected some evidence of selection of nonmacrolide-resistance determinants, the difference between the azithromycin and placebo groups was more compelling at 36 months than at 48 months. For multiple drug classes analyzed, however, point estimates of resistance were higher in the azithromycin-treated communities at both trial visits. Although it is not clear to what extent genetic resistance determinants correlate with phenotypic resistance, the findings highlight the potential for broad antibiotic resistance even when a single antibiotic is repeatedly distributed in the community. Currently, health care providers in regions that receive mass azithromycin distribution for trachoma are alert to the possibility of increased macrolide resistance. Any program that involves mass drug distribution to reduce childhood mortality would need to inform providers and monitor for antimicrobial resistance. The increase in antibiotic-resistance determinants across multiple antibiotic classes observed in this trial suggests that the routine practice of antibiotic-resistance surveillance by performing phenotypic drug-resistance profiles on any single model organism may be insufficient to provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall changes in antibiotic resistance in the community. As metagenomic approaches become more routine, combining phenotypic and genomic approaches to monitor changes in antibiotic resistance may be useful.
Several limitations of the trial should be noted. First, the storage of the rectal samples in our trial precluded phenotypic assessments of the gut organisms, preventing direct identification of organisms that may have increased nonmacrolide resistance, and thus limiting mechanistic insights. Second, we did not collect data on symptoms of infectious illnesses in children from whom samples were collected nor on the occurrence of clinically resistant infections at local health posts, which limited our ability to make clinical inferences from the data. Here, we addressed colonization in a random sample of children, regardless of symptoms. Other studies will be necessary to document whether azithromycin distributions result in increased resistance to macrolides and other antibiotics in symptomatic children who present to health posts or hospitals. Third, the trial region began to receive seasonal malarial chemoprevention before the 48-month visit. Although this should not affect the magnitude of the relative difference in resistance genes between groups in a randomized trial setting, since children in both groups received seasonal malarial chemoprevention, we cannot fully rule out potential confounders. Fourth, randomization was performed at the village level and all children in a village were offered treatment; thus adherence to treatment and the number of treatments cannot be interpreted at the individual level. Similarly, the outcome is a community average load of antimicrobial-resistance genes, and therefore a single person could disproportionately affect that average. Finally, generalization of these findings to populations beyond rural settings similar to those we studied in Niger should be made with caution.
This placebo-controlled, community-randomized trial showed that mass azithromycin distributions twice yearly for 4 years were associated with an increase in both macrolide- and nonmacrolide-resistance genes. Resistance surveillance should be an intrinsic component of any mass drug distribution program, and it can be achieved with metagenomic approaches.
