Title: Randomized Trial of Amoxicillin for Pneumonia in Pakistan


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends oral amoxicillin for patients who have pneumonia with tachypnea, yet trial data indicate that not using amoxicillin to treat this condition may be noninferior to using amoxicillin.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled noninferiority trial involving children at primary health care centers in low-income communities in Karachi, Pakistan. Children who were 2 to 59 months of age and who met WHO criteria for nonsevere pneumonia with tachypnea were randomly assigned to a 3-day course of a suspension of amoxicillin (the active control) of 50 mg per milliliter or matched volume of placebo (the test regimen), according to WHO weight bands (500 mg every 12 hours for a weight of 4 to <10 kg, 1000 mg every 12 hours for a weight of 10 to <14 kg, or 1500 mg every 12 hours for a weight of 14 to <20 kg). The primary outcome was treatment failure during the 3-day course of amoxicillin or placebo. The prespecified noninferiority margin was 1.75 percentage points.

Abstract_Section: Results

From November 9, 2014, through November 30, 2017, a total of 4002 children underwent randomization (1999 in the placebo group and 2003 in the amoxicillin group). In the per-protocol analysis, the incidence of treatment failure was 4.9% among placebo recipients (95 of 1927 children) and 2.6% among amoxicillin recipients (51 of 1929 children) (between-group difference, 2.3 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.9 to 3.7). Results were similar in the intention-to-treat analysis. The presence of fever and wheeze predicted treatment failure. The number needed to treat to prevent one treatment failure was 44 (95% CI, 31 to 80). One patient (<0.1%) in each group died. Relapse occurred in 40 children (2.2%) in the placebo group and in 58 children (3.1%) in the amoxicillin group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among children younger than 5 years of age with nonsevere pneumonia, the frequency of treatment failure was higher in the placebo group than in the amoxicillin group, a difference that did not meet the noninferiority margin for placebo. (Funded by the Joint Global Health Trials Scheme [of the Department for International Development, Medical Research Council, and Wellcome] and others; RETAPP ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02372461 .)

Section: Introduction

In 2015, acute lower respiratory tract infections caused 7.4 deaths per 1000 live births (95% confidence interval [CI], 6.7 to 8.8) worldwide. These infections disproportionately affected children in impoverished areas. The epidemiologic characteristics of pneumonia are changing rapidly as a result of vaccination against major pathogens such as Haemophilus influenzae type B and Streptococcus pneumoniae ; viral pathogens now cause the majority of acute lower respiratory tract infections. Nevertheless, antibiotics continue to be used for the treatment of acute lower respiratory tract infections, resulting in antimicrobial resistance and, possibly, alteration of gut microbiota and immunity.
In primary care settings in low-income communities, the diagnosis of pneumonia is generally clinical and guided by the Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) approach of the World Health Organization (WHO). WHO guidelines classify acute lower respiratory tract infections according to the absence of pneumonia, the presence of mild pneumonia (with tachypnea or retraction of the chest wall), or severe pneumonia with danger signs (stridor when the patient is calm, hypoxia [oxygen saturation as measured by pulse oximeter, <90% while the patient is breathing ambient air], inability to feed, persistent vomiting, convulsions, and reduced level of consciousness). For children who live in areas with a low prevalence of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and who have mild pneumonia and tachypnea, the WHO recommends a 3-day course of amoxicillin. With the rationale that pneumonia has a bacterial cause in a substantial proportion of children, the current guidelines that are based on the presence of tachypnea emphasize sensitivity over specificity. However, as suggested by trial data, the use of vaccines against pneumonia with common bacterial causes ( Haemophilus influenzae type B and pneumococcus) may have further reduced the specificity of the guidelines for the clinical identification of bacterial pneumonia.
We conducted RETAPP (Randomized Trial of Amoxicillin Versus Placebo for [Fast Breathing] Pneumonia), a double-blind, randomized, controlled noninferiority trial comparing placebo with amoxicillin for the management of pneumonia with tachypnea. Our trial involved children who were 2 to 59 months of age and resided in low-income communities in Karachi, Pakistan.

Section: Methods

This trial was conducted at four primary health care centers in an area without HIV infection and with a low incidence of malaria. Oversight was provided by a technical steering committee and a data and safety monitoring board. The protocol is available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. Ethics approval was provided by the ethics review committee of Aga Khan University. All the parents or legal guardians provided written informed consent before randomization. The trial was performed in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
The trial was designed by the first two authors and the last author. The third and fourth authors oversaw data collection, and the seventh author performed the analysis. The first and second authors wrote the first draft of the manuscript with considerable input from all the authors. The first and seventh authors had full access to the data, and the first author made the final decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The funders and providers of the amoxicillin (purchased from GlaxoSmithKline Pakistan) and placebo (provided free of charge by Wilshire Laboratories) that were used in the trial had no role in the design, implementation, or interpretation of the trial. All the authors reviewed and approved the final draft of the manuscript and vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and analyses and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol .
Children who were 2 to 59 months of age were triaged by staff members at each primary health center according to whether they had cough or difficulty breathing. The diagnosis of pneumonia with tachypnea, defined according to the WHO classification as a respiratory rate of at least 50 breaths per minute in children 2 to 11 months of age or at least 40 breaths per minute in children 12 to 59 months of age, was based on agreement between a trained health worker and a physician. The presence of wheeze was assessed with the use of auscultation. All children with wheeze received up to three doses of an inhaled bronchodilator according to WHO-IMCI guidelines. After each administration of a bronchodilator, the respiratory rate was rechecked and the level of tachypnea was noted.
Only children with persistent tachypnea were considered for enrollment, irrespective of whether they had wheeze. Children were excluded if they had retraction of the chest wall or any danger sign (as defined above), had received antibiotics within the previous 48 hours, had been hospitalized within the past 2 weeks, or had pedal edema, known tuberculosis, asthma, or other severe illness for which antibiotic therapy was warranted. Children were also excluded if they lived outside the catchment area, were enrolled in another trial, or had enrolled in the trial within the past 6 months (which was considered to be an adequate washout period).
Children were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive either amoxicillin as a syrup (the active control) daily for 3 days according to WHO-IMCI weight bands (500 mg every 12 hours for children who weighed 4 to <10 kg, 1000 mg every 12 hours for children who weighed 10 to <14 kg, and 1500 mg every 12 hours for children who weighed 14 to <20 kg) or a matched volume of placebo (the test regimen) in an equivalent dose in milliliters. Lists were generated by the clinical trials unit of Aga Khan University with block randomization stratified according to age category (2 to 11 months or 12 to 59 months). A pharmacist in the clinical trials unit pasted treatment assignment codes on white, sealed bottles and reconstituted syrups that were stored at 4 to 8°C during the trial. A randomization identification number that was assigned by a physician who was unaware of the assignment codes was pasted on case files. Drug dispensing was independently performed in a segregated area. Physicians who assessed outcomes were also unaware of the trial-group assignments, as were participating parents and staff.
Data on baseline sociodemographic characteristics, birth and breast-feeding history, household air quality, immunization status, and clinical history were collected. All doses were administered, recorded, and observed by trial staff at a primary health care center or at the patients’ home. Treatment failure was assessed on days 0, 1, 2, and 3 of randomization. Relapse was assessed up to day 14 through visits scheduled at days 5 and 14. Visits at day 8 and 12 were added on the recommendation of the data and safety monitoring board after a death occurred during the trial. If a visit was missed, trial staff conducted home visits. In all the children, vital status was checked on day 21. Any deterioration that was detected during the visit (including an oxygen saturation of ≤92%) or noticed by a family member was reported on a 24-hour telephone hotline with facilitated referral to tertiary care.
The primary outcome was treatment failure during the 3-day course of the trial regimen. Treatment failure was considered to have occurred if the patient died or had WHO-defined danger signs or retraction of the lower chest wall, if the patient was hospitalized, or if the patient’s trial regimen was changed by the trial physician owing to new-onset infection or a serious adverse event. The null hypothesis was inferiority of placebo to amoxicillin; the alternative was noninferiority. A key secondary outcome was relapse (between days 4 and 14) defined according to similar criteria. Adherence for the purposes of the per-protocol analysis was defined as the receipt of at least 5 doses by day 3, including the first 4 doses, or receipt of the assigned amoxicillin or placebo until treatment failure and receipt of no other antibiotic. Adverse events were defined as nonsevere (mild diarrhea, rash, or mouth ulcer) and severe (diarrhea for which intravenous hydration was warranted, anaphylaxis, organ failure, life-threatening injury, or death).
The initial sample size was based on a trial by Hazir et al. and specified an incidence of treatment failure of 5% with amoxicillin and a noninferiority margin of 2.5 percentage points. The sample size was later revised to specify a more conservative noninferiority margin of 1.75 percentage points with a presumed treatment failure of 3.50% with amoxicillin (based on an interim analysis involving 1000 patients). An increase of 1.75 percentage points in the incidence of treatment failure with placebo over amoxicillin was considered to be clinically meaningful. Considering nonadherence and loss to follow-up of 5%, we estimated that 3978 children would have to complete treatment for the trial to have 90% power at a one-sided alpha level of 0.05.
Data were double entered in a structured query language (SQL)–based relational database with an audit trail (Microsoft SQL Server 2008, release 2). Interim analyses for safety were performed with the use of the O’Brien–Fleming approach by an independent statistician who was supervised by the data and safety monitoring board. A between-group difference in adverse events (including death) that was statistically meaningful, clinically meaningful, or both was assessed in a blinded manner, at an alpha level of 0.01 for stopping the trial.
A statistical analysis plan was created and approved by the data and safety monitoring board in December 2017; no changes were made before locking the database and unblinding. The intention-to-treat analysis included all the children who had undergone randomization and received at least one dose of the assigned amoxicillin or placebo. The per-protocol population, which included all the children who had received five of six doses (with four doses in the first 2 days), was used for the primary analysis. We estimated unadjusted proportions and the between-group difference in the risk of treatment failure, with 95% confidence intervals. It was planned that noninferiority would be shown if the upper boundary of the 95% confidence interval for the between-group difference was less than 1.75 percentage points. As part of a post hoc analysis, we looked at the lower boundary of the 95% confidence interval for evidence of superiority of amoxicillin. We also estimated the percentage of children with nonserious and serious adverse events and the between-group difference in these measures. The results of a stratified analysis that was performed according to age categories and the presence or absence of fever and wheeze, as prespecified, were presented with point estimates and 95% confidence intervals.
In additional exploratory analyses, we identified predictors of treatment failure using backward elimination logistic regression. At the outset, univariate analysis was conducted to identify the effect of each predictor on outcome. Variables that were significant at a P value of 0.2 or less at a univariable level were considered for adjustment in a multivariable model. Because of different cutoff values for the respiratory rate according to age, the respiratory rate was expressed in thirds (lowest third, up to 44.5 breaths per minute; middle third, from 44.6 to 51.0 breaths per minute; and highest third, >51.0 breaths per minute). We also assessed the effect of repeated randomization on treatment failure using mixed-effects logistic regression to account for potential nonindependence between observations from re-enrolled children.
Secondary outcomes (including relapse) were compared with the use of raw incidence data, since we had no prespecified information on which to base inferiority margins. In addition, we calculated the number of children who would need to be treated to prevent one treatment failure. All analyses were performed with the use of Stata software, version 14 (StataCorp).

Section: Results

From November 9, 2014, through November 30, 2017, a total of 4002 children were randomly assigned to receive placebo (1999 children) or amoxicillin (2003 children). Of these children, 1927 in the placebo group (96.4%) and 1929 in the amoxicillin group (96.3%) were eligible to be included in the per-protocol analysis ( Figure 1 ).
The trial groups were balanced with respect to important variables such as individual and household demographic characteristics as well as respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and other clinical characteristics ( Table 1 ; and Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org). Of the children who were eligible for the per-protocol analysis, 2030 of 3856 (52.6%) were male and 1776 of 3856 (46.1%) were between 2 and 11 months of age.
A total of 694 of 3815 children (18.2%) (335 of 1901 in the placebo group and 359 of 1914 in the amoxicillin group) had moderate-to-severe wasting. A total of 2079 of 3856 children (53.9%) had received a third dose of pentavalent and pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (1023 of 1927 children in the placebo group and 1056 of 1929 children in the amoxicillin group).
Treatment failure occurred in 95 children in the placebo group (4.9%) and in 51 children in the amoxicillin group (2.6%) (between-group difference, 2.3 percentage points; 95% CI, 0.9 to 3.7, favoring amoxicillin), including one death in each group. This difference was above the noninferiority margin of 1.75 percentage points ( Table 2 ), which indicates that we did not find that placebo was noninferior to amoxicillin. The 95% confidence interval suggested that amoxicillin was superior to placebo. The results were similar when the analysis was repeated in the intention-to-treat population (between-group difference, 2.3 percentage points; 95% CI, 0.9 to 3.6, favoring amoxicillin).
Univariable analyses showed that the major factors affecting treatment failure were reported symptoms of diarrhea and fever, anemia detected on physical examination, temperature of at least 37.5°C, a respiratory rate of at least 45 breaths per minute, and poor indoor air quality ( Figure 2A and Table S2).
In an exploratory adjusted model ( Figure 2B and Table S3), amoxicillin was associated with a lower risk of treatment failure than placebo (odds ratio, 0.52; 95% CI, 0.37 to 0.74). Other independent predictors of treatment failure included respiratory rate (middle third vs. lowest third: odds ratio, 1.61; 95% CI, 1.03 to 2.52; highest third vs. lowest third: odds ratio, 2.03; 95% CI, 1.31 to 3.12), wheeze (odds ratio, 1.89; 95% CI, 1.14 to 3.14), fever (odds ratio, 1.75; 95% CI, 1.21 to 2.55), history of fever (odds ratio, 1.60; 95% CI, 1.04 to 2.46), history of diarrhea (odds ratio, 1.63; 95% CI, 1.00 to 2.71), and poor indoor air quality (odds ratio, 1.46; 95% CI, 1.04 to 2.06) ( Figure 2B ).
To assess the effect of re-enrollment, child-level variability in results showed an intracluster correlation coefficient of 0 (variance=0.001), suggesting that episodes could be treated independently even when the same child was enrolled more than once (which occurred in 256 children). The analysis results are presented in Table S4.
At day 14, relapse had occurred in 40 children (2.2%) in the placebo group and in 58 children (3.1%) in the amoxicillin group (mean difference, 0.9 percentage points; 95% CI, −2.1 to 0.3) ( Table 2 ). At day 3, adverse events had occurred in 63 children in the placebo group (3.3%) and in 43 children in the amoxicillin group (2.2%) (mean difference, 1.0 percentage point; 95% CI, −0.2 to 2.2).
Results were consistent across subgroups defined according to age, the presence or absence of fever, and the presence or absence of wheeze ( Table 3 ). In the placebo group, the incidence of treatment failure was higher among children with fever (difference, 4.1 percentage points; 95% CI, 1.5 to 6.7) and among those with wheeze (difference, 7.0 percentage points; 95% CI, 1.4 to 12.7) ( Table 3 ). In order to prevent one treatment failure, the number of children with pneumonia and tachypnea who would need to be treated was 44 (95% CI, 31 to 80).

Section: Discussion

This trial, which involved children younger than 5 years of age with nonsevere pneumonia with tachypnea and which was conducted in low-income communities without HIV infection and with a low incidence of malaria, did not show that placebo was noninferior to amoxicillin in preventing treatment failure between days 0 and 3. The incidence of treatment failure was lower among patients who received amoxicillin, and the 95% confidence interval for the difference did not include 0. There were more relapses in the amoxicillin group between days 4 and 14, although the between-group differences for those results were not significant.
In our trial, almost one in five children had moderate-to-severe wasting, and only 62% of the children had received a third dose of pentavalent and pneumococcal vaccines. The results did not differ when the analysis was stratified according to age.
Data are lacking on withholding antibiotics for pneumonia with tachypnea in children from low-income and low-to-middle-income communities, and conclusions from reports are inconsistent. In a trial conducted by Hazir et al. in an outpatient setting in Pakistan, the incidence of treatment failure at day 3 (7.2% in the placebo group and 8.3% in the amoxicillin group, indicating equivalence) was higher but similar to that in our trial, but their population included far more children with wheeze than ours (50% vs. 7%). In contrast, in a trial conducted by Awasthi et al. involving children who did not have a response to bronchodilators and who had normal chest radiographic findings in an ambulatory care setting in India, the incidence of treatment failure was substantially higher among children who received placebo than among those who received amoxicillin (24.0% vs. 19.9%; difference, 4.2 percentage points, 95% CI, 0.2 to 8.1). In the trial by Awasthi et al., the persistence of wheeze was used as a criterion for treatment failure; this limits the generalizability of the findings. Our trial included far fewer children with wheeze than that conducted by Awasthi and colleagues. Also, none of the children with tachypnea in our trial had had a response to bronchodilator therapy; this lack of response indicates that the children in our trial were likely to have had pneumonia with an infectious cause.
In a trial in Malawi conducted by Ginsburg et al., the comparison of amoxicillin with placebo was similar to that in our current trial. The trial by Ginsburg et al. was stopped early because the incidence of treatment failure was higher in the placebo group than in the amoxicillin group (7% vs. 4%); however, the trial included fever as an additional criterion of treatment failure and was conducted in hospital outpatient departments.
Our results, which were based on the current WHO categorization of pneumonia, suggest that existing recommendations are valid. However, there are a number of important considerations, including the number needed to treat, cost-effectiveness, and high-risk subgroups.
In our trial, the number of children with pneumonia and tachypnea who would have needed to be treated to prevent one treatment failure was 44 — a relatively high number. This number is high enough to suggest that antibiotics may not be warranted for a large number of children, yet there are subgroups with a clinical phenotype severe enough to warrant antibiotic therapy. Identifying these subgroups for targeted treatment can limit unnecessary antibiotic use.
Treatment costs are related to raw expenditures on antibiotics. As Zhang et al. found in a systematic review of costs associated with severe pneumonia, these expenditures are considerable at both the individual and societal levels. Furthermore, the global implications of antibiotic resistance are important. Resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics is at epidemic levels in parts of Asia, and stewardship of antibiotic prescription is the only sure means of preventing further extension of resistance to cephalosporin and carbapenem. With the changing epidemiologic characteristics of pneumonia owing to the success of pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccination programs, the equation is complex. In addition, the hypothesis that most children in our trial had viral infections is supported by the observation that treatment failure was not associated with wasting, stunting, or vaccination status.
Another issue relates to risk stratification. Although our trial was not powered for subgroup analyses, our findings raise several questions about targeted treatment. Estimates of the difference in treatment failure were higher in favor of amoxicillin in children with fever and wheeze. Reported temperature, documented fever, and wheeze at presentation have also been identified to be of prognostic importance in children with acute cough and respiratory infections in developed countries.
Exploratory analyses suggest that changing the criteria for nonsevere pneumonia, with screening according to predictor variables, might be more cost-effective than using the current criteria for classification of pneumonia in primary care settings. It is unclear whether new methods such as measurement of oxygen saturation at presentation or point-of-care biomarker testing would enhance management.
The strengths of our trial include a high level of adherence, directly observed treatment, a low level of attrition, assiduous reporting and investigation of adverse events, and per-protocol analyses that are necessary for the internal validity of noninferiority trials. Our trial also had important limitations, including narrow generalizability because of the strict trial exclusion criteria and short follow-up beyond what is usual in Pakistan for this population. The area in which the patients resided has substantial health care utilization for respiratory infections ; thus, the results may not be generalizable to areas where presentation is delayed, often until signs and symptoms worsen. The lack of imaging results was a limitation, but this was a deliberate part of the “real life” design of the trial. Amoxicillin was prescribed with the use of standard weight bands recommended by the WHO; thus, some children received lower doses and some children received higher doses of amoxicillin than the dose of 90 mg per kilogram of body weight per day recommended by the WHO. However, none of the children received a dose of less than 50 mg per kilogram per day, the lower limit of high-dose amoxicillin.
In conclusion, among Pakistani children younger than 5 years of age with pneumonia with tachypnea as defined by the WHO, the frequency of treatment failure was higher in the placebo group than in the amoxicillin group, a difference that did not meet the noninferiority margin for placebo.
