Title: Ofatumumab versus Teriflunomide in Multiple Sclerosis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Ofatumumab, a subcutaneous anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, selectively depletes B cells. Teriflunomide, an oral inhibitor of pyrimidine synthesis, reduces T-cell and B-cell activation. The relative effects of these two drugs in patients with multiple sclerosis are not known.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In two double-blind, double-dummy, phase 3 trials, we randomly assigned patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis to receive subcutaneous ofatumumab (20 mg every 4 weeks after 20-mg loading doses at days 1, 7, and 14) or oral teriflunomide (14 mg daily) for up to 30 months. The primary end point was the annualized relapse rate. Secondary end points included disability worsening confirmed at 3 months or 6 months, disability improvement confirmed at 6 months, the number of gadolinium-enhancing lesions per T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, the annualized rate of new or enlarging lesions on T2-weighted MRI, serum neurofilament light chain levels at month 3, and change in brain volume.

Abstract_Section: Results

Overall, 946 patients were assigned to receive ofatumumab and 936 to receive teriflunomide; the median follow-up was 1.6 years. The annualized relapse rates in the ofatumumab and teriflunomide groups were 0.11 and 0.22, respectively, in trial 1 (difference, −0.11; 95% confidence interval [CI], −0.16 to −0.06; P<0.001) and 0.10 and 0.25 in trial 2 (difference, −0.15; 95% CI, −0.20 to −0.09; P<0.001). In the pooled trials, the percentage of patients with disability worsening confirmed at 3 months was 10.9% with ofatumumab and 15.0% with teriflunomide (hazard ratio, 0.66; P=0.002); the percentage with disability worsening confirmed at 6 months was 8.1% and 12.0%, respectively (hazard ratio, 0.68; P=0.01); and the percentage with disability improvement confirmed at 6 months was 11.0% and 8.1% (hazard ratio, 1.35; P=0.09). The number of gadolinium-enhancing lesions per T1-weighted MRI scan, the annualized rate of lesions on T2-weighted MRI, and serum neurofilament light chain levels, but not the change in brain volume, were in the same direction as the primary end point. Injection-related reactions occurred in 20.2% in the ofatumumab group and in 15.0% in the teriflunomide group (placebo injections). Serious infections occurred in 2.5% and 1.8% of the patients in the respective groups.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among patients with multiple sclerosis, ofatumumab was associated with lower annualized relapse rates than teriflunomide. (Funded by Novartis; ASCLEPIOS I and II ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT02792218 and NCT02792231 .)

Section: Introduction

The pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis involves B cells. Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies that induce B-cell depletion, such as rituximab and ocrelizumab, are effective disease-modifying therapies for multiple sclerosis. Ofatumumab, a fully human antibody that is used to treat chronic leukemia, binds to a region distinct from that of other anti-CD20 antibodies, including the smaller and the larger loop of CD20 receptors. In experimental models, a high binding affinity and slow off-rate (slow dissociation of the binding between ofatumumab and the CD20 receptor in B cells) result in efficient B-cell lysis, mediated through complement-dependent and, to a lesser extent, antibody-dependent cytotoxicity. In patients with multiple sclerosis, ofatumumab can be given at lower doses than those studied in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and rheumatoid arthritis, and ofatumumab can be administered subcutaneously by the patient after initial doses are given under medical supervision. Experimental models have shown that there may be more direct access to lymph nodes through the lymphatic system with subcutaneous administration than with intravenous infusion, but this has not been tested under clinical conditions. On treatment cessation, B-cell repletion and reconstitution of humoral immunity have been reported to occur faster with ofatumumab than with other intravenously administered B-cell–targeted therapies.
Teriflunomide, an oral disease-modifying therapy for relapsing multiple sclerosis, inhibits pyrimidine synthesis, reducing T-cell and B-cell activation. According to the results of one comparative prospective trial and a network meta-analysis, the efficacy of teriflunomide to reduce annualized relapse rates is similar to that of interferons and glatiramer acetate, but according to observational studies it is probably inferior to other oral and monoclonal antibody treatments for multiple sclerosis. We report the results of two phase 3, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, active-controlled clinical trials of identical design, which assessed the efficacy and safety of subcutaneous ofatumumab as compared with oral teriflunomide.

Section: Methods

The ASCLEPIOS I and II trials were designed by the sponsor (Novartis Pharma) in consultation with the steering committee. The investigators collected data, which were analyzed by the sponsor. The investigators, the sponsor, and the steering committee were unaware of treatment assignments throughout the trials. An independent data monitoring committee reviewed the safety of treatment using regular analyses performed by independent statisticians, who were not involved in the conduct of the trials. The manuscript was drafted with medical writing assistance funded by the sponsor. All the authors, including those employed by Novartis, had full access to the data and were involved in the critical review of all drafts of the manuscript. All the authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data, the accurate reporting of adverse events, and the fidelity of the trials to the protocols (available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). There were confidentiality agreements in place between the authors and the sponsor. Novartis supplied the trial drugs and placebo. The trials were conducted in accordance with the International Conference on Harmonisation guidelines for Good Clinical Practice and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The protocol was approved by an institutional review board or ethics committee at each trial site. All the patients or their legal representatives provided written informed consent before commencing trial-related procedures.
Eligibility criteria at screening included an age of 18 to 55 years; a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (according to the 2010 revised McDonald criteria ) with a relapsing–remitting course or a secondary progressive course with disease activity (according to the criteria of Lublin et al. ); an Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score of 0 to 5.5 (scores range from 0 to 10.0, with higher scores indicating greater disability ); at least one relapse in the year before screening, at least two relapses in the 2 years before screening, or at least one lesion detected with the use of gadolinium enhancement (gadolinium-enhancing lesion) on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the year before randomization; and a neurologically stable condition for at least 1 month before randomization. Key exclusion criteria, including the use of previous disease-modifying treatments and the durations of washout periods, are listed in the Additional Methodology Details section and Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.
ASCLEPIOS I and II were randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, active-controlled, multicenter trials of identical design that were conducted concurrently. Patients, centers, and investigators could participate in only one of the trials. The trials featured a blinded sample-size reestimation to adjust the sample size and trial duration on the basis of a predefined overall minimum event rate. Each trial was powered for the primary end point (annualized relapse rate); the combined trials provided the required sample size and power for the preplanned meta-analysis of disability worsening confirmed at 3 months or 6 months. Eligible patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio through interactive response technology to receive ofatumumab at a dose of 20 mg subcutaneously every 4 weeks after 20-mg loading doses at days 1, 7, and 14 or oral teriflunomide at a dose of 14 mg once daily, for up to 30 months. Patients in the ofatumumab group also received oral placebo and patients in the teriflunomide group also received subcutaneous placebo corresponding to the active drug in the other group. Patients received their first subcutaneous injection at the trial site, which was administered by a health care provider (investigator, trial nurse, or trial coordinator). On days 7 and 14 and at month 1, patients returned to the site to administer the injection themselves under the supervision of trial staff, who provided training on the correct method. The patient’s ability to administer the injection had to be demonstrated and documented before administration at home after month 1 was permitted. Randomization was stratified according to geographic region and subtype of multiple sclerosis. (For more on trial design, see the Additional Methodology Details section in the Supplementary Appendix .)
The primary end point was the annualized relapse rate up to the end of the trial. The annualized relapse rate was defined as the number of confirmed relapses of multiple sclerosis per year, according to prespecified criteria. Secondary clinical end points were disability worsening confirmed at 3 months, disability worsening confirmed at 6 months, and disability improvement (i.e., lessening of disability) confirmed at 6 months; a prespecified meta-analysis of these end points used the combined data from both trials. Secondary MRI end points included the number of gadolinium-enhancing lesions per T1-weighted MRI scan, the number of new or enlarging lesions on T2-weighted MRI per year, and the annual rate of brain-volume loss (see the protocols of the trials). A secondary biomarker end point was the serum neurofilament light chain concentration at month 3 and beyond, analyzed centrally by Navigate BioPharma using single-molecule-array immunoassay technology. Exploratory secondary end points included the relationship between neurofilament light chain concentration at baseline and the formation of new or enlarging lesions on T2-weighted MRI or brain-volume loss. Adverse events were recorded at all visits and graded according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE). (For more on trial end points, see the Additional Methodology Details section and Safety section in the Supplementary Appendix .)
We calculated that a sample size of 900 patients per trial would provide greater than 90% power in each trial to detect a 40% lower annualized relapse rate with ofatumumab than with teriflunomide. In the combined data from both trials, a sample of 900 patients per trial (i.e. a total of 1800 patients) would provide 90% power and 80% power to detect a 38.6% lower risk of disability worsening confirmed at 3 months and at 6 months, respectively, with ofatumumab than with teriflunomide. Sample size could be increased to a maximum of 1250 patients per trial, and the end of the trials was declared on the basis of a statistical projection when sufficient events had accumulated to power the analysis for the primary end point and the two end points of disability worsening. (For details, see the statistical analysis plan, available with the protocols at NEJM.org, and the Statistical Analyses section in the Supplementary Appendix .)
Efficacy analyses were carried out according to the intention-to-treat principle. Data on the annualized relapse rate were analyzed with the use of a negative binomial-regression model, with an offset for time spent in the trial in years to adjust for varying treatment durations among patients. The type I error was controlled by a statistical testing procedure, with seven prespecified secondary end points tested; disability worsening confirmed at 3 months or 6 months and disability improvement confirmed at 6 months were tested in preplanned meta-analyses of the combined trials only if the primary null hypothesis for the annualized relapse rate was rejected in both trials independently. Other secondary end points were tested in hierarchical sequential order in each trial (number of gadolinium-enhancing lesions per T1-weighted MRI scan, annualized rate of new or enlarging lesions on T2-weighted MRI, serum neurofilament light chain concentration, and annual rate of brain-volume loss) as long as all preceding null hypotheses could be rejected (Fig. S1).
Data from disability-related end points were analyzed with the use of a Cox proportional-hazards model, stratified according to trial. Numbers of gadolinium-enhancing lesions on T1-weighted MRI and new or enlarging lesions on T2-weighted MRI were assessed with the use of negative binomial-regression models; for analysis of data on gadolinium-enhancing lesions on T1-weighted MRI, the number of available MRI scans was used as an offset; for lesions on T2-weighted MRI, the time between the last available scan and baseline scan was used as an offset.
Data on serum neurofilament light chain concentration were analyzed with the use of a repeated-measures model after log transformation of the data; the treatment effect is reported as a percentage reduction in neurofilament light chain concentration on the basis of the ratio of geometric means (relative reduction in geometric means with ofatumumab vs. teriflunomide). The annual rate of brain-volume loss was estimated as the marginal slope estimate from a random-coefficient model with random intercept and slope on the basis of assessments of the percentage change from baseline in brain volume performed at month 12, month 24, and at the end of the trial. The primary end point and key secondary end points used analysis methods that handle missing data under missing-at-random assumptions. Empirical evidence for data missing at random is presented in Table S2 and Figures S2 and S3, together with sensitivity analyses under missing-not-at-random assumptions for the primary and key secondary disability-related end points (Tables S3 and S4).
The safety population included all the patients who received trial drugs. Safety data were collected during the treatment period (screening to end of trial) and the safety follow-up period until a patient’s last visit. After the last dose of trial drug, patients were followed for at least 9 months. Adverse events that occurred during the treatment period were reported from the first dose and up to 100 days (approximately 5 times the half-life of ofatumumab) after permanent trial-drug discontinuation, and all serious adverse events that were reported up to the last visit by the last patient were analyzed. Safety end points are reported for the individual and combined trials.

Section: Results

From October 2016 through March 2018, a total of 1882 patients were enrolled at 385 sites in 37 countries: 927 in ASCLEPIOS I (465 assigned to ofatumumab and 462 to teriflunomide) and 955 in ASCLEPIOS II (481 assigned to ofatumumab and 474 to teriflunomide). The median time in trial was 1.6 years (1.5 years in ASCLEPIOS I and 1.6 years in ASCLEPIOS II). More than 30% of the patients had a time in trial longer than 2 years (Table S2). Individual times in trial and times to trial-drug discontinuation and trial discontinuation are presented in Figures S2 and S3. The demographic and disease characteristics of the patients at baseline were similar in the two trials and in the treatment groups ( Table 1 ). In ASCLEPIOS I, the trial was completed by 89.5% of the patients in the ofatumumab group and by 81.4% of those in the teriflunomide group. In ASCLEPIOS II, the corresponding percentages were 82.5% and 82.1%. Screening, randomization, and follow-up are summarized in Figure S4.
In ASCLEPIOS I, the adjusted annualized relapse rate was 0.11 with ofatumumab and 0.22 with teriflunomide (difference, −0.11; 95% confidence interval [CI], −0.16 to −0.06; P<0.001). The corresponding rates in ASCLEPIOS II were 0.10 and 0.25 (difference, −0.15; 95% CI, −0.20 to −0.09; P<0.001) ( Table 2 ).
In the meta-analysis of both trials, the percentage of patients (Kaplan–Meier estimate at month 24) with disability worsening confirmed at 3 months was 10.9% with ofatumumab and 15.0% with teriflunomide (hazard ratio, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.50 to 0.86; P=0.002) ( Figure 1A and Table 2 ). The percentage of patients with disability worsening confirmed at 6 months was 8.1% with ofatumumab and 12.0% with teriflunomide (hazard ratio, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.50 to 0.92; P=0.01) ( Figure 1B and Table 2 ). Corresponding percentages of patients with disability improvement confirmed at 6 months from both trials were 11.0% with ofatumumab and 8.1% with teriflunomide (hazard ratio, 1.35; 95% CI, 0.95 to 1.92; P=0.09) ( Figure 1C and Table 2 ). The effect of ofatumumab on confirmed disability worsening was consistent across the two trials, as was the absence of a significant between-group difference in confirmed disability improvement ( Table 2 ).
In ASCLEPIOS I, the mean number of gadolinium-enhancing lesions per T1-weighted MRI scan was 0.01 with ofatumumab and 0.45 with teriflunomide (97% lower number of lesions with ofatumumab, P<0.001); in ASCLEPIOS II, the corresponding numbers were 0.03 and 0.51, respectively (94% lower with ofatumumab, P<0.001) ( Table 2 ). In ASCLEPIOS I, the mean number of new or enlarging lesions per year on T2-weighted MRI was 0.72 with ofatumumab and 4.00 with teriflunomide (82% lower number of lesions with ofatumumab, P<0.001); corresponding values in ASCLEPIOS II were 0.64 and 4.15, respectively (85% lower with ofatumumab, P<0.001) ( Table 2 and Table S5). The annual rate of brain-volume loss did not differ significantly between the ofatumumab group and the teriflunomide group (−0.28% with ofatumumab and −0.35% with teriflunomide in ASCLEPIOS I and −0.29% with ofatumumab and −0.35% with teriflunomide in ASCLEPIOS II) ( Table 2 and Fig. S5).
In ASCLEPIOS I, the serum neurofilament light chain concentration was lower in the ofatumumab group than in the teriflunomide group by 7% at month 3 (P=0.01), by 27% at month 12, and by 23% at month 24. Corresponding differences in ASCLEPIOS II were 11% (P<0.001), 26%, and 24% ( Table 2 and Fig. S6). Adjusted annualized mean rates of new or enlarging lesions on T2-weighted MRI according to quartiles of neurofilament light chain concentration at baseline are presented in Table S6 and Figure S7.
Adverse events up to 100 days after the last administration of a trial drug, serious adverse events up to the last visit by the last patient, adverse events leading to treatment discontinuation, and deaths are summarized in Table 3 . In the combined analyses, 791 of 946 patients (83.6%) in the ofatumumab group reported an adverse event, as compared with 788 of 936 patients (84.2%) in the teriflunomide group. Adverse events that occurred in at least 10% of the patients treated with ofatumumab were injection-related reactions, nasopharyngitis, headache, injection-site reaction, upper respiratory tract infection, and urinary tract infection; events that occurred in at least 10% of those treated with teriflunomide were nasopharyngitis, injection-related reactions, alopecia, upper respiratory tract infection, headache, and diarrhea (Table S7). Serious adverse events were reported in 9.1% of the patients treated with ofatumumab and 7.9% of those treated with teriflunomide. One death occurred in the teriflunomide group (aortic dissection) during the post-treatment follow-up period.
Infections and infestations were reported in 488 patients (51.6%) who received ofatumumab and 493 (52.7%) who received teriflunomide. Infections reported in 10% or more of the patients in either group across both trials were nasopharyngitis (18.0% with ofatumumab and 16.7% with teriflunomide), upper respiratory tract infection (10.3% and 12.8%, respectively), and urinary tract infection (10.3% and 8.3%, respectively). The percentage of patients who reported a serious infection was 2.5% with ofatumumab and 1.8% with teriflunomide. The percentage of patients who reported a herpesvirus-associated infection was 4.9% in the ofatumumab group and 4.2% in the teriflunomide group. All herpesvirus-associated infections were mild (CTCAE grade 1) or moderate (grade 2), resolved while patients continued therapy, and did not lead to treatment discontinuation. Bronchitis was reported in 2.5% of the patients treated with ofatumumab and in 3.5% of those treated with teriflunomide; corresponding percentages for pneumonia were 0.3% and 0.7%, respectively. Appendicitis was reported in 8 patients who received ofatumumab and in 2 who received teriflunomide. No opportunistic infections were reported (Table S7).
At least one injection-related systemic reaction, defined as systemic reactions occurring within 24 hours after injection (see the list of symptoms in the Safety section in the Supplementary Appendix ), was reported in 20.2% of the patients who received ofatumumab and in 15.0% of those given placebo injections in the teriflunomide group (for details on injection-related premedication, see Tables S8 and S9). Injection-site reactions occurred in 10.9% and 5.6% of patients who received ofatumumab or placebo injections, respectively. Most injection-related systemic reactions (e.g., headache, flushing, and “other”) occurred at the first injection (14.4% and 7.5% among the patients who received ofatumumab or placebo-dummy injections, respectively) (Fig. S8), were mild or moderate (grades 1 or 2), and were managed without treatment. Two severe (grade 3) injection-related systemic reactions were reported in the ofatumumab group (0.2%), one of which led to drug discontinuation after the first injection (0.1%). No life-threatening or anaphylactoid injection-related reactions (grade 4) were reported. After the fourth injection, 74.4% of patients administered ofatumumab at home.
Five neoplasms (0.5%) occurred in the ofatumumab group (two cases of basal-cell carcinoma and one case each of malignant melanoma in situ, recurrent non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and invasive breast carcinoma) and four (0.4%) in the teriflunomide group (two cases of basal-cell carcinoma and one case each of cervix carcinoma and fibrosarcoma) ( Table 3 ). Findings regarding B-cell depletion and antidrug-binding antibodies are reported in Figures S9 through S11.

Section: Discussion

In these two simultaneously conducted active-controlled trials involving patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis, both ofatumumab and teriflunomide were associated with low relapse rates. The relapse rate was significantly lower with ofatumumab than with teriflunomide in each of the two trials. In a prespecified meta-analysis of both trials, the percentages of patients with disability worsening confirmed at 3 months or 6 months were lower with ofatumumab than with teriflunomide, but the groups did not differ significantly with respect to confirmed disability improvement. The results of these trials do not permit any inferences to be made about the efficacy of ofatumumab as compared with other drugs for multiple sclerosis that are considered to be more potent than teriflunomide.
Ofatumumab was also superior to teriflunomide in suppressing lesion activity on MRI. Lesion counts on MRI in the teriflunomide groups were higher than those previously reported in one phase 3 trial of teriflunomide as compared with placebo, which suggests a population with more disease activity overall in the ASCLEPIOS trials, differences in the assessment methods used at the MRI analysis centers, or both. Ofatumumab lowered serum concentrations of neurofilament light chain, a marker of neuroaxonal damage. However, despite greater reductions in neurofilament light chain concentrations with ofatumumab than with teriflunomide, change in brain volume did not differ significantly between the two treatments. This discrepancy between two markers of tissue damage needs further analysis. Ofatumumab lowered B-cell numbers during the 4-week loading regimen, and the initial B-cell depletion was maintained by monthly injections.
Injection-related reactions were more frequent with ofatumumab than with placebo injections in the teriflunomide group, particularly with the first injection. Premedication was used for the first injection by less than 70% of the patients, with decreasing usage thereafter. The reason for the observed imbalance in appendicitis as an adverse event with ofatumumab is unknown, and no signal for appendicitis has been observed with ofatumumab treatment in phase 2 studies in multiple sclerosis and other autoimmune indications or with other anti-CD20 therapies in multiple sclerosis.
Ofatumumab was associated with lower annualized relapse rates than teriflunomide and showed benefit with respect to most secondary clinical and MRI end points but not confirmed disability improvement. Ofatumumab was associated with a higher frequency of injection-related systemic reactions, predominantly with the first injection, than was placebo injection. Larger and longer trials are required to determine the long-term effect and risks of ofatumumab as compared with other disease-modifying treatments, including other anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies.
