Title: Tranexamic Acid in Patients Undergoing Noncardiac Surgery


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Perioperative bleeding is common in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. Tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic drug that may safely decrease such bleeding.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a trial involving patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. Patients were randomly assigned to receive tranexamic acid (1-g intravenous bolus) or placebo at the start and end of surgery (reported here) and, with the use of a partial factorial design, a hypotension-avoidance or hypertension-avoidance strategy (not reported here). The primary efficacy outcome was life-threatening bleeding, major bleeding, or bleeding into a critical organ (composite bleeding outcome) at 30 days. The primary safety outcome was myocardial injury after noncardiac surgery, nonhemorrhagic stroke, peripheral arterial thrombosis, or symptomatic proximal venous thromboembolism (composite cardiovascular outcome) at 30 days. To establish the noninferiority of tranexamic acid to placebo for the composite cardiovascular outcome, the upper boundary of the one-sided 97.5% confidence interval for the hazard ratio had to be below 1.125, and the one-sided P value had to be less than 0.025.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 9535 patients underwent randomization. A composite bleeding outcome event occurred in 433 of 4757 patients (9.1%) in the tranexamic acid group and in 561 of 4778 patients (11.7%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.76; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.67 to 0.87; absolute difference, −2.6 percentage points; 95% CI, −3.8 to −1.4; two-sided P<0.001 for superiority). A composite cardiovascular outcome event occurred in 649 of 4581 patients (14.2%) in the tranexamic acid group and in 639 of 4601 patients (13.9%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.92 to 1.14; upper boundary of the one-sided 97.5% CI, 1.14; absolute difference, 0.3 percentage points; 95% CI, −1.1 to 1.7; one-sided P=0.04 for noninferiority).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among patients undergoing noncardiac surgery, the incidence of the composite bleeding outcome was significantly lower with tranexamic acid than with placebo. Although the between-group difference in the composite cardiovascular outcome was small, the noninferiority of tranexamic acid was not established. (Funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and others; POISE-3 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03505723 .)

Section: Introduction

Perioperative bleeding, a common complication in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery, is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Large surgical trials have shown that tranexamic acid reduces the incidence and severity of bleeding in patients undergoing cesarean section or cardiac surgery. Encouraging evidence from small trials suggests that tranexamic acid may reduce the incidence and severity of bleeding in patients undergoing orthopedic surgery ; there are limited data on its use in patients undergoing nonorthopedic noncardiac surgeries. Tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic drug, and trials have not been large enough to establish whether tranexamic acid increases the risk of thrombotic events in noncardiac surgery.
We undertook the Perioperative Ischemic Evaluation–3 (POISE-3) trial to answer the following questions. In patients undergoing noncardiac surgery who are at risk for bleeding and cardiovascular events, does tranexamic acid result in a lower incidence of life-threatening bleeding, major bleeding, or bleeding into a critical organ than placebo, and is it noninferior to placebo with respect to the incidence of major cardiovascular complications within 30 days?

Section: Methods

In this international, randomized, controlled trial, we evaluated the effects of tranexamic acid as compared with placebo in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. We used a partial factorial design in patients who were receiving at least one long-term antihypertensive medication to evaluate a hypotension-avoidance strategy as compared with a hypertension-avoidance strategy. We report the results of the trial of tranexamic acid here. Details of the trial design have been published previously. Trial centers obtained ethics approval before commencing recruitment.
The trial was funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and others. The Population Health Research Institute was the trial coordinating center and was responsible for the randomization scheme, database, data validation, analyses, and trial coordination. No external funder had a role in the design or conduct of the trial, collection or analysis of the data, or preparation of the manuscript. The steering committee designed the trial and vouches for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the adherence of the trial to the protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. Investigators and trial personnel collected the data. The writing committee finalized the statistical analysis plan, available with the protocol, before any investigator was made aware of the trial results. The first author wrote the first draft of the manuscript, and the writing committee made revisions and made the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. There were no agreements concerning confidentiality of the data between the sponsors (i.e., funders) and the authors or their institutions.
We recruited patients from June 2018 through July 2021 at 114 hospitals in 22 countries. Eligible patients were 45 years of age or older, were undergoing inpatient noncardiac surgery, and were at risk for bleeding and cardiovascular complications according to criteria previously associated with perioperative bleeding and cardiovascular complications (e.g., known atherosclerotic disease, undergoing major surgery, an age of ≥70 years, and a serum creatinine level of >175 μmol per liter [2.0 mg per deciliter]). Patients were excluded if they were undergoing cardiac surgery or intracranial neurosurgery, if a physician planned to administer systemic tranexamic acid during surgery, or if the patient had a creatinine clearance of less than 30 ml per minute (Cockcroft–Gault equation) or was receiving long-term dialysis. All eligibility criteria are presented in Section S1 in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.
After written informed consent was obtained from all the patients or a patient-designated decision maker, randomization was performed by means of a central computerized system with the use of block randomization, with stratification according to center. Patients were assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive tranexamic acid (1-g intravenous bolus) or placebo at the start and end of surgery and, in a 1:1 ratio with the use of a partial factorial design, to a hypotension-avoidance strategy or a hypertension-avoidance strategy. Patients, health care providers, data collectors, and outcome adjudicators were unaware of the trial-group assignments. The follow-up process is described in Section S2.
The primary efficacy outcome was a composite of life-threatening bleeding, major bleeding, and bleeding into a critical organ — henceforth referred to as the composite bleeding outcome — at 30 days after randomization. The primary safety outcome was a composite of myocardial injury after noncardiac surgery (i.e., myocardial infarction or isolated ischemic troponin elevation), nonhemorrhagic stroke, peripheral arterial thrombosis, and symptomatic proximal venous thromboembolism — henceforth referred to as the composite cardiovascular outcome — at 30 days after randomization.
Secondary and tertiary outcomes (Section S3) included the individual components of the composite bleeding outcome and the composite cardiovascular outcome, bleeding independently associated with death after noncardiac surgery, myocardial infarction, a net risk–benefit outcome (death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal life-threatening bleeding, major bleeding, bleeding into a critical organ, myocardial injury after noncardiac surgery, stroke, peripheral arterial thrombosis, or symptomatic proximal venous thromboembolism), major bleeding according to the criteria of the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) , transfusion of at least 1 unit of packed red cells, amputation, any symptomatic or asymptomatic proximal venous thromboembolism, and seizure. Outcome definitions, monitoring, and the adjudication process are described in Sections S4, S5, and S6, respectively.
The primary efficacy hypothesis was that tranexamic acid would be superior to placebo with respect to the composite bleeding outcome. The primary safety hypothesis was that tranexamic acid would be noninferior to placebo with respect to the composite cardiovascular outcome. To satisfy the noninferiority hypothesis, the upper boundary of the one-sided 97.5% confidence interval for the hazard ratio of the composite cardiovascular outcome — which corresponds to the upper boundary of the two-sided 95% confidence interval — had to be below 1.125, and the one-sided P value had to be less than 0.025. The noninferiority margin corresponds to a relative increase in risk of 12.5%, which is half the relative decrease in risk of 25% that we looked for to establish the superiority of aspirin to placebo in the POISE-2 trial. To inform our primary hypotheses, the POISE-3 trial was initially designed to randomly assign 10,000 patients to receive tranexamic acid or placebo (Section S7).
Owing to a financial deficit resulting from slowed recruitment during the coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) pandemic, the steering committee stopped recruitment on July 15, 2021, after at least 9500 patients had undergone randomization. This decision was made without knowledge of the trial results but with knowledge that the incidences of the aggregate composite bleeding and composite cardiovascular outcome events were higher than originally estimated. We estimated that a sample of 9500 patients would provide the trial with 90% power to detect a hazard ratio of 0.80 or less (two-sided alpha level of 0.05) for tranexamic acid as compared with placebo, assuming an incidence of composite bleeding outcome events of 9.0% in the placebo group. Stopping the trial at 9500 patients also provided the trial with 98% power for a noninferiority margin, expressed as a hazard ratio of 1.125 (one-sided alpha level of 0.025), under the assumption of an incidence of composite cardiovascular outcome events of 14.0% in the placebo group and an expected hazard ratio of 0.90 and with adjustment for the partial factorial design.
The noninferiority hypothesis was evaluated in the per-protocol population (i.e., patients who received both planned doses of tranexamic acid or placebo). For all the other analyses, data were analyzed in the intention-to-treat population (i.e., patients evaluated in the trial group to which they had been randomly assigned). Data for patients who were lost to follow-up were censored on the last day that their status was known. An independent data and safety monitoring committee reviewed interim analyses when 25%, 50%, and 75% of the 30-day data were available. Details of the interim analyses are provided in Section S8.
Most outcomes were analyzed with the use of Cox proportional-hazards models, with stratification according to trial group in the blood-pressure management factorial. For the Cox models, we calculated the hazard ratio, corresponding 95% confidence interval, and associated P value. A two-sided P value of less than 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. For the primary efficacy and safety outcomes, we assessed whether the blood-pressure management factorial affected the results of tranexamic acid as compared with placebo using Cox proportional-hazards models that incorporated tests of interaction.
We analyzed the binary outcome of transfusion using a two-by-two table and analyzed length of hospital stay and days alive at home using quantile regression. Because we did not correct for multiplicity when conducting tests for secondary or tertiary outcomes, results are reported as point estimates and 95% confidence intervals. The widths of the confidence intervals have not been adjusted for multiplicity, so the intervals should not be used to infer definitive treatment effects for the secondary or tertiary outcomes.
We performed four prespecified subgroup analyses of the primary outcomes; subgroups were defined according to type of surgery, hemoglobin level, estimated glomerular filtration rate, and N-terminal pro–brain natriuretic peptide level (Section S9). For the composite cardiovascular outcome, we performed a sensitivity analysis according to the intention-to-treat principle. Statistical analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

We randomly assigned 9535 patients to receive tranexamic acid (4757 patients) or placebo (4778 patients) (Fig. S1). The 30-day follow-up visit was completed for 99.9% of the patients. The baseline characteristics of the patients, type of noncardiac surgeries, and preoperative medications were similar in the two groups ( Table 1 ). The mean age of the patients was 69.4 years, and 4183 were women (43.9%). Most patients underwent nonorthopedic noncardiac surgery (76.8%). Most patients were enrolled in North America (31.1%), Europe (39.8%), and the Asia–Pacific region (27.0%) (Table S1). A total of 75.9% of the patients were White (Table S2).
In both the tranexamic acid group and the placebo group, 96.3% of the patients received both doses of the trial agent (Table S3). Administration of nontrial antifibrinolytic drugs was uncommon (Table S4), and the postoperative use of drugs during the hospital stay that can increase the risk of bleeding was similar in the two groups (Table S5). After surgery, 64.2% of the patients in the tranexamic acid group and 63.6% of those in the placebo group received prophylactic medication against venous thromboembolism.
A composite bleeding outcome event occurred in 433 patients (9.1%) in the tranexamic acid group and in 561 patients (11.7%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.76; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.67 to 0.87; absolute difference, −2.6 percentage points; 95% CI, −3.8 to −1.4; two-sided P<0.001 for superiority) ( Table 2 and Figure 1 ). A composite cardiovascular outcome event occurred in 649 of 4581 patients (14.2%) in the tranexamic acid group and in 639 of 4601 patients (13.9%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.92 to 1.14; upper boundary of the one-sided 97.5% CI, 1.14; absolute difference, 0.3 percentage points; 95% CI, −1.1 to 1.7; one-sided P=0.04 for noninferiority); the sensitivity analysis performed according to the intention-to-treat principle produced a similar result (hazard ratio, 1.03; 95% CI, 0.92 to 1.14).
The interaction term of log-time according to trial group in the models indicated that the assumptions of proportional hazards were not violated (P=0.75 for interaction in the analysis of the primary efficacy outcome and P=0.48 for interaction in the analysis of the primary safety outcome). The blood-pressure management factorial had no significant effect on the results of the comparison between tranexamic acid and placebo for the primary efficacy outcome (P=0.67 for interaction) and the primary safety outcome (P=0.74 for interaction).
With respect to secondary outcomes ( Table 2 ), bleeding independently associated with death after noncardiac surgery occurred in 416 patients in the tranexamic acid group (8.7%) and in 541 patients (11.3%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.67 to 0.87); major bleeding occurred in 363 patients (7.6%) and in 496 patients (10.4%), respectively (hazard ratio, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.63 to 0.83); and a net risk–benefit outcome event occurred in 983 patients (20.7%) and in 1046 patients (21.9%), respectively (hazard ratio, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.86 to 1.02). With respect to tertiary outcomes ( Table 3 ), major bleeding according to ISTH criteria occurred in 315 patients (6.6%) in the tranexamic acid group and in 415 patients (8.7%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.65 to 0.87), and transfusion of at least 1 unit of packed red cells occurred in 449 patients (9.4%) and in 574 patients (12.0%), respectively (odds ratio, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.68 to 0.88).
Hazard ratios for selected secondary and tertiary outcomes in the tranexamic acid group as compared with the placebo group are as follows: for myocardial infarction, 1.27 (95% CI, 0.89 to 1.82); for nonhemorrhagic stroke, 1.51 (95% CI, 0.80 to 2.84); for peripheral arterial thrombosis, 0.96 (95% CI, 0.53 to 1.72); for amputation, 0.67 (95% CI, 0.34 to 1.31); and for any symptomatic or asymptomatic proximal venous thromboembolism, 1.15 (95% CI, 0.69 to 1.91) ( Table 2 and Table 3 ). Serious adverse events occurred in 263 patients (5.5%) in the tranexamic acid group and in 242 patients (5.1%) in the placebo group (P=0.16) (Table S6).
The results in the tranexamic acid group as compared with the placebo group with respect to the primary efficacy and safety outcomes were consistent across the prespecified subgroups ( Figure 2 ) and, in post hoc analyses, were generally consistent across all major surgical subgroups (Fig. S2). The odds ratio for transfusion of at least 2 units of packed red cells in the tranexamic acid group as compared with the placebo group was 0.74 (95% CI, 0.64 to 0.86), and the odds ratio for transfusion of 2 to 4 units of packed red cells was 0.71 (95% CI, 0.60 to 0.84) (Table S7). Results of a competing-risks analysis that was adjusted for death that prevented observation of the primary outcome events were consistent with the results of the primary efficacy and safety analyses (Table S8).

Section: Discussion

In this trial involving patients undergoing noncardiac surgery who met criteria for increased risk of bleeding and cardiovascular events, composite bleeding outcome events (life-threatening bleeding, major bleeding, and bleeding into a critical organ) proved common (11.7% in the placebo group), and the likelihood of composite bleeding outcome events was lower with tranexamic acid than with placebo (hazard ratio, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.67 to 0.87). The noninferiority of tranexamic acid to placebo with respect to the composite cardiovascular outcome was not shown (hazard ratio, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.92 to 1.14).
Large trials have shown that tranexamic acid, as compared with placebo, is associated with a lower risk of death due to bleeding among patients with postpartum hemorrhage (relative risk, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.65 to 1.00) and a lower risk of death among patients with trauma (relative risk, 0.91; 95% CI, 0.85 to 0.97). Large surgical trials have shown that tranexamic acid resulted in a lower incidence of postpartum hemorrhage among patients undergoing cesarean section and a lower incidence of hemorrhage resulting in reoperation among patients undergoing cardiac surgery than placebo.
Small trials suggest that tranexamic acid reduces the risk of bleeding among patients undergoing orthopedic surgery or nonorthopedic noncardiac surgery. Although a recent meta-analysis of trials in diverse settings showed no increased risk of thromboembolic events with tranexamic acid, the noncardiac surgery trials were small, which limits their reliability. POISE-3 was a large trial addressing this knowledge gap in noncardiac surgery.
A recent meta-analysis of trials showed no dose response with tranexamic acid as compared with control for thrombotic events (2620 total events; relative risk, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.93 to 1.08); however, there was a dose response for seizures (P=0.01). Tranexamic acid doses of 2 g or less per day as compared with control were not associated with an increased risk of seizure (676 events; relative risk, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.88 to 1.19), whereas tranexamic acid doses of more than 2 g per day were associated with an increased risk of seizure (79 events; relative risk, 3.05; 95% CI, 1.01 to 9.02). In the POISE-3 trial, we evaluated a tranexamic acid dose of 2 g per day as compared with placebo, and seizures were uncommon (in 0.2% and <0.1% of the patients, respectively; hazard ratio, 3.35; 95% CI, 0.92 to 12.20).
A trial involving patients undergoing cesarean section showed that tranexamic acid was associated with a higher incidence of nausea and vomiting than placebo (relative risk, 1.19; 95% CI, 1.08 to 1.30). In the POISE-3 trial, we did not collect data on nausea and vomiting outcomes, but tranexamic acid was not associated with an increased risk of nausea or vomiting reported as a serious adverse event. We report significant between-group differences in serious adverse events for a few category outcomes (e.g., cardiovascular disorders); however, within these categories, the between-group differences in most individual serious adverse events were not significant, had contrasting results (e.g., hypertension and hypotension), and were not adjusted for multiplicity.
Bleeding was common in the placebo group in the POISE-3 trial irrespective of the definition used: the composite bleeding outcome (in 11.7% of the patients), bleeding independently associated with death after noncardiac surgery (in 11.3%), major bleeding (in 10.4%), major bleeding according to ISTH criteria (in 8.7%), and transfusion of packed red cells (in 12.0%). Tranexamic acid consistently lowered the relative risk by approximately 25% across these outcomes. Tranexamic acid yielded similar results for the composite bleeding outcome in patients undergoing orthopedic and nonorthopedic noncardiac surgery. Moreover, post hoc subgroup analyses showed a consistent result across all types of noncardiac surgery. We recently published a bleeding-risk calculator for patients undergoing noncardiac surgery that physicians can use to estimate the reduction in bleeding risk with tranexamic acid in individual patients.
Noninferiority was not established for the primary safety outcome. Health care providers and patients will have to weigh a clear beneficial reduction in the incidence of composite bleeding outcome events (absolute difference, −2.6 percentage points; 95% CI, −3.8 to −1.4) against the low probability of a small increase in the incidence of composite cardiovascular outcome events (absolute difference, 0.3 percentage points; 95% CI, −1.1 to 1.7).
Patients prefer to avoid bleeding and transfusions. Although tranexamic acid can facilitate these goals, only a small proportion of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery receive it. There is an annual global shortage of 30 million blood-product units, and surgical bleeding accounts for up to 40% of all transfusions. Given that 300 million surgeries occur annually worldwide, the results of the POISE-3 trial indicate the potential for large public health and clinical benefits if tranexamic acid becomes standard practice in noncardiac surgery.
Strengths of the trial include the participation of 114 hospitals across six continents, the blinding of trial-group assignments, high adherence to the trial agents, and follow-up of 99.9% of the patients. A limitation was that we stopped the trial early owing to a financial deficit resulting from slowed recruitment during the Covid-19 pandemic. We did, however, enroll more than 95% of our original planned sample size. Our decision to stop recruitment was made without knowledge of the trial results. There are limitations regarding our clinical ability to identify perioperative thrombotic complications ; however, tranexamic acid did not appear to increase the risk of any outcome known to result from thrombosis.
In our trial involving patients undergoing noncardiac surgery, the incidence of a composite of life-threatening bleeding, major bleeding, and bleeding into a critical organ was significantly lower with tranexamic acid than with placebo. Although the difference in composite cardiovascular complications between the tranexamic acid group and the placebo group was small, the noninferiority of tranexamic acid was not established.
