Title: Vaginal Transmission of Cancer from Mothers with Cervical Cancer to Infants


Abstract: Summary


Section: Introduction

Transmission of maternal cancer to offspring is extremely rare and is estimated to occur in approximately 1 infant per every 500,000 mothers with cancer, whereas approximately 1 in 1000 live births involves a mother with cancer. Table 1 provides data on 18 previously reported cases. In these cases, cancer of the blood, skin, lungs, and cervix in the mother was presumably transmitted hematogenously (through transplacental mother-to-fetus transmission) and often involved dissemination of maternal tumor cells to multiple organs (e.g., brain, bone, liver, and soft tissues) in the infant. All the reported cases were diagnosed in children younger than 2 years of age. In some cases, spontaneous tumor regression in the affected offspring was noted ( Table 1 ). Transplacental transmission to the fetus is probably rare because of the placental barrier and the fetal alloimmune response.
Mother-to-infant transmission of tumor in the birth canal during vaginal delivery is also theoretically possible. If the mother has cervical cancer, the infant can be exposed to tumor cells in fluids in the birth canal and could aspirate tumor cells into the lungs. Thus, mother-to-infant transmission of tumor may be a risk of vaginal delivery among women with cervical tumors. However, data on such mother-to-infant transmission are lacking.
Here, we report two cases of pediatric lung cancers that probably developed through mother-to-infant transmission of cervical carcinoma. These two cases were identified incidentally during an analysis of the results of routine next-generation sequencing testing of paired samples of tumor and normal tissue. This analysis was undertaken in TOP-GEAR (Trial of Onco-Panel for Gene-profiling to Estimate both Adverse Events and Response during Cancer Treatment), a prospective gene-profiling trial involving patients with advanced cancer.

Section: Methods

We performed next-generation sequencing of paired samples of tumor and normal tissue to detect mutations in 114 cancer-related genes as a part of a prospective clinical trial. We used a next-generation sequencing–based solid-tumor test in which germline DNA was used as a control. This National Cancer Center Oncopanel test is a hybridization capture–based next-generation sequencing assay.
Nivolumab (at a dose of 3 mg per kilogram of body weight every 2 weeks) was administered to Patient 1 in a phase 1 trial of nivolumab involving Japanese children with relapsed or refractory solid tumors (UMIN Clinical Trials Registry number, UMIN000026497 ). Detailed information on the materials and methods for this trial is provided in the Supplementary Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. The research protocol was approved by relevant institutional review boards or ethics committees. The parents of the children provided written informed consent.

Section: Results

A 23-month-old boy (Patient 1) presented to a local hospital with a 2-week history of a productive cough. Computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple masses scattered along the bronchi in both lungs, and a lung biopsy performed by means of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) revealed neuroendocrine carcinoma of the lung with focal glandular differentiation ( Figure 1A ).
A cervical cytologic test performed in the mother 7 months before the birth was negative, and the infant was delivered transvaginally at 39 weeks of gestation. The 35-year-old mother, who had not received vaccination against human papillomavirus (HPV), received a diagnosis of squamous-cell carcinoma of the cervix 3 months after the infant’s birth. After the diagnosis, she underwent radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy, followed by four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy. At that time, transmission of the tumor to her son was not suspected because the histologic characteristics were thought to be different from those of her son.
In accordance with his parents’ wishes, Patient 1 received frequent follow-up but did not receive treatment. One year after the diagnosis of neuroendocrine carcinoma, the lesions progressed. He was referred to our hospital for further treatment at 3 years of age (Fig. S1A in the Supplementary Appendix ). Surprisingly, some of the lesions had spontaneously regressed by that time ( Figure 1A ). However, round opacities on radiographic images indicated that multiple foci of the tumor were still present in both lungs. CT imaging confirmed that tumor masses were spread along the bronchi ( Figure 1A ). The patient received five cycles of chemotherapy with cisplatin (at a dose of 60 mg per square meter of body-surface area on day 1) and irinotecan (60 mg per square meter on days 1, 8, and 15 of each 28-day cycle), followed by two cycles of carboplatin (400 mg per square meter on day 1 and 2) and etoposide (100 mg per square meter on days 1 to 5 of each 28-day cycle). Some of the tumors shrank, but others subsequently progressed (Fig. S1B).
Lung, liver, and bone metastases developed in the mother during 3 years of follow-up after her last treatment. Histologic examination of the mother’s left lung tumor obtained by VATS revealed poorly differentiated carcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation. Pathological reexamination of the hysterectomy specimen revealed that the cervical cancer was predominantly poorly differentiated squamous-cell carcinoma with focal neuroendocrine differentiation admixed with a minor component of adenocarcinoma; this histologic picture was similar to the tumor in her lung as well as that in her son’s lung ( Figure 1A ).
Next-generation sequencing testing of paired samples of tumor and normal tissue was independently performed in the analysis of DNA from the lung tumor in the child and from the cervical tumor in his mother. Histologic similarities between the tumor samples from the mother and child prompted us to compare the results of their next-generation sequencing tests. The comparison of the gene profiles in the samples of tumor and normal tissue confirmed that transmission of maternal tumor to the child had occurred ( Figure 2A and Table S1); both tumors had the same pathogenic KRAS (c.G38A:p.G13D) and TP53 (c.G853A:p.E285K) mutations, and 47 exonic single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) alleles carried by the mother but not inherited in the child’s germline were detected in the child’s tumor (i.e., the child’s tumor was related to the mother’s tumor and contained genes that were not in the child’s germline genome). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed that the tumor in the boy lacked the Y chromosome ( Figure 2C ). Whole-exome sequencing showed an additional 20 somatic mutations that were detected in tumor samples from both the mother and child (Table S2), and HLA class I alleles that were not inherited by the child were lost in tumor samples from both the mother and child (Fig. S2). Polymerase-chain-reaction analysis performed with a set of pan-HPV primers, followed by Sanger sequencing, revealed that both tumors were positive for HPV type 18 (Fig. S3).
The disease in the child progressed despite two chemotherapy regimens, so he was enrolled in a clinical trial of nivolumab therapy (see the overview of the trial in the Supplementary Appendix ). After four cycles of nivolumab (at a dose of 3 mg per kilogram every 2 weeks), CT showed shrinkage of all the lesions ( Figure 1A ), and the pro–gastrin-releasing peptide level decreased from 1649 to 152 pg per milliliter. He received a total of 14 cycles of nivolumab. The response continued for 7 months without the appearance of new lesions. We then performed lobectomy to resect the remaining nodule. This fibrous nodule with tertiary lymphoid formation and calcification without viable tumor cells indicated a pathological complete response ( Figure 1A ). Flow cytometric analysis of the resected tumor showed a considerably higher fraction of immune cells (88%) than that in nontumorous lung tissue (33%) (Fig. S1C). A higher fraction of B cells (44%) as well as CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were also noted in the tumor sample; these findings were consistent with a response of the tumor to anti–programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) therapy. The patient had no evidence of disease recurrence at 12 months after lobectomy.
His mother was enrolled in a phase 2 trial of anti–PD-1 therapy (Japan Medical Association Center for Clinical Trials number, I JMA-IIA00345 ) in which nivolumab was administered at a dose of 240 mg every 2 weeks. However, the tumor progressed despite four cycles of nivolumab, and she died 5 months after disease progression. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumors in the child and mother were negative both for PD-1 and for programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) (Fig. S4).
A 6-year-old boy (Patient 2) presented to a local hospital with chest pain on the left side. CT revealed a mass measuring 6 cm in diameter at the hilar region of the left lung; mucinous adenocarcinoma was diagnosed ( Figure 1B ). A cervical polypoid tumor had been detected in the patient’s mother during pregnancy; however, since cervical cytologic analysis was negative and the tumor was stable without any intervention, she delivered the boy vaginally at 38 weeks of gestation. Biopsy of the cervical lesion after the delivery revealed adenocarcinoma, and she was referred to a university hospital for radical hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy 3 months after delivery. She died of the disease 2 years after the surgery. We did not suspect maternal transmission of the cancer when the child received a diagnosis at 6 years of age.
The tumor in the boy was considered to be inoperable. He received five cycles of paclitaxel (210 mg per square meter on day 1 of each 14-day cycle) and cisplatin (90 mg per square meter on day 1 of each 14-day cycle) followed by three cycles of paclitaxel (210 mg per square meter on day 1 of each 14-day cycle) and carboplatin (400 mg per square meter on day 1 of each 14-day cycle) and two cycles of paclitaxel (210 mg per square meter on day 1 of each 21-day cycle) and irinotecan chemotherapy (125 mg per square meter on day 1 of each 21-day cycle). He had a partial response, with a reduction in levels of the tumor marker CA19-9 to normal levels. The treatment was discontinued. Three months later, the disease recurred in the left lung ( Figure 1B ). After five cycles of chemotherapy (gemcitabine at a dose of 675 mg per square meter on days 1 and 8 and docetaxel at a dose of 75 mg per square meter on day 8 of each 21-day cycle) plus one cycle of paclitaxel and carboplatin chemotherapy, he underwent total left pneumonectomy. Pathological examination of the lung showed mucinous adenocarcinoma, which is an unusual morphologic finding for a primary lung tumor, but it was similar to the uterine cervical tumor in the mother. He was followed for 15 months after pneumonectomy and was free from disease.
Samples of the cervical tumor from the mother and from the lung tumor of the child were submitted for next-generation sequencing tests. Although the normal samples from the mother and child differed (as expected), the similarity of the gene profiles of the tumor samples from the mother and child indicated mother-to-infant transmission ( Figure 2B and Table S1). Both tumors had the same KRAS (c.G35A:p.G12D) and STK11 (c.464+1G→A) mutations, and 38 exonic SNP alleles that were carried by the mother but not inherited in the child’s germline were detected in the tumor sample from the child. FISH analysis revealed that that tumor lacked the Y chromosome ( Figure 2C ). Whole-exome sequencing detected an additional 14 somatic mutations that were present in tumors from both the mother and the child (Table S2). Loss of HLA class I alleles was not detected in tumor samples from either the mother or the child. Tumors from both the mother and the child were positive for HPV type 16 (Fig. S3).

Section: Discussion

Here, we report two cases of lung cancer in children that was caused by transmission of cervical tumors from the children’s mothers. The transmission was demonstrated by the fact that the tumors in both male children lacked the Y chromosome and shared multiple somatic mutations, an HPV genome, and SNP alleles (which were not inherited in the children’s germline) with tumors from the mothers. The peribronchial pattern of tumor growth in both children suggested that the tumors arose from mother-to-infant vaginal transmission through aspiration of tumor-contaminated vaginal fluids during birth. In other cases of rare mother-to-fetus transmission of cancer, the offspring present with multiple disseminated metastases in the brain, bones, liver, lungs, and soft tissues; these metastases are consistent with presumed hematogenous spread from the placenta ( Table 1 ). However, in our two patients, tumors were observed only in the lungs and were localized along the bronchi. It is likely that maternal tumor cells were present in the amniotic fluid, secretions, or blood from the cervix and were aspirated by the infants during vaginal delivery. These cases indicate that mother-to-infant transmission of uterine cervical cancer is possible during vaginal delivery; therefore, cesarean section should be recommended for mothers with uterine cervical cancer.
HLA class I alleles, which were not inherited by Patient 1, were lost in the tumors in this child and his mother. This phenomenon has been reported in a case of mother-to-fetus transmission of leukemia cells. Since HLA proteins are known to provide major antigenic targets for allograft recognition and rejection, the loss of HLA alleles might have contributed to the survival of the maternal tumor cells in the child. Patient 1 had spontaneous regression of several lesions within 1 year after detection of the tumor, during the follow-up period when he was not receiving treatment; this regression occurs extremely rarely in metastatic neuroendocrine carcinomas. In addition, the remaining tumors evidently had a response to anti–PD-1 immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy, although neither PD-1 nor PD-L1 was expressed in this patient, and immune checkpoint therapy is known to be ineffective in most solid tumors in children. In contrast, this patient’s mother did not have a response to the same anti–PD-1 therapy. In Patient 2, the tumor grew very slowly, and clinical manifestations did not occur until he was 6 years of age. This slow growth is very rare for metastatic cervical adenocarcinoma; therefore, it appears likely that an alloimmune response in the child affected the rate of tumor growth.
We report two cases of transmission of uterine cervical tumors in mothers to the lungs of infants. Next-generation sequencing of paired samples of tumor and normal tissue may be a useful tool to diagnose cancer that is transmitted from mothers to infants and to understand the prevalence of this transmission.
