Title: Vaccine Efficacy in Adults in a Respiratory Syncytial Virus Challenge Study


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Although human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is an important cause of illness and death in older adults, no RSV vaccine has been licensed.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a phase 2a study, we randomly assigned healthy adults (18 to 50 years of age), in a 1:1 ratio, to receive a single intramuscular injection of either bivalent prefusion F (RSVpreF) vaccine or placebo. Approximately 28 days after injection, participants were inoculated intranasally with the RSV A Memphis 37b challenge virus and observed for 12 days. The per-protocol prespecified primary end points were the following: reverse-transcriptase–quantitative polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-qPCR)−confirmed detectable RSV infection on at least 2 consecutive days with at least one clinical symptom of any grade from two categories or at least one grade 2 symptom from any category, the total symptom score from day 1 to discharge, and the area under the curve (AUC) for the RSV viral load in nasal-wash samples measured by means of RT-qPCR from day 2 after challenge to discharge. In addition, we assessed immunogenicity and safety.

Abstract_Section: Results

After participants were inoculated with the challenge virus, vaccine efficacy of 86.7% (95% CI, 53.8 to 96.5) was observed for symptomatic RSV infection confirmed by any detectable viral RNA on at least 2 consecutive days. The median AUC for the RSV viral load (hours×log 10 copies per milliliter) as measured by RT-qPCR assay was 0.0 (interquartile range, 0.0 to 19.0) in the vaccine group and 96.7 (interquartile range, 0.0 to 675.3) in the placebo group. The geometric mean factor increase from baseline in RSV A–neutralizing titers 28 days after injection was 20.5 (95% CI, 16.6 to 25.3) in the vaccine group and 1.1 (95% CI, 0.9 to 1.3) in the placebo group. More local injection-site pain was noted in the vaccine group than in the placebo group. No serious adverse events were observed in either group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

RSVpreF vaccine was effective against symptomatic RSV infection and viral shedding. No evident safety concerns were identified. These findings provide support for further evaluation of RSVpreF vaccine in a phase 3 efficacy study. (Funded by Pfizer; EudraCT number, 2020-003887-21 ; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04785612 .)

Section: Introduction

Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is an important cause of disease in older adults. The risk of severe RSV disease is increased among frail older adults and those with coexisting conditions, including congestive heart failure, stroke, chronic kidney disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and immunosuppression. Each year in the United States, RSV illness develops in 3 to 7% of adults who are older than 65 years of age, resulting in approximately 177,000 hospitalizations and 14,000 deaths. The RSV burden in older adults may be underestimated because of nonstandardized testing methods and low levels of RSV shedding. Development of an RSV vaccine is a high priority.
The increased risk of severe disease among older adults is associated with age-related decreases in innate immunity and impaired cellular immune responses to RSV. Although higher serum-neutralizing titers correlate with less severe disease, no accepted immune correlate of protection from RSV disease in older adults exists. The goal of vaccination is to prevent RSV-associated lower respiratory tract illness.
The RSV fusion (F) glycoprotein is anchored in the viral envelope in a metastable prefusion state, and it undergoes structural rearrangement to a stable postfusion state as it fuses the viral envelope with a cell membrane during viral entry. Prefusion F is the major target of potent virus neutralizing antibodies and a key vaccine antigen.
A clinical stage, bivalent RSV prefusion F protein–based (RSVpreF) vaccine candidate contains stabilized prefusion F glycoproteins from RSV subgroups A and B. In phase 1–2 and 2b studies, immunization with RSVpreF vaccine in adults greatly increased RSV-neutralizing titers, and the vaccine had a good safety profile. In the current phase 2a study, the efficacy of RSVpreF vaccine against human experimental RSV challenge was tested in adults 18 to 50 years of age to obtain proof of concept before a pivotal, phase 3, field efficacy study involving older adults would be conducted. The challenge model was developed to mimic natural infection and to assess the effectiveness of RSV vaccines safely and reproducibly. In the current study, we used an RSV challenge model to assess the safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy of RSVpreF vaccine in healthy adults.

Section: Methods

This phase 2a, single-center, randomized, double-blind, exploratory study had screening, injection, and quarantine phases, as well as a safety follow-up through 6 months (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). Screened participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive 120 μg of RSVpreF vaccine (nonadjuvanted) or placebo (a lyophile match to the RSVpreF vaccine, minus the active ingredients), each reconstituted with sterile water to a volume of 0.5 ml and administered intramuscularly. The RSVpreF vaccine contained equal amounts of two stabilized prefusion F antigens, one each from the subgroup A Ontario and subgroup B Buenos Aires strains, totaling 120 μg.
On day 0, approximately 28 days after injection, participants were challenged intranasally with 4.5 log 10 plaque-forming units of an RSV A Memphis 37b preparation that has been well characterized in a human challenge model. Participants were observed for 12 days after challenge in a quarantine unit and had a follow-up visit 28 days after challenge (day 28), with a final follow-up visit 6 months after injection (day 155).
The study protocol was approved by the institutional review board (the North West–Haydock Research Ethics Committee), and is available at NEJM.org. The first draft of the manuscript was written by a medical writer (paid by Pfizer) under the direction of the authors.
Healthy adults (18 to 50 years of age) were prescreened for RSV A–neutralizing titers to enrich the population for increased RSV susceptibility, and all the participants provided written informed consent. Participants who had had screening titers in the lowest quartile of the population titer distribution in the previous 12 months were selected. Additional eligibility criteria, ethical study conduct, and author contributions are described in the Supplementary Appendix .
Participants completed a 13-item symptom scorecard up to 3 times a day on days −2 to 12. The symptom score ranked symptoms from three categories (upper respiratory tract, lower respiratory tract, and systemic) on a severity scale of 0 to 3 (with higher scores indicating greater severity; shortness of breath and wheeze occurring at rest were assigned a score of 4). The number of tissues used by the participants and mucus weights were recorded every 24 hours.
Nasal-wash samples were collected on day −1 relative to challenge, twice daily on days 2 to 11, and once on day 12 after challenge. Viral RNA in nasal-wash samples was assessed with the use of a reverse-transcriptase–quantitative polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-qPCR) assay validated to quantitatively measure viral RNA in clinical specimens, with a lower limit of quantitation defined as a cycle threshold (Ct) at or below 33.9, equivalent to 2.8 log 10 RSV RNA copies per milliliter. For end points that included evaluation of the incidence of infection, RSV positivity was based on quantifiable viral RNA (i.e., at or above the lower limit of quantitation, with values below the lower limit of quantitation set to 0) or on any detectable viral RNA (Ct <40). Nasal-wash samples that were positive on RT-qPCR were subsequently cultured with the use of an RSV plaque assay. More detailed information on methods, including virus culture in human epithelial type 2 cells, is provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
The per-protocol prespecified primary end points were the following: RT-qPCR−confirmed detectable RSV infection on at least 2 consecutive days with at least one clinical symptom of any grade from two categories or at least one grade 2 symptom from any category, the total symptom score from day 1 to discharge, and the area under the curve (AUC) for the RSV viral load in nasal-wash samples measured by means of RT-qPCR from day 2 after challenge to discharge. The main secondary end point of RT-qPCR−confirmed symptomatic RSV infection was determined by quantifiable RT-qPCR results (at or above the lower limit of quantitation). Additional secondary end points included the following: culture-confirmed symptomatic RSV infection (at least one viral culture result at or above the lower limit of quantitation) from day 2 after challenge to discharge; RT-qPCR–confirmed or culture-confirmed infection, regardless of symptoms; the peak viral load determined by RT-qPCR; the peak viral load determined by viral culture; the duration of the viral load; the peak total symptom score; the AUC for total symptom score; the total mucus weight; and the total number of tissues used by the participants.
Blood samples were collected throughout the study. We analyzed and report on specimens collected before injection; at day −2 before challenge, day −1 before challenge, or both; and at day 12 after challenge. The immunogenicity end points included immune responses elicited by RSVpreF vaccine and those elicited after RSV A Memphis 37b challenge. Corresponding end points included RSV A– and RSV B–neutralizing titers in serum, prefusion–F binding antibody levels, and nonvaccine RSV antigen–binding antibody levels before and after challenge (detailed methods are provided in the Supplementary Appendix ).
Safety was monitored throughout the study. The safety end points included local reactions and systemic events that occurred within 7 days after injection, unsolicited adverse events that occurred between injection and challenge, and medically attended adverse events and serious adverse events that occurred from injection through day 155 after challenge.
The intention-to-treat population for the challenge analysis was the primary analysis population for the efficacy end points and included participants who had been randomly assigned to receive RSVpreF vaccine or placebo and had been challenged with RSV A Memphis 37b. The evaluable immunogenicity population consisted of participants who had been randomly assigned to receive RSVpreF vaccine or placebo, had an immunogenicity measurement before injection, and had at least one immunogenicity measurement after injection. The safety analysis population included all the participants who had undergone randomization and had received RSVpreF vaccine or placebo, regardless of whether they received the challenge virus.
Missing data were expected to be rare because participants were observed in a quarantine unit; thus, missing data were not imputed. All summary statistics were reported with the use of observed data. Vaccine efficacy was calculated as (1–incidence rate ratio)×100%, in which the incidence rate ratio was defined as the ratio of the incidence of symptomatic RSV infection in the vaccine group to the incidence in the placebo group; 95% confidence intervals were obtained with the use of the Farrington–Manning method. Geometric means were calculated for the sum of total clinical symptoms on the basis of graded symptom scores and were reported as ratios of vaccine to placebo, with 95% confidence intervals based on Satterthwaite’s tests assuming unequal variances, with logarithm-transformed data. Geometric mean factor increases for immunogenicity and 95% confidence intervals were calculated by back-transforming the mean logarithm of the factor increases and the corresponding confidence intervals (based on Student’s t distribution). Confidence intervals have not been adjusted for multiplicity and cannot be used to infer effects. The data were analyzed by S-Cubed Biometrics.

Section: Results

A total of 70 participants underwent randomization and received RSVpreF vaccine or placebo (35 in each group); as planned, 62 participants (89%, 31 in each group) were subsequently inoculated with RSV Memphis 37b, and 60 participants completed the full quarantine observation period (Fig. S2). Two participants did not complete the quarantine period for personal reasons and left the quarantine unit; one participant left on day 9 and the other left on day 11. The baseline characteristics of the participants were similar in the vaccine and placebo groups ( Table 1 ). The representativeness of the participants to the disease population is summarized in Table S1.
The efficacy of RSVpreF vaccine against symptomatic RSV infection confirmed by any detectable viral RNA on at least 2 consecutive days (a primary end point) was 86.7% (95% CI, 53.8 to 96.5) ( Figure 1A ). After participants were inoculated with the challenge virus, the percentages of participants with symptomatic infection were 6% (2 of 31 participants) in the RSVpreF vaccine group and 48% (15 of 31 participants) in the placebo group.
The vaccine efficacy against symptomatic RSV infection confirmed by two quantifiable RT-qPCR results (at or above the lower limit of quantitation) on at least 2 consecutive days (a secondary end point) was 100.0% (95% confidence interval [CI], 72.8 to 100.0) (Table S2). The percentages of participants with symptomatic infection were 0% (0 of 31 participants) in the RSVpreF vaccine group and 42% (13 of 31 participants) in the placebo group. When symptomatic RSV infection was confirmed by culture (one quantifiable culture result), vaccine efficacy was 100.0% (95% CI, 67.7 to 100.0) ( Figure 1B ). Efficacy against RSV infection, regardless of the presence, absence, or severity of symptoms, was 75.0% (95% CI, 38.4 to 90.6) with RT-qPCR results on at least 2 consecutive days and 100.0% (95% CI, 72.8 to 100.0) with any one quantifiable culture-confirmed infection.
Two days after challenge, virus was present in nasal-wash samples as measured by RT-qPCR in both the placebo and vaccine groups; thereafter, in the placebo group, the viral load was positive from days 3 through 12 and peaked at day 6; in the RSVpreF vaccine group, the viral load was low to undetectable ( Figure 2A and S3). The median AUC for the RSV viral load from days 2 through 12 by RT-qPCR (hours×log 10 copies per milliliter, based on results that were at or above the lower limit of quantitation) was 0.0 (interquartile range, 0.0 to 19.0) in the vaccine group and 96.7 (interquartile range, 0.0 to 675.3) in the placebo group. The median peak viral load by RT-qPCR (log 10 copies per milliliter) was 0.0 (interquartile range, 0.0 to 3.1) in the vaccine group and 4.2 (interquartile range, 0.0 to 7.0) in the placebo group. The median duration of viral shedding, independent of symptoms, by RT-qPCR was 18.0 hours (interquartile range, 11.8 to 54.4) in the vaccine group and 131.6 hours (interquartile range, 72.1 to not estimable) in the placebo group. After challenge, the viral load determined by culture was elevated in the placebo group from days 4 through 8 and was undetectable after day 10; the corresponding viral load was undetectable in the vaccine group ( Figure 2B ).
Protection with respect to both the duration and severity of symptoms was observed in the vaccine group ( Figure 2C ). The geometric mean sum of the total symptom scores was 2.1 in the vaccine group and 10.8 in the placebo group (ratio, 0.26; 95% CI, 0.12 to 0.56). Baseline symptom scores were similar in the vaccine and placebo groups — either 0 or low (a score of 1 or 2) before challenge. The geometric mean peak total symptom score was 0.8 in the vaccine group and 2.6 in the placebo group (ratio, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.33 to 0.73). The geometric mean of the area under the total symptom score time curve (hours×score) was 6.7 in the vaccine group and 56.7 in the placebo group (ratio, 0.13; 95% CI, 0.04 to 0.43).
Throughout the quarantine period, the weight of excreted mucus was lower in participants in the vaccine group than in participants in the placebo group ( Figure 2D ). The median number of tissues used was 6 (interquartile range, 0 to 30) in the vaccine group and 26 (interquartile range, 7 to 75) in the placebo group.
On the basis of the efficacy end-point definition of symptomatic RSV infection as determined by RT-qPCR or viral culture, none of the participants who received the RSVpreF vaccine had symptomatic infection. Among the placebo recipients, the Kaplan–Meier estimate of the median time to symptomatic infection confirmed by RT-qPCR was 3.3 days (interquartile range, 2.9 to 4.8) ( Figure 1A ) and to symptomatic infection confirmed by viral culture was 4.8 days (interquartile range, 3.8 to 5.3) ( Figure 1B ). Of the 8 participants in the vaccine group in whom quantifiable virus was detected by RT-qPCR, independent of symptoms, viral shedding was mostly limited to 24 hours after the first measurement of quantifiable viral RNA by RT-qPCR after challenge ( Figure 1C ).
The baseline 50% serum neutralizing geometric mean titers were similar in the vaccine and placebo recipients ( Figure 3 and Table S3). Approximately 28 days after injection and immediately before challenge, in the vaccine group, the geometric mean factor increase in neutralizing geometric mean titers from baseline was 20.5 (95% CI, 16.6 to 25.3) against RSV A and 20.3 (95% CI, 15.6 to 26.4) against RSV B; in the placebo group, the geometric mean factor increase was 1.1 (95% CI, 0.9 to 1.3) and 1.0 (95% CI, 0.9 to 1.1) for RSV A and B, respectively. Among vaccine recipients, the neutralizing geometric mean factor increases from baseline were lower at day 12 after challenge than before challenge; at day 12 after challenge, the increase was 16.8 (95% CI, 13.0 to 21.7) (RSV A) and 14.8 (95% CI, 11.0 to 20.0) (RSV B). Among placebo recipients, the neutralizing geometric mean factor increase after challenge was higher for RSV A (2.3; 95% CI, 1.7 to 3.2) than for RSV B (1.8; 95% CI, 1.4 to 2.4).
The baseline geometric mean concentrations of RSV prefusion F–binding IgG were similar in the vaccine and placebo groups. Trends in geometric mean concentrations at 28 days after injection and at 12 days after challenge and geometric mean factor increases in IgG geometric mean concentrations from baseline were similar to those of 50% neutralization geometric mean titers (Fig. S4). The geometric mean ratio of the combined RSV A– and RSV B–neutralizing titer factor increase to the prefusion F–binding IgG factor increase before challenge was 0.81 in vaccine recipients (Table S4). Before challenge, the percentage of participants with an increase of at least a factor of 4 in any RSV nonvaccine antigen–binding Ig (recognizing matrix, Ga peptide, Gb peptide, or nucleoprotein) was 2.9% (1 of 34 participants) in the vaccine group and 3.1% (1 of 32 participants) in the placebo group (Table S5). At day 12 after challenge, the percentage with at least a 4-factor increase in any nonvaccine antigen-binding Ig was 0% in the vaccine group and 73% (22 of 30 participants) in the placebo group. With the use of more stringent criteria, the percentage of participants with an increase of at least a factor of 4 in at least two RSV nonvaccine antigens before challenge was 0% in the vaccine group and 0% in the placebo group; at day 12 after challenge, these percentages were 0% in the vaccine group and 47% (14 of 30 participants) in the placebo group.
Within 7 days after injection, local reactions were reported by more participants in the vaccine group (in 5 of 35 participants [14%]) than in the placebo group (in 2 of 33 participants [6%]) ( Figure 4A ). All reactions in the vaccine group were mild. The most frequently reported local reaction was injection-site pain (in 5 participants in the vaccine group and 1 participant in the placebo group). Within 7 days after injection, at least one prompted systemic event was reported by 18 participants (51%) in the vaccine group and by 11 participants (33%) in the placebo group. The most common systemic event, fatigue or tiredness, occurred in 14 participants (40%) in the vaccine group and 10 participants (30%) in the placebo group. All systemic events were mild. None of the participants had a temperature of 38°C or higher.
Within 28 days after injection, 22 participants reported 25 adverse events; these events occurred in 12 of 35 participants (34%) in the vaccine group and 10 of 35 participants (29%) in the placebo group ( Figure 4B ). One adverse event was considered by the investigators to be related to the vaccine (enlarged submandibular lymph nodes that were reported on day 26 after vaccination and that resolved by day 53). Two adverse events leading to withdrawal from the study were not considered by the investigators to be related to a study agent (a positive test for coronavirus disease 2019 and a prolonged QT interval on electrocardiographic assessment, both in participants who received RSVpreF vaccine). There were no immediate adverse events (within 30 minutes after injection), and no serious or severe adverse events were reported within 28 days after injection.

Section: Discussion

In this RSV challenge study, RSVpreF vaccine was effective in preventing symptomatic RSV infection in healthy adults. None of the participants who received the vaccine had symptomatic RSV infection with virus detected by culture or quantified by RT-qPCR throughout the quarantine period. RT-qPCR signals below the lower limit of quantitation that were not associated with the recovery of infectious virus are of uncertain importance. Vaccine, as compared with placebo, was effective against all RT-qPCR−confirmed infections (with and without symptoms), limiting peak viral loads and the duration of viral shedding. The increase in nonvaccine RSV antigen–binding antibodies after challenge of placebo recipients but not after challenge of RSVpreF vaccine recipients confirms vaccine-mediated protection from RSV infection, with or without symptoms. A single dose of RSVpreF vaccine elicited large increases in neutralizing titers, with geometric mean factor increases against RSV A and RSV B that were greater than 20 at 28 days after vaccination. The RSVpreF vaccine elicited similar responses in adults in previous phase 1–2 and 2b studies. The local and systemic reactogenicity of RSVpreF vaccine in our study was mild to moderate, a finding that is consistent with findings in previous studies.
The RSV challenge model used in this study mimics natural infection in many ways. Recently, the Ad26.RSV.preF vaccine, with a recombinant adenovirus serotype 26 vector, and the MVA-BN RSV vaccine, with a modified vaccinia Ankara virus vector encoding Ga, Gb, F, and M2, were evaluated with the use of the same human challenge model and virus detection method. The efficacy of the Ad26.RSV.preF vaccine in preventing asymptomatic and symptomatic quantifiable infection ranged from 37.7 to 51.9%, and the efficacy of the MVA-BN RSV vaccine ranged from 51.8 to 79.3%. The RSVpreF vaccine elicited higher geometric mean factor increases from baseline in RSV A–neutralizing titers than did the Ad26.RSV.preF vaccine (20.5 vs. 5.8), but it is not expected to elicit a CD8+ T-cell response ; data on immune response are not yet reported for the MVA-BN RSV challenge study. A phase 3, pivotal, field efficacy study (RENOIR; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT05035212 ) is under way to assess protection against RSV-associated lower respiratory tract illness.
The limitations of our study include the artificial nature of experimental human challenge, the small sample size, prescreening of participants for low baseline RSV-neutralizing titers, and the young age of the participants as compared with that of the vaccine target population of older adults. Older adults have a higher risk of severe disease than younger adults. The RENOIR field efficacy study is under way to address these limitations.
Immunization with a single dose of RSVpreF vaccine provided protection against symptomatic RSV infection in a viral challenge model.
