Title: Acute Myeloid Leukemia Case after Gene Therapy for Sickle Cell Disease


Abstract: Summary


Section: Introduction

Sickle cell disease is a progressive, genetic disease caused by a point mutation in the β-globin gene and is associated with substantial morbidity and early mortality. Sickle hemoglobin production and subsequent polymerization leads to red-cell sickling, clinically manifesting as chronic hemolytic anemia, vasculopathy, and vaso-occlusion. Current management of sickle cell disease relies on lifelong use of palliative short-term and long-term therapies. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation is the only accepted, potentially curative treatment option for patients with sickle cell disease; however, its use is limited by a paucity of matched donors, immunologic complications, and the inherent risks of transplantation-related morbidity and mortality.
Gene therapy with LentiGlobin for sickle cell disease (bb1111, lovotibeglogene autotemcel) consists of autologous transplantation of the patients’ own hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) transduced with the BB305 lentiviral vector encoding the β -globin gene, which is designed to produce antisickling hemoglobin (HbA ). Through the use of autologous HSCs, gene therapy with LentiGlobin circumvents the need for a donor and may avoid the immunologic complications associated with allogeneic HSC transplantation. The phase 1–2 HGB-206 study is evaluating the efficacy and safety of LentiGlobin for sickle cell disease, and an unprespecified interim analysis of the results is now reported in the Journal . Here, we report a case of acute myeloid leukemia that developed in a female patient approximately 5.5 years after she had received gene therapy with LentiGlobin as part of the initial cohort (Group A) of the HGB-206 study, as well as the results of investigations to determine whether the development of acute myeloid leukemia was vector-mediated.

Section: Case Report

Before receiving gene therapy with LentiGlobin, the patient had sickle cell disease (β /β genotype) with recurrent vaso-occlusive crises that had led to frequent hospitalizations despite the use of long-term hydroxyurea therapy. She was 31 years of age when she received a diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia in February 2021 ( Table 1 ).
In August 2015, as part of the Group A cohort in the HGB-206 study, the patient received LentiGlobin produced from HSCs harvested from bone marrow through an earlier version of the drug-product manufacturing process as part of the initial study protocol . The manufacturing process was later modified for subsequent patients enrolled in Groups B and C (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The drug product administered in the patient had a total CD34+ cell dose of 2.6×10 cells per kilogram of body weight (of which 1.5×10 cells per kilogram were CD34 long-term repopulating hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells [HSPCs]) and a vector copy number of 0.57 copies per diploid genome ( Table 1 ). At day 16 after LentiGlobin treatment, the patient received granulocyte colony-stimulating factor because of fever, and subsequent neutrophil and platelet engraftments occurred at 19 and 31 days after treatment, respectively. At 6 months after treatment, the vector copy number in peripheral blood was 0.05 copies per diploid genome and the level of gene therapy–derived hemoglobin (HbA ) was 4.33% of total nontransfused hemoglobin, findings that suggest low engraftment of gene-modified cells and low transgene expression with minimal clinical benefit, because the pretransplantation sickle cell disease phenotype persisted and led to the need for hydroxyurea therapy and packed red-cell transfusions ( Table 1 and Table S2).
During an emergency department visit for a vaso-occlusive crisis in December 2020, the patient was noted to have 2% blast cells in peripheral blood, which was thought to be related to recovery after infection; the presence of blast cells was not reported in subsequent blood analyses. In January 2021, neutropenia (defined as an absolute neutrophil count of <1000 per microliter) developed, and in February 2021, acute myeloid leukemia (subtype M0 according to the French–American–British classification) was diagnosed after the detection of 29% blast cells in peripheral blood and 22 to 50% blast cells in bone marrow ( Table 1 ). Given the potential of insertional oncogenesis by the lentiviral vector and the exposure to myelotoxic chemotherapy with busulfan, the acute myeloid leukemia was studied to determine causality and relation to gene therapy. Chromosomal microarray analysis of the bone marrow samples revealed monosomy 7 in 70% of cells and partial loss of 11p involving WT1 in 50% of cells. A next-generation sequencing myeloid mutation panel revealed a RUNX1 frameshift mutation and a PTPN11 missense mutation ( Table 1 ). Retrospective next-generation sequencing and single-nucleotide-polymorphism microarray analyses of retained pretreatment peripheral-blood leukocytes did not reveal any genetic abnormalities, nor were any abnormalities observed in any retained post-treatment sample up to month 48 (the most recent sample obtained before the diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia). Further analysis of the peripheral-blood samples revealed that the blast cells were positive for BB305 lentiviral vector. Specifically, CD34+ blast-enriched cell populations in samples of both peripheral-blood and bone marrow contained an integrated lentiviral vector, with vector copy numbers of 1.12 copies per diploid genome and 1.17 copies per diploid genome, respectively. The percentage of lentiviral vector–positive cells was 92.1% in the CD34+ peripheral-blood sample and 86.7% in the CD34+ bone marrow sample. The investigator assessed the acute myeloid leukemia as possibly related to her gene therapy.
After acute myeloid leukemia was diagnosed, the patient underwent three cycles of induction chemotherapy, which led to morphologic remission, but she remained positive for minimal residual disease with a blast-cell percentage of 0.2%. She underwent a human leukocyte antigen–haploidentical peripheral-blood stem-cell transplantation in June 2021 and remained positive for minimal residual disease. The patient had a relapse with the reappearance of circulating blast cells 90 days after transplantation and underwent additional chemotherapy; however, she later died from complications of progressive acute myeloid leukemia.

Section: Methods

The phase 1–2 HGB-206 study evaluated the use of LentiGlobin in patients with sickle cell disease. The drug product was manufactured by transduction of autologous enriched CD34+ stem cells with BB305 lentiviral vector encoding the antisickling β -globin gene. The structure of the BB305 lentiviral vector has been previously described. To assess whether the acute myeloid leukemia in the patient was due to insertional oncogenesis, we performed integration site analysis and RNA sequencing, as described previously and detailed in the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Results

We performed an integration site analysis to evaluate the role of vector insertion in the development of acute myeloid leukemia. Many unique insertion sites (a total of 2997) were detected in the patient; however, the insertion site in the vesicle-associated membrane protein 4 gene ( VAMP4 ) increased over time, reaching a relative frequency of more than 60% in August 2020 ( Figure 1A ) and 98.6% in February 2021. The increase in VAMP4 insertion-site frequency prompted specific quantitative polymerase-chain-reaction analyses designed to estimate the fractional contribution of the clone carrying the VAMP4 insertion site in peripheral blood. Until January 2020 (54 months after treatment), the VAMP4 insertion site was present in approximately 1% of peripheral-blood cells in the patient, and by August 2020, this increased to 7% of peripheral-blood cells ( Figure 1B ). This increase coincided with an overall increase in the vector copy number in peripheral blood during this period, which increased from approximately 0.05 copies per diploid genome to 0.13 copies per diploid genome. Concurrent with this rise, decreases in white-cell and absolute neutrophil counts were also observed; these findings suggest a potential correlation of these measures ( Figure 1C ).
A single insertion was identified in VAMP4 in the intronic region between exons 4 and 5 that did not disrupt a putative enhancer (approximately 5 kilobases upstream) or the promoter (approximately 30 kilobases upstream). An insertion site in the VAMP4 gene body was present in most patients (25 of 35 [71%]) in the HGB-206 study who had received LentiGlobin and had available data from integration site analysis. A total of 60 unique insertions in the VAMP4 gene locus were mapped, of which 14 were localized to the intronic region between exons 4 and 5, including the VAMP4 insertion site in the patient with acute myeloid leukemia ( Figure 1D ). As compared with other protein-coding genes, VAMP4 was in the 68th percentile for insertion sites when normalized for gene length. In all other patients in the HGB-206 study, VAMP4 insertion sites were not associated with sequelae, including clonal expansion.
We performed RNA-sequencing analysis to determine the transcriptional effect of the VAMP4 insertion site. Given the location of the insertion site, we first determined whether VAMP4 expression had changed. An analysis of the CD34+ cells from the patient showed VAMP4 expression that was similar to that in mobilized peripheral-blood CD34+ cells from a healthy donor ( Figure 2A and Table S3). Next, we measured HBB expression levels, including lentiviral vector–derived β and endogenous β transcripts, in different cell fractions. The highest expression levels of HBA1 and HBB were in unsorted and CD34− bone marrow cells, which is expected in cell populations enriched for the presence of erythroblasts and erythroid progenitors. In contrast, in CD34+ peripheral-blood cells enriched for leukemic blast cells, HBB expression was 0.6% of that detected in the sample of CD34− bone marrow cells, which indicated very low expression levels in blast cells. Among the CD34+ peripheral-blood HBB transcripts, the majority (60%) were endogenous β transcripts — 40% derived from the therapeutic transgene β . In a finding consistent with the site and orientation of vector insertion, we also detected very low levels of HBB–VAMP4 and VAMP4–HBB fusion transcripts (<1 normalized fusion fragment transcript per million for CD34+ and CD34− peripheral-blood samples). These results showed that the BB305 lentiviral vector had minimal transcriptional activity in blast cells and no noticeable effect on VAMP4 expression.
We investigated whether the VAMP4 insertion site affected gene expression across the 10-megabase region flanking VAMP4 . An analysis of the CD34+ cells from the patient, as compared with CD34+ cells from a healthy donor, showed gene-expression ratios centered around 1 ( Figure 2B ). These population-level data indicated that expression levels of genes proximal to the VAMP4 locus in CD34+ bone marrow cells from the patient were similar to those in the CD34+ mobilized peripheral-blood cells from the healthy donor. An assessment of genes within 100 kilobases of the VAMP4 locus revealed no or minimal changes in expression level in analyzed genes in all patient samples, particularly in genes with a transcripts-per-million value of 1.0 or greater ( Figure 2B and Table S3). An analysis of all chromosomes showed a ratio of protein-coding gene transcripts centered around 1, indicating that the only chromosome-wide differences in gene expression between the patient and the healthy donor occurred in chromosome 7 (Fig. S2). The shift in the gene-expression ratio for chromosome 7 is consistent with monosomy 7. Finally, targeted whole-genome sequencing analysis of the 10-megabase flanking region of the VAMP4 insertion site showed no chromosomal abnormalities or copy-number alterations, which suggests that BB305 lentiviral vector insertion did not result in unexpected chromosomal damage in this region (data not shown). These results indicated that gene expression within 10 megabases of the VAMP4 insertion site was not noticeably affected, and no chromosomal abnormalities were observed. The overall transcriptional profile in the blast cells was consistent with monosomy 7, a common genetic lesion in alkylating agent-induced acute myeloid leukemia.

Section: Discussion

Among the seven patients who received LentiGlobin treatment in the initial cohort (Group A) of the HGB-206 study, this patient is the second to present with acute myeloid leukemia. Understanding potential risk factors for the development of hematologic malignant conditions is important for communities affected by sickle cell disease and persons who are considering gene therapy. In contrast to the case of acute myeloid leukemia that was diagnosed in 2018, the case in the current patient showed vector present in leukemic blast cells, which suggests that blast cells originated from a transduced HSC and not from residual unablated host cells exposed to busulfan.
This report provides several lines of evidence showing that the development of this case of acute myeloid leukemia most likely occurred independently of insertional oncogenesis. First, the insertion site was in VAMP4 , a gene that is known to play a role in Golgi structure and function but has no known role in cellular proliferation or oncogenesis on the basis of an analysis of the published literature and gene databases (COSMIC [Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer], cBioPortal, DepMap [Dependency Map], and CCGD [Candidate Cancer Gene Database]), which included sequenced cancer tissue samples from more than 2000 patients with acute myeloid leukemia and 800 human-derived cancer cell lines (see the Supplementary Appendix ). Second, the insertion site mapped to a noncoding region of VAMP4 in a location with no annotated genomic features, a finding that is in line with the frequent integration of lentiviral vector into introns because of their larger size relative to exons in a gene. Third, a VAMP4 insertion site was present in most evaluated patients with sickle cell disease (71%) who received treatment in the HGB-206 study and had no sequelae. Our findings are in keeping with those reported for other lentiviral vectors, which frequently integrate into VAMP4 . Finally, the BB305 lentiviral vector was minimally transcriptionally active in blast cells and did not noticeably alter the expression of proximal genes, and no chromosome-wide changes in gene expression were observed, except in chromosome 7, which is consistent with monosomy 7.
Because the development of acute myeloid leukemia was most likely independent of vector insertion, other contributing factors in both patients should be considered. Genetic testing identified several known driver alterations of acute myeloid leukemia in the blast cells from the current patient ( RUNX1 , PTPN11 , monosomy 7, and partial loss of 11p), which suggests a molecular basis for the findings observed in this case. In the previous case diagnosed in 2018, a similar mutation profile ( RUNX1 , PTPN11 , and monosomy 7) was observed. Both patients could have accumulated several mutations predisposing them to the development of acute myeloid leukemia over the course of their sickle cell disease and their treatment, resulting in a clone that led to acute myeloid leukemia. The mechanism behind the accumulation of these somatic mutations is likely to be multifactorial, with contributions from the transplantation procedure and its associated risks, the underlying sickle cell disease, and the continued hematopoietic stress resulting from the minimal clinical benefit derived from LentiGlobin, which was observed in both cases.
Among patients with sickle cell disease, the risk of hematologic malignant conditions is 2 to 11 times as high as that in the general population. Factors that probably contribute to this increased baseline risk include the underlying pathophysiological mechanism of chronic hypoxia, the generation of reactive oxygen species with associated oxidative stress, the chronic inflammation, the endothelial and vascular damage and constant erythropoietic stress, the high cell turnover, and the damage to the HSC compartment in bone marrow. Use of hydroxyurea for sickle cell disease has been suggested as a possible risk factor, but analyses of data accumulated over decades from patients with sickle cell disease and chronic myeloid leukemia have not established a link. The transplantation procedure, including the use of myeloablative conditioning agents such as busulfan, carries inherent risks of malignant disease. Furthermore, after myeloablation, the bone marrow niche undergoes extensive proliferation of HSCs and HSPCs, generating proliferative stress that may lead to the rise and accumulation of mutations as part of the normal engraftment process. If a lower cell dose is administered to a patient after myeloablation, fewer HSCs and HSPCs are available to repopulate the bone marrow, which leads to the need for more replication cycles and hence additional proliferative stress and a higher probability of acquiring a mutation that could lead to acute myeloid leukemia.
The two patients in Group A of the HGB-206 study in whom acute myeloid leukemia developed had received LentiGlobin produced from bone marrow–harvested HSCs through an earlier version of the drug-product manufacturing process. Cell collections from the bone marrow with the use of this process resulted in low cell doses, with fewer CD34 long-term HSPCs, leading to increased proliferative stress (Table S1). The low transduction efficiency of the drug product in these patients resulted in minimal transgene expression and an inadequate therapeutic response, with ongoing hemolysis and persistent anemia — outcomes that subjected transplanted and endogenous bone marrow cells to continued hematopoietic stress after treatment, providing further opportunity for accumulation of mutations.
Before the development of malignant disease in these two patients, alterations to the HGB-206 study protocol were necessary to improve clinical benefit; thus, the initial protocol and manufacturing process used in Group A underwent several changes to improve HSC collection and transduction efficiency. The protocol used in Group C includes a minimum of 60 days of packed red-cell transfusions before HSC collection, HSC collection by mobilization with plerixafor followed by apheresis, and an increased target value for the area under the plasma busulfan concentration–time curve during conditioning. Some of these modifications have positively affected the quality (CD34 ) and number of HSCs available for ex vivo manipulation (Table S1). In addition, the improvement in transduction efficiency resulting from the refining of the manufacturing process has resulted in improved levels of antisickling hemoglobin. Together, these protocol improvements are anticipated to reduce proliferative and hematopoietic stresses and therefore may contribute to reducing the risk of acute myeloid leukemia after transplantation in patients in Group C. Although follow-up was limited (median duration, 20.9 months [range, 8.5 to 43.1] as of July 26, 2021), no cases of malignant disease have been reported in Group C patients to date.
In summary, acute myeloid leukemia developed in a patient who had received LentiGlobin for sickle cell disease as part of the initial cohort (Group A) of the HGB-206 study; the development of this malignant condition was most likely independent of insertional oncogenesis. We have suggested possible contributing factors to the development of acute myeloid leukemia; however, a higher proportion of transgene-expressing cells may eliminate many of them. Longer follow-up is required to assess the effect of transplant-mediated gene therapy for patients with sickle cell disease.
