Title: Intermittently Scanned Continuous Glucose Monitoring for Type 1 Diabetes


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

In persons with type 1 diabetes and high glycated hemoglobin levels, the benefits of intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring with optional alarms for high and low blood glucose levels are uncertain.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a parallel-group, multicenter, randomized, controlled trial involving participants with type 1 diabetes and glycated hemoglobin levels between 7.5% and 11.0%, we investigated the efficacy of intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring as compared with participant monitoring of blood glucose levels with fingerstick testing. The primary outcome was the glycated hemoglobin level at 24 weeks, analyzed according to the intention-to-treat principle. Key secondary outcomes included sensor data, participant-reported outcome measures, and safety.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 156 participants were randomly assigned, in a 1:1 ratio, to undergo intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring (the intervention group, 78 participants) or to monitor their own blood glucose levels with fingerstick testing (the usual-care group, 78 participants). At baseline, the mean (±SD) age of the participants was 44±15 years, and the mean duration of diabetes was 21±13 years; 44% of the participants were women. The mean baseline glycated hemoglobin level was 8.7±0.9% in the intervention group and 8.5±0.8% in the usual-care group; these levels decreased to 7.9±0.8% and 8.3±0.9%, respectively, at 24 weeks (adjusted mean between-group difference, −0.5 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], −0.7 to −0.3; P<0.001). The time per day that the glucose level was in the target range was 9.0 percentage points (95% CI, 4.7 to 13.3) higher or 130 minutes (95% CI, 68 to 192) longer in the intervention group than in the usual-care group, and the time spent in a hypoglycemic state (blood glucose level, <70 mg per deciliter [<3.9 mmol per liter]) was 3.0 percentage points (95% CI, 1.4 to 4.5) lower or 43 minutes (95% CI, 20 to 65) shorter in the intervention group. Two participants in the usual-care group had an episode of severe hypoglycemia, and 1 participant in the intervention group had a skin reaction to the sensor.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among participants with type 1 diabetes and high glycated hemoglobin levels, the use of intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring with optional alarms for high and low blood glucose levels resulted in significantly lower glycated hemoglobin levels than levels monitored by fingerstick testing. (Funded by Diabetes UK and others; FLASH-UK ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03815006 .)

Section: Introduction

Type 1 diabetes is one of the most challenging long-term conditions to manage; many persons struggle to monitor their blood glucose levels with the use of fingerstick testing at the frequency needed to guide adjustments in the dose of insulin. Consequently, in most persons with type 1 diabetes, the glycated hemoglobin level, a marker of glycemia, remains above target levels and increases the risk of major complications.
The development of continuous glucose monitoring systems (either intermittently scanned systems or real-time systems) has enabled the monitoring of glucose levels without fingerstick testing. Studies have been needed to assess the efficacy of intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring with optional alarms for high and low blood glucose levels in persons with type 1 diabetes, particularly in those with high glycated hemoglobin levels and a risk of complications who would benefit the most from decreased glycemia. In the FLASH-UK trial, we aimed to determine whether the use of intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring with optional alarms, as compared with traditional monitoring of blood glucose levels with the use of fingerstick testing, would reduce glycemia and increase treatment satisfaction over a 24-week period in persons with type 1 diabetes and high glycated hemoglobin levels.

Section: Methods

We conducted an open-label, parallel-group, multicenter, randomized, controlled trial at seven specialist diabetes clinics and one primary care center in the United Kingdom. The device manufacturer played no part in the design, funding, or conduct of the trial. The trial was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki, and oversight was provided by the trial steering committee and an independent data monitoring committee. The protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org, was approved by the Greater Manchester West Research Ethics Committee. The trial protocol has been published previously.
The first author and the ninth through the twelfth authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. All the authors made the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
Participants who were at least 16 years of age and who had had type 1 diabetes for at least 1 year and a glycated hemoglobin level of 7.5 to 11.0% while receiving either continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion or multiple daily injections were eligible. Key exclusion criteria were the current use of real-time continuous glucose monitors or intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring for more than 4 weeks within the previous 12 weeks, pregnancy or planned pregnancy, and complete loss of awareness of hypoglycemia, as judged by the investigators. Full inclusion and exclusion criteria are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org. All the participants received oral and written information about the trial before they provided written informed consent.
Participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to undergo intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring or to monitor their own blood glucose levels with the use of fingerstick testing. Randomization was performed with a Web-based system (Sealed Envelope) that used stochastic minimization to balance treatment assignments according to trial center, category of baseline glycated hemoglobin level (7.5 to 9.0% or >9.0 to 11.0%), method of treatment (multiple daily injections or continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion), previous participation in a structured education program regarding diabetes (yes or no), and current use of a bolus calculator (yes or no).
The device used in the intervention group was the FreeStyle Libre 2 (Abbott Diabetes Care) intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitor with optional alerts. This device met the safety, health, and environmental protection requirements in the European Union and had received Conformité Européenne (CE) marking. The glucose sensor was worn on the arm for 14 days. A handheld reader, mobile telephone application (app), or both displayed current and historical glucose data and provided optional alarms at glucose thresholds that were set by the user. Participants in the usual-care (control) group continued to monitor their own blood glucose levels with the use of fingerstick testing. All trial devices were provided to the participants free of charge.
The trial included six visits for participants in the intervention group and seven visits for those in the usual-care group (see the Supplementary Appendix ). Owing to the coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) pandemic, trial visits were conducted either in person or by means of telephone, text messaging, or the Internet. Before randomization, all the participants underwent blinded continuous glucose monitoring with the use of a FreeStyle Libre Pro continuous glucose monitoring device for 10 to 14 days. Participants in the usual-care group attended an additional visit at 22 weeks to have another continuous glucose monitoring sensor fitted to obtain blinded data. This sensor was worn at 22 to 24 weeks to allow for a comparison of blinded sensor data with data in the intervention group. Education about the use of sensor data and glucose data obtained by fingerstick testing and about treatment was provided to both groups at randomization and at 4 and 12 weeks. Additional information about how the participants could use glucose data according to their assigned treatment is provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
The glycated hemoglobin level was measured at screening and at 12 and 24 weeks locally with the use of a method that was recommended by the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine and consistent with the guidelines of the National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program. Participants who were receiving care through telemedicine performed a capillary test at home with the use of a glycated hemoglobin kit (TDL TINY). The capillary blood sample was then mailed to the Doctors Laboratory and was analyzed with the use of the Tosoh G8 HPLC Analyzer system, which had previously been shown to be similar to interlaboratory methods; in one study involving 240 participants, the percentage of participants with glycated hemoglobin levels within 5% of venous levels ranged from 96 to 99%. LibreView software was used to download sensor data.
The primary outcome was the glycated hemoglobin level at 24 weeks after randomization. Prespecified secondary outcomes included the glycated hemoglobin level at 12 weeks and the percentage of participants with a glycated hemoglobin level of 7.0% or less, the percentage of those with a glycated hemoglobin level of 7.5% or less, and a reduction in the glycated hemoglobin level of at least 0.5 percentage points or at least 1.0 percentage point at 12 weeks and 24 weeks. Prespecified outcomes based on sensor data and calculated over the last 2 weeks of follow-up included the percentage of time that the sensor glucose measurement was in the target range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter (3.9 to 10.0 mmol per liter), the duration of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia, the mean glucose level, and glucose variability.
Outcome questionnaires that were completed by the participants at baseline and at the end of the trial included the following: the Type 1 Diabetes Distress Scale (T1-DDS) questionnaire ; the Diabetes Fear of Injecting and Self-Testing Questionnaire, Fear of Self-Injection component (D-FISQ FSI) ; the Diabetes Eating Problem Survey–Revised (DEPS-R) ; the Diabetes Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire (DTSQ), with scores ranging from 0 to 36 and higher scores indicating greater satisfaction ; the Patient Health Questionnaire 9-item version (PHQ-9) ; and the Glucose Monitoring Satisfaction Survey (GMSS), with scores ranging from 1 to 5 and higher scores indicating greater satisfaction with glucose monitoring. Further details regarding these questionnaires and secondary outcome measures are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
We determined that a sample of 128 participants would provide the trial with 80% power to detect a target effect size of 0.4 percentage points for the glycated hemoglobin level at 24 weeks, assuming a standard deviation of 0.8 percentage points at a two-sided alpha level of 0.05. The target for randomization was 150 participants to allow for attrition of 15%. Analyses were conducted in accordance with the intention-to-treat principle. The primary analysis included only those participants who had provided a blood sample for evaluation of the glycated hemoglobin level at 24 weeks. A complete-case analysis was used owing to the low percentage of missing data (<10% overall and <10 percentage points for between-group differences). Sensitivity analyses for the primary outcome included a variety of recommended imputation-based approaches, including multiple imputation with the use of chained equations under a missing-at-random assumption and imputation with the use of alternative missing-not-at-random assumptions. Further details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
The primary outcome was analyzed with the use of a linear mixed model, with trial group, baseline glycated hemoglobin level, method of treatment, previous participation in a structured education program regarding diabetes, and current use of a bolus calculator as fixed effects and with trial center as a random effect. Secondary outcomes were analyzed with the use of linear or logistic mixed models; the variables that were included were the same as those in the primary-outcome model described above (i.e., trial group, baseline glycated hemoglobin level, method of treatment, previous participation in a structured education program regarding diabetes, and current use of a bolus calculator), except that the baseline glycated hemoglobin level was included as a categorical variable and the baseline level of the secondary outcome was also included. A two-sided alpha level of 0.05 was used for the primary outcome; 95% confidence intervals are presented throughout, with no adjustment for multiplicity for secondary outcomes.
Outcomes based on sensor data were calculated with the use of GStat software, version 2.3 (University of Cambridge). Statistical analyses were performed with the use of Stata software (StataCorp). The statistical analysis plan is available with the trial protocol .

Section: Results

From December 2019 through March 2021, a total of 313 persons underwent screening, and 185 were enrolled. Subsequently, 156 participants were randomly assigned to the intervention group (78 participants) or the usual-care group (78 participants); of these participants, 72 (92%) in the intervention group and 69 (88%) in the usual-care group were included in the analysis of the primary outcome (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). Two participants in the intervention group stopped using the device, and 8 participants in the usual-care group crossed over owing to either private purchase of an intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitor or prescription of this monitoring through the National Health Service.
The baseline characteristics of the participants in the intervention group and the usual-care group were similar ( Table 1 ). The mean (±SD) age of the participants was 44±15 years, the duration of diabetes was 21±13 years, and the glycated hemoglobin level was 8.6±0.8%. Almost all the participants (152 of 156 participants [97%]) were White, 69 (44%) were women, 54 (35%) had an occupation involving manual labor, and 106 (68%) had less than a bachelor’s degree. Table S1 shows the representativeness of the trial participants to the population of persons with type 1 diabetes in the United Kingdom.
The mean glycated hemoglobin level at baseline was 8.7±0.9% in the intervention group and 8.5±0.8% in the usual-care group. At 24 weeks, the glycated hemoglobin level had decreased to 7.9±0.8% and 8.3±0.9%, respectively, with an adjusted mean between-group difference of −0.5 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI], −0.7 to −0.3; P<0.001).
The effect of intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring on glycated hemoglobin levels was reflected in the secondary glycated hemoglobin outcomes ( Table 2 ), with a higher percentage of participants in the intervention group having a glycated hemoglobin level at or below 7.5% (adjusted odds ratio, 2.47; 95% CI, 1.08 to 5.68) and a greater percentage of participants in the intervention group having a glycated hemoglobin level that decreased by 0.5 percentage points or more (adjusted odds ratio, 4.74; 95% CI, 2.10 to 10.71) or by at least 1.0 percentage point (adjusted odds ratio, 4.30; 95% CI, 1.67 to 11.09). Figure 1 shows the glycated hemoglobin levels at baseline as compared with those at 24 weeks and the cumulative distribution of glycated hemoglobin levels at 24 weeks. At 12 weeks, the mean adjusted between-group difference in the glycated hemoglobin level was −0.3 percentage points (95% CI, −0.5 to −0.1) in favor of the intervention group (Table S2). Sensitivity analyses for the primary outcome showed that the estimates were consistent with alternative assumptions, including those around missing data (Table S3).
The percentage of time spent in the target glucose range (70 to 180 mg per deciliter) was 9.0 percentage points (95% CI, 4.7 to 13.3) higher and 130 minutes per day (95% CI, 68 to 192) longer in the intervention group than in the usual-care group, and the time spent in a hypoglycemic state (<70 mg per deciliter) was 3.0 percentage points (95% CI, 1.4 to 4.5) lower and 43 minutes (95% CI, 20 to 65) shorter in the intervention group. The time spent in a hyperglycemic state (>180 mg per deciliter) was 6.0 percentage points (95% CI, 0.9 to 11.0) lower and 86 minutes per day (95% CI, 13 to 158) shorter in the intervention group than in the usual-care group ( Table 3 ). Analyses of selected glycemic outcomes according to sensor data were performed for nighttime levels (Table S4) and daytime levels (Table S5). Glucose variability was lower in the intervention group than in the usual-care group. Sensor glucose levels are shown in Figures S2 and S3.
The mean number of sensor scans per 24 hours in the intervention group was 11.0±6.2 (9.7±5.6 during the daytime and 1.3±0.9 during the nighttime) (Table S6). The mean percentage of sensor use during the last 2 weeks of the intervention period was 92.1±10.4%. The mean number of participant-monitored blood glucose tests performed per day in the intervention group decreased from 4.2±2.1 tests per day at baseline to 0.6±1.1 tests at 24 weeks, with an adjusted mean between-group difference of −3.3 tests per day (95% CI, −3.9 to −2.8) (Table S7).
The between-group difference in the mean total daily insulin dose at 24 weeks was small (adjusted difference between the intervention group and the usual-care group, −0.5 units; 95% CI −5.6 to 4.0). Additional details are provided in Tables S8 through S10.
The use of intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring with alarms resulted in a higher DTSQ total score in the intervention group than in the usual-care group (adjusted difference, 7.0 points; 95% CI, 5.2 to 8.7) (Table S11). At 24 weeks, the GMSS total score was also higher in the intervention group than in the usual-care group (adjusted difference, 0.7 points; 95% CI, 0.5 to 0.9), results that indicated greater overall satisfaction. The T1-DDS questionnaire, the PHQ-9, the D-FISQ FSI, and the DEPS-R did not show substantial evidence of an effect of intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring on a range of participant-reported outcomes, including diabetes-related distress, depression, fear of injection and testing, and eating behaviors.
The incidence of adverse events and serious adverse events was low throughout the trial ( Table 4 ). Two participants in the usual-care group had episodes of severe hypoglycemia, one participant in the intervention group had an episode of diabetic ketoacidosis, and two participants in the usual-care group had ketosis that did not result in hospitalization (an overall total of six episodes of ketosis). Sensor-related adverse events were low.

Section: Discussion

In this multicenter, randomized trial, we found that intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring with alarms for high and low blood glucose levels in persons with type 1 diabetes and high glycated hemoglobin levels safely reduced glycated hemoglobin levels, increased the time spent in target glucose ranges, and reduced the burden of hypoglycemia. The benefit with respect to glycated hemoglobin levels was robust in a range of sensitivity analyses, including imputations under plausible missing-at-random and missing-not-at-random assumptions. The confidence intervals for participant-reported satisfaction measures suggested that the device was easy to use and that it functioned well and accurately. A cost-effectiveness analysis is under way.
The improvements in glycated hemoglobin levels in the current trial are broadly similar to those in trials of real-time continuous glucose monitoring as compared with participants’ monitoring of their own blood glucose levels with the use of fingerstick testing. The adjusted between-group difference in the mean change in the glycated hemoglobin level from baseline was −0.6 percentage points in the DIAMOND (Multiple Daily Injections and Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Diabetes) trial and −0.4 percentage points in the GOLD trial (A Randomized Trial of the Effect of Continuous Glucose Monitoring [CGM] in Individuals with Type 1 Diabetes Treated with Multiple Daily Insulin Injections [MDI]), as compared with −0.5 percentage points in our current trial. Furthermore, the decrease in the glycated hemoglobin level in the current trial (change from baseline to 24 weeks, −0.8 percentage points) was marginally greater than that indicated by real-world data on intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring in the United Kingdom as reported by the Association of British Clinical Diabetologists Nationwide Audit (baseline glycated hemoglobin level, 8.3%, with a change of −0.48 percentage points) and that in a study involving participants in Scotland who had a glycated hemoglobin level greater than 7.5%, with a change of −0.6 percentage points. In both the DIAMOND trial and the current trial, total daily insulin doses were small, which suggests that participants may have been able to use continuous glucose monitoring to adjust their own insulin levels effectively.
Previous studies have examined the first-generation intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitors (without alarms). The Randomised Controlled Study to Evaluate the Impact of Novel Glucose Sensing Technology on Hypoglycaemia in Type 1 Diabetes (IMPACT) compared intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring with participants’ monitoring of their own blood glucose levels with the use of fingerstick testing. That trial showed a reduction in hypoglycemia but no between-group difference in glycated hemoglobin levels. In addition, a 6-month, parallel-group, randomized trial investigated first-generation intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring without alarms in participants 13 to 20 years of age who had high glycated hemoglobin levels of at least 9%. In contrast to the findings of the current trial, there was no significant between-group difference in the glycated hemoglobin level at 6 months (0.2 percentage points; 95% CI, −0.9 to 0.5). Studies comparing the first-generation intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitors that do not have alarms with real-time continuous glucose monitors that do have alarms have shown benefits of the latter monitors, but data are limited regarding the comparison of newer intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitors (with alarms) with real-time continuous glucose monitors.
The current trial used an intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring device with optional alarms in persons with type 1 diabetes and high glycated hemoglobin levels. Other strengths of the trial are the broad range of outcomes, including outcome measures reported by the participants and sensor-based glucose data, as well as the independence of the trial from the device manufacturer.
Our trial has certain limitations. The participants were aware of the trial-group assignments, and eight participants in the usual-care group crossed over to intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring, although at 24 weeks, a glycated hemoglobin measurement was obtained in five of these participants and was analyzed according to their usual-care group assignment, with imputation approaches showing a lack of sensitivity to assumptions for the other three participants who crossed over. Nearly all the participants were White; this limited the generalizability of the findings. Also, the trial took place during the Covid-19 pandemic, so some participants had virtual visits with the option of performing capillary blood tests to determine the glycated hemoglobin level at home. LibreView software, which was used to review sensor data, did not provide data on alarm settings and use, so detailed insights into how these alarms were used by the participants were limited. Consequently, we were unable to ascertain whether the benefits observed were due to the sensor alone or to the alarms in the intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring device used. We excluded persons who were completely unaware of hypoglycemia, who had recurrent severe hypoglycemia, or both, so the benefits observed cannot be extrapolated to these higher-risk groups.
Among participants with type 1 diabetes and high glycated hemoglobin levels, those who underwent intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring with optional alarms for high and low blood glucose levels had significantly lower glycated hemoglobin levels than those who monitored their own blood glucose levels with the use of fingerstick testing.
