Title: Once-Weekly Dulaglutide for the Treatment of Youths with Type 2 Diabetes


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

The incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus is increasing among youths. Once-weekly treatment with dulaglutide, a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist, may have efficacy with regard to glycemic control in youths with type 2 diabetes.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, 26-week trial, we randomly assigned participants (10 to <18 years of age; body-mass index [BMI], >85th percentile) being treated with lifestyle modifications alone or with metformin, with or without basal insulin, in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive once-weekly subcutaneous injections of placebo, dulaglutide at a dose of 0.75 mg, or dulaglutide at a dose of 1.5 mg. Participants were then included in a 26-week open-label extension study in which those who had received placebo began receiving dulaglutide at a weekly dose of 0.75 mg. The primary end point was the change from baseline in the glycated hemoglobin level at 26 weeks. Secondary end points included a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0% and changes from baseline in the fasting glucose concentration and BMI. Safety was also assessed.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 154 participants underwent randomization. At 26 weeks, the mean glycated hemoglobin level had increased in the placebo group (0.6 percentage points) and had decreased in the dulaglutide groups (–0.6 percentage points in the 0.75-mg group and −0.9 percentage points in the 1.5-mg group, P<0.001 for both comparisons vs. placebo). At 26 weeks, a higher percentage of participants in the pooled dulaglutide groups than in the placebo group had a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0% (51% vs. 14%, P<0.001). The fasting glucose concentration increased in the placebo group (17.1 mg per deciliter) and decreased in the pooled dulaglutide groups (−18.9 mg per deciliter, P<0.001), and there were no between-group differences in the change in BMI. The incidence of gastrointestinal adverse events was higher with dulaglutide therapy than with placebo. The safety profile of dulaglutide was consistent with that reported in adults.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Treatment with dulaglutide at a once-weekly dose of 0.75 mg or 1.5 mg was superior to placebo in improving glycemic control through 26 weeks among youths with type 2 diabetes who were being treated with or without metformin or basal insulin, without an effect on BMI. (Funded by Eli Lilly; AWARD-PEDS ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02963766 .)

Section: Introduction

Type 2 diabetes in young persons is a rapidly progressive disorder with early onset and rapid progression of complications. In the Treatment Options for Type 2 Diabetes in Adolescents and Youth (TODAY) trial of maintenance of glycemic control in youths with type 2 diabetes, investigators found high therapeutic-failure rates in response to metformin, a recommended first-line therapy for youth-onset type 2 diabetes, against the backdrop of rapid deterioration in β-cell function. Although youth-onset type 2 diabetes shares pathophysiological components with adult type 2 diabetes, the severity of insulin resistance and β-cell dysfunction is greater in youths than in adults. Pharmacotherapeutic options that are targeted to pathophysiological features remain limited for youths with type 2 diabetes, as compared with the extensive pharmacopeia that is presently available for adults with type 2 diabetes.
Recently, two glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, liraglutide and exenatide, both of which have been shown to improve glycemic control in youths, were approved for the treatment of youths with type 2 diabetes. Liraglutide requires daily injection, selection of the correct dose, and manual needle attachment and removal, whereas exenatide, although it is a weekly injection, requires mixing as well as visual inspection of the injection device before administration, and only a single dose level of exenatide is available, a situation that precludes treatment intensification if additional glycemic control is warranted. Thus, more convenient options in the choice of a GLP-1 receptor agonist that improve glycemic control by means of targeting known pathophysiological impairments in insulin sensitivity, β-cell and α-cell dysfunction, and impaired incretin effect in youths may be needed to fill the therapeutic gap in this vulnerable age group.
Dulaglutide, a GLP-1 receptor agonist that is administered subcutaneously once weekly, has been approved since 2014 for the treatment of adults with type 2 diabetes. We present here the results of the Assessment of Weekly Administration of LY2189265 in Diabetes–Pediatric Study (AWARD-PEDS), a randomized, double-blind trial to assess the efficacy and safety of dulaglutide as compared with placebo in youths with type 2 diabetes.

Section: Methods

In this phase 3, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, superiority trial, we investigated the efficacy and safety of once-weekly treatment with dulaglutide (at a dose of 0.75 mg or 1.5 mg) in youths with type 2 diabetes, with or without metformin or basal insulin therapy. The 26-week double-blind period of the trial was followed by a 26-week open-label extension period. The trial was conducted at 46 centers in nine countries (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The protocol (available at NEJM.org) was approved by local institutional review boards. The trial was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and with the Good Clinical Practice guidelines of the International Council for Harmonisation. Written informed consent was obtained from a legally acceptable representative of each participant, and assent was obtained from all the participants who had not reached the age of majority according to local country regulations.
The trial protocol and statistical analysis plan were designed by the sponsor (Eli Lilly). An independent data and safety monitoring committee had access to all unblinded safety data to ensure participant safety during the double-blind period. The investigators, working under confidentiality agreements with the sponsor, were responsible for data collection, and the sponsor undertook site monitoring and data collation and analysis. The first draft of the manuscript was written by the first and last authors, and all the authors subsequently reviewed and revised the manuscript and approved the submission of the manuscript for publication. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol.
Eligible youths were 10 years to less than 18 years of age at randomization and had a body-mass index (BMI) greater than the 85th percentile for age and sex in the participant’s country or region, a body weight of at least 50 kg, and a glycated hemoglobin level of more than 6.5% to no more than 11.0% (if the participant was taking metformin, with or without basal insulin therapy) or of more than 6.5% to no more than 9.0% (if the participant was being treated with diet and exercise alone). The metformin and insulin doses had to be stable (defined as varying within 15%) and lifestyle measures in place for at least 8 weeks before screening. Key exclusion criteria were type 1 diabetes or positive antibodies against insulinoma-associated protein 2 or the 65-kD isoform of glutamic acid decarboxylase, the use of any antidiabetic agent other than metformin or basal insulin within 3 months before screening, a history of pancreatitis, a serum calcitonin level of at least 20 pg per milliliter, and a personal or family history of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A or type 2B, thyroid C-cell hyperplasia, or medullary thyroid carcinoma. The complete eligibility criteria are listed in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix .
After a 4-week screening period, eligible participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive once-weekly subcutaneous injections (with the use of visually identical, single-use, single-dose pen devices) of dulaglutide at a dose of 0.75 mg, dulaglutide at a dose of 1.5 mg, or placebo for 26 weeks, followed by a 26-week open-label period and a 4-week safety follow-up period (Fig. S1). Randomization was stratified according to the glycated hemoglobin level (<8.0% or ≥8.0%), metformin use (yes or no), and insulin use (yes or no). For participants who were randomly assigned to receive the 1.5-mg dose, dulaglutide was initiated at the 0.75-mg dose for the first 4 weeks and then escalated to the 1.5-mg dose if the participant did not have unacceptable side effects with the lower dose. At the end of the double-blind period (week 26), participants who had been assigned to a dulaglutide group continued to receive open-label dulaglutide at their assigned dose, and participants who had been assigned to the placebo group began receiving open-label dulaglutide at a weekly dose of 0.75 mg.
Participants performed self-monitoring of blood glucose in the fasted state and at one other time each day, as well as at any time that they had symptoms suggestive of hypoglycemia. Trial sites provided standardized diet and exercise counseling to participants at randomization and at each subsequent clinic visit. Prespecified criteria for treatment with metformin and insulin for severe, persistent hyperglycemia that were based on the fasting plasma glucose concentration were defined (see the Supplementary Appendix ). Adherence to the administration of dulaglutide or placebo was assessed according to dates and times of each weekly dose as recorded by participants in trial diaries.
The primary efficacy end point was the change in the glycated hemoglobin level from baseline to week 26. Key secondary efficacy end points (controlled for multiplicity in a graphical testing scheme; see the Statistical Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ) were a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0% and changes from baseline in the fasting plasma glucose concentration and in the BMI. Exploratory efficacy end points that were assessed at week 26 included a glycated hemoglobin level of no more than 6.5% and changes from baseline in body weight, waist circumference, and the BMI standard-deviation score (calculated on the basis of age and sex with the use of 2006 World Health Organization standards and methods ). The attainment of composite end points of glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0% and of no more than 6.5% without hypoglycemia (defined as a blood glucose concentration of <70 mg per deciliter [3.9 mmol per liter] or severe hypoglycemia) was also assessed. Safety was assessed throughout the trial (see the Supplementary Appendix ).
The trial was designed to have at least 90% power to show the superiority of the pooled dulaglutide doses to placebo (primary objective), with a difference in the mean change from baseline in the glycated hemoglobin level of −0.65 percentage points and a standard deviation of 1 percentage point, under the assumption that 20% of the participants would withdraw. On the basis of these assumptions, we planned to enroll 150 participants (50 participants per group) such that 120 participants would complete the trial.
The primary analysis was conducted in the intention-to-treat population, which was defined as all the participants who underwent randomization and received at least one dose of dulaglutide or placebo. For the evaluation of the primary and key secondary efficacy end points at 26 weeks, two estimands (i.e., precisely defined estimated measures of treatment effect) were prespecified to meet regulatory requirements. The treatment-regimen estimand (also called the intention-to-treat estimand) included all the data from the intention-to-treat population regardless of antihyperglycemic rescue status and imputed data for participants who were missing primary end-point measures, an approach that aligns with the intention-to-treat principle as defined by International Council for Harmonisation E9(R1). For the intention-to-treat estimand, all missing data were replaced with a multiple-imputation method that assumed that participants who were missing end-point data had a response as though they had received placebo. The efficacy estimand included data from the intention-to-treat population up to the point that rescue therapy was initiated and estimated what the treatment effect would have been if all the participants had continued to receive dulaglutide without the initiation of another glucose lowering medication.
The intention-to-treat estimand used an analysis-of-covariance model for the primary and continuous secondary efficacy end points and a logistic-regression model for the secondary end point of a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0%. The efficacy estimand used a mixed model for repeated measurements for the primary and continuous secondary efficacy end points and a longitudinal logistic-regression model for the categorical secondary end point. The type I error rate was strongly controlled within each estimand independently for the evaluation of the primary and key secondary end points at 26 weeks with a graphical approach. Subgroup analyses according to categories of baseline age, sex, race, ethnic group, diabetes medication use, duration of diabetes, baseline glycated hemoglobin level, BMI, and body weight were prespecified in the statistical analysis plan and were performed on the primary end point with the use of the intention-to-treat estimand with the washout method for multiple imputation for missing data. Analyses of data through the complete 52-week treatment period and analyses of exploratory outcomes were performed with the use of the efficacy estimand only. Further details of the estimands, analysis methods, and graphical testing procedure are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Results

From December 2016 through December 2020, a total of 227 youths with type 2 diabetes were assessed for eligibility. Of these youths, 154 underwent randomization, all of whom received at least one dose of dulaglutide or placebo and were included in the intention-to-treat population (Fig. S2). Among the participants who underwent randomization, 146 (95%) completed the 26-week double-blind period and 139 (90%) completed the 52-week treatment period. Of the 52 participants who had been assigned to the 1.5-mg dulaglutide group, 48 (92%) had their dose escalated to 1.5 mg after 4 weeks and continued to receive this dose throughout the double-blind period.
The characteristics of the participants and their diabetes therapies at baseline were balanced across the three groups, with the majority of the participants taking metformin alone ( Table 1 and Table S2). Among the participants who had adjustments in the insulin dose reported during the trial, the mean changes in the total daily insulin dose were small (≤10% of the baseline dose), with no clinically meaningful difference across the trial groups (Table S3). Overall adherence to the administration of dulaglutide or placebo, which was assessed by means of weekly records of dosing information as reported by the participants, was 98.7% during the double-blind period (weeks 1 through 26) and 99.4% overall (weeks 1 through 52), with no clinically relevant difference across the trial groups during any trial period (Table S4).
The mean glycated hemoglobin level at week 26, according to the intention-to-treat estimand, decreased from baseline by 0.8 percentage points in the pooled dulaglutide groups but increased by 0.6 percentage points in the placebo group (estimated treatment difference, −1.4 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], −1.9 to −0.8; P<0.001) ( Figure 1A ). Superiority in the primary end-point analysis of the change in the glycated hemoglobin level was shown with each dulaglutide dose (0.75 mg per week and 1.5 mg per week) as compared with placebo (P<0.001 for both comparisons) ( Figure 1A and Tables S5 and S6). The superiority of dulaglutide therapy (in the pooled and individual dose groups) to placebo was also shown for the other key secondary glycemic end points: a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0% ( Figure 1B ) and the change from baseline in the fasting blood glucose concentration ( Figure 1C ).
The primary and key secondary glycemic-control objectives for the superiority of dulaglutide therapy to placebo were also met according to the efficacy estimand, with similar point estimates for each end point. Subgroup analyses of the primary end point showed improvements in the glycated hemoglobin level that were associated with dulaglutide treatment across categories of baseline age, sex, race, ethnic group, diabetes medication use, duration of diabetes, baseline glycated hemoglobin level, BMI, and body weight (Fig. S3).
Participants who had been assigned to receive dulaglutide at a dose of 0.75 mg or 1.5 mg continued to have mean reductions from baseline in the glycated hemoglobin level through 52 weeks, although the magnitudes of the reductions were less at week 52 than at week 26 (Fig. S4A). In participants who had been randomly assigned to receive placebo, the mean glycated hemoglobin level decreased by approximately 0.9 percentage points at 13 weeks after they switched to receiving open-label dulaglutide at a dose of 0.75 mg (week 39), and at week 52, the level remained reduced as compared with baseline (mean change, −0.1 percentage point). At 52 weeks, 50% of the participants who had switched from placebo to the 0.75-mg dose of dulaglutide had a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0%, and 60% of the participants who had been assigned to receive dulaglutide at randomization (65% of those receiving the 0.75-mg dose and 55% of those receiving the 1.5-mg dose) had a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0% at 52 weeks (Fig. S4B). Reductions from baseline in the fasting blood glucose concentration in participants who had been assigned to receive dulaglutide were generally sustained through 52 weeks, and the concentration was reduced after 26 weeks in participants who switched from placebo to the 0.75-mg dose of dulaglutide (Fig. S4C).
The exploratory glycated hemoglobin target of no more than 6.5% at 26 weeks was met by 47% of the participants (43 of 92) in the dulaglutide groups and by 13% of those (5 of 38) in the placebo group (Table S7). Similar results were observed for exploratory composite end points of a glycated hemoglobin target of less than 7.0% or of no more than 6.5% without any episodes of severe or documented symptomatic hypoglycemia.
Dulaglutide was not superior to placebo with regard to lowering the BMI ( Figure 1D ), and there were no clinically relevant differences across the trial groups in the change from baseline in BMI through 52 weeks (Fig. S4D). Similar results for superiority testing at 26 weeks were obtained with the use of the efficacy estimand. No relevant difference in the change from baseline at either 26 or 52 weeks was observed for the exploratory weight variables of the BMI standard-deviation score, body weight, or waist circumference (Table S8). The mean changes from baseline in height or in the height standard-deviation score through the 52-week treatment period were small, with no clinically relevant differences across trial groups (Fig. S5). In the majority of participants with available data (95 of 138 participants [69%]), height increased by 1 cm or less during the 52-week treatment period.
The mean total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and serum triglyceride concentrations increased in the placebo group and decreased in the dulaglutide groups from baseline to 26 weeks (Table S9). Differences in the changes from baseline in the heart rate and blood pressure between the dulaglutide groups and the placebo group at 26 weeks were not clinically meaningful (Table S10).
The percentages of participants who reported any adverse event through 26 weeks was 69% (35 of 51 participants) in the placebo group, 75% (38 of 51) in the 0.75-mg dulaglutide group, and 73% (38 of 52) in the 1.5-mg dulaglutide group ( Table 2 ). Serious adverse events through 26 weeks were reported in 3 participants in the placebo group (6% [3 of 51]) and in 2 in the dulaglutide groups (2% [2 of 103]) ( Table 2 ). During the 26-week double-blind period, 4 participants (3%) discontinued placebo or dulaglutide owing to an adverse event ( Table 2 and Table S11). Overall, most adverse events were reported during the first 26 weeks, with a similar adverse-event profile through 52 weeks (Tables S12 and S13). No adverse events leading to treatment discontinuation were reported during the open-label period through 52 weeks, and no deaths were reported during the trial.
Gastrointestinal events were among the most common adverse events, with a higher incidence in the dulaglutide groups than in the placebo group through 26 weeks ( Table 2 ). Most cases of nausea (80% [in 12 of 15 participants]), vomiting (69% [in 11 of 16]), and diarrhea (89% [in 17 of 19]) with dulaglutide treatment were mild in severity (Table S14). Most cases of gastrointestinal events in all the groups were also transient, occurring during the 2 weeks after the initiation of dulaglutide therapy (Fig. S6). One participant in the 1.5-mg dulaglutide group discontinued treatment owing to a gastrointestinal event (vomiting) during the trial.
The percentages of participants reporting an allergic or hypersensitivity reaction through 26 weeks (5% [in 7 of 154 participants]) and 52 weeks (6% [in 10 of 154) did not differ across the trial groups; similarly, the percentages of participants with injection-site reactions through 26 weeks (9% [in 14 of 154 participants]) and 52 weeks (12% [in 18 of 154]) did not differ across the trial groups ( Table 2 ). The percentage of participants reporting hypoglycemia (documented symptomatic plasma glucose concentration of <70 mg per deciliter) through 26 weeks (9% [in 14 participants]) and through 52 weeks (12% [in 18]) did not differ across the trial groups, and no participants reported severe hypoglycemia during the trial ( Table 2 ). The incidence and annual rate of hypoglycemia were generally higher overall among participants using insulin than among those not using insulin at baseline; however, there were no clinically meaningful differences in the incidence or annual rate of hypoglycemia between the dulaglutide groups and the placebo group among participants taking insulin at baseline (Table S15).
More participants in the placebo group than in each dulaglutide group received rescue therapy for persistent hyperglycemia through 26 weeks: 18% (in 9 of 51 participants) in the placebo group, 4% (in 2 of 51) in the 0.75-mg dulaglutide group, and 2% (in 1 of 52) in the 1.5-mg dulaglutide group. This difference persisted through 52 weeks of the trial (Fig. S7).
No cases of pancreatitis were reported. The mean changes from baseline to 26 weeks in pancreatic enzyme levels were greater in the dulaglutide groups than in the placebo group (Table S16). No participant had clinically relevant increases (>3 times the upper limit of the normal range) in the amylase or pancreatic amylase levels. The serum lipase level was more than 3 times the upper limit of the normal range in 1% of the participants in the dulaglutide groups, as compared with 4% of those in the placebo group. The mean change from baseline in the calcitonin level through 26 weeks ranged from 0.1 to 0.4 pg per milliliter, with no clinically meaningful difference among the trial groups. No cases of thyroid neoplasms were reported.

Section: Discussion

Results from this double-blind, randomized, phase 3 trial showed that dulaglutide treatment was superior to placebo in reducing the glycated hemoglobin level at 26 weeks in youths with type 2 diabetes who were being treated with diet and exercise, with or without metformin or basal insulin. In contrast to the findings of a previous trial of a once-weekly GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy in youths with type 2 diabetes, dulaglutide treatment lowered the fasting plasma glucose concentration significantly more than placebo, and approximately 3 times as many participants in the dulaglutide groups as in the placebo group had a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7.0% at 26 weeks.
Improvements from baseline in glycemic control with dulaglutide therapy persisted through 52 weeks, although the glycated hemoglobin level tended to increase during the open-label period, a trend that we speculate is likely to be related to the rapid underlying disease progression in these youths, as evidenced by the progressive increase in the glycated hemoglobin level in the placebo group through the first 26 weeks. Considering the progressive increase in the glycated hemoglobin level over time that was observed in the TODAY trial, with 34% of youths having a glycated hemoglobin level of at least 10% after up to 15 years of follow-up, we believe that the effects of dulaglutide therapy appear to be potentially promising.
The data from our trial suggest that dulaglutide, if ultimately approved for pediatric use, may offer advantages not only with regard to glycemic control but also with regard to its frequency and method of administration. Weekly administration with a device that does not require reconstitution steps or needle handling and that has shown favorable ease-of-use characteristics in preference studies involving adults with type 2 diabetes may have relevance for long-term treatment of youths with type 2 diabetes.
The present trial did not include a placebo group through 52 weeks, which precludes the estimation of placebo-adjusted effects of longer-term treatment. However, previous phase 3 trials involving youths with type 2 diabetes have shown mean increases from baseline in the glycated hemoglobin level of 0.7 percentage points and 0.8 percentage points over a 12-month period in the placebo groups, a finding that supports the potential value of minimizing placebo exposure during the latter parts of these trials. Moreover, given the major barriers to successful recruitment, conduct, and data collection in trials involving youths with type 2 diabetes, the opportunity for an open-label extension period in which all the participants receive active intervention is generally favored by participants and their parents or guardians and enhances enrollment and adherence.
In adults with type 2 diabetes, dulaglutide therapy at the doses tested in this trial has been associated with body-weight loss of 1.4 to 3.0 kg over a period of 6 to 12 months. In contrast, no changes in body weight and related variables were observed in this trial involving youths. Although the findings are consistent with two previous trials of GLP-1 receptor agonists in youths with type 2 diabetes, the reasons behind these discrepant findings, as compared with those in adults, remain unclear. The possibility of rapid adolescent growth confounding the assessment of BMI or body-weight change is unlikely, given that most participants had nearly reached their final height at trial entry.
The catabolic effect of rapidly worsening glycemic control in the placebo group may have confounded the detection of dulaglutide-associated changes in body weight. Moreover, studies involving adults suggest that the severity of baseline hyperglycemia and, presumably, underlying insulin resistance may influence the magnitude of weight loss mediated by GLP-1 receptor agonists. In adults with obesity, GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy generally results in less weight loss in those with type 2 diabetes than in those without type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, in studies involving adults with type 2 diabetes, the magnitude of body-weight loss with liraglutide and dulaglutide therapy was attenuated as baseline hyperglycemia worsened. On the basis of these findings, one could hypothesize that the heightened insulin resistance and accelerated loss of glycemic control in youths as compared with adults with type 2 diabetes could potentially render youths more resistant to the weight-reducing effects of GLP-1 receptor agonists. Whether higher doses of GLP-1 receptor agonists or other incretin mimetic agents with more robust effects on weight loss will be more effective for weight management in youths with type 2 diabetes is unknown.
The overall safety profile of dulaglutide in our trial was consistent with that reported in adults. Gastrointestinal symptoms were among the most common adverse events but were primarily mild and were most likely to occur soon after the initiation of therapy.
The strengths of this trial include its randomized design testing two dulaglutide doses independently against placebo, the high percentage of participant retention, and racial and ethnic diversity (Table S17). We aimed for racial and ethnic diversity in our trial, given the higher prevalence of type 2 diabetes among Black and Hispanic youths than among White and non-Hispanic youths.
Our trial has certain limitations. The enrollment of participants outside the United States and Mexico was limited, particularly in European countries, but was consistent with geographic differences in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes among youths. Higher dulaglutide doses (3.0 mg and 4.5 mg) than were used in our trial are now available for the treatment of adults but were not available for use when our trial was initiated.
Among youths with inadequately controlled type 2 diabetes being treated with or without metformin or basal insulin, once-weekly treatment with dulaglutide was superior to placebo in improving glycemic control.
