Title: Early Amino Acids in Extremely Preterm Infants and Neurodisability at 2 Years


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Whether higher parenteral amino acid intake improves outcomes in infants with extremely low birth weight is unclear.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this multicenter, parallel-group, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial, we assigned infants with birth weights of less than 1000 g at 8 neonatal intensive care units to receive amino acids at a dose of 1 g per day (intervention group) or placebo in addition to usual nutrition for the first 5 days after birth. The primary outcome was survival free from neurodisability as assessed with the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development and neurologic examination at 2 years, corrected for gestational age at birth. Secondary outcomes were the components of the primary outcome as well as the presence or absence of neonatal disorders, the rate of growth, and nutritional intake.

Abstract_Section: Results

We enrolled 434 infants (217 per group) in this trial. Survival free from neurodisability was observed in 97 of 203 children (47.8%) in the intervention group and in 102 of 205 (49.8%) in the placebo group (adjusted relative risk, 0.95; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.79 to 1.14; P=0.56). Death before the age of 2 years occurred in 39 of 217 children (18.0%) in the intervention group and 42 of 217 (19.4%) in the placebo group (adjusted relative risk, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.63 to 1.36); neurodisability occurred in 67 of 164 children (40.9%) in the intervention group and 61 of 163 (37.4%) in the placebo group (adjusted relative risk, 1.16; 95% CI, 0.90 to 1.50). Neurodisability was moderate to severe in 27 children (16.5%) in the intervention group and 14 (8.6%) in the placebo group (adjusted relative risk, 1.95; 95% CI, 1.09 to 3.48). More children in the intervention group than in the placebo group had patent ductus arteriosus (adjusted relative risk, 1.65; 95% CI, 1.11 to 2.46). In a post hoc analysis, refeeding syndrome occurred in 42 of 172 children in the intervention group and 26 of 166 in the placebo group (adjusted relative risk, 1.64; 95% CI, 1.09 to 2.47). Eight serious adverse events occurred.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In infants with extremely low birth weight, extra parenteral amino acids at a dose of 1 g per day for 5 days after birth did not increase the number who survived free from neurodisability at 2 years. (Funded by the New Zealand Health Research Council and others; ProVIDe Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry number, ACTRN12612001084875 .)

Section: Introduction

A fetus receives amino acids at an estimated rate of 3 to 4 g per kilogram of body weight per day, an amount that supports fetal growth and brain development. Insufficient protein is known to lead to a negative nitrogen balance; however, the appropriate protein intake to support the growth and development of infants with extremely low birth weight (<1000 g) is unknown, especially in the first few days after birth.
Preterm infants have impaired brain maturation after birth, which is reflected in altered brain size, structure, connectivity, and function, as compared with the maturation in full-term infants. Although the percentage of preterm infants with extremely low birth weight who survive without moderate-to-severe neurodisability has increased over time, up to 50% of infants with extremely low birth weight have some degree of neurodevelopmental impairment.
Observational studies that showed associations between higher levels of protein intake and better growth and neurodevelopment have prompted recommendations for earlier and higher amino acid intake for these infants. However, data from randomized, controlled trials that are powered to detect differences in morbidity, mortality, and important functional outcomes are lacking. Of concern, trials in which parenteral nutrition was begun early in critically ill adults and children have shown decreased survival and, in a subgroup of full-term newborns, adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes at 2 years of age. Whether this outcome also occurs with parenteral nutrition in the first postnatal days in extremely preterm neonates is not known.
The aim of the Protein Intravenous Nutrition on Development (ProVIDe) trial involving infants with a birth weight of less than 1000 g was to determine whether the administration of amino acids at an additional 1 g per day starting within 24 hours after birth and continuing for 5 days would increase the percentage of children who survived without neurodisability at an age of 2 years, corrected for gestational age at birth. Secondary aims were to determine the effects of the additional amino acid intake on neonatal morbidity and growth.

Section: Methods

ProVIDe was an investigator-initiated, multicenter, parallel-group, double-blind, two-group, randomized, controlled trial that was designed and overseen by a steering committee consisting of the authors (see the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The protocol (also available at NEJM.org) was preregistered with the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry. The trial was funded by the New Zealand Health Research Council and grants from several foundations. Ethics approval was obtained from the Northern B Health and Disability Ethics Committee and Children’s Health Queensland Human Research Ethics Committee. Each participating site received local institutional approval.
The authors designed the trial and vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. The last author wrote the first draft of the manuscript; all the authors contributed to the manuscript and made the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. Data were gathered by trial-site investigators and analyzed by the second author. Neither the funders nor the authors’ institution had any role in the design, collection, analysis, or interpretation of the data or in the writing of the manuscript or the decision to submit it for publication.
Infants with a birth weight of less than 1000 g and an umbilical arterial catheter in situ in an acceptable position were eligible for inclusion. Exclusion criteria were admission to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) more than 24 hours after birth; multiple births of more than 2 infants; the presence of a known chromosomal, genetic, or congenital disorder that affects growth; the presence of an inborn error of metabolism; and danger of imminent death. Infants who were eligible underwent randomization within 24 hours after birth. When possible, informed consent was sought before birth. In New Zealand, infants for whom consent was not obtained before birth were enrolled on the basis of delayed consent (approved by the ethics committee), which permitted randomization and administration of the intervention before parental consent was obtained, with a requirement that informed, written consent be obtained within 24 hours after birth. If consent was not obtained within 24 hours, the intervention ceased and the infant was excluded from the trial.
Infants were enrolled by medical and research staff. Within 24 hours after birth and once an umbilical artery catheter had been placed, infants were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive the intervention or placebo. Assignments were made by means of a Web-based interface that was maintained and concealed by an independent database controller. Twins underwent randomization as individual infants. Randomization was conducted with the use of variable block sizes stratified according to recruitment site, sex, and size relative to gestational age (i.e., small for gestational age [birth weight <10th percentile] or not).
The participants’ families, clinical staff, investigators, follow-up assessors, and members of the data and safety monitoring committees were unaware of the treatment assignments throughout the trial and follow-up until the statistical analysis was completed. An independent contractor compounded the intervention and placebo fluids, which were identical in appearance and identified only by a randomly generated numerical identifier.
Starting within 24 hours after birth and continuing for 5 days, infants received 8.5% TrophAmine (B Braun Medical) containing 1 g of amino acids and 1.4 mg of sodium in 12 ml of fluid (intervention group) or 0.45% saline containing 21.2 mg of sodium in 12 ml of fluid (placebo group). Both the intervention solution and the placebo solution contained heparin at a concentration of 0.5 IU per milliliter, and both were administered through an umbilical arterial catheter at an infusion rate of 0.5 ml per hour for 120 hours or until the umbilical arterial catheter was removed, whichever came first.
An arterial blood sample was obtained at the end of the intervention period for analysis of serum urea, calcium, phosphate, and ammonia concentrations. Results from these tests were not available to clinicians to inform care. All other care, including parenteral nutrition and any other blood testing, was performed according to local practice. The umbilical artery catheter was chosen as the route of administration to ensure that the intervention and placebo groups maintained a difference in amino acid intake of 1 g per day regardless of any changes in intravenous nutrition that were made to accommodate other intravenous fluids.
At a corrected age of 2 years, the children underwent assessment of cognitive, language, and motor skills scored according to the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, third edition (Bayley-III) ; a neurologic examination; evaluation of executive function (clinical assessment of inhibitory control and attentional flexibility) ; and assessment with the use of the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function–Preschool Version and Child Behavior Checklist. Assessments were video-recorded (with parental consent), and a random sample of 10% of the assessments were reviewed by a single expert assessor who provided group feedback to the investigators to ensure consistency and reliability of the assessments.
Enteral and parenteral fluid intake levels were recorded daily until day 28. Mean daily protein, energy, and other nutrient intake levels were calculated with actual intake amounts. We considered that an infant was receiving full enteral feeds as of the day parenteral nutrition was stopped or when enteral feeds of 150 ml per kilogram of body weight per day were reached. Enteral energy and protein intake levels were calculated with the use of an estimated breast-milk composition of 67.35 kcal and 1.83 g of protein per 100 ml of milk for the first 14 days and 72.95 kcal and 1.35 g of protein per 100 ml of milk thereafter.
The primary outcome was survival that was free from any neurodisability at a corrected age of 2 years. Cerebral palsy and other disability outcomes were assessed according to previously reported criteria, with neurodisabilities classified as severe, moderate, or mild. All findings regarding the primary outcome were confirmed by members of an end-point review committee in a blinded fashion. Because few disabilities were classified as severe or moderate, these categories were combined post hoc into a single category.
Secondary outcomes were intraventricular hemorrhage (any); cerebellar hemorrhage; periventricular leukomalacia; patent ductus arteriosus (confirmed on an echocardiogram and treated); necrotizing enterocolitis of stage II or higher on the Bell classification scale (stages range from I to III, with higher stages indicating greater severity of disease) ; chronic lung disease, defined as the need for supplemental oxygen therapy at 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age (gestational age at birth plus chronological age); retinopathy of prematurity of stage 3 or higher (stages range from 1 to 5, with higher stages indicating greater severity of disease) ; sepsis that occurred from birth to 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age (categorized as early onset [≤48 hours after birth] or late onset [>48 hours after birth]) and either confirmed by culture (positive bacterial culture in cerebrospinal fluid, blood, or urine with clinical signs of infection) and treated with antibiotics for ≥5 days or believed probable (no positive culture but clinical signs of infection) and treated with antibiotics for ≥5 days; serum concentrations of urea, calcium, phosphate, and ammonia at the end of the intervention (at New Zealand sites only); length of neonatal unit stay; infant growth (weight, length, and head circumference, as absolute and z scores, at 28 days, 8 weeks, 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age, neonatal unit discharge, and 2 years corrected age; and body composition as assessed by means of air-displacement plethysmography at 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age.
Since air-displacement plethysmography was available at just one site and could only be performed if the child was not receiving respiratory support, these data are only available for a small number of the children and are not reported. Growth velocity was calculated with the exponential method. Refeeding syndrome (serum phosphate concentration of <1.4 mmol per liter and total serum calcium concentration of >2.8 mmol per liter on day 5 after birth) was added as a post hoc secondary outcome.
We estimated that 430 infants (215 per group) would provide the trial with 85% power at a 5% level of significance (two-sided) to detect an absolute difference between the two groups of 15 percentage points for the primary outcome, assuming a 10% loss to follow-up and a percentage of infants with a neurodisability of 50% in the placebo group.
All analyses that are not otherwise identified were prespecified in the statistical analysis plan and were performed in a modified intention-to-treat population, which included all the infants who had undergone randomization except for those whose parents did not provide consent (i.e., consent was declined, consent was not obtained within 24 hours, or the infant died before consent could be obtained) or infants who had undergone randomization in error. Missing data were not imputed in the primary analysis, since the key assumption that data were missing at random would probably not be valid in the analysis population. In a post hoc conservative sensitivity analysis, we considered the children who had not been assessed at 2 years to have a neurodisability. Per-protocol analysis was performed in the population of children who received at least 80% of the assigned amino acid or placebo fluid.
We used generalized linear models to compare outcomes between groups, with adjustments for stratification factors (i.e., hospital site, sex, and small-for-gestational-age status [<10th percentile] ). Continuous variables were analyzed with the use of linear regression and were presented as adjusted mean differences. In analyzing binary outcomes, we estimated adjusted relative risks using modified Poisson regression models with a log link and calculated robust standard error estimator, with accounting for clustering of twins. When outcomes were rare and the models did not converge, we omitted hospital site as a stratification factor in the adjusted analysis. For categorical outcomes with more than two levels, we analyzed separate models at each level.
Prespecified subgroup analyses for growth were stratified according to sex and small-for-gestational-age status; post hoc subgroup analyses for neurodisability, sepsis, and refeeding syndrome were stratified according to small-for-gestational-age status. Treatment differences were estimated with 95% confidence intervals that were not adjusted for multiplicity and should not be used to infer differences between groups because they cannot be used in place of hypothesis testing. Where appropriate, a two-sided P value of 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. Analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

From April 2014 through October 2018, a total of 981 infants were assessed for eligibility and 499 underwent randomization at six NICUs in New Zealand and two in Australia. Consent was not obtained for 21 infants who underwent randomization in error, who died, or for whom the 24-hour period for obtaining deferred consent was missed; those infants were not included. Parents of 44 infants who underwent randomization under the deferred-consent provision declined to participate, leaving a total of 434 infants enrolled, with 217 assigned to each group. The final 2-year assessment was conducted in May 2021 ( Figure 1 ).
Characteristics of the infants at baseline were well balanced in the two groups ( Table 1 ). Infants from ethnic and socioeconomic groups that have higher rates of extremely preterm births were well represented (Tables S1 and S2). Characteristics of children who were assessed at 2 years were similar in characteristics to those who were not assessed at 2 years.
All infants who had undergone randomization received the assigned intervention or placebo; 73% of children in both groups (316 of 434) received at least 80% of the maximum allocated fluid. The mean (±SD) parenteral amino acid intake in the first 7 days after birth was higher in the intervention group (3.4±0.6 g per kilogram per day) than in the placebo group (2.6±0.6 g per kilogram per day), for an adjusted mean difference of 0.8 g (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.7 to 0.9) (Fig. S1 and Table S3). Eight serious adverse events occurred, including six in the placebo group (Table S4), one of which was considered potentially related to the trial.
A total of 39 infants in the intervention group and 42 in the placebo group died before a corrected age of 2 years, and 23 could not be assessed at 2 years ( Figure 1 ). The primary outcome was available for 203 infants (93.6%) in the intervention group and 205 (94.5%) in the placebo group. Survival without neurodisability at 2 years was seen in 97 of 203 infants (47.8%) in the intervention group and 102 of 205 infants (49.8%) in the placebo group (adjusted relative risk, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.79 to 1.14; P=0.56) ( Table 2 ). Results were similar among infants who had received more than 80% of the assigned regimen (69 of 154 [44.8%] in the intervention group and 65 of 144 [45.1%] in the placebo group in the per-protocol analysis; adjusted relative risk, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.80 to 1.27). Similar results were also obtained in a conservative sensitivity analysis that included 26 infants who were considered to have a neurodisability because primary-outcome data were not available (97 infants [44.7%] in the intervention group and 102 [47.0%] in the placebo group; adjusted relative risk, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.78 to 1.15) .
Of the infants who were alive at 2 years, a neurodisability was diagnosed in 67 of 164 (40.9%) in the intervention group and 61 of 163 (37.4%) in the placebo group (adjusted relative risk, 1.16; 95% CI, 0.90 to 1.50). Moderate-to-severe neurodisability appeared to be more common in the intervention group (27 of 164 infants assessed [16.5%]) than in the placebo group (14 of 163 [8.6%]) (adjusted relative risk, 1.95; 95% CI, 1.09 to 3.48). Moderate-to-severe cognitive delay appeared to be more common in the intervention group (11 of 160 infants assessed [6.9%]) than in the placebo group (3 of 162 [1.9%]) (adjusted relative risk, 3.81; 95% CI, 1.09 to 13.31). Language scores on the Bayley-III scale appeared to be lower in the intervention group (89.4) than in the placebo group (92.5) (adjusted mean difference, −3.86; 95% CI, −7.43 to −0.29). Other individual components of the primary outcome were similar in the two groups ( Table 2 and Table S5).
More infants in the intervention group than in the placebo group received treatment for patent ductus arteriosus (113 of 208 infants [54%] vs. 84 of 202 [42%]; adjusted relative risk, 1.30; 95% CI, 1.05 to 1.60). Neonatal morbidity and mortality were similar in the two groups ( Table 3 ). The length of NICU stay for those who survived to hospital discharge was also similar in the intervention group (112±36 days) and the placebo group (108±34 days). Analyses conducted after the infants had completed the 5-day intervention or placebo period showed that serum concentrations of urea were higher in the intervention group (adjusted mean difference, 36.6 mg per deciliter; 95% CI, 31.2 to 42.0) than in the placebo group and serum concentrations of calcium were higher in the intervention group (adjusted mean difference, 0.24 mg per deciliter; 95% CI, 0.04 to 0.48) than in the placebo group. Serum concentrations of phosphate were lower in the intervention group than in the placebo group (adjusted mean difference, −0.53 mg per deciliter; 95% CI, −0.78 to −0.31). Serum concentrations of ammonia were similar in the two groups (adjusted mean difference, 17.0 μg per deciliter; 95% CI, −6.1 to 40.0). Refeeding syndrome occurred in 42 of 172 infants (24.4%) in the intervention group and 26 of 166 infants (15.7%) in the placebo group (adjusted relative risk, 1.64; 95% CI, 1.09 to 2.45).
Results suggest that infants in the intervention group had a lesser decrease in z scores for weight between birth and 4 weeks than those in the placebo group and consequently were heavier at 4 weeks (adjusted mean difference, 0.13; 95% CI, 0.05 to 0.22) (Table S6). Other measurements of growth were similar ( Table 3 and Table S6). In preplanned subgroup analyses of growth, measurements of infants who were small for gestational age and those who were not were similar in the two groups, with no evidence of a treatment-by-sex interaction (Tables S7 and S8). In post hoc subgroup analyses, the numbers of infants with sepsis, refeeding syndrome, and survival free from neurodisability were similar in the two groups among infants regardless of their small-for-gestational-age status (Table S9).
Macronutrient and fluid intake levels in the two groups were similar other than the effect of the intervention in the first week (Tables S3 and S10 through S12). The time to reach full enteral feeding and the type of feeding at the time of hospital discharge were similar in the two groups (Table S13).

Section: Discussion

In this multicenter, randomized, controlled trial that involved infants with extremely low birth weight, the administration of amino acids at a dose of 1 g per day for 5 days after birth resulted in no significant difference in the incidence of death or survival without neurodisability at a corrected age of 2 years. However, in analyses of secondary outcomes, the results were consistent with a possible increase in moderate-to-severe neurodisability among infants who received the intervention. Amino acid intake in the placebo group fell within the range of the most recent recommendations of 2.5 to 3.5 g per kilogram per day. Our findings support these recommendations and suggest that intake levels higher than this are not needed to support growth and may have adverse effects on neurodevelopment.
At the time recruitment began, international recommendations for parenteral amino acid intake for infants with extremely low birth weight were 3.5 to 4.0 g per kilogram per day or higher, with recommended amounts having increased gradually over the previous two decades. A 2018 Cochrane meta-analysis of two randomized trials (involving 201 participants) that assessed the level of parenteral amino acid intake in preterm infants and the outcome of neurodisability showed insufficient evidence to support a conclusion. Our results are similar to those of another randomized trial involving 168 participants, which was not included in the Cochrane review and showed that among infants with a birth weight of 1250 g, there was no difference in neurodevelopmental outcomes or growth between infants who received 3 to 4 g of amino acids per kilogram per day in the first 5 days after birth and those who received 2 to 3 g per kilogram per day.
Infants in the intervention group in our trial had more patent ductus arteriosus, along with refeeding syndrome and its characteristic biochemical feature, hypophosphatemia, than infants in the placebo group, which we speculate could have contributed to the neurodevelopmental outcomes. The effect of the intervention on patent ductus arteriosus in this trial differs from the findings in meta-analyses of trials of amino acids administered in high versus low amounts and with early versus late parenteral administration in preterm infants, which showed no effect on patent ductus arteriosus. The mechanism by which administration of amino acids through an umbilical arterial catheter increases the risk of patent ductus arteriosus is not clear, and total fluid intake did not differ between groups.
We performed a post hoc analysis of the incidence of refeeding syndrome because some studies, including a cohort analysis involving infants in our trial, have shown that refeeding syndrome is more likely to occur with enhanced nutrition. Biochemical disturbances consistent with refeeding syndrome have been associated with an increased incidence of late-onset sepsis. Urea concentrations were elevated in the intervention group, but ammonia concentrations were similar in the two groups and were in the range of concentrations seen in full-term infants.
Although the intervention was associated with increased early weight gain, this difference did not persist. The small and temporary effects on weight suggest that parenteral amino acid intake in the placebo group was sufficient to support growth. Such effects also suggest that amino acid intake above those in the placebo group during the first 5 days after birth did not enhance head growth.
Our trial has several strengths. The route of administration of the intervention ensured a clinically significant difference between groups in the intake of amino acid, which has been difficult to achieve in other trials. Other strengths include the very high follow-up rate at a corrected age of 2 years, good protocol adherence, standardized anthropometric measurements, and comprehensive, prospective collection of nutritional intake data. The sample size is larger than those in previous trials and meta-analyses, which allowed subgroup analysis according to sex.
This trial has certain limitations. The trial population consisted of neonates with extremely low birth weight in whom the clinical team elected to insert an umbilical arterial catheter. Such infants are usually the smallest, most unwell neonates; we did not use illness severity scores to assess this. Therefore, the findings may be less generalizable to infants with extremely low birth weight who do not have an umbilical arterial catheter inserted. However, the clinical question of parenteral nutrition requirements is more pertinent for unwell neonates in whom enteral feeding is often challenging or delayed. Combining moderate and severe neurodisability into a single category was not prespecified; early-onset sepsis, late-onset sepsis, and refeeding syndrome were not prespecified outcomes. There is no universally agreed-on definition of neonatal sepsis. We used the modified Australian and New Zealand Neonatal Network definitions for sepsis, which are limited by the inclusion of subjective elements. We are unable to rule out potentially large effects for some outcomes that had wide confidence intervals that included 1; in those cases, the findings should not be interpreted as evidence of no difference between the groups. Neurodevelopmental assessment at a corrected age of 2 years only weakly predicts outcomes in middle childhood, and follow-up of the children at 6 to 7 years of age is in progress as a continuation of this trial .
This trial provided robust evidence that in infants with extremely low birth weight, additional parenteral amino acids administered at a dose of 1 g per day in the first 5 days after birth did not result in a higher rate of survival without neurodisability at a corrected age of 2 years.
