Title: Rituximab versus Mycophenolate Mofetil in Patients with Pemphigus Vulgaris


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Rituximab and mycophenolate mofetil are used to treat pemphigus vulgaris, but they have not been adequately compared in clinical trials.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a randomized, controlled trial, we assigned patients with moderate-to-severe pemphigus vulgaris in a 1:1 ratio to receive intravenous rituximab (1000 mg on days 1, 15, 168, and 182) or oral mycophenolate mofetil (2 g per day), in addition to an oral glucocorticoid administered on the same tapering schedule in the two groups. The primary end point was sustained complete remission at week 52, defined as the healing of lesions with no new active lesions, as reflected by a Pemphigus Disease Area Index (PDAI) activity score of 0 (on a scale of 0 to 250, with higher scores indicating greater disease severity), for at least 16 weeks without the use of glucocorticoids. Secondary end points were the cumulative dose of glucocorticoids, the number of disease flares, and the change from baseline in the score on the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI; scores range from 0 to 30, with higher scores indicating greater impairment).

Abstract_Section: Results

Of the 135 patients who underwent randomization, 67 were assigned to receive rituximab and 68 to receive mycophenolate mofetil. The primary outcome was assessed in the modified intention-to-treat population: 62 patients in the rituximab group and 63 in the mycophenolate mofetil group. The median PDAI activity scores at baseline were 22.7 in the rituximab group and 18.3 in the mycophenolate mofetil group. At week 52, sustained complete remission was observed in 25 patients (40%) in the rituximab group and in 6 (10%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group (difference, 31 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 15 to 45; P<0.001). The mean cumulative glucocorticoid dose during the 52-week treatment period was 3545 mg in the rituximab group and 5140 mg in the mycophenolate mofetil group (difference, −1595 mg; 95% CI, −2838 to −353; P<0.001). There were 6 disease flares in the rituximab group and 44 in the mycophenolate mofetil group (adjusted rate ratio, 0.12; 95% CI, 0.05 to 0.29; P<0.001). The mean change in DLQI score was −8.87 points and −6.00 points, respectively (difference, −2.87 points; 95% CI, −4.58 to −1.17; P=0.001). Serious adverse events occurred in 15 of 67 patients (22%) in the rituximab group and in 10 of 68 (15%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Rituximab was superior to mycophenolate mofetil in producing sustained complete remission at 52 weeks in patients with pemphigus vulgaris. Rituximab resulted in a greater reduction in glucocorticoid use than mycophenolate mofetil, but more patients in the rituximab group had serious adverse events. Further trials are needed to determine the comparative efficacy and safety of rituximab and mycophenolate mofetil beyond 52 weeks of treatment. (Funded by F. Hoffmann–La Roche; PEMPHIX ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02383589 .)

Section: Introduction

Pemphigus vulgaris is an autoimmune blistering skin disease caused by cadherin desmoglein (Dsg)–specific autoantibodies that bind to epidermal desmosomes, resulting in blisters and erosions of the mucous membranes or skin or both. Rituximab is a chimeric, humanized anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody used to treat moderate-to-severe pemphigus vulgaris in the United States and Europe. Rituximab is recommended as first-line therapy in patients with pemphigus, but the comparison with mycophenolate mofetil, a first-line glucocorticoid-sparing agent, in the treatment of pemphigus vulgaris has not been extensively investigated. In a previous 52-week, randomized trial, mycophenolate mofetil plus a glucocorticoid did not show a significant advantage over a glucocorticoid alone with respect to the primary end point of the absence of new oral or cutaneous lesions and the use of a daily prednisone dose of 10 mg or less from weeks 48 to 52, but the investigators claimed that there was a benefit with respect to several secondary outcomes. The current PEMPHIX trial compared rituximab with mycophenolate mofetil, each in combination with a tapering glucocorticoid regimen, in patients with moderate-to-severe pemphigus vulgaris.

Section: Methods

This was an international, phase 3, double-blind, double-dummy, multicenter trial. Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive intravenous rituximab or oral mycophenolate mofetil for 52 weeks; both groups received oral prednisone (or equivalent), which was to be tapered and discontinued by week 24. Randomization was stratified according to duration of pemphigus vulgaris (≤1 year or >1 year) and geographic region (North America or rest of the world).
The trial was conducted in accordance with the International Council for Harmonisation guidelines for Good Clinical Practice and the Declaration of Helsinki as well as local regulations and was approved by institutional review boards and ethics committees at each trial site. The trial was designed by the sponsor (F. Hoffmann–La Roche) in consultation with experts in pemphigus. The sponsor collected, analyzed, and interpreted the data, was involved in writing the manuscript, and paid for professional writing support. The sponsor also provided rituximab, mycophenolate mofetil, and placebo for the trial. An independent data and safety monitoring committee monitored safety. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data, for adherence of the trial to the protocol (available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org), and for the complete reporting of adverse events. Confidentiality agreements were in place between the sponsor and the authors, and the sponsor placed no restrictions on the authors in publishing the results.
Key eligibility criteria were an age of 18 to 75 years, a diagnosis of pemphigus vulgaris confirmed by the investigator (on the basis of findings on skin or mucosal histopathological studies and direct immunofluorescence of tissue-bound IgG antibodies or on the basis of serologic detection of Dsg3 autoantibodies by indirect immunofluorescence or by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) within the previous 24 months, moderately to severely active disease according to an activity score on the Pemphigus Disease Area Index (PDAI) of 15 or greater, receipt of glucocorticoids (60 to 120 mg per day [1.0 to 1.5 mg per kilogram of body weight per day]), and an expectation of a benefit from the addition of immunosuppressive therapy, according to the judgment of the investigator (e.g., on the basis of disease refractoriness to glucocorticoids and disease severity). The PDAI is a validated pemphigus-specific severity index and includes an activity score and a damage score. PDAI activity scores range from 0 to 250, with higher scores indicating greater disease severity (skin is assessed on a scale of 0 to 120; scalp, 0 to 10; and mucosa, 0 to 120). Activity scores of 15 to 45 indicate moderate disease severity, and scores higher than 45 indicate severe disease. Damage scores are not reported here. Patients were excluded if they had pemphigus foliaceus or evidence of paraneoplastic pemphigus or other non–pemphigus vulgaris autoimmune blistering disease, if they had received previous treatment with mycophenolate mofetil within 1 week before randomization, and if they had received rituximab or a B-cell–targeted therapy within 12 months before randomization. All patients provided written informed consent. Full eligibility criteria are provided in the Supplementary Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.
Patients in the rituximab group received 1000 mg of intravenous rituximab on days 1, 15, 168, and 182 plus twice-daily oral placebo. Patients in the mycophenolate mofetil group received mycophenolate mofetil orally twice daily, starting at 1 g per day in divided doses and adjusted to 2 g per day in divided doses by week 2, plus placebo infusions on days 1, 15, 168, and 182. Intravenous methylprednisolone at a dose of 100 mg was administered before each rituximab infusion to reduce infusion-related reactions. Saline solution was administered intravenously before the placebo infusion to patients in the mycophenolate mofetil group. All the patients received a 1-g dose of oral acetaminophen (paracetamol) and an antihistamine 30 to 60 minutes before infusion. All patients also received an oral glucocorticoid, starting at a dose of 60 or 80 mg per day (1.0 to 1.5 mg per kilogram per day) on day 1, with the goal of discontinuing the drug by week 24 (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). From weeks 12 through 52, patients who had treatment failure could receive rescue therapy with another immunosuppressive medication, intravenous immunoglobulin, plasmapheresis, or another treatment or procedure during the treatment period according to the investigator’s judgment. Treatment failure was defined as the occurrence of any one of the following events: a two-step increase in glucocorticoid dose to 20 mg or more per day for more than 2 weeks after disease control had been achieved, a lack of disease control after receipt of 240 mg per day of a glucocorticoid for 1 week, an increase in mycophenolate mofetil or oral placebo dosage to more than 2 g per day, and receipt of any rescue therapy according to the investigator’s best medical judgment.
At each trial site, separate investigators assessed either safety or efficacy, and all the investigators were unaware of treatment assignments. The safety investigators were responsible for determining adjustments to the doses of the trial drug and glucocorticoids on the basis of the results of laboratory tests (e.g., complete blood count, blood chemical analysis, and urinalysis) and adverse events. The safety investigators did not receive data on CD19+ B-cell counts, antidrug antibodies, or clinical responses, and the efficacy investigators received no laboratory information.
The primary efficacy end point was sustained complete remission at week 52. Sustained complete remission was defined as the healing of lesions with no new active lesions (PDAI activity score of 0), no use of an oral glucocorticoid, and the maintenance of this response for at least 16 consecutive weeks during the 52-week treatment period. Ranked secondary efficacy end points included cumulative oral glucocorticoid dose, total number of disease flares, time to initial sustained complete remission, time to disease flare, and change from baseline in the score on the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI; scores range from 0 to 30, with higher scores indicating greater impairment in quality of life). Safety end points were the frequency, nature, and severity of adverse events (according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0). Before the results were unblinded, the protocol and statistical analysis plan were amended to include the scores on the Patient Global Impression of Change and the Clinician Global Impression of Change scales as exploratory end-point measures and not as secondary end points. Additional exploratory end points were treatment failure, Skindex-29 score, and the score on the European Quality of Life–5 Dimensions (EQ-5D) questionnaire. Skindex-29 is a 30-item questionnaire used to assess the effect of dermatologic diseases on patients’ health-related quality of life ; scores are calculated on a scale of 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating a greater effect of the patient’s skin disease on quality of life. Antidrug antibodies, CD19+ B-cell counts, and anti-Dsg autoantibody titers were measured throughout the trial.
The efficacy analyses were conducted in the modified intention-to-treat population, which included all patients who had undergone randomization and excluded 5 patients in each group from one center in the United States, where patients had interacted with investigators through telemedicine visits to enable participation in the trial. The patients from this center were excluded from the efficacy analyses at the request of health authorities before the trial data were unblinded. All the patients who had undergone randomization and received any part of the trial regimen were included in the safety population, including the 10 patients who were excluded from the modified intention-to-treat population; this population included the same patients as those in the intention-to-treat population.
We calculated that a sample size of 122 patients (61 in the rituximab group and 61 in the mycophenolate mofetil group) would give the trial approximately 80% power to detect a difference of 25 percentage points in the percentage of patients with sustained complete remission between the rituximab group and the mycophenolate mofetil group, at a 5% significance level (two-sided test). To account for the 10 patients who were excluded from the primary efficacy analysis, a target enrollment of approximately 132 patients was planned.
The primary method we used to compare the percentage of patients who had sustained complete remission was the log-rank value obtained from the Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel test, stratified according to the stratification factors applied at randomization. To control for the type I error, the five secondary end points were tested in a fixed-sequence manner in the order stated above at a two-sided 5% significance level. If at any step in the testing procedure, the P value associated with a test was not less than 0.05, the remaining end points below the sequence would not be considered significant. A negative binomial model was used for the analysis of the number of flares, with adjustment for trial group, region, duration of illness, baseline PDAI activity score, and baseline prednisone dose. For outcomes for which Cox proportional-hazard ratios were calculated (post hoc), proportionality was assessed informally with the use of graphical displays. Missing data on PDAI activity scores and total daily glucocorticoid doses were imputed to the worst measurement of the previous or following visits. For patients who received rescue therapy, data obtained after the administration of rescue therapy were excluded from the analysis of efficacy end points, and the patients were classified as not having had a response. The statistical analysis plan is available with the protocol.

Section: Results

From May 2015 through November 2017, a total of 135 patients with moderate-to-severe pemphigus vulgaris underwent randomization; 67 were assigned to receive rituximab and 68 to receive mycophenolate mofetil. A total of 66 patients (99%) in the rituximab group and 58 (85%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group completed the 52-week treatment period ( Figure 1 ). Three patients (4%) in the rituximab group and 26 (38%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group received rescue therapy and were excluded from the primary efficacy analysis at the time rescue therapy was administered.
A total of 125 patients received at least one dose of trial medication and were included in the modified intention-to-treat population for the efficacy analysis (62 in the rituximab group and 63 in the mycophenolate mofetil group). The median age was 48.0 years (range, 23.0 to 75.0), and 66 patients (53%) were women. The demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients were similar in the two groups ( Table 1 ). At the time of screening, 104 patients (83%) had moderate pemphigus vulgaris, and 19 (15%) had severe pemphigus vulgaris. Two patients (2%) with mild pemphigus vulgaris (PDAI activity score, <15) who did not meet eligibility criteria were inadvertently enrolled by investigators and were recorded as having had protocol deviations, but these patients were included in the analyses. Data on PDAI activity scores were missing for 4 patients (6%) in the rituximab group and 5 patients (8%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group. Most patients had not previously received treatment with rituximab (98%) or mycophenolate mofetil (93%) for pemphigus vulgaris.
Sustained complete remission at week 52 (the primary end point) was observed in 25 of 62 patients (40%) in the rituximab group and in 6 of 63 (10%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group (difference, 31 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 15 to 45; P<0.001) ( Table 2 ). The mean cumulative dose of oral glucocorticoids over the 52-week treatment period (a secondary end point) was 3545 mg in the rituximab group and 5140 mg in the mycophenolate mofetil group (difference, −1595 mg; 95% CI, −2838 to −353; P<0.001). The median daily oral glucocorticoid dose over time in each group is shown in Figure 2A . There were 6 disease flares in the rituximab group and 44 in the mycophenolate mofetil group (adjusted rate ratio, 0.12; 95% CI, 0.05 to 0.29; P<0.001). Five patients (8%) in the rituximab group had at least 1 disease flare during the treatment period, as compared with 26 patients (41%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group (hazard ratio for disease flare, 0.15; 95% CI, 0.06 to 0.39; P<0.001) ( Figure 2C ). Because less than 50% of the patients overall had sustained complete remission and less than 50% had disease flare, the median times for these outcomes could not be estimated. The hazard ratio for sustained complete remission with rituximab as compared with mycophenolate mofetil was 4.83 (95% CI, 1.97 to 11.81; P<0.001) ( Figure 2B ). The results of sensitivity analyses of the primary efficacy end point were consistent with those of the primary analysis and included analyses in the intention-to-treat population, patients whose data were censored at the time of rescue therapy, patients whose data were censored at the time of treatment failure, patients who had discontinued glucocorticoids (except for topical glucocorticoids and intravenous preinfusion methyprednisolone), and patients who had had treatment failure as defined in version 2 of the protocol.
The estimated mean change from baseline in DLQI score was −8.87 points in the rituximab group and −6.00 points in the mycophenolate mofetil group (difference, −2.87 points; 95% CI, −4.58 to −1.17; P=0.001). In a post hoc analysis from which no conclusions can be drawn, 62% of the patients who received rituximab had a DLQI score of 0 (indicating no effect of disease on health-related quality of life) at week 52, as compared with 25% of the patients who received mycophenolate mofetil.
From week 12 through week 52, a total of 3 patients (5%) in the rituximab group and 29 (46%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group had treatment failure. The changes in scores for the Skindex-29, EQ-5D, Patient Global Impression of Change, and Clinician Global Impression of Change are provided in Tables S3 through S7. No clinical conclusions can be drawn from these data.
Adverse events occurred in 57 of 67 patients (85%) in the rituximab group and in 60 of 68 (88%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group ( Table 3 ). The most frequent adverse events in the rituximab group were infusion-related reactions (15 patients [22%]), headache (10 patients [15%]), lymphopenia (8 patients [12%]), and upper respiratory tract infection (7 patients [10%]). The most frequent adverse events in the mycophenolate mofetil group were diarrhea (10 patients [15%]) and nasopharyngitis (8 patients [12%]). Infusion-related reactions are described in the Supplementary Appendix .
Serious adverse events occurred in 15 patients (22%) in the rituximab group and in 10 (15%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group (Table S8). Serious infections occurred in 6 patients (9%) in the rituximab group (pneumonia and upper respiratory tract infection, cellulitis and acute pyelonephritis, pyelonephritis, viral pneumonia, infective bursitis, and skin infection) and in 4 patients (6%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group (pneumonia and influenza, cellulitis and sepsis, herpes zoster, and pyelonephritis). All the patients with serious infections in each group were treated, except in the case of viral pneumonia (which has no specific treatment), and all the cases resolved. In the rituximab group, none of the serious infections resulted in withdrawal from the trial, discontinuation of treatment, or dose modification. In the mycophenolate mofetil group, serious infections resulted in discontinuation of treatment in 2 patients (1 of these patients also withdrew from the trial) and in interruption of mycophenolate mofetil in 2 patients. No deaths or cancers occurred in the rituximab group during treatment or up to 18 months after the last dose. One patient in the mycophenolate mofetil group who had a history of smoking died on trial day 115 from small-cell lung cancer. In the rituximab group, 6 patients (9%) discontinued rituximab because of adverse events (infusion-related reactions, lumbar vertebral fracture, and pulmonary embolism). A total of 6 patients (9%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group discontinued the trial regimen because of adverse events (cellulitis, pneumonia and influenza together with pulmonary embolism, hyperamylasemia, urinary retention, hepatitis, and the aforementioned small-cell lung cancer). One patient (1%) in the rituximab group and 5 (7%) in the mycophenolate mofetil group had a glucocorticoid-related adverse event of grade 3 or higher, as assessed by the investigator.
Glucocorticoid-related effects were observed in patients in the rituximab group who received intravenous methylprednisolone premedication: transient decrease in T lymphocytes (CD3, CD4, and CD8) immediately after each infusion and a transient decrease in phosphorus level immediately after the third and fourth infusions (Table S9). The percentage of patients with low serum IgG and IgM levels at each visit are shown in Table S10. Median decreases from baseline in anti-Dsg3 and anti-Dsg1 autoantibody titers in both groups are shown in Figure S1. At 8 weeks, the values were similar in the two trial groups (Fig. S1A). The Dsg1 curves over time in the two groups were essentially the same (Fig. S1B). However, there was a greater decrease in anti-Dsg3 autoantibodies from week 8 through week 52 among the patients in the rituximab group than among those in the mycophenolate mofetil group (Fig. S2).
Antidrug antibodies were evaluated in patients who received rituximab. Patients were considered to have had treatment-induced antidrug antibodies if the baseline sample was negative and at least one sample after baseline was positive. Patients with a positive antidrug-antibody sample at baseline and at least one positive postbaseline sample and an increase in the titer of at least 0.6 were classified as having a treatment-enhanced response. Of the 63 patients in the rituximab group who had at least one postbaseline sample, 20 (32%) tested positive for antidrug antibodies (19 were classified as having a treatment-induced response and 1 as having a treatment-enhanced response). Antidrug antibodies are described in the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Discussion

Mycophenolate mofetil is commonly used as a first-line glucocorticoid-sparing agent for the treatment of moderate-to-severe pemphigus vulgaris and is recommended in treatment guidelines. Rituximab has been approved for the treatment of pemphigus vulgaris in the United States and in Europe on the basis of the results of the Ritux 3 trial. Our trial compared rituximab with mycophenolate mofetil, and the results showed that among patients with moderate-to-severe pemphigus vulgaris, rituximab was superior to mycophenolate mofetil in producing sustained complete remission, but more patients who received rituximab had serious adverse events than those who received mycophenolate mofetil. Secondary end points favored rituximab, and rituximab antidrug antibodies were detected in some trial participants.
Reduction of oral glucocorticoid use is a goal in the treatment of pemphigus vulgaris. In this trial, more patients in the rituximab group than in the mycophenolate mofetil group were able to discontinue glucocorticoids, and patients in the rituximab group had lower cumulative glucocorticoid exposure than those in the mycophenolate mofetil group over 52 weeks. As is consistent with the greater use of glucocorticoids in the mycophenolate mofetil group, more grade 3 or higher glucocorticoid-related adverse events occurred in the mycophenolate mofetil group than in the rituximab group.
Anti-Dsg3 autoantibodies are pathogenic in pemphigus vulgaris and correspond to disease activity. Several small clinical studies have shown a treatment effect of mycophenolate mofetil in patients with pemphigus vulgaris in that it reduced the production of anti-Dsg3 autoantibodies by B cells. In the current trial, the results of exploratory analyses suggested a greater reduction in anti-Dsg3 autoantibodies with rituximab than with mycophenolate mofetil, but the curves for the reduction in anti-Dsg1 autoantibodies over time were essentially identical in the two groups over 52 weeks. Reductions in anti-Dsg1 and anti-Dsg3 autoantibodies were similar at 8 weeks with both drugs. No conclusions can be drawn from the data regarding anti-Dsg autoantibodies because of the exploratory nature of the analyses.
The results of the Ritux 3 trial showed a benefit of rituximab plus glucocorticoids as compared with glucocorticoids alone for pemphigus. The results in the rituximab group in our trial cannot be compared with those of the Ritux 3 trial because of differences in trial design, including the manner of blinding, rituximab administration schedule and dosing, glucocorticoid-tapering regimens, treatment duration, and patient population. In the current trial, both treatment groups followed the same prednisone-tapering dose and schedule. Furthermore, patients in the rituximab group in the Ritux 3 trial could be retreated with rituximab in the case of relapse and could be considered to have had a response in the primary analysis, whereas in the primary analysis in the current trial, patients who received additional immunosuppressive treatment or had treatment failure during the 52-week treatment period were considered to have not had a response.
A previous randomized trial did not show a significant advantage in the efficacy of mycophenolate mofetil plus glucocorticoids as compared with glucocorticoids alone after 52 weeks. The authors of that trial claimed a benefit in secondary end points in 94 patients among three trial groups, but approximately 20% of patients dropped out, and there was no adjustment of confidence intervals for multiple comparisons. Observations from a small, prospective, multicenter, randomized, nonblinded trial (in which 20 of 21 patients treated with oral methylprednisolone plus mycophenolate mofetil had complete remission) and another small, single-center case series were suggestive of a beneficial effect of mycophenolate mofetil in patients with pemphigus. Although mycophenolate mofetil is not an approved treatment for pemphigus vulgaris, it is considered standard care in treatment guidelines, and in many countries it is used as a first-line glucocorticoid-sparing treatment. Therefore, we chose to compare mycophenolate mofetil plus glucocorticoids with rituximab in the current trial.
Limitations of this trial include the small number of enrolled patients with severe or recalcitrant pemphigus and the short duration of follow-up after discontinuation of glucocorticoids. Patients who had a delayed response to either trial drug may have been missed, because the trial design called for glucocorticoid tapering to 0 mg by week 24 and achievement of complete remission that was sustained for at least 16 weeks at the week 52 time point. More patients in the mycophenolate mofetil group than in the rituximab group did not complete the 52-week treatment period, mostly because rescue therapy had been administered. Given this imbalance between the trial groups, a longer glucocorticoid-tapering regimen could have been considered. The methylprednisolone premedication administered just before the rituximab infusion could have potentially influenced trial outcomes, but this is unlikely, given the low dose, the single preinfusion administration, and the long period between administration and the time of the assessment of the primary end point. It is possible that the safety investigator may have been aware of the treatment assignment on the basis of conventional laboratory and adverse-event information when dose adjustments of the trial drug or glucocorticoids were made.
The results of this trial showed that rituximab was superior to mycophenolate mofetil in producing sustained complete remission over 52 weeks among patients with moderate-to-severe pemphigus vulgaris. Rituximab had a greater glucocorticoid-sparing effect than mycophenolate mofetil, but more patients in this group had serious adverse events. Further trials are needed to determine the comparative efficacy and safety of these drugs beyond 52 weeks of treatment.
