Title: Congenital Hypermetabolism and Uncoupled Oxidative Phosphorylation


Abstract: Summary


Section: Introduction

Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation is the major pathway for ATP production in eukaryotic cells ( Figure 1 ). During this process, cellular redox energy from the breakdown of food is converted to a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane (called the proton motive force), which is dissipated to catalyze the formation of ATP. Respiratory chain complexes I, III, and IV pump protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane while consuming oxygen. Complex V, the central enzyme in energy conversion, dissipates the proton gradient across the membrane, catalyzing the phosphorylation of ADP to ATP. In normally functioning mitochondria, mitochondrial respiration is tightly coupled to the formation of the proton motive force, and the dissipation of the proton motive force is closely linked to the synthesis of ATP. This tight chemiosmotic coupling between respiration and ATP synthesis ensures efficient energy transformations.
To date, more than 300 molecular genetic forms of mitochondrial disease have been reported. These disorders result from pathogenic variants in either the nuclear or mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Most are recessive conditions with decreased respiration. In contrast, the first described mitochondrial disease, Luft syndrome, results in a euthyroid, hypermetabolic state characterized by high rates of mitochondrial respiration uncoupled from ATP synthesis. Only one related case has been reported, but the molecular bases are unknown.
Two domains make up complex V: transmembrane F O , which includes a proton pore, and catalytic F 1 . The catalytic core of F 1 contains three α and three β subunits arranged around the γ subunit of the central stalk. Protons passing through F O (the pore) cause the γ stalk to rotate, inducing conformational transitions in the β subunit that are required for the synthesis of ATP from ADP. The synthesis of ATP is thus dependent on the rotation of the γ stalk, which, in turn, is dependent on the passage of protons through F O .
Here, we report the case of monozygotic twin boys who underwent their first biochemical genetics evaluation in the neonatal intensive care unit at the age of 2 months after euthyroid hypermetabolism, failure to thrive despite excessive caloric intake, intermittent hyperthermia, and developmental delay had been observed. Genetic and biochemical studies in samples containing the patients’ fibroblasts and in engineered cellular models implicated a dominant-acting, de novo pathogenic variant affecting complex V that loosens coupling between the passage of protons (generated by mitochondrial respiration) through F O and the synthesis of ATP by complex V.

Section: Methods

Patients 1 and 2 are monozygotic twins born at 34 weeks’ gestation with intrauterine growth restriction. Failure to thrive had developed by 2 months of age and persisted despite caloric intake in excess of the calculated need for catch-up growth.
The two infants had hyperphagia, with increasing caloric intake over time. At the last follow-up at 21 months of age, Patient 1 was consuming 1280 kcal per day (152 kcal per kilogram) and Patient 2 was consuming 1480 kcal per day (175 kcal per kilogram) (2.8 and 3.2 times the estimated resting energy expenditure, respectively ) ( Figure 2A ). Their body-weight z score was −2.5 and −3.2, respectively ( Figure 2B ). They had persistent tachypnea (50 to 70 breaths per minute) without increased work of breathing, apnea, oxygen desaturation, or pulmonary disease. Both twins had recurrent unexplained hyperthermia (38.0 to 39.0°C). Their baseline temperatures ranged from 37.0 to 37.8°C with persistent diaphoresis and tactile warmth. Patient 1 underwent chordee repair, during which he had an unexplained temperature of 40°C.
Laboratory results were notable for elevated levels of branched-chain amino acids, mild hyperammonemia and uremia, and elevated triglyceride levels (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). Both twins had mild developmental delay (Table S2). Their nonconsanguineous parents and their older brother were healthy ( Figure 2C ).
Protocols for characterization of the patients and the creation of a primary cell line were developed in accordance with the requirements of the institutional review board at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. The twins’ parents provided written informed consent.
Details regarding the molecular and biochemical studies are provided in the Supplementary Appendix . Briefly, primary dermoid fibroblast lines were established from the foreskin of each boy; a primary dermoid fibroblast line was used as a control. Knock-in heterozygous clones of ATP5B Leu335Pro mutant were generated with the use of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)–Cas9 gene editing, and an isogenic control (also treated with CRISPR-Cas9) was generated in A375 melanoma cells (Synthego). HeLa cells were engineered for heterologous expression of either ATP5B-FLAG or ATP5B-Leu335Pro-FLAG by means of lentiviral expression. For the analysis of primary fibroblasts, we measured the oxygen consumption rate and mitochondrial membrane potential simultaneously using an O2k-FluoRespirometer (Oroboros Instruments). The plasma membrane of cells was selectively permeabilized with digitonin, and a substrate–uncoupler–inhibitor titration (SUIT) protocol was performed. For engineered A375 and HeLa cells, we determined the oxygen consumption rate in intact or permeabilized cells and the extracellular acidification rate using a Seahorse XFe96 Analyzer (Agilent), both at baseline and after the addition of oxidative phosphorylation modulators. The mitochondrial membrane potential in intact cells was measured with the use of tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester perchlorate (TMRM) with a BioTek Cytation 5 microplate reader (Agilent). We performed sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), Blue native PAGE, and Western blotting using standard methods with commercially available antibodies.
We used the cryo-EM structure of ovine complex V (Protein Data Bank [PDB] identifier, 6TT7) to model the Leu335Pro variant of human ATP5B. We identified positions that corresponded to yeast mitochondrial genome integrity (MGI) variants and human Leu335Pro both by multiple sequence alignment and by structural alignment of yeast (PDB identifier, 6CP6) and ovine complex V. Structures were rendered with the PyMOL molecular visualization system.
We performed Mann–Whitney testing on the results of pulse oximetry ( Figure 2F and 2G ) and Wilcoxon testing for TMRM measurements ( Figure 2H ). We performed ordinary two-way analysis of variance comparing the mean value in each sample with that in every other sample, followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, with a family-wise alpha threshold of 0.05 and with individual variances computed for each comparison ( Figure 3 ). We report P values for specified comparisons after adjustment for multiple comparisons. All the statistical analyses were performed with the use of RStudio software, version 1.1.456, and Prism software, version 9.

Section: Results

Exome analysis in the twins revealed an apparently de novo heterozygous variant in ATP5F1B (NM_001686.3:c.1004 T→C), which predicted a p.(Leu335Pro) change in the β subunit of complex V. Both Leu335 and the surrounding region were highly conserved ( Figure 2D ). According to the gnomAD database, ATP5F1B is highly evolutionarily constrained and the Leu335Pro variant has not been observed in any of approximately 200,000 samples.
Leu335 lies close to the hydrophobic sleeve in the α 3 β 3 assembly that holds the tip of the γ subunit of the central stalk ( Figure 2E and Fig. S1). Mutations in this region in the genes encoding the α, β, or γ subunits in yeast are MGI variants and result in uncoupling between ATP synthesis and mitochondrial respiration. Leu335Pro is close to several such variants in the yeast equivalent of β.
We observed a higher rate of basal oxygen consumption in intact fibroblasts than in control fibroblasts ( Figure 2F and Fig. S2). This difference was more pronounced in permeabilized cells after the addition of the complex I-linked substrates glutamate–malate but normalized after the addition of saturating ADP ( Figure 2G ). In human mitochondria, the membrane potential is the dominant component of the proton motive force. A cell line derived from Patient 2 showed comparatively diminished inner membrane polarization after the addition of glutamate–malate, which suggests higher basal leak across the membrane ( Figure 2H ). The membrane potential after the addition of ADP was similar to that in the control cell line. Overall, these results suggest that the increased oxygen consumption rate was caused by the dissipation of the proton motive force without a corresponding increase in ATP synthesis — in other words, the dissipation of the proton motive force had become less coupled to the synthesis of ATP. In such circumstances, more energy is theoretically lost in the form of heat and less is being captured in the form of ATP.
To further corroborate these findings, we next used CRISPR-Cas9 to engineer two independent clones with the heterozygous Leu335Pro mutation and compared them with an isogenic control. As in the patient-derived fibroblasts, we observed an elevated rate of basal mitochondrial oxygen consumption in intact mutant cells ( Figure 3A ) and in permeabilized mutant cells ( Figure 3B ), elevations that were associated with a lower baseline mitochondrial membrane potential ( Figure 3C ). Both the increased oxygen consumption rate and lower mitochondrial membrane potential normalized after treatment with oligomycin, which inhibits complex V. After treatment with a chemical protonophore (which allows protons to move freely across the inner mitochondrial membrane) in permeabilized cells, the oxygen consumption rate was similar in the wild-type and mutant cells, which corresponded to the complete uncoupling and depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane in both samples. The oxygen consumption rate remained higher in intact mutant cells than in intact wild-type cells after protonophore treatment, which suggested the occurrence of secondary changes in cytosolic metabolism. Indeed, we observed an elevated baseline rate of extracellular acidification, increased glucose consumption, and increased lactate release in the mutant cells, which suggests that secondary cellular adaptations include increased glycolysis (Fig. S4). These studies in engineered knock-in cell lines support the identification of a mitochondrial uncoupling phenotype that biochemically originates from a variant affecting complex V.
The Leu335Pro variant appears to have a dominant effect on the basis of the familial pattern of inheritance. To distinguish between haploinsufficiency (insufficient wild-type β subunit) and dominant negativity (variant protein suppressing function of the wild-type protein), we heterologously expressed either an epitope-tagged wild-type or Leu335Pro variant in HeLa cells using lentiviral transduction. Cells tolerated the expression of either allele. Although the expression of the Leu335Pro variant was consistently lower than that of the wild-type variant ( Figure 3D ), it assembled into macromolecular complex V (Fig. S5A and S5B). Despite these lower levels of expression, the baseline oxygen consumption rate ( Figure 3E ) and glycolysis (Fig. S5C) were higher and the basal membrane potential was lower than the values in the wild-type variant ( Figure 3F ). Although MGI mutations in yeast can cause mtDNA depletion, we did not observe changes in the mtDNA copy number in our cell lines (Fig. S5D). The data support the findings that heterologous expression of the Leu335Pro variant is sufficient to decrease basal mitochondrial membrane potential and increase respiration, consistent with a dominant-negative effect of the mutation on coupling.
Collectively, our analyses provide strong support for the pathogenicity of the Leu335Pro variant. We confirmed that this was a de novo variant in the twin boys, since it had not been identified in either of their parents or in controls. In addition, the variant affects an amino acid residue that is evolutionarily conserved. Leu335 is in the critical hydrophobic sleeve region; mutations in yeast affecting nearby residues cause an uncoupling phenotype. Oxygen consumption and membrane potential studies in fibroblasts and cells with genetic introduction of the Leu335Pro variant showed loosened coupling between the proton motive force (generated by mitochondrial respiration) and ATP synthesis due to intrinsic dysfunction of complex V. Furthermore, heterologous expression of the Leu335Pro variant on a wild-type background recapitulates these biochemical findings, which is also consistent with a dominant-negative effect on chemiosmotic coupling. On the basis of these findings, we classified the variant as pathogenic according to the criteria of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ClinVar accession number, SCV002555570) (Table S4).

Section: Discussion

Here we describe monozygotic twin boys with euthyroid hypermetabolism characterized by excessive caloric intake, inability to gain weight, and tachypnea with a pathogenic variant (Leu335Pro) in ATP5F1B that results in a loosened coupling between dissipation of the proton motive force and the generation of ATP. At the time of this report, the twins continued to have persistent symptoms despite excess calorie provision, supplemental creatine to support muscle-energy metabolism, and supplemental folinic acid. Mitochondria in the patients’ fibroblasts and in engineered heterozygous mutant cells had decreased mitochondrial membrane potential, presumably resulting from a greater flux of protons through complex V, which has resulted in less efficient ATP production. The twins also have had increased mitochondrial oxygen consumption.
Complex V uses the proton motive force that is generated by the respiratory chain for the synthesis of ATP. The catalytic F 1 domain of complex V consists of a trimer of α−β dimers and a central γδε stalk. The nucleotide-binding sites are located at the interface between each α and β subunit. Protons pass through the pore of F O , which is connected to the central stalk, driving its rotation within the α 3 β 3 assembly. This rotation alters the affinity of the α−β interface for nucleotides, driving the catalytic cycle for ATP formation. Normally, during every 360° rotation, eight protons are translocated into the matrix and three molecules of ATP are produced. Tight contacts between the γ subunit and the α 3 β 3 assembly maximize efficient powering of ATP production by the translocation of protons. The C-terminal tip of the γ subunit fits snugly in a hydrophobic sleeve made of amino acids 287 to 294 of the α subunits and amino acids 274 to 281 of the β subunits.
Our measurements of oxygen consumption and membrane potential show that if we chemically eliminate complex V activity or, alternatively, activate it maximally (saturating ADP), there are no residual differences in mitochondrial leak, which shows that uncoupling arises from a defect intrinsic to complex V. Arsenieva and colleagues identified two categories of uncoupling by MGI mutations in complex V in yeast. Group 1 mutations affect amino acids that make up the hydrophobic sleeve of the α–β hexamer and allow the γ subunit to rotate without tightly engaging the α–β regions. Group 2 mutations alter the matrix-facing interface of the α and β subunits. Given the proximity of Leu335 to the hydrophobic sleeve and the effect of certain group 1 mutations in yeast, we propose that Leu335Pro is a group 1 mutation, because it probably impairs engagement of the γ subunit by the α–β hexamer by disrupting contact between the β and γ subunits. It thereby disrupts the efficiency of ATP synthesis, even with normal translocation of protons through F O .
We propose that the current condition being evaluated in the twins belongs to a category of mitochondrial uncoupling syndromes (including Luft syndrome) that are characterized by elevated mitochondrial respiration uncoupled from mitochondrial ATP synthesis. However, Luft syndrome appears to be caused by uncoupled respiration that originates outside complex V. Both conditions are characterized by high caloric intake, low body mass, and recurrent hyperthermia. Distinct clinical features in the twin brothers were presentation in infancy, developmental delay, and episodic hyperthermia. The occurrence of hyperthermia was consistent with the observation that uncoupling respiration from ATP synthesis results in heat generation in a variety of systems. Although it is reasonable to assume that the hypermetabolism and hyperthermia are directly attributable to the effect of Leu335Pro on complex V, it remains unclear why hyperthermia is episodic. Future challenges lie in delineating how the uncoupling defect within complex V leads to secondary changes within mitochondria, the cell, and the patient.
We anticipate that mitochondrial uncoupling syndromes may have diverse molecular and biochemical causes. For example, uncoupling may be mediated by genetic variants that make the mitochondrial inner membrane leaky to protons. Alternatively, variants in the genes encoding the α, β, or γ subunits of complex V may loosen coupling between the proton motive force and ATP synthesis. In the future, it will be important to determine whether inherited variation in these pathways may contribute to differences in energy metabolism in the broader population.
