Title: Complications of Unsafe and Self-Managed Abortion


Section: Introduction

When abortion is legally restricted or otherwise inaccessible, girls, women, and those who care about them look outside formal medical care to end pregnancies. Worldwide, people increasingly choose misoprostol or a combination of mifepristone and misoprostol to end pregnancies on their own (referred to as self-managed abortion). These medications are safer and more effective than older, invasive techniques of self-managed abortion, and patients who have used these medications may be clinically indistinguishable from those who have had uncomplicated spontaneous pregnancy loss. Similarly, patients with complications of self-managed medication-induced abortion and those with complications of miscarriage may have identical clinical presentations.
As U.S. abortion laws become increasingly restrictive, people will decide to end pregnancies without clinical supervision. Health care providers must become familiar with the normal course of self-managed abortion with medications and its rare complications, as well as complications of unsafe methods. This review provides the information clinicians need to prepare for an increasingly restrictive legal climate for abortion. Ultimately, we conclude that appropriate care is centered on two clinical concepts. First, because medication-induced abortion and spontaneous abortion are clinically similar processes, care can usually be given without knowledge of whether the abortion is self-managed or spontaneous. Second, because medication-induced abortion is safe, many patients who seek care will require only confirmation that their abortion is complete or outpatient intervention for incomplete abortion. In contrast, those using unsafe methods may need lifesaving critical care for sepsis, hemorrhage, pelvic-organ injury, or toxic exposures. The hallmark of skilled care in this new era will be judicious use of intervention in most cases and readiness for aggressive treatment when needed.
Appropriate care also involves understanding that women’s legal safety — their risk of prosecution — may be the biggest threat to their well-being. Seven states criminalize self-managed abortion, and 24 others have laws that can be interpreted as doing so. However, no state mandates that health care providers report suspected or confirmed self-managed abortion, including for minors. Indeed, reporting may violate patients’ privacy rights and result in penalties for those who report. Reporting is also problematic because caregivers are more likely to report women of color and low-income women than white or affluent women in similar circumstances. When patients present with bleeding in pregnancy and caregivers involve the police, patients may face detention and prosecution, regardless of whether they induced the abortion.

Section: Background

Before 1973, when abortion was illegal in most U.S. states, approximately 800,000 illegal abortions took place annually, although the clandestine nature of illegal abortion makes enumeration imprecise. As access to legal abortion increased after Roe v. Wade , morbidity and mortality from illegal abortion declined by a factor of nearly 8. Similar precipitous declines in mortality occurred with the legalization of abortion in Romania and South Africa.
Before U.S. legalization of abortion, some women found relatively safe methods of self-managed abortion; others used dangerous means, such as vaginal or cervical insertion of implements, objects, or caustic substances. Some women were able to obtain safe surgical abortion care — for example, with lay caregivers of the Jane Collective. Other women underwent surgery performed by inadequately trained providers. Pelvic-organ injuries, hemorrhage, dangerous clostridial infections, and sepsis resulted, leading to emergency hysterectomies and sometimes death. Doctors working in hospitals at that time recall the regularity with which patients presented with life-threatening complications, and some hospitals had entire clinical wards dedicated to septic abortion.
More recently, women worldwide have been managing abortion with the use of mifepristone and misoprostol or with misoprostol alone. These drugs are the most extensively studied, safe, and effective agents for clinician-supervised abortion and miscarriage management, as well as for self-managed abortion ( Table 1 ). After taking the medications, patients have bleeding, cramping, and expulsion of pregnancy tissue at home. The World Health Organization recommends both regimens, preferring those with mifepristone where available. With clinical supervision, major complications associated with the combination of mifepristone and misoprostol (those requiring hospitalization, surgery, or blood transfusion) are rare, occurring in 0.3% of cases. Mortality is approximately 0.65 deaths per 100,000 medication-induced abortions, making medical abortion more than 13 times as safe as childbirth in the United States.
Evidence from Ireland, Peru, and other countries indicates that using these medications outside of clinician supervision is also effective and associated with a low rate of complications. In Latin America, where abortion has historically been legally restricted, the increase in self-managed abortion with misoprostol has been associated with reduced maternal mortality. Though abortion is legal in the United States, at least for now, 2 to 7% of patients seeking this service report efforts to self-induce abortion. They do so for a variety of reasons, including those related to privacy, cost, distance from clinics, and a preference for self-managed care.
Not all methods of self-managed abortion are effective or safe. Women in the United States report using herbs, including rue, sage, St. John’s wort, and black or blue cohosh, among other understudied methods generally thought to be ineffective. Toxic reactions and even death have been reported with some of these substances, especially rue. In rare cases, women in the United States have also reported the use of other means, such as vaginal insertion of implements or objects or abdominal trauma to try to disrupt their pregnancy.
Data are limited on self-managed abortion during the second trimester. The mifepristone–misoprostol combination is probably the safest method. The research gap here is important, since approximately two thirds of deaths worldwide from unsafe abortion involve attempts after the first trimester.
If U.S. abortion law is further restricted, some of the nearly 1 million people seeking abortion care annually will travel for medically supervised, legal care. However, since 75% of patients seeking abortion are poor or low-income, many will need alternatives. Some will self-induce abortion using safe medications that they have obtained themselves. Others, lacking access or relying on misinformation, will use dangerous methods. Emergency-department (ED) physicians, obstetrician–gynecologists, family physicians, and internists will have a role in all these care paths. They will need to know where abortion care is legally available and be familiar with resources to assist patients (see Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). They will also need to understand the normal course of medication-induced abortion and be prepared to manage its rare complications. Finally, along with subspecialist consultants, they will need to effectively manage the life-threatening complications of unsafe abortion methods.
Although prevention of undesired pregnancy should remain a public health focus, restrictions on funding for contraceptive services make accessing family planning even harder for people with low incomes, contributing to an increase in pregnancy rates. New restrictions on Title X funding also prevent clinicians from referring patients for abortion care. These restrictions, in combination with more restricted access to abortion care, may lead to increased efforts of pregnant people to manage an abortion themselves.

Section: Clinical Assessment

Assessment centers on determining hemodynamic status, including evaluation for life-threatening hemorrhage, sepsis, trauma, and toxin exposure ( Table 2 ). Ectopic pregnancy must be considered in all pregnant patients who have no prior documentation of intrauterine pregnancy.
Hemodynamically unstable patients require rapid evaluation, supportive care, and immediate involvement of a gynecologic surgeon. Assessment, resuscitation, stabilization, and treatment occur simultaneously. Measurement of vital signs, a targeted physical examination, and appropriate laboratory testing are essential. Rapid bedside ultrasonography can be used to detect ongoing pregnancy, intrauterine tissue, and intraabdominal hemorrhage. Hemodynamically unstable patients with hemorrhage or suspected pelvic-organ trauma usually require assessment and treatment in the operating room. Use of uterotonic medications may be a temporizing measure. If sepsis is suspected, antibiotic agents should be administered immediately, followed by prompt uterine evacuation, performed under ultrasound or laparoscopic guidance if uterine injury is suspected. Hysterectomy may be required for advanced infection or uterine necrosis. Ruptured ectopic pregnancy, bowel or other visceral injury, and amniotic-fluid embolism must also be considered ( Table 2 ). Care teams should initiate massive-transfusion protocols or sepsis-resuscitation protocols as needed.
Although doctors must prepare for acute presentations related to trauma, hemorrhage, or sepsis, growing use of medications for abortion (in contrast to mechanical methods) means that most patients with abortion-related symptoms are in stable condition. Diagnosis and treatment center on determining whether clinically important bleeding or infection is present and whether ectopic pregnancy can be ruled out. These factors guide decisions about uterine evacuation, antibiotic therapy, follow-up evaluation of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels, and in the case of ectopic pregnancy, surgery or treatment with methotrexate.
In most cases, a symptom-focused history, not one focused on the cause of pregnancy loss, will generate an appropriate differential diagnosis. Inquire whether the patient had prior ultrasound documentation of intrauterine pregnancy, which can rule out ectopic pregnancy. Asking about a history of uterine instrumentation (especially if there are peritoneal signs on physical examination) may be clinically relevant, though it may not be necessary to know whether instrumentation was for spontaneous or induced abortion. Pregnancy complications must be considered in transgender men.
People having a typical medication-induced abortion and those having a spontaneous abortion present similarly. Patients may describe bleeding or cramping that intensified over a period of several hours and peaked as the pregnancy tissue was expelled, with heavy bleeding and large blood clots. Symptoms usually subside shortly after expulsion. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, transient low-grade fever, and chills may occur on the day misoprostol is used. Second-trimester spontaneous or induced abortion resembles labor, with painful contractions over a period of hours or days, sometimes with bleeding or membrane rupture.
Some signs and symptoms associated with complications of abortion may be the same as the signs and symptoms that occur during the normal course of an uncomplicated medication-induced abortion. For example, dizziness can signify either hypovolemia due to hemorrhage or a vagal reaction as tissue passes through the cervix. Low-grade fever can be a typical reaction to misoprostol or may indicate infection. Nausea and vomiting can be due to misoprostol or can be a result of serious infection or bowel injury from uterine perforation. Patients may report tissue passage even if the pregnancy itself has not passed; decidualized endometrium can shed even with ongoing pregnancy.
Some presentations suggest a specific diagnosis more readily. For example, severe cramping without bleeding suggests hematometra (accumulation of blood in the uterus) or possibly infection. In contrast, cramping accompanied by bleeding suggests incomplete abortion.
A complete physical examination is indicated, with a focus on the abdomen and pelvis; speculum and bimanual examinations are essential. The examiner may need to gently rotate the speculum to look for cervical or vaginal lacerations. If pregnancy tissue is visualized at the cervix, it may be possible to gently remove it with the use of ring forceps; however, the examiner should be prepared for heavy bleeding, which may require rapid uterine evacuation. If pain or bleeding limits the assessment, the examination should be performed in the operating room while the patient is under anesthesia.
Ultrasound imaging can identify ongoing pregnancy, the duration and site of pregnancy, adnexal masses, hematometra, and intraabdominal fluid, suggesting uterine perforation or rupture, vascular injury, or ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Echogenic material in the uterus, or a “thickened stripe,” may indicate incomplete abortion; however, this is also a normal finding after medication-induced or spontaneous abortion, and this ultrasound finding alone is not diagnostic and should not dictate treatment ( Figure 1 ). The clinical picture as a whole determines the need for intervention. Computed tomography may help in an evaluation for possible pelvic abscess, bowel injury, hematoma, or uterine myonecrosis.
To assess for clinically important bleeding, infection, renal or hepatic effects of toxins, or possible ectopic pregnancy, laboratory evaluation should include, at a minimum, a complete blood count, blood typing and screening, a blood chemistry panel, and hCG measurement. Successful first-trimester, medication-induced abortion can be diagnosed when the hCG level drops by at least 80% 5 to 8 days after initiation of the abortion. When initial hCG levels are unknown and prior ultrasound confirmation of intrauterine pregnancy is unavailable, hCG levels should be measured at appropriate intervals to rule out ectopic pregnancy. Suspected sepsis warrants measurement of the serum lactate level, blood and cervical cultures, and endometrial cultures from uterine aspiration. If disseminated intravascular coagulation is suspected, a platelet count and fibrinogen and d -dimer tests are indicated. Rh 0 (D) immune globulin may not be needed for an Rh-negative patient with a pregnancy of less than 56 days’ gestation. When the duration of the pregnancy is unclear, Rh 0 (D) immune globulin should be offered.

Section: Differential Diagnosis and Treatment

In the era of mifepristone and misoprostol, patients who present for care are likely to be experiencing the normal course of medication-induced or spontaneous abortion or having incomplete abortion. For medication-induced or spontaneous abortion, patients may need pain management or confirmation of abortion completion. When a thickened uterine stripe is the only finding and the patient does not have clinically important bleeding or evidence of infection, no treatment is needed.
Management options for incomplete abortion are expectant care, misoprostol ( Table 1 ), or uterine aspiration. The patient’s preference is important. Uterine aspiration can be performed in the emergency department or office with a paracervical block and oral analgesic agents or intravenous administration of moderate sedation. If the patient requests deep sedation or general anesthesia, an operating room or other appropriate medical setting is required. Data on prophylactic antibiotics for uterine aspiration in patients with incomplete abortion are insufficient; however, it is reasonable to consider the use of prophylactic antibiotics in such patients on the basis of evidence that supports its use before surgical abortion.
When spontaneous or induced pregnancy loss occurs after the first trimester, patients may present with a range of complications, including incomplete abortion with retained fetus, placenta, or both. Patients with hemorrhage or infection require an expeditious dilation and evacuation procedure; in other situations, induction of labor with mifepristone–misoprostol, misoprostol alone, or oxytocin may be appropriate. Hysterotomy is much riskier and is seldom indicated. In rare cases, patients may present with self-induced abortion after 24 weeks of gestation, which may appear clinically similar to spontaneous preterm delivery and is managed similarly.
Endometritis after spontaneous, surgical, or medically induced abortion is unusual, occurring in approximately 0.5% of surgical or misoprostol-only abortions and in 0.01 to 0.2% of mifepristone–misoprostol abortions. Infection is typically polymicrobial, including vaginal and bowel flora, Neisseria gonorrhoeae , and Chlamydia trachomatis . Most infections are mild and treatable with the use of outpatient antibiotic regimens recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. If retained tissue is suspected, outpatient uterine aspiration is also indicated. When more serious infection is suspected, admission for treatment with broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics is required, followed by prompt uterine aspiration. If postabortion infection is not treated expeditiously, it can rapidly progress to septic shock and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Blood and endometrial cultures guide treatment, though the odds of uncontaminated results are greater with blood cultures. Parenteral antibiotics should be continued until 48 hours after the first signs of consistent improvement, followed by oral antibiotics, for a total of 14 days of treatment ( Table 3 ).
Clostridial infection, including infection with Clostridium perfringens and C. sordellii species, is particularly dangerous and is reported after spontaneous, medication-induced, and surgical abortion. In a 10-year period, eight deaths from toxic shock associated with C. sordellii infection were reported among nearly 2 million women in the United States who were undergoing mifepristone–misoprostol abortions. Clostridial infection can lead to full-thickness uterine necrosis (gas gangrene) and rapid deterioration and death. It should be suspected if endometrial Gram’s staining shows large, gram-positive rods and patients have tachycardia, dramatic leukocytosis, hemolysis, hematuria, or rapidly developing shock and ARDS. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are indicated (e.g., high-dose penicillin G, gentamicin, and clindamycin). Consultation with critical care and infectious disease specialists is needed. If the patient’s clinical status worsens or does not rapidly improve, hysterectomy is indicated. In rare cases, other bacterial pathogens can cause uterine necrosis and require hysterectomy for source control. Postabortion sepsis can also be caused by unrecognized bowel injury.
Uterine atony, retained products of conception, abnormal placentation (placenta accreta, percreta, or increta), arteriovenous malformation, and bleeding disorders can all be causes of uterine hemorrhage. Uterotonic agents, uterine aspiration, balloon tamponade (with a Foley catheter, or Bakri balloon), aggressive volume repletion, and activation of massive-transfusion protocols may be indicated, with embolization (performed by an interventional radiologist) or hysterectomy, if other efforts fail. Large hemorrhage can lead to disseminated intravascular coagulation, requiring specialized supportive care.
Mechanical injuries to the uterus, cervix, or vagina can also cause hemorrhage. Injuries to the lateral cervix and uterus are the most dangerous, involving branches of the uterine artery. Since such injuries can lead to potentially catastrophic pelvic, broad-ligament, and retroperitoneal bleeding, they require expert surgical repair ( Figure 2 ). Small fundal perforations may not result in clinically significant bleeding and may not require repair; however, when such perforations are caused by suction devices or forceps, injury to the bowel, bladder, omentum, or other structures must be ruled out with exploratory surgery. Uterine rupture also may cause hemorrhage and is a particular risk in patients with a history of cesarean section; it requires surgical evaluation and repair. Catastrophic damage to the uterus or its vasculature may require hysterectomy.
Patients with postabortion hematometra, which is generally not life-threatening, present with severe cramping. The condition is best managed with the combined use of uterotonic agents and outpatient uterine evacuation.

Section: Preparing for Shifts in the Legal Climate

In addition to becoming familiar with the necessary clinical care after self-managed abortion, doctors should consider their larger role in a legally restrictive environment. When patients present after efforts to self-manage abortion, prompt, nonjudgmental, evidence-based care is critical and should not be delayed out of the physician’s fear of being legally implicated in an abortion or because of ethical objections. When a facility’s policies — or possibly future laws — restrict needed intervention (e.g., when uterine evacuation is prohibited because of fetal cardiac activity), prompt consultation with lawyers or ethicists may be needed. Facilities should proactively establish communication and care protocols that prioritize the safety of pregnant patients.
Globally, in countries where abortion is legally restricted, programs focused on postabortion care that include outpatient uterine evacuation and management of complications have good clinical outcomes and high levels of patient satisfaction. Health care centers in the United States will need to develop infrastructure for ready access to outpatient uterine evacuation, if it is not already offered. Since care for complications of self-managed medication abortion and care for complications of miscarriage are essentially identical, institutions should ensure that their management of miscarriage is up to date and includes opportunities for patients to receive medical treatment and surgical treatment in the office, the ED, and the operating room.
There are also roles for physicians before patients attempt abortion. For example, clinicians working under restrictive laws in Uruguay developed a harm-reduction approach that involved preabortion evaluation (confirming intrauterine pregnancy and offering information about safe self-managed methods of abortion), as well as postabortion care. Doctors did not provide abortifacient medications, which were generally available at pharmacies without a prescription. This approach was effective and was associated with a low rate of complications. It remains to be seen whether harm-reduction models will be adopted in the United States, potentially relying on medications obtained online. Finally, some physicians may feel conscience-bound to provide safe abortion care because they believe patients will be harmed without it. Whether they or their patients face prosecution depends on local contexts.

Section: Conclusions

As U.S. abortion restrictions increase, self-managed abortion will undoubtedly also increase. Health care providers must prepare for this clinical reality. This involves becoming comfortable with the ambiguity of providing care without knowing whether it is for spontaneous or induced abortion. It also involves preparing to manage life-threatening complications of abortion, which are most likely to be caused by unsafe means. Given the safety of the combination of mifepristone and misoprostol for self-managed abortion, the biggest danger to patients may be legal prosecution. Both the American Medical Association and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists take strong positions against criminalization of self-managed abortion, because it deters patients with complications from seeking care. Furthermore, since medication-induced abortion and spontaneous abortion are clinically indistinguishable, criminalization of the former would inevitably lead to policing of all reproductive-age women with bleeding or pregnancy loss. Doctors and health care institutions must develop strategies that favor effective, compassionate clinical care over legal investigation of patients.
