Title: Neonatal Docosahexaenoic Acid in Preterm Infants and Intelligence at 5 Years


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is a component of neural tissue. Because its accretion into the brain is greatest during the final trimester of pregnancy, infants born before 29 weeks’ gestation do not receive the normal supply of DHA. The effect of this deficiency on subsequent cognitive development is not well understood.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We assessed general intelligence at 5 years in children who had been enrolled in a trial of neonatal DHA supplementation to prevent bronchopulmonary dysplasia. In the previous trial, infants born before 29 weeks’ gestation had been randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive an enteral emulsion that provided 60 mg of DHA per kilogram of body weight per day or a control emulsion from the first 3 days of enteral feeds until 36 weeks of postmenstrual age or discharge home, whichever occurred first. Children from 5 of the 13 centers in the original trial were invited to undergo assessment with the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI) at 5 years of corrected age. The primary outcome was the full-scale intelligence quotient (FSIQ) score. Secondary outcomes included the components of WPPSI.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 1273 infants underwent randomization in the original trial; of the 656 surviving children who had undergone randomization at the centers included in this follow-up study, 480 (73%) had an FSIQ score available — 241 in the DHA group and 239 in the control group. After imputation of missing data, the mean (±SD) FSIQ scores were 95.4±17.3 in the DHA group and 91.9±19.1 in the control group (adjusted difference, 3.45; 95% confidence interval, 0.38 to 6.53; P=0.03). The results for secondary outcomes generally did not support that obtained for the primary outcome. Adverse events were similar in the two groups.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In infants born before 29 weeks’ gestation who had been enrolled in a trial to assess the effect of DHA supplementation on bronchopulmonary dysplasia, the use of an enteral DHA emulsion until 36 weeks of postmenstrual age was associated with modestly higher FSIQ scores at 5 years of age than control feeding. (Funded by the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council and Nu-Mega Ingredients; N3RO Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry number, ACTRN12612000503820 .)

Section: Introduction

Children born preterm are more likely to have lower cognitive scores and have a higher risk of cognitive impairment than children born at full term, and the risk and severity of impairment increases as gestational age at birth decreases. Infants born at the earliest gestational ages are deprived of the placental supply of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) that normally accumulates in the brain during the final trimester of pregnancy. DHA makes up approximately 30% of the lipid content of the brain and is integral to synaptosomal structure during neuronal development. Preterm infants born before 30 weeks’ gestation have reduced DHA concentrations in neural tissues, which may contribute to poorer cognitive outcomes.
The current feeding practice for preterm infants is to provide approximately 20 mg of DHA per kilogram of body weight per day (the level naturally present in the milk of women consuming a Western diet), which is lower than the estimated in utero requirement of approximately 60 mg per kilogram per day. Three trials have tested whether providing the estimated requirement of DHA is associated with improved cognitive function. Although these trials have reported largely null effects, the trial with the largest number of the most immature infants, who are likely to have the greatest depletion of DHA, suggested a potential benefit for language at 18 to 22 months of corrected age.
In this study, we evaluated the general cognitive functioning of infants born before 29 weeks’ gestation who had been part of a larger trial (involving 1273 infants) that evaluated the effect of providing the estimated requirement of DHA during the neonatal period as compared with standard practice for the prevention of bronchopulmonary dysplasia. We assessed general intelligence at 5 years of corrected age in a subgroup of these children.

Section: Methods

We conducted a study involving children who had been born before 29 weeks’ gestation and were included in the N−3 Fatty Acids for Improvement in Respiratory Outcomes (N3RO) trial, a multicenter, blinded, parallel-group, randomized, controlled trial that evaluated the effect of DHA feeding on bronchopulmonary dysplasia. The period of recruitment for the N3RO trial was June 2012 through September 2015; the trial included 1273 infants in 13 centers in Australia, New Zealand, and Singapore who were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio within 3 days after their first enteral feed to receive a DHA or control emulsion. The N3RO trial protocol (February 28, 2012) has been published previously, and the bronchopulmonary dysplasia results have been published in the Journal (database locked on May 10, 2016). The N3RO trial protocol included analysis of the effect of DHA on bronchopulmonary dysplasia and other clinical outcomes during the initial hospitalization of infants but did not include analyses of long-term outcomes.
The protocol for the current follow-up study was subsequently developed (March 14, 2018) and is available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org; it has also been published previously. Three other studies involving subgroups of infants from N3RO have explored early attention, the microbiome, and behavior. Infants were excluded from the trial if they had a major congenital or chromosomal abnormality, were participating in another fatty-acid intervention trial, or were receiving intravenous lipids containing fish oil or if the mother wanted to provide breast milk while taking supplements containing DHA at a dose of more than 250 mg per day.
All infants in the trial received approximately 20 mg of DHA per kilogram per day from human milk or preterm infant formula as soon as they were receiving full enteral feeds. The intervention emulsion provided 60 mg of DHA per kilogram per day from the time of enrollment, whereas the control emulsion contained no DHA. Both the DHA emulsion and the control soy oil emulsion were emulsified with 1% lecithin and contained 20% total fat and 6% protein. The DHA emulsion was a microencapsulated aqueous emulsion of fractionated tuna oil (70% of total oil as DHA in triglyceride form); 0.5 ml of the DHA emulsion contained 60 mg of DHA, 4 mg of eicosapentaenoic acid, 4.6 mg of vitamin C, and 0.05 mg of vitamin E. For the control emulsion, 0.5 ml contained 55 mg of linoleic acid, 5.7 mg of alpha-linolenic acid, 4.8 mg of vitamin C, and 0.01 mg of vitamin E. Trial emulsions were administered three times per day, starting at the time of enrollment, for at least 7 weeks; administration of the emulsions ceased at 36 weeks of postmenstrual age or discharge home, whichever occurred first. Family members and clinical and research personnel were unaware of the feeding assignment until completion of the analyses of the N3RO primary outcome (bronchopulmonary dysplasia), after which time the trial statisticians were made aware of the trial results and the parents or guardians could request knowledge of the group assignment from the statistical team. Other trial staff and outcome assessors continued to be unaware of the group assignments throughout the 5-year follow-up.
This follow-up study was developed by the authors, peer reviewed by the IMPACT Clinical Trials Network for Mothers’ and Babies’ Health, approved by the Women’s and Children’s Health Network Human Research Ethics Committee, and conducted in accordance with the principles of International Council for Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice guidelines. Before the children reached 5 years of corrected age, we contacted their parents or guardians by telephone to explain the study, determine whether they intended to participate, and schedule an appointment. At the start of the appointment for the follow-up study, a parent or guardian provided written informed consent for each child’s participation. The study was funded by the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council and by Nu-Mega Ingredients, neither of which was involved in the study design or conduct; the collection, analysis, or interpretation of the data; the writing, review, or approval of the manuscript to be submitted; or the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the study to the protocol.
Children were eligible to participate in the current study if they had not been withdrawn from the N3RO trial or died. The 5 highest-recruiting centers among the original 13 centers were chosen for this study, as discussed below; all 5 centers were in Australia. Randomization in the N3RO trial was stratified according to center, sex, and gestational age at birth (<27 weeks’ or 27 to <29 weeks’ gestation). Infants from multiple births underwent randomization individually.
The primary outcome of the 5-year follow-up study was the full-scale intelligence quotient (FSIQ) score, assessed at 5 years of corrected age (preferably at a corrected age between 4 years 9 months and 6 years 0 months) with the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence–Fourth Edition, Australian and New Zealand (WPPSI-IV). The WPPSI-IV was administered by a psychologist or by trained technicians under the supervision of a psychologist in a hospital, the family home, or a local community center. Scores were age-standardized to a mean (±SD) of 100±15 and a range of 40 to 160 (the expected mean and range for a general sample of Australian children).
Other indexes from the WPPSI-IV (verbal comprehension, fluid reasoning, working memory, processing speed, general ability, and cognitive proficiency primary index scales — all age-standardized to a mean of 100±15 and a range of 45 to 155) as well as mild (FSIQ score <85) and moderate to severe (FSIQ score <70) intellectual impairment or other cognitive impairment (any non-FSIQ WPPSI-IV index score <85) were prespecified secondary outcomes. Additional prespecified secondary outcomes included executive functioning, represented by the fruit Stroop interference score (higher scores indicate better performance); height, weight, and head circumference z scores appropriate for corrected age and sex ; and neurologic and physical diagnoses or disabilities.
Because in-person assessments were restricted as a result of the coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) pandemic, we adapted our methods at a point during the follow-up period. Assessments were conducted between August 29, 2018, and May 22, 2021, but were paused on March 24, 2020, for 7 to 12 months because of the pandemic (this timing varied at individual sites in accordance with local restrictions). To maximize inclusion in the follow-up, we widened the acceptable age range for assessments (to 4.0 to 7.5 years), included assessments conducted with an earlier edition of the WPPSI (WPPSI-III), conducted some assessments with social distancing or with face masks worn by the assessor (or with both measures taken), and used local private psychologists to assess children in families who had relocated to a place to which travel was not permitted. We also sought external assessments completed by school psychologists or as part of other research studies, provided that the assessment could be audited for scoring consistency and the scores could be standardized for corrected age.
Adverse events of special interest during this follow-up period included deaths, which were considered to be serious adverse events, and respiratory-related hospital admissions. Deaths were reviewed by an independent mortality review committee, the members of which were unaware of the group assignments, during the birth hospitalization in the original trial and after discharge in the follow-up study.
We estimated that 296 participants in each group (592 in total) would be required in order to detect a mean between-group difference of 4 points (equivalent to 0.27 standard deviations) in the primary outcome of the FSIQ score (mean, 100±15) with 90% power (two-tailed alpha level, 0.05). If attrition was higher than anticipated as a result of Covid-19 restrictions, at least 222 participants per group (444 in total) would be required for 80% power. To exceed this sample size, the 5 highest-recruiting centers among the 13 N3RO centers were asked to participate in the 5-year follow-up (details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org). The database for the current study was locked on October 25, 2021.
The primary analyses were performed on an intention-to-treat basis according to a prespecified statistical analysis plan (available with the protocol). Outcomes were compared between the two groups with the use of generalized linear models, with generalized estimating equations used to account for clustering due to multiple births within a family. Continuous, binary, and count outcomes were analyzed with linear (mean difference), log binomial (relative risk), and negative binomial (ratio of means) regression models, respectively. All analyses were adjusted for sex, center, and gestational age, and anthropometric analyses were additionally adjusted for the corresponding anthropometric z score at baseline. Preplanned subgroup analyses were performed to assess the effect of DHA separately according to sex (for all outcomes), gestational age (for the primary outcome), and status with respect to cesarean birth (for the primary outcome).
Missing outcome data were addressed with multiple imputation implemented under a missing-at-random assumption; imputation was performed separately in each group with the use of fully conditional specification (chained equations). Because infants from multiple births underwent randomization individually, observations were considered to be independent in imputation models. Given the interest in intention-to-treat effects, imputed data sets included all surviving children who underwent randomization from the five centers involved in the follow-up (further details of the imputation model, its plausibility, and the results of sensitivity analyses around the method of imputation and the missing data mechanism assumed are provided in the Supplementary Appendix ).
The widths of the 95% confidence intervals reported for secondary outcomes and subgroup analyses have not been adjusted for multiplicity, and no inferences can be drawn from these data. All analyses were performed with Stata software, version 17 (StataCorp).

Section: Results

Of the 702 children who had been enrolled in the initial N3RO trial at the five centers involved in the follow-up study, 656 survived to 5 years of corrected age, and 652 were eligible to participate (4 had previously withdrawn from future contact) ( Figure 1 ). Parents or guardians of 575 children intended to participate. Because of the Covid-19 pandemic, 85 children could not be assessed. We therefore were able to assess 490 children, of whom 480 (73% of the 656 surviving children) had an FSIQ score available ( Figure 1 ); 18 of the children in the DHA group and 12 of those in the control group were evaluated with the WPPSI-III rather than the WPPSI-IV. A total of 82 children in the DHA group (25.4%) and 94 in the control group (28.2%) could not be assessed or did not have an FSIQ score available but were included in analyses through imputation ( Figure 1 ). After imputation, 656 children (323 in the DHA group and 333 in the control group) were included in the analyses.
The mean corrected age at assessment was similar in the two groups (5.3±0.5 years in the DHA group and 5.3±0.4 years in the control group). Other characteristics were also similar in the two groups at baseline and at 5 years ( Table 1 , and Tables S1 and S2 in the Supplementary Appendix ) and similar to other samples of infants born extremely preterm (Table S8). As in the overall population included in the original trial, bronchopulmonary dysplasia was numerically more common in the DHA group in this study, but no substantial differences in other respiratory characteristics were found ( Table 1 ). The scheduled doses of DHA were taken by 92% of the participants in each group. Among the centers involved in the follow-up study, 11 children (5 in the DHA group and 6 in the control group) had parents who had requested to be made aware of the group assignment before the 5-year assessment. It took approximately 18 days in each group before the infants were receiving full enteral feeding with breast milk or formula that contained 20 mg of DHA per kilogram per day.
The mean FSIQ score at approximately 5 years of age was 95.4±17.3 in the DHA group and 91.9±19.1 in the control group (difference, 3.45; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.38 to 6.53; P=0.03) ( Table 2 ). The estimates of the treatment effect on other indexes of the WPPSI-IV and the fruit Stroop interference score generally did not support the results for the primary outcome ( Table 2 ).
The percentages of children with a clinical diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit–hyperactivity disorder, or other behavioral or neurologic disorders were below 7.0% and were similar in the two groups ( Table 3 ). Likewise, growth z scores were similar in the two groups (Table S4). The effects of the DHA intervention according to sex, gestational age, and delivery mode are shown in Tables S5 and S6.
Adverse events in the follow-up study were similar in the two groups ( Table 3 ). Three deaths occurred after the birth hospitalization (two in the DHA group and one in the control group); these deaths were deemed by the independent mortality review committee to be unrelated to DHA or to protocol-directed activities.

Section: Discussion

Among children who had been born before 29 weeks’ gestation, the mean FSIQ score at 5 years of corrected age was approximately 3.5 points higher among those who had received neonatal DHA supplementation than among those who had received a control emulsion. IQ scores obtained at approximately 5 years of age are considered to be relatively stable throughout the rest of childhood and early adulthood. The potential benefit to individual infants born before 29 weeks’ gestation may extend beyond general cognition, because as IQ increases, the later risk of death decreases and quality of life increases. It has been reported that a 1-point increase in FSIQ score increases worker productivity by 1.8 to 2.4%, resulting in an economic gain in lifetime earnings and societal contribution. However, none of these putative advantages can be inferred from the current study, and whether the difference in FSIQ score found here will persist beyond 5 years is unknown. Other indexes from the WPPSI-IV were generally similar in the two trial groups and therefore did not support the results for the primary outcome.
Three other randomized, controlled trials, including a trial conducted by some of the investigators involved in the current study, attempted to test supplementation with the estimated in utero dose of DHA as compared with standard practice in preterm populations and showed mostly null effects on cognition. Two trials conducted subgroup analyses that were restricted to more vulnerable infants (born at either <1250 g of body weight or <27 weeks’ gestation) and suggested a benefit of high-dose enteral DHA for early neurodevelopment, although these analyses were underpowered.
In the original N3RO trial and in our follow-up study, there was a tendency for physiologically defined bronchopulmonary dysplasia to occur more commonly in the DHA group. We found that DHA supplementation had a beneficial effect on the FSIQ score despite an association between bronchopulmonary dysplasia and poorer cognitive outcome, which suggests that the possible mechanisms underlying the cognitive effects may be independent of those underlying the effects on the risk of bronchopulmonary dysplasia.
Our trial design involved a method of delivery of DHA that ensured that infants received the prescribed dose of DHA from the start of enteral feeds, regardless of whether the infant was fed human milk, formula, or both, thereby conferring immediate exposure and high adherence to the intervention. Our follow-up population was similar to the overall trial population and is representative of the wider population of infants born before 29 weeks’ gestation in high-income countries (Table S8).
We had higher-than-anticipated attrition because of restrictions associated with the Covid-19 pandemic but met the sample size that was calculated to provide 80% power to detect a 4-point difference between the groups. The effect that we detected (3.5 points) was smaller than the 4-point effect size that has previously been a catalyst for changes to public health policy, yet an effect of 3.5 points may confer a benefit to individual infants. Although it was appropriate to conduct our analysis under a missing-at-random assumption, we imputed data for approximately 27% of the sample and the results are sensitive to this assumption. The treatment effect might have differed if we had been able to achieve a higher follow-up rate. The range of ages at assessment was wider than planned, but all scores were age-standardized and were corrected for preterm birth. Caregivers of 11 children (2%) requested to be made aware of the group assignment before the follow-up study; this is unlikely to have introduced bias, because all trial staff members and outcome assessors remained unaware of the assignments.
Our follow-up study showed that an enteral emulsion of DHA at a dose of 60 mg per kilogram per day was associated with modestly higher FSIQ scores at 5 years of age among infants born before 29 weeks’ gestation than a control emulsion. These results support the current recommendations that preterm infants born before 29 weeks’ gestation receive approximately 60 mg of supplemental DHA per kilogram per day in addition to the DHA available from human milk or preterm infant formula, in order to approximate the fetal required rate.
