Title: Decompression with or without Fusion in Degenerative Lumbar Spondylolisthesis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

In patients with lumbar spinal stenosis and degenerative spondylolisthesis, it is uncertain whether decompression surgery alone is noninferior to decompression with instrumented fusion.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted an open-label, multicenter, noninferiority trial involving patients with symptomatic lumbar stenosis that had not responded to conservative management and who had single-level spondylolisthesis of 3 mm or more. Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to undergo decompression surgery (decompression-alone group) or decompression surgery with instrumented fusion (fusion group). The primary outcome was a reduction of at least 30% in the score on the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI; range, 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating more impairment) during the 2 years after surgery, with a noninferiority margin of −15 percentage points. Secondary outcomes included the mean change in the ODI score as well as scores on the Zurich Claudication Questionnaire, leg and back pain, the duration of surgery and length of hospital stay, and reoperation within 2 years.

Abstract_Section: Results

The mean age of patients was approximately 66 years. Approximately 75% of the patients had leg pain for more than a year, and more than 80% had back pain for more than a year. The mean change from baseline to 2 years in the ODI score was −20.6 in the decompression-alone group and −21.3 in the fusion group (mean difference, 0.7; 95% confidence interval [CI], −2.8 to 4.3). In the modified intention-to-treat analysis, 95 of 133 patients (71.4%) in the decompression-alone group and 94 of 129 patients (72.9%) in the fusion group had a reduction of at least 30% in the ODI score (difference, −1.4 percentage points; 95% CI, −12.2 to 9.4), showing the noninferiority of decompression alone. In the per-protocol analysis, 80 of 106 patients (75.5%) and 83 of 110 patients (75.5%), respectively, had a reduction of at least 30% in the ODI score (difference, 0.0 percentage points; 95% CI, −11.4 to 11.4), showing noninferiority. The results for the secondary outcomes were generally in the same direction as those for the primary outcome. Successful fusion was achieved with certainty in 86 of 100 patients (86.0%) who had imaging available at 2 years. Reoperation was performed in 15 of 120 patients (12.5%) in the decompression-alone group and in 11 of 121 patients (9.1%) in the fusion group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In this trial involving patients who underwent surgery for degenerative lumbar spondylolisthesis, most of whom had symptoms for more than a year, decompression alone was noninferior to decompression with instrumented fusion over a period of 2 years. Reoperation occurred somewhat more often in the decompression-alone group than in the fusion group. (NORDSTEN-DS ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02051374 .)

Section: Introduction

Degenerative spondylolisthesis is a condition in which one vertebra has slipped forward in relation to the next lower vertebra. Patients, usually older than 60 years of age, typically have leg and back pain and restricted function due to lumbar spinal stenosis caused by spondylolisthesis, disc bulging, and ligamentous and facet hypertrophy. Surgical treatment is often recommended in patients whose pain has not decreased with conservative management. In the past few decades, instrumented fusion (the use of screws, rods, plates, or other apparatus to assist in achieving fusion between vertebral bodies by bone grafts) in addition to decompression of the lumbar canal has been widely used to treat lumbar spondylolisthesis and accounts for more than 90% of decompression surgeries in some countries. In the United States, the hospital costs of lumbar instrumented fusion procedures were estimated at $13 billion in 2011, higher than for any other surgical procedure, such as knee and hip arthroplasty and percutaneous coronary angioplasty. Degenerative spondylolisthesis accounts for the largest proportion of these procedures, and the number of surgeries for this condition more than doubled from 2004 to 2015. Nevertheless, there is a large variation in practice, and in some countries approximately 50% of patients undergo decompression surgery without fusion. Instead of laminectomy, which was the original method of decompression, less invasive procedures that preserve the integrity of stabilizing structures of the spine are now commonly used.
Two randomized, controlled trials that were published in the Journal in 2016 investigated the benefit of adding fusion to decompression in patients with lumbar spondylolisthesis. The conclusions of the trials diverged, but an editorial that summarized the results suggested that fusion does not add value for this patient group. There has been debate about the interpretation of these two trials because of different entry criteria, equivocal conclusions from subsequent meta-analyses and systematic reviews, and requests for further high-quality studies. In the Norwegian Degenerative Spondylolisthesis and Spinal Stenosis (NORDSTEN-DS) trial, we investigated whether decompression surgery was noninferior to decompression surgery with instrumented fusion in patients who have spinal stenosis with degenerative spondylolisthesis.

Section: Methods

The NORDSTEN-DS trial is an investigator-initiated, multicenter, randomized, open-label, parallel-group, noninferiority trial. The Regional Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics of Central Norway approved the trial (project identifier 2013/366). The trial was independently monitored in accordance with a modified model of the International Council for Harmonisation guidelines for Good Clinical Practice. Information about monitoring and patient involvement is provided in Section 3 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. The trial is reported according to the recommendations of Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials. The initial draft of the manuscript was written by the first, third, and last authors, who had full access to all data. The analyses were conducted by the third author, who was unaware of the treatment-group assignments. All the authors vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. The trial protocol and the statistical analysis plan have been published previously and are available at NEJM.org.
When 150 of the trial patients had completed their 1-year assessment, a third-party statistician, who was unaware of the treatment-group assignments, performed an interim analysis for safety and efficacy according to the protocol. Permission to continue the trial, and no other results, was disclosed to the research group on February 28, 2017.
Eligible patients were 18 to 80 years of age with neurogenic claudication or radicular radiating pain in the lower limbs that had not responded to at least 3 months of conservative care. Patients had to have radiographic evidence of spinal stenosis verified by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and have degenerative spondylolisthesis solely at the stenotic level of at least 3 mm verified by standing plain radiographs obtained in the lateral view. Patients were included regardless of the grade of slippage above 3 mm and regardless of the result of the flexion–extension radiographs to detect dynamic slippage of vertebral bodies. Patients were not to be included if they had foraminal stenosis of grade 3 (i.e., a deformed nerve root in the intervertebral foramen) on MRI, according to the classification of Lee et al. ; had previous surgery at the level of spondylolisthesis; or had a former fracture or fusion surgery in the thoracolumbar region. Patients were referred to public orthopedic and neurosurgical clinics and screened for eligibility by surgeons involved in performing the trial operations. Patients who opted to undergo surgery and who fulfilled the eligibility criteria received written and spoken information about the trial. Those who were willing to take part in the trial provided written informed consent before randomization. Information about the surgical departments and their contribution to the enrollment of patients is provided in Section 2 in the Supplementary Appendix .
Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to undergo decompression surgery alone or decompression surgery with instrumented fusion. Randomization was performed within the MedInsight database hosted by the Clinical Trial Unit at Oslo University Hospital (OUS). The sequence was concealed from the investigators, computer-generated, and stratified according to center with the use of permuted blocks. The block sizes varied randomly between four patients and six patients. Information on block size, generation of the randomization sequence, and treatment assignments was unavailable to the investigators. The trial coordinating center at the Research and Communication Unit for Musculoskeletal Health at OUS emailed output information from MedInsight regarding treatment assignments to local trial coordinators who documented the assignments in the patients’ records and informed the surgeons.
For patients who were assigned to undergo decompression without fusion (decompression-alone group), a posterior decompression that preserved the midline structures (supraspinous–interspinous ligament complex) was used. The approach could be bilateral, ipsilateral, or ipsilateral with crossover to the contralateral side. For patients who were assigned to undergo decompression with instrumented fusion (fusion group), an optional technique for posterior decompression (with or without preservation of midline structures) was used, followed by implantation of pedicle screws with rods and bone grafting across the level of spondylolisthesis, with optional use of an intervertebral fusion device. The selection of implants was at the discretion of the surgeons. All participating surgeons routinely performed the procedures used in the trial. Microsurgical decompression (i.e., the use of a microscope or magnifying glasses during decompression) was recommended in both treatment groups. Fusion after 2 years was independently evaluated on computed tomography by two experienced surgeons (the first and eighth authors) and one experienced radiologist (the twelfth author). A conclusion of fusion or not was based on majority ratings.
At admission for surgery, patients completed questionnaires on demographic characteristics, coexisting conditions, and patient-reported outcome measurements. The local trial coordinators collected this information and registered complications during the hospital stay. The surgeons recorded data on diagnosis and treatment. The coordinating center distributed patient follow-up forms for outcomes, which were returned to local trial coordinators at follow-up visits at 3 months and 2 years and by mail to the coordinating center at 1 year. The data were entered into the MedInsight database by the coordinating center, stored at the Clinical Trial Unit at OUS, and were inaccessible to the research group until February 5, 2020. Details of the data storage and the date on which the data were made available to the research group are provided in Section 5.1 in the Supplementary Appendix . Details regarding imaging assessments are provided in Section 5.3 in the Supplementary Appendix .
The primary outcome was a reduction in the score on the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), version 2.0, of 30% or greater from baseline to 2-year follow-up. This index comprises 10 questions with a total score ranging from 0 (no impairment) to 100 (maximum impairment) and has been used and validated for the assessment of treatment outcomes in patients with lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis. The primary outcome was assessed for noninferiority of decompression alone by 15 percentage points, as described in the Statistical Analysis section. The mean change in the ODI score was a secondary outcome. Other secondary outcomes were the scores on the Zurich Claudication Questionnaire (ZCQ), which assesses symptom severity (range, 1 to 5, with lower scores indicating less severity), functional impairment (range, 1 to 5, with lower scores indicating less impairment), and satisfaction with treatment (range, 1 to 4, with lower scores indicating higher satisfaction); scores on the Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) for leg pain and for back pain (range, 0 to 10, with lower scores indicating less pain), which assessed pain experienced during the past week ; and the score on the 3-level version of the EuroQol Group 5-Dimension (EQ-5D-3L) questionnaire (range, −0.59 to 1.0, with higher scores indicating better quality of life). The questionnaires have been translated and validated for a Norwegian population; further information is provided in Section 5.2 in the Supplementary Appendix .
The duration of surgery and length of hospital stay were recorded in order to indicate the use of resources. The incidences of complications and reoperations and the percentage of patients who responded that their condition was “much worse” or “worse than ever” on the Global Perceived Effect scale (7-point Likert scale) were used to evaluate safety and patient-reported deterioration in their condition.
The null hypothesis was that the percentage of patients who had a reduction of at least 30% in the ODI score (i.e., had a clinically important improvement in functioning) would be at least 15 percentage points lower in the decompression-alone group than in the fusion group. This margin was based on information that decompression alone has some advantages over decompression with instrumented fusion (less complex, less invasive, cheaper, and possibly safer) that would justify an “acceptable” loss of efficacy. The margin of −15 percentage points corresponds to a number needed to benefit with fusion of 7 (number needed to treat, 1÷0.15=6.67) — that is, at least 7 patients would need instrumented fusion for 1 additional patient to have a clinically important improvement in functioning. To reject the null hypothesis and show the noninferiority of decompression alone, the participation of 232 patients was required to be 80% certain (i.e., power of 80%) that the lower limit of a 95% two-sided confidence interval would exclude a difference in the frequency of a clinically important improvement in functioning of more than 15 percentage points. To account for a possible dropout rate of 10%, 128 patients were required in each group.
The main analysis was conducted in the modified intention-to-treat population, which consisted of all the patients who received the trial treatment in accordance with the randomization assignment and had available data after randomization. For the modified intention-to-treat analyses, missing data on the primary and secondary outcomes were imputed with the use of 50 imputations by chained equations. A list of the 29 variables that were used in the imputation model and other details pertaining to the imputations are provided in Section 5.4.1 in the Supplementary Appendix . The per-protocol population consisted of all the patients in the modified intention-to-treat population who did not undergo reoperation during the follow-up period and had available data on the primary outcome. To declare noninferiority of decompression alone, noninferiority was to be shown for the primary outcome in both the modified intention-to-treat population with multiple imputation of missing data and in the per-protocol population. Three sensitivity analyses were performed: one in the modified intention-to-treat population with complete cases (without imputation for missing data); one in which missing values at 2 years were replaced by values at 1 year, when available; and a post hoc intention-to-treat analysis in which the sample was defined by all the patients who underwent randomization, regardless of treatment adherence. Analyses of the percentage of patients with a clinically important improvement from inclusion to 2 years after surgery as assessed by the ZCQ, NRS for leg pain, and NRS for back pain were performed.
The primary outcome and all categorical secondary outcomes were analyzed with the use of Newcombe hybrid score confidence intervals. We analyzed all repeated-measures continuous outcomes (scores on the ODI, ZCQ, NRS for leg pain, NRS for back pain, and EQ-5D-3L) with linear mixed models. The models contained fixed effects for treatment, time, interaction between treatment and time, and trial center. Time was modeled as piecewise linear with a knot at 3 months. A random intercept at the patient level was used. On the basis of the fitted models, we estimated mean values with 95% confidence intervals at baseline (inclusion), 3 months, and 2 years after surgery and the change from baseline to 2 years within each treatment group. We also estimated the between-group difference (with 95% confidence interval) in change from baseline to 2 years.
The mean between-group differences in the duration of surgery and length of hospital stay were analyzed with 95% confidence intervals that were based on the t distribution with adjustment for unequal variance. We assessed the assumption of normally distributed data with visual inspection of histograms and descriptive statistics. No major deviations from normality were observed. There was no method for adjustment of confidence intervals for multiple comparisons of secondary outcomes, and these results are presented as point estimates with unadjusted confidence intervals from which no definite conclusions can be made. The analyses were performed with the use of Stata/SE software, version 15.0 (StataCorp).

Section: Results

From February 12, 2014, to December 18, 2017, a total of 267 patients from 16 surgical departments were enrolled; 134 were assigned to undergo decompression alone and 133 to undergo decompression with instrumented fusion, and 240 patients (89.9%) had available data at the 2-year follow-up. Five patients were not included in the modified intention-to-treat population: 1 withdrew consent before randomization, and 4 were not treated according to the randomization assignment ( Figure 1 ). Of 46 patients who were not included in the per-protocol population, 26 were excluded owing to a reoperation (15 patients in the decompression-alone group and 11 in the fusion group). Table 1 shows the demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients at baseline, which were similar in the two groups. Approximately 75% of the patients in each group had had leg pain for more than a year, and more than 80% in each group had had back pain for more than a year. Table S3 in the Supplementary Appendix shows surgical and imaging data, including the assessment of fusion, which was achieved with certainty in 86 of 100 patients (86.0%) and was uncertain or absent in the remaining 14 patients (14.0%) with available imaging at 2 years. Figure S1 shows the distribution of the observed scores on the continuous repeated outcome measurements. The ODI scores were imputed for 26 patients (15 in the decompression-alone group and 11 in the fusion group) who had missing data; of these patients, 4 had missing data at baseline.
In the modified intention-to-treat population, 95 of 133 patients (71.4%) in the decompression-alone group and 94 of 129 patients (72.9%) in the fusion group had a reduction of at least 30% in the ODI score (difference, −1.4 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], −12.2 to 9.4). In the per-protocol population, 80 of 106 patients (75.5%) and 83 of 110 patients (75.5%), respectively, had a reduction of at least 30% in the ODI score (difference, 0.0 percentage points; 95% CI, −11.4 to 11.4). For both analyses, the lower boundary of the 95% confidence interval for the between-group difference was within the noninferiority margin of −15 percentage points. Results of sensitivity analyses of the primary outcome, including the post hoc intention-to-treat analysis, were generally in the same direction as those of the primary analysis ( Figure 2 ).
Results of the secondary outcomes, with confidence intervals that were not adjusted for multiple comparisons and from which no definite conclusions can be drawn, are shown in Table 2 and Table 3 . The mean change in the ODI score from baseline to 2-year follow-up was −20.6 in the decompression-alone group and −21.3 in the fusion group (mean difference, 0.7; 95% CI, −2.8 to 4.3). Similar small between-group differences in point estimates of mean change were found for scores on the ZCQ, NRS for leg pain, NRS for back pain, and EQ-5D-3L. Results of analyses of the percentage of patients with a clinically important improvement from inclusion to 2 years after surgery as assessed by the ZCQ, NRS for leg pain, and NRS for back pain were generally in the same direction as those of the analysis of the primary outcome.
The mean duration of surgery was 104 minutes in the decompression-alone group and 174 minutes in the fusion group (mean difference, −69 minutes; 95% CI, −83 to −56); the mean length of hospital stay was 3.3 days and 5.0 days, respectively (mean difference, −1.8 days; 95% CI, −2.4 to −1.2); dural tears occurred in 7 of 132 patients (5.3%) and 17 of 128 patients (13.3%) (difference, −8.0 percentage points; 95% CI, −15.5 to −0.9); and 7 of 119 patients (5.9%) and 6 of 120 patients (5.0%) responded that their condition was “much worse” or “worse than ever” on the Global Perceived Effect scale (difference, 0.9 percentage points; 95% CI, −5.4 to 7.2). Table S4 shows additional responses on this scale. During the 2-year follow-up period, reoperation was performed in 15 of 120 patients (12.5%) in the decompression-alone group and in 11 of 121 patients (9.1%) in the fusion group (difference, 3.4 percentage points; 95% CI, −4.6 to 11.5).

Section: Discussion

In this randomized trial involving 267 patients with lumbar spinal stenosis and degenerative spondylolisthesis, surgery with decompression was noninferior to surgery with decompression and instrumented fusion with respect to the percentage of patients who had a reduction of at least 30% in the ODI score at 2 years after surgery within a margin of −15 percentage points. Results for secondary outcomes with respect to pain, disability, symptom severity, functional status, and satisfaction with treatment were generally in the same direction as those for the primary outcome.
Two previous trials, both with a superiority design, have challenged the widespread use of instrumented fusion in the surgical treatment of degenerative spondylolisthesis. Our results were in accordance with the findings of one of these trials, which involved 133 patients with spondylolisthesis at one or two levels but did not include information about dynamic motion. The second trial, which involved 66 patients with single-level spondylolisthesis without dynamic instability, showed less improvement in the physical-component summary score of the Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey and more reoperations in the decompression-alone group than in the fusion group. The entry criteria and design of both trials differed from those of our trial.
Spine surgeons may presume that slippage and dynamic instability at the level of spondylolisthesis are better treated with fusion. In our trial, approximately 20% of the patients had slippage of at least 3 mm, or at least 10 degrees of angulation, as assessed by dynamic standing radiographs. Nevertheless, the incidence of reoperation in our trial was lower than the incidence in an aforementioned trial involving patients with no instability. We hypothesize that these differences in outcomes may be the result of differences in follow-up time and variations in medical practice. The present trial was not powered to compare the incidence of reoperation between the two treatment groups, and we cannot rule out the possibility that decompression alone may require a subsequent fusion. However, patients who are treated with decompression and fusion may also require further secondary surgeries, such as hardware removal or surgery at the adjacent lumbar level. Patients and surgeons may weigh a potentially higher risk of reoperation against the complexity and costs of surgical alternatives.
In the present trial, 38% of instrumented fusions were supported by an interbody cage, as compared with 17%, 6%, and 0% in somewhat similar trials. Owing to a lack of evidence for the superiority of one fusion method over the other and the high frequency of successful fusion as assessed by computed tomography in our trial, we consider the risk of the fusion methods having biased our results to be low.
This trial has limitations. The eligibility criteria limit the generalizability of the results. We did not include patients with degenerative scoliosis, those with radicular pain related to extensive foraminal stenosis, those who had previous surgery at the level of spondylolisthesis, and those with spondylolisthesis at more than one level. For these patients, fusion surgery is considered established practice. Conclusions cannot be drawn from data regarding subgroups, including the approximately 20% of patients who had dynamic instability at the level of spondylolisthesis. Well-powered, high-quality studies are warranted to investigate whether patient characteristics and radiologic variables can predict the appropriate treatment for subgroups of patients. This was an open-label trial, and only the data analyst but not the outcome assessors were unaware of the treatment-group assignments. An evidence-based margin of noninferiority for this research question does not exist, and we chose −15 percentage points empirically. There was possible selection bias in the per-protocol analysis because of the exclusion of patients who had undergone reoperation, which could have favored the decompression-alone group. Because these patients were included in the modified intention-to-treat analysis and the three sensitivity analyses of the primary outcome, we consider the conclusion of noninferiority to be valid.
In this multicenter, single-country, randomized trial involving patients with degenerative single-level lumbar spondylolisthesis, decompression alone was noninferior to decompression with instrumented fusion at 2 years of follow-up. Reoperation occurred somewhat more often in the decompression-alone group.
