Title: Safety and Efficacy of Vadadustat for Anemia in Patients Undergoing Dialysis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Vadadustat is an oral hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor, a class of compounds that stimulate endogenous erythropoietin production.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted two randomized, open-label, noninferiority phase 3 trials to evaluate the safety and efficacy of vadadustat, as compared with darbepoetin alfa, in patients with anemia and incident or prevalent dialysis-dependent chronic kidney disease (DD-CKD). The primary safety end point, assessed in a time-to-event analysis, was the first occurrence of a major adverse cardiovascular event (MACE, a composite of death from any cause, a nonfatal myocardial infarction, or a nonfatal stroke), pooled across the trials (noninferiority margin, 1.25). A key secondary safety end point was the first occurrence of a MACE plus hospitalization for either heart failure or a thromboembolic event. The primary and key secondary efficacy end points were the mean change in hemoglobin from baseline to weeks 24 to 36 and from baseline to weeks 40 to 52, respectively, in each trial (noninferiority margin, −0.75 g per deciliter).

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 3923 patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive vadadustat or darbepoetin alfa: 369 in the incident DD-CKD trial and 3554 in the prevalent DD-CKD trial. In the pooled analysis, a first MACE occurred in 355 patients (18.2%) in the vadadustat group and in 377 patients (19.3%) in the darbepoetin alfa group (hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.83 to 1.11). The mean differences between the groups in the change in hemoglobin concentration were −0.31 g per deciliter (95% CI, −0.53 to −0.10) at weeks 24 to 36 and −0.07 g per deciliter (95% CI, −0.34 to 0.19) at weeks 40 to 52 in the incident DD-CKD trial and −0.17 g per deciliter (95% CI, −0.23 to −0.10) and −0.18 g per deciliter (95% CI, −0.25 to −0.12), respectively, in the prevalent DD-CKD trial. The incidence of serious adverse events in the vadadustat group was 49.7% in the incident DD-CKD trial and 55.0% in the prevalent DD-CKD trial, and the incidences in the darbepoetin alfa group were 56.5% and 58.3%, respectively.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among patients with anemia and CKD who were undergoing dialysis, vadadustat was noninferior to darbepoetin alfa with respect to cardiovascular safety and correction and maintenance of hemoglobin concentrations. (Funded by Akebia Therapeutics and Otsuka Pharmaceutical; INNO 2 VATE ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT02865850 and NCT02892149 .)

Section: Introduction

Anemia, a common complication of chronic kidney disease (CKD), is associated with a reduced health-related quality of life, an increase in red-cell transfusions, and a heightened risk of cardiovascular events. Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) (i.e., recombinant human erythropoietin and its derivatives) are standard care for the management of anemia in patients with CKD. The use of ESAs to target hemoglobin concentrations in the normal or near-normal range in patients with CKD has been shown to increase the risks of stroke, vascular access thrombosis, and death ; such findings have resulted in recommendations for caution in the use of ESAs and for only partial correction of anemia.
Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), a transcription factor that regulates physiological responses to hypoxia, stimulates erythropoietin production by the liver and kidneys. HIF is regulated by oxygen-dependent proteasomal degradation through a family of prolyl hydroxylases that serve as oxygen sensors. HIF prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors comprise a recently developed class of compounds that stabilize HIF, in turn stimulating endogenous erythropoietin production and ultimately erythropoiesis.
Vadadustat, an oral HIF prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor, is an investigational drug that is in development for the treatment of anemia associated with CKD. In phase 2 trials, vadadustat was reported to increase and maintain hemoglobin concentrations in patients with CKD and anemia — both those who were undergoing dialysis and those who were not undergoing dialysis. The vadadustat phase 3 program includes four phase 3 international, randomized, controlled trials: two trials involving patients with non–dialysis-dependent CKD (the PRO 2 TECT trials) and two trials involving patients with dialysis-dependent CKD (DD-CKD) (the INNO 2 VATE trials). Here, we report the results of the two INNO 2 VATE trials, which evaluated the cardiovascular safety and hematologic efficacy of vadadustat as compared with the ESA darbepoetin alfa.

Section: Methods

Details regarding the rationale, design, and methods of the two INNO 2 VATE trials were described previously, and the protocols for the trials are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. Both trials were randomized, open-label, active-controlled, event-driven trials that were designed to evaluate the cardiovascular safety and hematologic efficacy of vadadustat, as compared with darbepoetin alfa, for the treatment of anemia in patients undergoing hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. In both trials, personnel at Akebia Therapeutics and Otsuka Pharmaceutical were unaware of the treatment assignments. In the incident DD-CKD trial (correction–conversion trial; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02865850 ), which involved the correction and maintenance of hemoglobin concentrations, patients were to have initiated dialysis within 16 weeks before screening and were to have had limited exposure to ESAs. In the prevalent DD-CKD trial (conversion trial; NCT02892149 ), which involved the maintenance of hemoglobin concentrations, patients were to have been undergoing maintenance dialysis for at least 12 weeks before screening and were to have been receiving treatment with an ESA.
Akebia Therapeutics designed the trials and protocols with input from an executive steering committee, and Otsuka Pharmaceutical participated in the executive steering committee meetings and provided input on trial protocol amendments. An independent ethics committee approved the informed consent forms. The trial investigators conducted the trials in collaboration with Akebia Therapeutics. The executive steering committee supervised the conduct and progress of the trials. The trials were monitored by an independent data and safety monitoring committee (lists of the members of these committees are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org). The first and last authors wrote the first draft of the manuscript and made final decisions regarding the content of the submitted manuscript. All the authors had access to the trial data, critically reviewed earlier drafts of the manuscript, and approved the manuscript for submission. The investigators vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data; the authors and Akebia Therapeutics vouch for the fidelity of the trials to the respective protocols and for the analysis of the data.
In both trials, eligible patients were at least 18 years of age, had CKD and were undergoing dialysis, had a serum ferritin concentration of at least 100 ng per milliliter and a transferrin saturation of at least 20%, and had not received a red-cell transfusion within the previous 8 weeks. In addition, patients had a hemoglobin concentration between 8 and 11 g per deciliter (incident DD-CKD trial) or a hemoglobin concentration between 8 and 11 g per deciliter (patients in the United States) or between 9 and 12 g per deciliter (patients in other countries) (prevalent DD-CKD trial). Patients were excluded if they had anemia that was considered to be due to causes other than CKD or if they had uncontrolled hypertension or had had a recent cardiovascular event. All the patients provided written informed consent.
Eligible patients were randomly assigned, in a 1:1 ratio, to receive vadadustat or darbepoetin alfa. Randomization was stratified according to geographic region (United States vs. Europe vs. other regions), New York Heart Association (NYHA) heart failure classification (class 0 or I vs. class II or III), and hemoglobin concentration at trial entry (incident DD-CKD trial, <9.5 vs. ≥9.5 g per deciliter; prevalent DD-CKD trial, <10 vs. ≥10 g per deciliter). Both trials had four defined trial periods: a correction or conversion period (weeks 0 to 23); a maintenance period (weeks 24 to 52), comprising the primary (weeks 24 to 36) and secondary (weeks 40 to 52) efficacy evaluation periods; a long-term treatment period (weeks 53 to the end of treatment); and a 4-week safety follow-up period.
The primary safety end point, assessed in a time-to-event analysis, was the first occurrence of an adjudicated major adverse cardiovascular event (MACE) — a composite end point of death from any cause, a nonfatal myocardial infarction, or a nonfatal stroke — pooled across the two trials. Key secondary safety end points, which were also pooled across the trials, were the first occurrence of “expanded MACE” (a MACE plus hospitalization for either heart failure or a thromboembolic event, excluding vascular access failure); death from cardiovascular causes, a nonfatal stroke, or a nonfatal myocardial infarction combined; death from cardiovascular causes; and death from any cause. Adjudication of MACE was performed by an independent clinical end-point committee whose members were unaware of the treatment assignments (a list of the committee members is provided in the Supplementary Appendix ). The primary efficacy end point was the mean change in the hemoglobin concentration from baseline to the average concentration during the primary evaluation period, and the key secondary efficacy end point was the mean change in the hemoglobin concentration from baseline to the average concentration during the secondary evaluation period.
The starting dose of vadadustat was 300 mg orally once daily, with doses of 150, 450, and 600 mg available for adjustment of the dose to a maximum of 600 mg daily. Darbepoetin alfa was administered subcutaneously or intravenously; the initial dose was based on the previous dose or, in the case of patients who had not received darbepoetin alfa before randomization, on information in the product label. Doses of the trial medications were adjusted according to protocol-specified dose-adjustment algorithms to achieve target hemoglobin concentrations (in the United States, 10 to 11 g per deciliter; in other countries, 10 to 12 g per deciliter). We encouraged the use of iron supplementation (intravenous, oral, or intradialytic administration) to maintain a serum ferritin concentration of at least 100 ng per milliliter or a transferrin saturation of at least 20%. The provision of red-cell transfusions did not necessitate discontinuation of the trial medication. Starting at week 6, patients in both treatment groups could receive ESAs as rescue therapy if they had worsening symptoms of anemia and a hemoglobin concentration of less than 9.5 g per deciliter. In addition, in the darbepoetin alfa group, an ESA was defined post hoc as a rescue medication if the dose was at least double that of the previous dose of darbepoetin alfa. Patients temporarily discontinued the trial medication while receiving ESAs as rescue therapy.
The prespecified noninferiority margins, which were selected in consultation with regulatory agencies, were an upper bound of the 95% confidence interval of 1.25 for the primary safety end point and a lower bound of −0.75 g per deciliter for the primary efficacy end point. To evaluate the primary and key secondary efficacy end points, an analysis of covariance with multiple imputation for missing data was used, with baseline hemoglobin concentration, geographic region, and NYHA class as covariates. The analysis of the time to a first occurrence of a MACE was performed with the use of a Cox regression model stratified according to trial. The model included the following covariates: baseline hemoglobin concentration, geographic region (United States vs. Europe vs. other regions), NYHA class (0 or I vs. II or III), sex, age (≤65 years vs. >65 years), race (White vs. non-White), cardiovascular disease (yes vs. no), and diabetes mellitus (yes vs. no). Subgroup analyses were performed with the use of the same Cox model as that used in the primary analysis.

Section: Results

Across the two trials, 3923 patients underwent randomization: 369 in the incident DD-CKD trial and 3554 in the prevalent DD-CKD trial (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). The median duration of follow-up was 1.2 years (interquartile range [25th to 75th percentile], 0.8 to 1.7) in the incident DD-CKD trial and 1.7 years (interquartile range, 1.2 to 2.2) in the prevalent DD-CKD trial.
The baseline characteristics at randomization have been described previously. The demographic, clinical, and laboratory characteristics of the two treatment groups were generally well balanced in both trials ( Table 1 and Table S1), except that in the incident DD-CKD trial, the percentage of patients with diabetes mellitus was higher among the patients randomly assigned to receive vadadustat than among those randomly assigned to receive darbepoetin alfa (58.0% vs. 51.1%).
Analyses of the safety end points were based on the pooled safety population, which included 1947 patients in the vadadustat group and 1955 patients in the darbepoetin alfa group. Figure 1A shows the cumulative probability of a first MACE. A first MACE occurred in 355 of the 1947 patients (18.2%) in the vadadustat group and in 377 of the 1955 patients (19.3%) in the darbepoetin alfa group (hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.83 to 1.11). The numbers and percentages of patients in whom the first MACE was death from any cause, a nonfatal myocardial infarction, or a nonfatal stroke were 253 (13.0%), 76 (3.9%), and 26 (1.3%), respectively, in the vadadustat group and 253 (12.9%), 87 (4.5%), and 37 (1.9%), respectively, in the darbepoetin alfa group (Table S2). The results within each trial were qualitatively consistent with the pooled analysis, but the confidence interval in the incident DD-CKD trial, which was a much smaller trial than the prevalent DD-CKD trial, was wide (incident DD-CKD trial: hazard ratio of a first MACE, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.54 to 1.76; prevalent DD-CKD trial: hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.83 to 1.12) (Table S3).
Figure 1B shows the cumulative probability of a first expanded MACE, which occurred in 420 of the 1947 patients (21.6%) in the vadadustat group and in 449 of the 1955 patients (23.0%) in the darbepoetin alfa group (hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.84 to 1.10). Figures 1C and 1D show the pooled cumulative probability of death from cardiovascular causes (hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.77 to 1.20) and the cumulative probability of death from any cause (hazard ratio, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.81 to 1.12), respectively. Figure S2 shows the cumulative probability of a composite of death from cardiovascular causes, a nonfatal myocardial infarction, or a nonfatal stroke (hazard ratio, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.80 to 1.14). Table S2 shows similar incidences of MACE, expanded MACE, and their components in the two treatment groups across both trials. The results of prespecified subgroup analyses of a first occurrence of a MACE and a first occurrence of an expanded MACE were consistent across subgroups, as shown in Figure 2 and Figure S3, respectively.
The median doses of vadadustat and darbepoetin alfa over the course of the trial are shown in Figure S5. Figure 3A shows the mean changes in hemoglobin concentrations in the two treatment groups over time. The least-squares mean (±SE) change in hemoglobin concentration from baseline to the average of the values during weeks 24 to 36 was 1.26±0.11 g per deciliter in the vadadustat group and 1.58±0.11 g per deciliter in the darbepoetin alfa group. The corresponding changes from baseline to the average of the values during weeks 40 to 52 were 1.42±0.13 g per deciliter and 1.50±0.14 g per deciliter, respectively. The mean (±SE) differences between the groups in the change in hemoglobin concentration were −0.31±0.11 g per deciliter (95% CI, −0.53 to −0.10) at weeks 24 to 36 and −0.07±0.13 g per deciliter (95% CI, −0.34 to 0.19) at weeks 40 to 52.
The percentages of patients who had an average hemoglobin concentration within their country-specific target range during weeks 24 to 36 were 43.6% in the vadadustat group and 56.9% in the darbepoetin alfa group. During weeks 40 to 52, the percentages were 39.8% and 41.0%, respectively (Table S5).
The percentages of patients who received red-cell transfusions during weeks 24 to 36 were 1.3% in the vadadustat group and 1.8% in the darbepoetin alfa group. During weeks 40 to 52, the percentages were 2.4% and 0.7%, respectively.
The median doses of vadadustat and darbepoetin alfa over the course of the trial are shown in Figure S5. Figure 3B shows the mean changes in hemoglobin concentrations in the two treatment groups over time. The least-squares mean (±SE) change in hemoglobin concentration from baseline to the average of the values during weeks 24 to 36 was 0.19±0.03 g per deciliter in the vadadustat group and 0.36±0.03 g per deciliter in the darbepoetin alfa group. The corresponding changes from baseline to the average of the values during weeks 40 to 52 were 0.23±0.04 g per deciliter and 0.41±0.03 g per deciliter, respectively. The mean (±SE) differences between the groups in the change in hemoglobin concentration were −0.17±0.03 g per deciliter (95% CI, −0.23 to −0.10) at weeks 24 to 36 and −0.18±0.04 g per deciliter (95% CI, −0.25 to −0.12) at weeks 40 to 52. In addition, Table S4 shows the differences between the two groups in the change in hemoglobin concentration according to the length of time that patients had been undergoing dialysis.
The percentages of patients whose average hemoglobin concentration was within their country-specific target range during weeks 24 to 36 were 49.2% in the vadadustat group and 53.2% in the darbepoetin alfa group. During weeks 40 to 52, the percentages were 44.3% and 50.9%, respectively (Table S5).
The percentages of patients who received red-cell transfusions during weeks 24 to 36 were 2.0% in the vadadustat group and 1.3% in the darbepoetin alfa group. During weeks 40 to 52, the percentages were 2.0% and 1.9%, respectively.
The mean systolic and diastolic blood pressures over time in each trial are shown in Figure S4. The values in the vadadustat and darbepoetin alfa groups were similar over the course of the trials.
In both trials, the mean serum concentrations of hepcidin and ferritin and the mean transferrin saturation were similar in the vadadustat and darbepoetin alfa groups during weeks 24 to 36 and weeks 40 to 52 (Table S6).
In the incident DD-CKD trial, 35 patients (20.4%) in the vadadustat group and 29 patients (16.0%) in the darbepoetin alfa group received an ESA as rescue medication during weeks 0 to 23. In the prevalent DD-CKD trial, 466 patients (27.6%) in the vadadustat group and 525 patients (30.2%) in the darbepoetin alfa group received such therapy during weeks 0 to 23 (Table S7).
In the incident DD-CKD trial, 83.8% of the patients in the vadadustat group and 85.5% of the patients in the darbepoetin alfa group had at least one adverse event after the start of treatment ( Table 2 ). The incidence of serious adverse events was 49.7% in the vadadustat group and 56.5% in the darbepoetin alfa group.
In the prevalent DD-CKD trial, 88.3% of the patients in the vadadustat group and 89.3% of the patients in the darbepoetin alfa group had at least one adverse event after the start of treatment ( Table 2 ). The incidence of serious adverse events was 55.0% and 58.3%, respectively.

Section: Discussion

These two international phase 3 clinical trials (the INNO 2 VATE trials) evaluated the safety and efficacy of once-daily oral vadadustat, as compared with parenteral darbepoetin alfa, for the maintenance treatment of anemia associated with DD-CKD. The trials met the prespecified noninferiority margins for cardiovascular safety, pooled across the two trials, and hematologic efficacy, assessed separately for each trial. The safety profile of vadadustat was similar to that of darbepoetin alfa with respect to three combined cardiovascular end points and the constituents of these end points, as well as investigator-reported adverse events. In these trials involving patients who either were new to dialysis or had been undergoing maintenance dialysis, vadadustat was also noninferior to darbepoetin alfa in maintaining hemoglobin concentrations in a target range during the primary (weeks 24 to 36) and secondary (weeks 40 to 52) evaluation periods. These findings were consistent across all the prespecified subgroups.
In this issue of the Journal , Chertow et al. report the pooled results of two trials (the PRO 2 TECT trials) in which vadadustat was compared with darbepoetin alfa in patients with non–dialysis-dependent CKD. In those trials, vadadustat, as compared with darbepoetin alfa, met the prespecified noninferiority criterion for hematologic efficacy but not the prespecified noninferiority criterion for cardiovascular safety.
Darbepoetin alfa is an injectable recombinant erythropoietin molecule that was developed for sustained activation of the erythropoietin receptor, whereas vadadustat is an orally active, small-molecule HIF prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor that is being developed to stabilize HIF and thereby mimic a state of cellular hypoxia. The success of ESAs in the treatment of anemia associated with CKD has provided strong evidence that inadequate production of endogenous erythropoietin is a major cause of anemia associated with CKD. Although the mechanisms repressing endogenous erythropoietin production in CKD are not fully understood, the current trials show that derepression by stabilization of HIF is effective for sustained management of anemia in patients with CKD who are undergoing dialysis. These findings extend the results of previous phase 2 trials of vadadustat and other HIF prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors. The effects of vadadustat on hemoglobin concentrations seen in the current trials are consistent with the recently published findings of a phase 3 trial of the HIF prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor roxadustat involving 305 patients in China with CKD who were undergoing dialysis.
In the prevalent DD-CKD trial, we observed an initial transient decline in hemoglobin concentrations as well as a less rapid increase in hemoglobin concentrations among patients randomly assigned to receive vadadustat than among those randomly assigned to receive darbepoetin alfa. We interpret these findings as a consequence of the design of the trial. All the patients randomly assigned to vadadustat received the same initial dose of vadadustat (i.e., 300 mg per day). In contrast, those randomly assigned to darbepoetin alfa either continued treatment with darbepoetin alfa at a dose that had previously been adjusted to individual needs or switched from another ESA with the use of accepted conversion factors for their previously established dose of the other ESA. The virtual overlay of hemoglobin-concentration curves beyond 24 weeks showed not only the efficacy of vadadustat but also the ability to achieve a target hemoglobin range without overshooting the target during dose adjustment of vadadustat. The mean maintenance doses for vadadustat during the primary and secondary efficacy evaluation periods suggest that dose requirements in many patients are above the starting dose used in these trials.
Strengths of our two trials include the large sample size and diverse patient population (with respect to age, sex, race or ethnic group, and geographic region), broad inclusion criteria, and differences in underlying causes of CKD. We included patients who were new to dialysis and patients who had been undergoing maintenance dialysis, as well as patients who were undergoing peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis, so that we could assess safety and efficacy across a broad range of patients and dialysis experience. Our protocols followed regional clinical practice guidelines for target hemoglobin ranges. Only a few patients were lost to follow-up, and we adjudicated all MACE safety end points.
The trials have several limitations. First, investigators were aware of the treatment assignments, which precluded a meaningful evaluation of patient-reported physical function and fatigue. The inability to mask the treatment assignments probably led to a proclivity to administer rescue therapy with an ESA in the vadadustat groups. Second, we did not measure residual kidney function; however, results were uniform among patients with incident and prevalent DD-CKD and among those with prevalent DD-CKD who had undergone dialysis for varying lengths of time. Third, we used darbepoetin alfa as the control in both trials and cannot conclude noninferiority to other ESAs. Finally, although the sample size was large and the median follow-up was more than 1.5 years, many patients with DD-CKD receive treatment for anemia for many years, and some for decades; real-world data from longer-term clinical practice will be informative.
In these two trials, we found that vadadustat was noninferior to darbepoetin alfa with respect to cardiovascular safety and correction and maintenance of hemoglobin concentrations in patients with CKD who were undergoing dialysis.
