Title: Daprodustat for the Treatment of Anemia in Patients Undergoing Dialysis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Among patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD), the use of recombinant human erythropoietin and its derivatives for the treatment of anemia has been linked to a possibly increased risk of stroke, myocardial infarction, and other adverse events. Several trials have suggested that hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors (PHIs) are as effective as erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) in increasing hemoglobin levels.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this randomized, open-label, phase 3 trial, we assigned patients with CKD who were undergoing dialysis and who had a hemoglobin level of 8.0 to 11.5 g per deciliter to receive an oral HIF-PHI (daprodustat) or an injectable ESA (epoetin alfa if they were receiving hemodialysis or darbepoetin alfa if they were receiving peritoneal dialysis). The two primary outcomes were the mean change in the hemoglobin level from baseline to weeks 28 through 52 (noninferiority margin, −0.75 g per deciliter) and the first occurrence of a major adverse cardiovascular event (a composite of death from any cause, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke), with a noninferiority margin of 1.25.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 2964 patients underwent randomization. The mean (±SD) baseline hemoglobin level was 10.4±1.0 g per deciliter overall. The mean (±SE) change in the hemoglobin level from baseline to weeks 28 through 52 was 0.28±0.02 g per deciliter in the daprodustat group and 0.10±0.02 g per deciliter in the ESA group (difference, 0.18 g per deciliter; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.12 to 0.24), which met the prespecified noninferiority margin of −0.75 g per deciliter. During a median follow-up of 2.5 years, a major adverse cardiovascular event occurred in 374 of 1487 patients (25.2%) in the daprodustat group and in 394 of 1477 (26.7%) in the ESA group (hazard ratio, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.81 to 1.07), which also met the prespecified noninferiority margin for daprodustat. The percentages of patients with other adverse events were similar in the two groups.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among patients with CKD undergoing dialysis, daprodustat was noninferior to ESAs regarding the change in the hemoglobin level from baseline and cardiovascular outcomes. (Funded by GlaxoSmithKline; ASCEND-D ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02879305 .)

Section: Introduction

Most patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) who are receiving dialysis treatment have anemia, which is associated with a reduced quality of life, more frequent blood transfusions, and an elevated risk of cardiovascular events. Previous clinical trials have raised safety concerns about the use of conventional erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) to treat anemia. Recombinant human erythropoietin and its derivatives have been linked to a possibly increased risk of stroke, myocardial infarction, vascular access thrombosis, tumor progression, or death when treatment is targeting a normal hemoglobin level (i.e., 13.0 to 14.0 g per deciliter). As a result, cautious use of ESAs and partial correction of anemia are recommended.
Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors (PHIs) are investigational agents that may offer an alternative oral treatment option for anemia associated with CKD. By stabilizing HIF, these compounds increase the secretion of endogenous erythropoietin and the production of red cells. Several trials have suggested that HIF-PHIs are as effective as ESAs in increasing hemoglobin levels, and safety data on these new agents are emerging. Here, we report the results of a phase 3 randomized trial, ASCEND-D (Anemia Studies in Chronic Kidney Disease: Erythropoiesis Via a Novel Prolyl Hydroxylase Inhibitor Daprodustat–Dialysis), involving patients who were undergoing maintenance dialysis, including those with ESA hyporesponsiveness. In this trial, we examined the hematologic efficacy, cardiovascular safety, and iron kinetics of the oral HIF-PHI daprodustat as compared with conventional therapy with ESAs.

Section: Methods

The sponsor, GlaxoSmithKline, and an academic steering committee designed and oversaw the trial conduct and analysis. The members of the academic steering committee are listed in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. The trial was conducted and reported in accordance with the protocol (which includes the statistical analysis plan), available at NEJM.org. The trial was approved by the ethics committee at each center. The safety of trial patients was overseen by an independent data monitoring committee. Analyses that were conducted by the sponsor were independently replicated by an academic group at the Robertson Centre for Biostatistics at the University of Glasgow.
The first draft of the manuscript was prepared by the first and last authors, who had unrestricted access to the data, and was reviewed and edited by all the authors. All the authors made the decision to submit the manuscript for publication and vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol.
Adults with CKD who had been undergoing dialysis for at least 90 days, had received an ESA for at least 6 weeks, and who had a hemoglobin level between 8.0 and 12.0 g per deciliter were eligible for screening. Patients were required to have a serum ferritin level of more than 100 ng per milliliter and a transferrin saturation above 20%. Patients who had anemia that was unrelated to CKD, a recent cardiovascular event, or current or recent cancer were excluded. A complete list of inclusion and exclusion criteria is provided in Table S2. All the patients provided written informed consent.
The trial consisted of four periods: screening, placebo run-in, treatment, and follow-up (Fig. S1). The patients were evaluated at least every 4 weeks during the first year of the trial and at least every 12 weeks thereafter.
Consenting patients who met all the inclusion and exclusion criteria during the screening period entered a 4-week placebo run-in period. Previous ESA therapy was continued during the screening and run-in periods. Patients were eligible for randomization if they met the criteria for adherence to the placebo run-in period and had a hemoglobin level of 8.0 to 11.5 g per deciliter. Patients underwent randomization with the use of balanced blocks in a 1:1 ratio to receive either oral daprodustat or an injectable ESA (intravenous epoetin alfa among those receiving hemodialysis and subcutaneous darbepoetin alfa among those receiving peritoneal dialysis). Investigators used an interactive voice- or Web-response system to determine treatment assignments. Randomization was stratified according to the type of dialysis, geographic region, and participation in an ambulatory substudy monitoring blood pressure. Investigators and patients were aware of the assigned treatments, but the sponsor and members of the steering committee remained unaware of the aggregate treatment assignments throughout the trial.
We used a trial-specific algorithm for both treatment groups to achieve and maintain a hemoglobin level in the target range of 10.0 to 11.0 g per deciliter (Table S3). The starting dose of daprodustat was between 4 and 12 mg daily, according to the patient’s previous ESA dose, and stepped changes in the dose from 1 to 24 mg were available for dose adjustments (Table S4). The starting dose of the ESA was also based on the previous ESA dose and hemoglobin level at the time of randomization. Dose steps were predefined, and most steps represented a change in dose of 25 to 33%. A rescue algorithm, which included a provision for intravenous iron or red-cell transfusion (Table S5) and a protocol for iron management (Table S6), was also provided.
The trial had two primary noninferiority outcomes: the mean change in the hemoglobin level from baseline to the average during the primary evaluation period (weeks 28 through 52) and the first occurrence of an adjudicated major adverse cardiovascular event (MACE), a composite of death from any cause, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke. These and other cardiovascular events were adjudicated by an independent committee led by the Duke Clinical Research Institute in collaboration with contract research organization George Clinical, whose members were unaware of treatment assignments. (Details regarding the adjudication charter are provided in Section S1 of the Supplementary Appendix .)
The principal secondary outcomes, each tested for superiority, were the average monthly dose of intravenous iron administered from baseline through week 52, the first occurrence of a MACE (as described above but tested for superiority rather than noninferiority), the first occurrence of a MACE or a thromboembolic event, and the first occurrence of a MACE or hospitalization for heart failure.
The trial was originally designed to enroll approximately 3000 patients, with follow-up until 945 adjudicated first MACEs had occurred with a noninferiority margin of 1.20. To accelerate trial closeout because of the coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) pandemic, the noninferiority margin was changed to 1.25 in a protocol amendment issued on July 30, 2020, before the unblinding of the trial data. This noninferiority margin was aligned with the margin used in other HIF-PHI clinical trials, and although the target number of events was reduced to 664, approximately 90% power was maintained. The revised trial size provided more than 99% power for the comparison of the effect of daprodustat and an ESA on the change in the hemoglobin level from baseline, with a noninferiority margin of −0.75 g per deciliter.
The two primary outcomes were tested in parallel in the intention-to-treat population (including all the patients who had undergone randomization) for noninferiority at a one-sided alpha level of 0.025. We used a Cox proportional-hazards model to analyze the MACE composite after adjustment for treatment group, dialysis type, and geographic region. Additional prespecified supplementary MACE analyses were conducted and included an on-treatment analysis that was restricted to events that had occurred between the initiation of a trial drug and 28 days after the last dose or the date of trial completion or withdrawal, whichever occurred first. For the primary hemoglobin outcome, the mean change from baseline to the evaluation period was assessed with the use of an analysis-of-covariance model after adjustment for the baseline hemoglobin level and the variables used in the MACE model. Missing hemoglobin values were imputed with the use of multiple imputation on the assumption that data were missing at random.
Principal secondary superiority analyses would proceed only if noninferiority was established for the two primary outcomes. We used an approach that was similar to that for the primary analysis to evaluate the secondary cardiovascular outcomes and the outcome for intravenous-iron therapy (until the first transfusion or week 52). The Holm–Bonferroni method was used to adjust for multiplicity. Subgroup analyses were performed with the use of analogous statistical models, with the addition of the subgroup term and treatment-by-subgroup interaction terms. All analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.4, or R software, version 3.6.2 or later.

Section: Results

From November 23, 2016, through August 10, 2018, a total of 2964 patients underwent randomization at 431 centers in 35 countries (Fig. S2). The characteristics of the patients — including history of cardiovascular disease, previous ESA dose, and use of intravenous iron — were well balanced between the trial groups at baseline ( Table 1 ). Overall, 88.5% of the patients were undergoing hemodialysis, and 12.2% were considered to have ESA hyporesponsiveness on the basis of the ESA-resistance index or receipt of an epoetin dose of at least 450 U per kilogram of body weight per week. The mean (±SD) baseline hemoglobin level was 10.4±1.0 g per deciliter across the two groups. In general, the patients were representative of the population with CKD undergoing dialysis (Table S7). Specifically, in the United States, a post hoc analysis showed that 39.0% of the trial patients were Black.
The trial drug was stopped prematurely for reasons other than death in 671 of 1487 patients (45.1%) in the daprodustat group and in 662 of 1477 patients (44.8%) in the ESA group (Figs. S2 and S3). At the end of the trial, vital status was unknown for 35 patients in the daprodustat group and 26 in the ESA group. The median duration of follow-up for evaluation of cardiovascular events was 2.5 years (interquartile range, 2.2 to 2.9), which provided 7028 total person-years of follow-up.
The mean (±SE) change in the hemoglobin level from baseline to weeks 28 through 52 was 0.28±0.02 g per deciliter with daprodustat and 0.10±0.02 g per deciliter with ESA therapy, for a difference of 0.18 g per deciliter (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.12 to 0.24), which met the prespecified noninferiority margin for daprodustat ( Table 2 and Figure 1 ). Supplementary analyses provided findings that were consistent with the primary analysis (Fig. S4). The effect of daprodustat as compared with ESA therapy was generally consistent across the prespecified subgroups (Fig. S5).
A rapid increase in the hemoglobin level, which was defined as an increase of more than 2 g per deciliter during a 4-week period, was observed in 50 of 1218 patients (4.1%) in the daprodustat group and in 20 of 1247 patients (1.6%) in the ESA group during the first 4 weeks. Thereafter, for any 4-week period during the first year, the percentage of patients with a rapid increase in the hemoglobin level was 2% or less in the two treatment groups. Median doses are presented in Figure S6; 95% of the patients were adherent to the trial regimen.
A first MACE occurred in 374 of 1487 patients (25.2%) in the daprodustat group and in 394 of 1477 patients (26.7%) in the ESA group (hazard ratio, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.81 to 1.07), results that met the prespecified noninferiority margin of 1.25 ( Table 2 and Figure 2 ). The effect of treatment was generally consistent across prespecified subgroups (Fig. S7). These results were consistent with other supplementary intention-to-treat and on-treatment analyses (Fig. S8). Additional time-to-event analyses, including the components of the MACE composite, are shown in Table S8.
The results of superiority testing for daprodustat as compared with ESA were not significant regarding the three cardiovascular principal secondary outcomes: the first occurrence of MACE (hazard ratio, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.81 to 1.07), the first occurrence of MACE or a thromboembolic event (hazard ratio, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.78 to 1.00), and the first occurrence of MACE or hospitalization for heart failure (hazard ratio, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.85 to 1.11) ( Table 2 and Figure 2 ). The incidence of death from any cause was similar in the two groups (hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.82 to 1.13) (Table S8).
The superiority test for the mean monthly dose of intravenous iron from baseline through week 52, a principal secondary outcome, was also not significant. The mean (±SE) monthly dose from day 1 to week 52 decreased to 90.8±3.3 mg in the daprodustat group and to 99.9±3.3 mg in the ESA group, for a mean difference of −9.1 mg (95% CI, −18.4 to 0.2 mg). Subgroup analyses for intravenous iron outcomes are shown in Figure S9.
Variables in iron metabolism are shown in Table 1 and Table 2 and Figure S10. In the daprodustat group, the level of hepcidin decreased and the total iron-binding capacity increased from baseline and relative to the ESA group, whereas the ferritin level decreased in both groups. Transferrin saturation levels were similar in the two groups and were slightly lower than baseline levels. Total iron levels increased slightly with daprodustat but not with ESA.
The criteria for rescue therapy (i.e., a hemoglobin level of <9 g per deciliter or transfusion of more than 2 units of packed red cells) were met by 53 patients (3.6%) in each treatment group, which resulted in permanent discontinuation of the randomized treatment. The percentage of patients who received at least one red-cell or whole-blood transfusion from day 1 through the day after discontinuation of the trial-specific dosing algorithm was 15.7% in the daprodustat group and 18.3% in the ESA group (hazard ratio, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.72 to 1.02) (Fig. S11).
Eight patients (5 in the daprodustat group and 3 in the ESA group) were excluded from the safety analyses because they did not receive the randomized treatment (Fig. S2). Serious adverse events during the trial were reported in 773 patients (52.2%) in the daprodustat group and in 748 (50.7%) in the ESA group ( Table 3 ). The most common adverse events and serious adverse events are listed in Tables S9 and S10, respectively. There was no notable excess of any event in the daprodustat group. The incidences of prespecified adverse events of special interest — including esophageal or gastric erosions and cancers — were similar in the two treatment groups. Daprodustat had an effect on blood pressure and the use of antihypertensive medications that was similar to that with ESA therapy (Table S11).

Section: Discussion

In this international, randomized, phase 3 clinical trial, daprodustat was effective as a treatment for anemia in patients with CKD who were undergoing maintenance hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. Daprodustat was noninferior to ESA therapy with respect to both the change in the hemoglobin level from baseline and cardiovascular safety. These findings were consistent across predefined subgroups, as well as for the expanded definitions of MACE to include thromboembolic events and hospitalization. The safety profile of daprodustat appeared to be similar to that of ESA therapy, and no unexpected safety concerns were identified.
Our findings extend the results of previous phase 2 trials of daprodustat. The effects of daprodustat on hemoglobin levels among patients receiving dialysis that we observed are also consistent with the recently published findings of a phase 3 trial of the HIF-PHI vadadustat (INNO 2 VATE) and a smaller trial of roxadustat involving patients who were undergoing dialysis in China, along with pooled roxadustat data for patients undergoing dialysis.
Neither the INNO 2 VATE trial nor the Chinese roxadustat trial included an evaluation of the rate of increase in the hemoglobin level from baseline. In our trial, we evaluated a rapid rise in the hemoglobin level, as measured by an increase of more than 2 g per deciliter during a 4-week period. Such increases occurred infrequently and did not differ between treatment groups.
The increase in the hemoglobin level with daprodustat is most plausibly explained by our dosing protocol, which included fewer dose steps for daprodustat than for ESAs. Although we observed benefits in several variables of iron metabolism, including a reduction in serum hepcidin in patients in the daprodustat group, the observed reduction in intravenous iron was similar to that with ESA. Thus, further studies are warranted to explore the effects of daprodustat on iron kinetics and utilization. The effect of HIF-PHI agents on hepcidin has been noted previously and confirmed observations from the 24-week daprodustat phase 2 trials and for other HIF-PHI agents.
We also examined the hemoglobin response in patients with ESA hyporesponsiveness, which remains a concern in managing anemia among patients who are receiving dialysis. In our trial, approximately 12% of the patients were observed to have ESA hyporesponsiveness at baseline. The mean hemoglobin level remained between 10.0 to 11.5 g per deciliter in patients treated with daprodustat, regardless of whether they were hyporesponsive or had a heightened level of inflammation as measured by an elevated level of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein. Patients with ESA hyporesponsiveness who were treated with daprodustat received less intravenous iron than those who were treated with an ESA.
There were no apparent between-group differences in adverse events during the trial, including serious adverse events. In particular, we did not observe a higher incidence of hypertension among the patients in the daprodustat group, in contrast to the incidence associated with roxadustat in the Chinese trial. Although an increased incidence of hyperkalemia has previously been observed with some HIF-PHIs, we did not observe such an increase with daprodustat in our trial. We also found similar incidences of esophageal or gastric erosions and cancers in the two groups.
Our trial has several limitations. First, the open-label design among patients and investigators may have biased reporting of adverse events. Second, since HIF activates the transcription of many cytokines, some of which have oncogenic or other potential long-term adverse effects, the observation time for this trial (although extended) may still be insufficient to characterize the full risks. Finally, we used epoetin alfa as the comparator for patients undergoing hemodialysis in this trial, which may limit the generalizability of our conclusions about the noninferiority of daprodustat to other ESAs.
In this trial, we found that daprodustat was noninferior to conventional ESAs in the treatment of anemia among patients with CKD who were undergoing dialysis and in the incidence of cardiovascular outcomes.
