Title: Secondary Antibiotic Prophylaxis for Latent Rheumatic Heart Disease


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Rheumatic heart disease affects more than 40.5 million people worldwide and results in 306,000 deaths annually. Echocardiographic screening detects rheumatic heart disease at an early, latent stage. Whether secondary antibiotic prophylaxis is effective in preventing progression of latent rheumatic heart disease is unknown.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a randomized, controlled trial of secondary antibiotic prophylaxis in Ugandan children and adolescents 5 to 17 years of age with latent rheumatic heart disease. Participants were randomly assigned to receive either injections of penicillin G benzathine (also known as benzathine benzylpenicillin) every 4 weeks for 2 years or no prophylaxis. All the participants underwent echocardiography at baseline and at 2 years after randomization. Changes from baseline were adjudicated by a panel whose members were unaware of the trial-group assignments. The primary outcome was echocardiographic progression of latent rheumatic heart disease at 2 years.

Abstract_Section: Results

Among 102,200 children and adolescents who had screening echocardiograms, 3327 were initially assessed as having latent rheumatic heart disease, and 926 of the 3327 subsequently received a definitive diagnosis on the basis of confirmatory echocardiography and were determined to be eligible for the trial. Consent or assent for participation was provided for 916 persons, and all underwent randomization; 818 participants were included in the modified intention-to-treat analysis, and 799 (97.7%) completed the trial. A total of 3 participants (0.8%) in the prophylaxis group had echocardiographic progression at 2 years, as compared with 33 (8.2%) in the control group (risk difference, −7.5 percentage points; 95% confidence interval, −10.2 to −4.7; P<0.001). Two participants in the prophylaxis group had serious adverse events that were attributable to receipt of prophylaxis, including one episode of a mild anaphylactic reaction (representing <0.1% of all administered doses of prophylaxis).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among children and adolescents 5 to 17 years of age with latent rheumatic heart disease, secondary antibiotic prophylaxis reduced the risk of disease progression at 2 years. Further research is needed before the implementation of population-level screening can be recommended. (Funded by the Thrasher Research Fund and others; GOAL ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03346525 .)

Section: Introduction

Rheumatic heart disease is a chronic valvular heart disease caused by rheumatic fever, which develops after untreated Streptococcus pyogenes infection. More than 40.5 million people worldwide are estimated to be living with rheumatic heart disease, and approximately 306,000 deaths from rheumatic heart disease occur annually.
Secondary antibiotic prophylaxis is the cornerstone of management of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease. Intramuscular penicillin G benzathine (also known as benzathine benzylpenicillin) has been found to be more effective than oral antibiotic agents in preventing streptococcal pharyngitis, and its use is associated with a lower incidence of recurrence of rheumatic fever. Studies of rheumatic fever cohorts suggest that prophylaxis allows for regression of valvular damage and may prevent death from rheumatic heart disease.
However, rheumatic fever is diagnosed infrequently in low-resource settings for several reasons, including limited health-seeking behavior, varied presentations, and overlap with other common illnesses, such as malaria and viral infections. Rather, most patients receive the diagnosis of rheumatic heart disease when the disease is advanced and complications have developed. Late diagnosis is associated with high mortality at a young age, in part owing to the missed opportunity to benefit from prophylaxis. If patients can be identified early, the period between initial valvular damage and clinical disease affords an opportunity for intervention and improved outcomes.
Latent rheumatic heart disease, which is a relatively new concept, is detected by means of screening surveys that involve echocardiography. Children with latent rheumatic heart disease have mild valvular changes that do not cause symptoms and are often clinically undetectable. A systematic review and meta-analysis of studies across several continents showed a worldwide pooled prevalence of latent rheumatic heart disease of 1.3%. In 2012, standardized criteria for the diagnosis of latent rheumatic heart disease were established; these criteria included categories of borderline disease and definite disease for persons younger than 20 years of age.
In order to justify echocardiographic screening, evidence that secondary prophylaxis improves outcomes for children and adolescents with latent rheumatic heart disease is needed. Despite dozens of published studies on echocardiographic screening, such data are lacking. In the absence of evidence, practice varies from provision of prophylaxis to active surveillance. To address this knowledge gap, we conducted a trial in Northern Uganda referred to as Gwoko Adunu pa Lutino (GOAL), meaning “protect the heart of a child.”

Section: Methods

We conducted a randomized, controlled trial to evaluate secondary prophylaxis with intramuscular penicillin G benzathine, as compared with no prophylaxis, in Ugandan children and adolescents with latent rheumatic heart disease. The trial was conducted in Gulu, Uganda, from July 2018 through October 2020. Details of the trial design are described in the protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
The trial was approved by the institutional review board at Makerere University School of Medicine and at Children’s National Medical Center, with additional approvals from the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology and the National Drug Authority in Uganda, and was conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines. A seven-member advisory board was involved in the design of the trial and provided oversight during the conduct of the trial. We held two general community engagement meetings and two focus groups to develop plans for recruitment, consent or assent, and retention. Parents or guardians provided written informed consent, and assent was obtained from children and adolescents older than 7 years of age.
Primary and secondary schools in Gulu and surrounding districts were selected for screening ( Figure 1 ). Children and adolescents 5 to 17 years of age were invited to participate. Participants with abnormal screening echocardiograms were referred for clinical evaluation and detailed echocardiography (Vivid q or Vivid iq [General Electric]). Participants who had a new diagnosis of latent rheumatic heart disease were approached for inclusion in the trial. Participants with moderate or severe disease were not eligible for the trial; however, prophylactic treatment was initiated, and the participants were referred for ongoing follow-up, in accordance with standard recommendations. Participants were also excluded if they had a history of rheumatic fever, rheumatic heart disease, or other structural or functional heart disease; had a known penicillin allergy; had a predisposition to bleeding; or were receiving prophylaxis with an antibiotic for other indications. A second round of exclusion occurred after randomization, when a consensus panel adjudicated the confirmatory echocardiograms that had been obtained at enrollment; details of this process are described below.
Participants were stratified at enrollment according to 2012 World Heart Federation category, and randomization was performed in permuted blocks, with participants assigned in equal numbers to either the prophylaxis group or the control group. The randomization scheme was designed by an independent statistician and embedded within the randomization module of REDCap, a Web-based electronic data capture system. Two designated members of the research staff enrolled participants after consent or assent was obtained, at which time the trial-group assignment was revealed automatically.
Participants in the prophylaxis group received intramuscular penicillin G benzathine every 4 weeks for 2 years (a total of 26 injections), with an acceptable window of 24 to 32 days between injections. Injections of penicillin G benzathine were administered by trial staff who were trained in best practices. Participants in the control group received no prophylaxis and no placebo.
A case-management and peer-group strategy that has been described previously was used to maximize retention of participants in both groups. (Details regarding the strategies used to retain participants in the trial and to achieve high adherence to the injections are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.) With the onset of the coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) pandemic in Uganda in March 2020, peer-group meetings halted, and administration of prophylaxis shifted to community health centers that were supported by GOAL staff. During this period, participants in the control group received telephone calls from their case managers twice monthly but were not seen in person.
The primary outcome was echocardiographic progression of latent rheumatic heart disease at 2 years. All the participants underwent standard echocardiography (during which 15 images were obtained) at enrollment and at 2 years (trial completion). We assembled a four-member consensus panel to evaluate and classify echocardiograms at both time points on the basis of the 2012 World Heart Federation criteria. The echocardiograms obtained at enrollment and at 2 years were presented side by side to the panel, with random right or left display. The members of the panel, who were unaware of the trial-group assignments and the timing of the echocardiograms, determined whether the images were “the same,” “right worse,” or “left worse,” according to strict definitions (see the Supplementary Appendix ). These data were subsequently unblinded by a single research coordinator and categorized as progression, regression, or no change. The secondary outcome was echocardiographic regression of latent rheumatic heart disease at 2 years.
Adverse events were recorded for participants in the prophylaxis group. These data were collected on a monthly basis through interviews with participants and parents and with the use of a standard checklist. Participants in whom a penicillin allergy or anaphylaxis developed received care in accordance with standard guidelines, and prophylaxis in these participants was changed to oral erythromycin (250 mg twice daily). All the participants in both trial groups underwent limited echocardiography at 13 months to monitor for the development of moderate or severe rheumatic heart disease; clinical care was adjusted as needed for any participants who had such progression of disease. Participants in the control group who had a midtrial echocardiogram that showed moderate or severe disease began receiving prophylaxis with penicillin G benzathine every 4 weeks; however, the final echocardiograms that were obtained at 2 years were still presented in a blinded fashion to the consensus panel for determination of outcome. An independent data and safety monitoring board oversaw the safety of the trial.
On the basis of previous natural-history cohorts, we estimated that progression would occur in 7.5 to 12.5% of the participants in the prophylaxis group and in 15 to 25% of the participants in the control group over the course of 2 years. To determine an appropriate sample size, we used the lowest percentages within these ranges in each trial group (7.5% and 15%, respectively). We estimated that a total sample of 916 participants would provide the trial with 90% power to detect a significant difference in the primary outcome between the trial groups at a two-sided alpha level of 0.05, using a chi-square test. This calculation was based on an estimated 20% attrition, including 10% from the initial echocardiographic adjudication and 10% for other reasons.
Efficacy was evaluated in the modified intention-to-treat population, which included all children and adolescents who had undergone randomization, who had been assessed on the basis of the consensus-panel adjudication of baseline echocardiograms as having borderline or definite disease, and who had final echocardiograms at 2 years. The percentages of participants who had echocardiographic progression or regression, along with 95% confidence intervals, were calculated for each group. These percentages were compared between the groups with the use of a generalized linear model with an identity link and binomial distribution; adjustment was made for the baseline disease category (borderline or definite) to estimate the differences between the groups. We also determined risk ratios, which we adjusted for baseline disease category using a generalized linear model. Analyses of the primary and secondary outcomes were planned to be performed with the use of multiple imputation if more than 10% of the data were missing.
We performed one subgroup analysis of the primary and secondary outcomes to assess whether baseline disease category (borderline disease or definite disease) influenced the effectiveness of the prophylaxis, using the same generalized linear model as that described above, with baseline disease category included as an interaction term. The widths of the confidence intervals were not adjusted for multiple comparisons, so the intervals should not be used to infer definitive treatment effects for the subgroup analysis or for the analysis of the secondary outcome.

Section: Results

A total of 102,200 children and adolescents 5 to 17 years of age had screening echocardiograms. On the basis of these echocardiograms, 3327 children and adolescents were initially assessed as having latent rheumatic heart disease; 926 of the 3327 subsequently received a positive diagnosis on the basis of confirmatory echocardiography and were determined to be eligible for the trial. Of these 926 persons, 10 declined to participate. After consent or assent to participate was obtained for each of the remaining 916 persons, all underwent randomization ( Figure 2 ). The consensus panel review of the confirmatory echocardiograms that had been obtained at enrollment led to the exclusion of 98 participants (10.7%) owing to reclassification (77 as normal, 15 as alternative diagnosis, and 6 as moderate or severe disease). The remaining 818 participants (409 in each group) composed the modified intention-to-treat population. Sociodemographic and clinical variables at baseline were similar in the two groups ( Table 1 ).
A total of 799 participants (97.7%) completed the trial: 399 in the prophylaxis group and 400 in the control group. Among the 19 participants (2.3%) who discontinued the trial early, 4 were lost to follow-up, 11 requested withdrawal from the trial, and 4 died from non–trial-related causes ( Figure 2 ).
Among the 399 participants in the prophylaxis group who were included in the modified intention-to-treat analyses and who completed the trial, a total of 10,284 of the 10,374 scheduled injections (99.1%) were administered, with 10,250 (98.8%) given within the acceptable window. Of the 90 missed injections, 77 were missed at the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, when all transportation was abruptly halted. Among all the participants in the modified intention-to-treat population, antistreptococcal antibiotic use for indications other than latent rheumatic heart disease was similar in the two groups; 252 participants (61.6%) in the prophylaxis group received 579 courses of treatment, and 230 participants (56.2%) in the control group received 571 courses. No episodes of suspected rheumatic fever were identified.
In total, 3 of 399 (0.8%) participants in the prophylaxis group had echocardiographic progression of latent rheumatic heart disease at 2 years, as compared with 33 of 400 (8.2%) participants in the control group (risk difference, −7.5 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], −10.2 to −4.7; P<0.001) ( Table 2 ). Among the participants who had progression, 3 of 3 (100.0%) in the prophylaxis group and 16 of 33 (48.5%) in the control group had progression to moderate or severe rheumatic heart disease. The number of children or adolescents with latent rheumatic heart disease who would need to receive prophylaxis to prevent 1 child or adolescent from having progression was 13 (95% CI, 10 to 21).
A total of 195 participants (48.9%) in the prophylaxis group and 191 participants (47.8%) in the control group had echocardiographic regression of latent rheumatic heart disease at 2 years (risk difference, 1.5 percentage points; 95% CI, −5.4 to 8.4) ( Table 2 ). Among the 386 participants who had regression, 363 (94.0%) had a normal echocardiogram at the end of the trial.
In a subgroup analysis of the primary and secondary outcomes among participants who had had definite latent rheumatic heart disease at baseline, 2 of 81 participants (2.5%) in the prophylaxis group had echocardiographic progression at 2 years, as compared with 8 of 67 participants (11.9%) in the control group (risk difference, −9.5 percentage points; 95% CI, −17.9 to −1.0). Among the participants who had had borderline latent rheumatic heart disease at baseline, 1 of 318 (0.3%) in the prophylaxis group had echocardiographic progression at 2 years, as compared with 25 of 333 (7.5%) in the control group (risk difference, −7.2 percentage points; 95% CI, −10.1 to −4.3) (Table S5 in the Supplementary Appendix ).
Adverse events reported in the prophylaxis group are summarized in Table 3 . Two participants had serious adverse events that were attributable to receipt of prophylaxis. In 1 of these participants (0.2% of the participants in the prophylaxis group, which represents <0.1% of the injections administered), symptoms of anaphylaxis (chest tightness and shortness of breath) developed 3 minutes after the injection of penicillin G benzathine; the symptoms resolved with a single intramuscular dose of epinephrine. The other participant had a sciatic nerve injury with paresthesia that ameliorated over the course of several months.
In total, 290 participants (63.3%) in the prophylaxis group reported 823 mild adverse events that occurred after injection, including pain, limp, and localized leg swelling. Eight participants (1.7%) had a delayed hypersensitivity rash associated with penicillin G benzathine; prophylaxis in these participants was subsequently changed to erythromycin. Under the assumption of zero adverse events in the control group (data in the control group not collected in this trial), the number of children or adolescents with latent rheumatic heart disease who would need to receive prophylaxis to cause harm ranged from 77 (95% CI, 43 to 372) (if only adverse events of grade 3 or 4 were included in the calculation) to 2 (95% CI, 1 to 2) (if all grades of events, the majority of which were minor pain, limp, or swelling at the injection site, were included).
Five participants in the control group were found to have moderate or severe rheumatic heart disease on the basis of the midtrial echocardiograms, and prophylaxis was initiated in these participants. Four participants died from non–trial-related causes during the trial period (1 in the prophylaxis group and 3 in the control group). Details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Discussion

This randomized trial investigated the effectiveness of secondary antibiotic prophylaxis in modifying the natural history of latent rheumatic heart disease. We observed a significant reduction in the risk of disease progression in the prophylaxis group. Across both groups, more than half the participants who had progression had moderate or severe rheumatic heart disease at the end of the trial, a finding that suggests important clinical and public health implications. Antibiotic prophylaxis did not significantly reduce the risk of disease regression.
Preventing the development of severe rheumatic heart disease is important because severe valve dysfunction is largely untreatable by medical management. The question of whether echocardiographic screening should be implemented in children and adolescents has been discussed by the rheumatic heart disease research community on the basis of population-screening criteria developed by the World Health Organization and the Council of Europe and remains controversial. Factors in support of screening include the obvious burden of disease, a detectable latent phase, and the availability of a suitable screening test. Results from this trial showed that prophylaxis with penicillin G benzathine every 4 weeks for 2 years can reduce the risk of progression of latent disease, a finding that provides new evidence in favor of screening.
Among the more than 100,000 children and adolescents who underwent screening echocardiography in this trial, approximately 900 were identified as being eligible for the trial; this indicates that more than 100 persons would need to be screened to identify 1 person eligible for the intervention studied. The overall incidence of progression was lower than anticipated, a result that may reflect the rigorous conditions of our trial, as compared with the observational natural-history data that informed our assumptions. Specifically, we used strict inclusion criteria that excluded children or adolescents with more advanced latent forms of rheumatic heart disease, and we used robust criteria for defining progression.
We estimated that 13 children or adolescents with latent rheumatic heart disease would need to be treated to prevent disease progression in 1 person at 2 years. In general, an acceptable number of persons who would need to be treated for prevention of disease varies, based on the severity of the condition to be prevented and the risk and burden of the intervention. In low-resource settings, symptomatic rheumatic heart disease has an annual case fatality rate approaching 10%. Although mild adverse events were common in our trial, serious adverse events attributable to secondary antibiotic prophylaxis occurred in 1 in 200 participants and anaphylaxis occurred in 1 in 10,000 injections, consistent with previously reported international data.
However, these trial data alone are not sufficient justification for adoption of a screening policy. A number of barriers to achieving high adherence in a real-world setting exist, including a lack of retention in care, a lack of availability of medication, a lack of access to transportation, social stigma, pain associated with intramuscular injection, and a limited understanding of the disease, and these factors are largely unaccounted for in a clinical trial setting. Furthermore, fear of serious adverse events and death contributes to the reluctance of health care workers and patients to consider the use of secondary prophylaxis, and increasing the number of children and adolescents receiving antibiotic prophylaxis arouses concern about worsening community antibiotic resistance. Although such resistance is not an issue for the causative agent of rheumatic heart disease (given that S. pyogenes remains universally susceptible to penicillin), the resistance of other bacteria could be affected. We think that this risk is relatively low, since penicillin is a narrow-spectrum antibiotic and the number of children and adolescents with latent rheumatic heart disease is small. In order to effectively scale secondary prophylaxis, these practical challenges need to be better understood and addressed.
There are also critical health system issues to consider before implementation of a population-based screening strategy. Screening, diagnosis, clinical follow-up, treatment, and program management require substantial strengthening of health systems and the workforce. Our trial involved highly specialized interpretation of echocardiographic imaging, as well as skilled staff to administer injections of secondary antibiotic prophylaxis. At scale, it is likely that health care personnel with less training would implement screening activities and prophylaxis administration, which could increase the likelihood of misdiagnosis and related adverse events, respectively. Furthermore, retention in care of patients with rheumatic heart disease is critical to achieving adequate treatment adherence, and the highly successful strategies used in our trial (e.g., the use of peer groups and case managers, as well as reimbursement of travel expenses) would be challenging and expensive to implement at scale. Both of these issues could be compounded by the longer duration of clinical follow-up required (typically at least 5 years as compared with our 2-year research end point).
The secondary outcome of this trial was echocardiographic regression of latent rheumatic heart disease, which occurred in nearly half the participants in both trial groups. Although the percentage of participants who had regression was higher than anticipated, it is not entirely unexpected. Rheumatic heart disease, even in its classic form after the occurrence of rheumatic fever, follows a heterogeneous course. However, the high incidence of regression seen in this trial arouses the concern that if screening in children and adolescents were adopted, a proportion of those treated would not be expected to benefit. Further study is needed to determine the efficacy, outcomes, and cost-effectiveness of alternative approaches, including secondary prophylaxis with oral penicillin and regular echocardiographic follow-up to monitor for progression in persons not receiving prophylaxis.
Initial regression may not imply lifelong protection. Rheumatic fever or progression of rheumatic heart disease may develop later in some children and adolescents. Further research is needed to identify subcategories of latent rheumatic heart disease that may pose a higher risk to children and adolescents than other subcategories and to refine recommendations for the duration of prophylaxis, including the safety of discontinuing prophylaxis in persons with normalization of echocardiographic findings.
In the GOAL trial, secondary antibiotic prophylaxis reduced the risk of progression of latent rheumatic heart disease in children and adolescents. Although further research is needed to assess real-world implementation, population-based screening and initiation of prophylaxis may eventually prove to be integral components of the National Rheumatic Heart Disease action plans envisioned by the World Health Assembly in 2017 in a resolution on rheumatic heart disease.
