Title: Aflibercept Monotherapy or Bevacizumab First for Diabetic Macular Edema


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

In eyes with diabetic macular edema, the relative efficacy of administering aflibercept monotherapy as compared with bevacizumab first with a switch to aflibercept if the eye condition does not improve sufficiently (a form of step therapy) is unclear.

Abstract_Section: Methods

At 54 clinical sites, we randomly assigned eyes in adults who had diabetic macular edema involving the macular center and a visual-acuity letter score of 24 to 69 (on a scale from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating better visual acuity; Snellen equivalent, 20/320 to 20/50) to receive either 2.0 mg of intravitreous aflibercept or 1.25 mg of intravitreous bevacizumab. The drug was administered at randomization and thereafter according to the prespecified retreatment protocol. Beginning at 12 weeks, eyes in the bevacizumab-first group were switched to aflibercept therapy if protocol-specified criteria were met. The primary outcome was the mean change in visual acuity over the 2-year trial period. Retinal central subfield thickness and visual acuity at 2 years and safety were also assessed.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 312 eyes (in 270 adults) underwent randomization; 158 eyes were assigned to receive aflibercept monotherapy and 154 to receive bevacizumab first. Over the 2-year period, 70% of the eyes in the bevacizumab-first group were switched to aflibercept therapy. The mean improvement in visual acuity was 15.0 letters in the aflibercept-monotherapy group and 14.0 letters in the bevacizumab-first group (adjusted difference, 0.8 letters; 95% confidence interval, −0.9 to 2.5; P=0.37). At 2 years, the mean changes in visual acuity and retinal central subfield thickness were similar in the two groups. Serious adverse events (in 52% of the patients in the aflibercept-monotherapy group and in 36% of those in the bevacizumab-first group) and hospitalizations for adverse events (in 48% and 32%, respectively) were more common in the aflibercept-monotherapy group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In this trial of treatment of moderate vision loss due to diabetic macular edema involving the center of the macula, we found no evidence of a significant difference in visual outcomes over a 2-year period between aflibercept monotherapy and treatment with bevacizumab first with a switch to aflibercept in the case of suboptimal response. (Funded by the National Institutes of Health; Protocol AC ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03321513 .)

Section: Introduction

Diabetic macular edema is a leading cause of vision loss in working-age adults. Current standard treatment for diabetic macular edema involves intravitreous injections of anti–vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents into the eye. Aflibercept and ranibizumab have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of diabetic macular edema, and bevacizumab, a lower-cost alternative, is used off-label.
These three drugs are effective in improving visual acuity. Although a comparative-effectiveness trial of these drugs showed similar outcomes in eyes with a baseline visual acuity of 20/40 or better, aflibercept treatment resulted in better vision than bevacizumab therapy at 2 years in eyes with a baseline visual acuity of 20/50 or worse (mean improvement, 18.1 letters with aflibercept vs. 13.3 letters with bevacizumab) and better vision through 1 year than ranibizumab therapy. Nevertheless, many eyes with baseline vision of 20/50 or worse in the bevacizumab group had good vision outcomes, with 68% having a final visual acuity of 20/40 or better at 2 years.
Because the costs of aflibercept and ranibizumab are substantially higher than that of bevacizumab, an increasing number of insurers require step therapy, in which bevacizumab is used for the initial treatment with a switch to another anti-VEGF agent if the clinical response is unsatisfactory. For eyes with a baseline visual acuity of 20/50 or worse, it is unclear whether this strategy compromises long-term visual acuity relative to aflibercept monotherapy. We conducted a randomized clinical trial to compare two strategies for treating diabetic macular edema involving the center of the macula in eyes with visual impairment (20/50 or worse): aflibercept monotherapy or bevacizumab first plus a switch to aflibercept therapy if the response was suboptimal.

Section: Methods

We conducted Protocol AC, a multicenter, randomized clinical trial at 54 clinical sites in the United States. The second, fourth, and fifth authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data, and the first and third authors vouch for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol (available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The Jaeb Center for Health Research has confidentiality agreements with the authors or their institutions. The DRCR Retina Network had complete control over the design of the protocol, ownership of the data, all editorial content of presentations and publications related to the protocol, and the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
The trial adhered to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by a central ethics board. All the patients provided written informed consent. An independent data and safety monitoring committee provided oversight. We followed the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) reporting guidelines.
Eligible patients were at least 18 years of age and had type 1 or 2 diabetes, at least one eye with a best-corrected Electronic Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study visual-acuity letter score of 24 to 69 (on a scale from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating better visual acuity; Snellen equivalent, 20/320 to 20/50), center-involved diabetic macular edema on ophthalmoscopic examination, and central subfield thickness values greater than machine- and sex-specific thresholds on optical coherence tomography (OCT). Eyes that had received anti-VEGF treatment for diabetic macular edema in the previous 12 months or any treatment for diabetic macular edema within the previous 4 months were excluded.
Randomization schedules were generated with the use of a permuted block design (random block sizes of two or four), with stratification according to site. Patients with one study eye (i.e., with one eye involved in the trial) were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive either 2.0 mg of intravitreous aflibercept (Eylea; the aflibercept-monotherapy group) or 1.25 mg of intravitreous bevacizumab (Avastin) with a switch to 2.0 mg of aflibercept if the eye met protocol criteria (bevacizumab-first group). For patients with two study eyes (i.e., with both eyes involved in the trial), the eye with the greater visual-acuity letter score was randomly assigned to a treatment group and then the other eye was assigned to the alternative treatment.
Visits occurred at baseline, every 4 weeks through 1 year, and then every 4 to 16 weeks in year 2 depending on disease progression and retreatment. Visual acuity with refraction and OCT scans were obtained by certified technicians at each visit. Fundus photographs were obtained annually, and assessment according to the Diabetic Retinopathy Severity Scale was performed by a reading center. Severity levels include 12 discrete steps ranging from 10 to 85, with higher levels indicating greater severity. The patients were unaware of the treatment assignments at clinic visits but could become aware of the assigned trial group because of information on billing documents. Technicians at the annual visits, graders at the central reading center, and the medical monitor were unaware of the treatment assignments. The trial investigators were aware of the treatment assignments. Adverse events were coded according to the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities , versions 20.0, 21.0, 22.0, 23.0, and 25.0.
Eyes were treated at randomization and thereafter according to the prespecified retreatment protocol (Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org). Initially, six monthly injections were administered, unless the protocol-defined criteria for success and sustained stability were both met. (Success was defined as visual acuity of 20/20 or better and a central subfield thickness less than the sex- and device-specific threshold, and sustained stability was defined as no improvement or worsening in visual acuity or central subfield thickness over two consecutive injections.) The thresholds were 320 μm for men and 305 μm for women on the Spectralis device (Heidelberg) and 305 μm and 290 μm, respectively, on the Cirrus device (Zeiss). Starting at 24 weeks, the injection was deferred if there was sustained stability alone on the basis of real-time data entry by the clinical site for these measures. (An automated algorithm provided treatment instructions.) Injections were resumed if visual acuity or central subfield thickness worsened.
Beginning at 12 weeks, eyes in the bevacizumab-first group were switched to aflibercept therapy if the following criteria were met: persistent center-involved diabetic macular edema (defined as the central subfield thickness being above the eligibility threshold), an adequately treated eye (administration of bevacizumab injections at the previous two consecutive visits), no recent improvement in eye condition (no improvement of visual acuity by ≥5 letters and no decrease in central subfield thickness of ≥10% as compared with each of the two preceding visits or between each of the two preceding visits), and suboptimal vision (visual acuity, 20/50 or worse before 24 weeks or 20/32 or worse at 24 weeks or later) ( Table 1 ). Eyes that were switched to aflibercept therapy received two aflibercept injections, separated by 1 month, and then received aflibercept injections according to the retreatment protocol.
The primary outcome was the time-averaged change in the visual-acuity letter score over a period of 104 weeks. The score was derived by calculating the area under the curve (AUC) over the 104-week period for the change in visual acuity from baseline and dividing by the length of follow-up. Secondary outcomes included the percentage of eyes in the bevacizumab-first group that met the switching criteria and the numbers of trial visits and trial injections completed during the 2-year trial period. Additional secondary outcomes included changes in visual acuity, central subfield thickness, retinal volume, and diabetic retinopathy severity, as well as visual-acuity threshold levels and diabetic retinopathy events. Safety outcomes included prespecified ocular and systemic adverse events.
We calculated that a sample of 312 eyes would be required in order for the trial to have approximately 90% power to detect a difference between groups, assuming a true difference of at least 3.5 letters in the mean change in the visual-acuity AUC over a 2-year period, a standard deviation of 8.7 letters with adjustment for baseline visual acuity, a type I error of 5%, and a projection that 15% of the patients would be lost to follow-up.
The primary analysis followed the intention-to-treat principle according to treatment group and included all the eyes that had undergone randomization. Missing values for visual acuity at follow-up visits were imputed with Markov chain Monte Carlo multiple imputation. Outlying values were truncated to ±3 SD from the mean of the visual-acuity distribution at 104 weeks. The primary analysis of the time-averaged mean score used a linear mixed-effects model with robust variance estimation and a random intercept to account for the correlation in outcome between two eyes in a patient, with adjustment for baseline visual acuity and number of study eyes in the same patient. Prespecified subgroup analyses evaluated the effects of baseline central subfield thickness and visual acuity. Secondary outcomes were compared with the use of linear mixed models or logistic regression with a random intercept term or a Student’s t-test for two independent samples (number of visits). Systemic safety outcomes were compared among three groups with the use of Fisher’s exact test, and global P values are reported. Ocular safety outcomes were compared with the use of Barnard’s unconditional exact test.
Means with standard deviations or medians with interquartile ranges are reported. All P values and 95% confidence intervals are two-sided. As prespecified, no P values are presented for secondary efficacy outcome measures. No adjustment for multiplicity in sensitivity, subgroup, or safety analyses was implemented. The widths of the confidence intervals are not adjusted for multiple comparisons and should not be used to infer treatment effects. Analyses were performed with the use of SAS/STAT software, version 15.1 (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

Between December 8, 2017, and November 25, 2019, a total of 312 eyes in 270 patients were randomly assigned to receive aflibercept monotherapy (158 eyes) or bevacizumab-first therapy (154 eyes). The median age of the patients was 61 years (interquartile range, 54 to 66); 48% of the patients were women. A total of 53% of the patients were White, 26% were Hispanic or Latino, and 19% were Black or African American; the remaining patients were Asian, Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, or of more than one race or ethnic group or had unknown or unreported race or ethnic group. (Percentages for baseline characteristics are based on numbers of eyes that had undergone randomization rather than on numbers of patients.) The median visual-acuity letter score at baseline was 60 (interquartile range, 65 to 52; approximate Snellen equivalent, 20/63), and the median baseline central subfield thickness was 488 μm (interquartile range, 404 to 616). The baseline characteristics of the patients and eyes were similar in the two groups ( Table 2 and Table S1). With the exclusion of the 14 patients who died, 88% of the patients (226 of 256) completed the 2-year trial (Fig S1). The mean (±SD) number of visits that were completed over the 2-year period in patients with one study eye was 22.0±3.6 among the 98 patients in the aflibercept-monotherapy group and 22.5±3.4 among the 94 patients in the bevacizumab-first group ( Table 3 and Table S2).
Over the 2-year trial period, eyes in the aflibercept-monotherapy group received a mean of 14.6±4.1 injections and those in the bevacizumab-first group received 16.1±4.1 injections (adjusted difference, −1.5 injections; 95% confidence interval [CI], −2.4 to −0.5) ( Table 3 ). Eyes in the bevacizumab-first group received a mean of 9.2±5.2 bevacizumab injections and 6.9±5.8 aflibercept injections over the 2-year period. Overall, 153 eyes (97%) in the aflibercept-monotherapy group and 147 (95%) in the bevacizumab-first group adhered to the trial-injection protocol (Table S3). The cumulative percentage of eyes in the bevacizumab-first group that were switched to aflibercept therapy was 39% (95% CI, 32 to 47) up to 24 weeks, 60% (95% CI, 53 to 68) up to 52 weeks, and 70% (95% CI, 62 to 77) over the 2-year period ( Figure 1 ). Among the 100 eyes that were switched to aflibercept therapy, 57 (57%) met the criteria between 12 weeks and 24 weeks. The cumulative percentage of eyes in the aflibercept-monotherapy group that met the protocol-defined criteria (but continued aflibercept treatment as prespecified) was 13% (95% CI, 9 to 20) up to 24 weeks, 26% (95% CI, 20 to 34) up to 52 weeks, and 30% (95% CI, 23 to 38) over the 2-year period (Fig. S3). On completion of the 2-year visit, 188 patients with one study eye were asked whether they believed they knew which drugs they had received, and if they did, to indicate which drug: 108 of 188 patients (57%) did not know or declined to answer; 46 of the 80 patients (58%) who provided a full response selected the correct treatment, and 34 (42%) did not select correctly.
The mean change in visual acuity from baseline over the 2-year trial period (AUC) was 15.0±8.5 letters in the aflibercept-monotherapy group and 14.0±8.8 letters in the bevacizumab-first group (adjusted difference, 0.8 letters; 95% CI, −0.9 to 2.5; P=0.37) ( Table 3 and Figure 2A ). Sensitivity analyses, including a comparison that involved only the 42 patients with one study eye assigned to each treatment group, yielded results that were consistent with the primary analysis (Table S4). The adjusted mean difference in the letter scores between eyes treated with aflibercept monotherapy and eyes treated with bevacizumab first was −1.6 letters (95% CI, −4.4 to 1.2) among eyes with a baseline central subfield thickness of less than 400 μm and 2.4 letters (95% CI, 0.2 to 4.7) among eyes with a baseline central subfield thickness of at least 400 μm (Table S5).
At 2 years, the mean change in visual acuity from baseline was 14.7±14.5 letters in the aflibercept-monotherapy group (in 132 eyes) and 15.9±12.4 letters in the bevacizumab-first group (in 128 eyes), with an adjusted between-group difference of −1.8 letters (95% CI, −4.9 to 1.2) ( Table 3 ). In each group, 77% of the eyes had an improvement in visual acuity of at least 10 letters (adjusted difference, −3 percentage points; 95% CI, −13 to 8), and 22% in each group had visual acuity of 20/20 or better (adjusted difference, −1 percentage point; 95% CI, −11 to 8). Visual acuity of 20/40 or better at 2 years was observed in 73% of the eyes in the aflibercept-monotherapy group and in 74% of those in the bevacizumab-first group (adjusted difference, −7 percentage points; 95% CI, −19 to 5).
The mean change in the central subfield thickness from baseline to 2 years was −192±143 μm in the aflibercept-monotherapy group (in 126 eyes) and −198±160 μm in the bevacizumab-first group (in 127 eyes), with an adjusted between-group difference of −16 μm (95% CI, −39 to 7) ( Table 3 and Figure 2B ). Although a greater reduction in the central subfield thickness was observed in the aflibercept-monotherapy group than in the bevacizumab-first group at 24 weeks and 52 weeks (Table S6), the percentages of eyes at 2 years with a central subfield thickness below thresholds for diabetic macular edema were similar in the two groups: 60% in the aflibercept-monotherapy group and 55% in the bevacizumab-first group (adjusted difference, 4 percentage points; 95% CI, −12 to 20).
At 2 years, an improvement of at least two steps in the severity of diabetic retinopathy occurred in 53 of 105 eyes (50%) in the aflibercept-monotherapy group and in 60 of 108 eyes (56%) in the bevacizumab-first group (adjusted difference, −3 percentage points; 95% CI, −23 to 17). Few eyes had a worsening in severity of at least two steps (4% in each group; adjusted difference, 0 percentage points; 95% CI, −5 to 5).
Endophthalmitis developed in one eye in the aflibercept-monotherapy group. Prespecified ocular adverse events were infrequent in the two treatment groups ( Table 4 ). At least one serious systemic adverse event occurred in 60 of 116 patients (52%) in the aflibercept-monotherapy group, in 40 of 112 (36%) in the bevacizumab-first group, and in 18 of 42 (43%) among patients with two study eyes (P=0.05). At least one hospitalization occurred in 56 patients (48%) in the aflibercept-monotherapy group, in 36 (32%) in the bevacizumab-first group, and in 18 (43%) among patients with two study eyes (P=0.04). The incidence of any adverse event as defined by the Antiplatelet Trialists’ Collaboration was 12% in the aflibercept-monotherapy group, 8% in the bevacizumab-first group, and 7% among patients with two study eyes (P=0.57) ( Table 4 ). All the adverse events are listed in Tables S7 through S11.

Section: Discussion

In this randomized clinical trial involving eyes with center-involved diabetic macular edema and moderately impaired vision of 20/50 or worse, there was no overall significant difference in the mean change in vision over a 2-year period with either aflibercept monotherapy or with the administration of bevacizumab first plus a switch to aflibercept therapy on the basis of prespecified criteria for suboptimal response. There was also no difference in retinal thickness between the groups at 2 years. Approximately 70% of the patients in the bevacizumab-first group had treatment switched to aflibercept during the 2-year trial. More than half these patients (57%) had treatment switched between 12 weeks and 24 weeks. These results expand our understanding of how and whether clinical outcomes differ with the use of various anti-VEGF treatment strategies for diabetic macular edema.
Previously, the DRCR Retina Network Protocol T trial showed that eyes with visual acuity worse than 20/50 had better visual-acuity and retinal-thickness outcomes with aflibercept monotherapy than with bevacizumab monotherapy. Unsurprisingly, given these findings, the visual-acuity and retinal-thickness outcomes in the current trial appeared to favor aflibercept monotherapy over the bevacizumab-first strategy throughout the first year. However, rescue treatment with aflibercept mitigated the mean visual and anatomical differences that arose from the initiation of therapy with bevacizumab or aflibercept. A post hoc sensitivity analysis involving study eyes in the subgroup of patients who were treated in one eye with aflibercept monotherapy and in the other eye with bevacizumab first did not identify significant differences in visual outcomes between the trial groups. The trial population had higher proportions of persons of color, in the aggregate, than the U.S. population (Table S12), but the proportions were similar enough to those in the U.S. population that the trial results are probably generalizable. Black or African American persons are disproportionately affected by diabetic macular edema and were overrepresented in the trial. A limitation, however, is the underrepresentation of Asians and no representation of Native Americans or Alaska Natives.
In a prespecified secondary analysis involving the subgroup of eyes with baseline central subfield thickness of at least 400 μm, eyes that were treated with aflibercept monotherapy had a better mean change in visual acuity from baseline over the 2-year period than eyes treated with bevacizumab first (adjusted difference, 2.4 letters; 95% CI, 0.2 to 4.7). However, the width of the confidence interval is not adjusted for multiple comparisons and cannot be used to infer treatment effects, and a difference of this magnitude is of marginal clinical relevance.
Findings from this trial are particularly relevant given the increasing frequency of insurers mandating step therapy with bevacizumab before the use of other drugs that have been approved by the FDA. However, the results from this trial can be generalized only to patients who receive therapy according to the same switching criteria, anti-VEGF agents, and retreatment algorithm as were used in this trial. Given the difference between the drugs in cost — by approximately a factor of 26 (Medicare reimbursement, approximately $1,830 for one dose of aflibercept and $70 for one dose of bevacizumab) — the initiation of treatment with bevacizumab could have substantial cost reductions for the health care system.
There was a higher frequency of serious systemic adverse events in the aflibercept-monotherapy group (52%) than in the bevacizumab-first group (36%), and the incidence of hospitalization was 48% and 32%, respectively. Previous trials of aflibercept monotherapy for diabetic macular edema have shown similar incidences of adverse events as compared with sham treatment and as compared with bevacizumab monotherapy.
This trial has limitations. First, it is unknown whether milder or stricter switching criteria would have led to different results. Second, although efforts were made to keep patients unaware of their treatment assignment, the cost of aflibercept in this trial was generally billed to the patients’ insurance when applicable; therefore, patients may have become aware of the treatment assignment if they viewed billing information. However, when patients were asked about the treatment they had received, 57% did not know or declined to answer; among patients who made a guess, 42% did so incorrectly. Third, besides aflibercept, this trial did not include other anti-VEGF agents that have been approved by the FDA for the treatment of diabetic macular edema.
In this trial involving eyes with moderate vision loss due to diabetic macular edema in the center of the macula, we found no evidence of significant difference in visual outcomes over a period of 2 years in eyes treated with aflibercept monotherapy as compared with eyes treated with bevacizumab first.
