Title: Olokizumab versus Placebo or Adalimumab in Rheumatoid Arthritis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

The cytokine interleukin-6 is involved in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. Olokizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody targeting the interleukin-6 cytokine directly, is being tested for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a 24-week, phase 3, multicenter, placebo- and active-controlled trial, we randomly assigned (in a 2:2:2:1 ratio) patients with rheumatoid arthritis and an inadequate response to methotrexate to receive subcutaneous olokizumab at a dose of 64 mg every 2 or 4 weeks, adalimumab (40 mg every 2 weeks), or placebo; all patients continued methotrexate therapy. The primary end point was an American College of Rheumatology 20 (ACR20) response (≥20% fewer tender and swollen joints and ≥20% improvement in three of five other domains) at week 12, with each olokizumab dose tested for superiority to placebo. We also tested the noninferiority of each olokizumab dose to adalimumab with respect to the percentage of patients with an ACR20 response (noninferiority margin, −12 percentage points in the lower boundary of the 97.5% confidence interval for the difference between groups).

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 464 patients were assigned to receive olokizumab every 2 weeks, 479 to receive olokizumab every 4 weeks, 462 to receive adalimumab, and 243 to receive placebo. An ACR20 response at week 12 occurred in 44.4% of the patients receiving placebo, in 70.3% receiving olokizumab every 2 weeks (difference vs. placebo, 25.9 percentage points; 97.5% confidence interval [CI], 17.1 to 34.1), in 71.4% receiving olokizumab every 4 weeks (difference vs. placebo, 27.0 percentage points; 97.5% CI, 18.3 to 35.2), and in 66.9% receiving adalimumab (difference vs. placebo, 22.5 percentage points; 95% CI, 14.8 to 29.8) (P<0.001 for the superiority of each olokizumab dose to placebo). Both olokizumab doses were noninferior to adalimumab with respect to the percentage of patients with an ACR20 response at week 12 (difference, 3.4 percentage points [97.5% CI, −3.5 to 10.2] with olokizumab every 2 weeks and 4.5 percentage points [97.5% CI, −2.2 to 11.2] with olokizumab every 4 weeks). Adverse events, most commonly infections, occurred in approximately 70% of the patients who received olokizumab. Antibodies against olokizumab were detected in 3.8% of the patients receiving the drug every 2 weeks and in 5.1% of those receiving it every 4 weeks.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In patients with rheumatoid arthritis who were receiving maintenance methotrexate, olokizumab was superior to placebo and noninferior to adalimumab in producing an ACR20 response at 12 weeks. Larger and longer trials are required to determine the efficacy and safety of olokizumab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. (Supported by R-Pharm; CREDO2 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02760407 .)

Section: Introduction

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory disease characterized by persistent synovitis with synovial cell proliferation and destructive changes in bone and cartilage of multiple joints, leading to joint damage and disability; it is also associated with premature death. Management recommendations suggest meeting the treatment targets of remission or low disease activity. If initial treatment with methotrexate fails, the addition of a biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drug or a Janus kinase inhibitor has been suggested.
Two drugs that target the interleukin-6 receptor are currently used to treat rheumatoid arthritis: tocilizumab and sarilumab. Inhibitors of the interleukin-6 ligand are not approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Two such inhibitors are sirukumab and clazakizumab; sirukumab, but not clazakizumab, has been evaluated in phase 3 trials. Tocilizumab and sarilumab have been investigated as monotherapies in head-to-head trials against adalimumab monotherapy. However, monotherapy with adalimumab is not standard therapy for rheumatoid arthritis because the combination of adalimumab and methotrexate has been shown to be superior to monotherapy.
The cytokine interleukin-6 has multiple functions in cell growth, hematopoiesis, bone metabolism, immune-cell activation, and inflammation. This cytokine has three antigenic sites: sites 1, 2, and 3. Sirukumab and clazakizumab target site 1, interfering with the binding of interleukin-6 to the cognate interleukin-6 receptor α in the trimolecular interleukin-6–interleukin-6 receptor–glycoprotein 130 complex. Olokizumab, another anti–interleukin-6, binds to site 3 and inhibits the interaction of interleukin-6 and the interleukin-6–interleukin-6 receptor dimer with the signal-transducing β-receptor subunit glycoprotein 130 of the receptor complex. In this trial, we evaluated the efficacy and safety of subcutaneous olokizumab in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.

Section: Methods

This phase 3, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group, randomized, placebo- and active-comparator-controlled trial from Clinical Rheumatoid Arthritis Development for Olokizumab (CREDO2) was conducted from May 2016 through November 2019, at 209 sites in the United States, continental Europe, the United Kingdom, Asia (South Korea and Taiwan), and Latin America (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The trial was designed by the sponsor, R-Pharm (registered in the United States and Russia), and an academic advisory board that included authors who were not employees of R-Pharm. The trial was conducted in accordance with the ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice guidelines and approved by the institutional review board or ethics committee at each center. All the patients provided written informed consent.
R-Pharm or its representatives provided data, laboratory, and site-monitoring services. All the authors participated in the company-sponsored statistical analyses and interpreted the data. There were confidentiality agreements in place between the sponsor and the authors; the company could not delay or interdict publication of the article. The authors vouch for the veracity and completeness of the data, for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol (available at NEJM.org), and for the complete reporting of adverse events. Major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE; defined in Table S12 in the Supplementary Appendix ) were adjudicated by a cardiovascular adjudication committee. An independent external data and safety monitoring board reviewed the safety throughout the trial.
Adult patients 18 years of age or older were eligible if they had active rheumatoid arthritis and fulfilled the American College of Rheumatology (ACR)–European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR) 2010 revised classification criteria ; had an inadequate response to methotrexate for at least 12 weeks at a dose of 15 to 25 mg per week (or ≥10 mg per week [≥7.5 mg per week for patients in South Korea] if there were unacceptable adverse events at higher doses), with a stable dose and administration route for at least 6 weeks before screening; and had at least 6 swollen joints (of 66 joints assessed), at least 6 tender joints (of 68 joints assessed), and an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (>6 mg per liter). (Details on the inclusion and exclusion criteria are provided in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix and in the protocol.)
Patients were randomly assigned in a 2:2:2:1 ratio to receive subcutaneous injections of 64 mg of olokizumab every 2 or 4 weeks, 40 mg of adalimumab (Humira, AbbVie) every 2 weeks, or placebo every 2 weeks for 24 weeks; all the patients continued methotrexate therapy. To maintain blinding, patients who received olokizumab every 4 weeks alternated between injections of olokizumab or placebo every 2 weeks. After the double-blind treatment period of 24 weeks, patients could enter an open-label extension study or a safety follow-up period of 20 weeks, at their discretion. All the patients, investigators, clinical site staff, and sponsor staff directly involved in the trial were unaware of the trial-group assignments. (Details on blinding are provided in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix .)
To allow a 24-week duration of the placebo control in the trial to be consistent with ethical treatment guidelines, all the patients who did not have a response (defined as those who did not have a decrease of ≥20% in both the swollen-joint count and the tender-joint count) at week 14 were prescribed rescue medication (sulfasalazine, hydroxychloroquine, or both) in addition to assigned treatment including methotrexate, irrespective of trial-group assignment. (Details on rescue medication are provided in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix .)
The primary efficacy end point was an improvement of at least 20% in the ACR response criteria (ACR20 response) at week 12, with each olokizumab dose tested for superiority to placebo. An ACR20 response was defined as a decrease of 20% or more in both the tender-joint count and the swollen-joint count and an improvement of 20% or more in at least three of the following five measures: a patient’s global assessment of disease activity, a patient’s assessment of pain, and a physician’s global assessment of disease activity (with all three evaluations measured on a visual-analogue scale of 0 to 100 mm, with higher values indicating greater disease activity or pain); patient function according to the Health Assessment Questionnaire–Disability Index (HAQ-DI) score (range, 0 to 3, with higher scores indicating greater disability); and the level of acute-phase reactants (as measured by the CRP level).
Multiplicity-controlled, ranked secondary end points were the noninferiority of each olokizumab dose to adalimumab with respect to an ACR20 response at week 12, the percentage of patients with a Disease Activity Score for 28 joints based on the CRP level (DAS28-CRP; range, 0 to 9.4, with higher scores indicating more disease activity) of less than 3.2 at week 12 to test the superiority of olokizumab to placebo and the noninferiority of olokizumab to adalimumab, the decrease (indicating improvement) in the HAQ-DI score from baseline to week 12, an improvement of at least 50% in the ACR response criteria (ACR50 response) at week 24, and a Clinical Disease Activity Index (CDAI) score of 2.8 or less (range, 0 to 76, with higher scores indicating greater disease activity and a score of ≤2.8 indicating remission) at week 24. Other exploratory efficacy end points were prespecified but not included in the hierarchical analysis, and the widths of confidence intervals for differences between groups were not adjusted for multiple comparisons. (Details on end points are provided in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix and in Table S4.)
Safety monitoring included assessment of adverse events that first occurred or worsened in severity after the first dose of a trial agent, assessment of serious adverse events, and regular centrally performed laboratory tests. Adverse events of special interest were serious infections (including opportunistic infections), systemic injection reactions (including anaphylaxis), cancers, autoimmune disorders, gastrointestinal perforations, elevation of lipid levels, cytopenias, demyelination in the peripheral or central nervous system, potential hepatotoxic effects, and adjudicated MACE. Plasma antidrug antibody titers against olokizumab were determined by means of electrochemiluminescence assay. A cell-based assay was used to detect neutralizing antidrug antibodies.
To confirm a significant treatment effect for at least one olokizumab dose regimen, we estimated that a sample size of 1575 patients randomly assigned in a 2:2:2:1 ratio was needed to ensure sufficient discriminatory power: 100% for testing the primary hypothesis, 92% for testing the noninferiority of both olokizumab doses to adalimumab with respect to an ACR20 response at week 12, and 92% for testing the superiority of olokizumab to placebo and 88% for testing the noninferiority of olokizumab to adalimumab with respect to a DAS28-CRP of less than 3.2 at week 12. The primary analysis was performed in the intention-to-treat population, defined as all the patients who underwent randomization. The safety population included all the patients who received at least one dose of a trial agent.
A gate-keeping strategy with fixed-order hypothesis testing was used for the primary and secondary end points within each olokizumab dose regimen independently (see Fig. S1 and the statistical analysis plan, available with the protocol). The following hypothesis tests were included in the multiplicity control procedure with 97.5% confidence intervals: the superiority of each olokizumab dose to placebo with respect to an ACR20 response at week 12 (primary end point), the noninferiority of each olokizumab dose to adalimumab with respect to an ACR20 response at week 12, the superiority of each olokizumab dose to placebo and the noninferiority of each olokizumab dose to adalimumab with respect to a DAS28-CRP of less than 3.2 at week 12, and the superiority of each olokizumab dose to placebo with respect to the decrease in the HAQ-DI score at week 12, an ACR50 response at week 24, and a CDAI score of 2.8 or less (remission) at week 24. The test for superiority of adalimumab to placebo with respect to an ACR20 response at week 12 was not included in the multiplicity control strategy and was carried out with the use of a one-sided alpha level of 0.025. To control the overall type I error rate at a one-sided alpha level of 0.025, Bonferroni adjustment was used in the analysis of each olokizumab dose as compared with placebo (i.e., one-sided alpha level of 0.0125 for each dose) to preserve the familywise error rate.
All efficacy end points that were binary in nature, including the primary efficacy end point, were analyzed with the use of two-by-two chi-square tests for equality of proportions for each olokizumab group as compared with the placebo group and for testing for superiority of adalimumab to placebo. Noninferiority testing for each olokizumab dose as compared with adalimumab with respect to an ACR20 response and a DAS28-CRP of less than 3.2 used a 97.5% two-sided confidence interval for the difference between proportions with the use of the Newcombe hybrid score method, with protocol-specified noninferiority margins of −12 percentage points and −7.5 percentage points, respectively. Noninferiority would be achieved if the lower limit of the 97.5% confidence interval was greater than the noninferiority margin.
For selection of the noninferiority margins, the following assumptions were used: in a meta-analysis of two pivotal clinical trials for registration of adalimumab, the difference in the percentage of patients with an ACR20 response at week 12 between adalimumab in combination with methotrexate (280 patients) and placebo in combination with methotrexate (262 patients) was 35.0 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI], 27.3 to 42.6). Therefore, 27.3 percentage points was estimated to be the absolute largest noninferiority margin that could be justified. In the determination of a clinically meaningful effect, we assumed that 55% of the patients receiving adalimumab would have an ACR20 response at week 12 and that a minimum of 43% of those receiving olokizumab would have such a response. As a result, a noninferiority margin of −12 percentage points for the percentage of patients with an ACR20 response at week 12 was used in this trial.
In a meta-analysis of two clinical trials of adalimumab, the difference in the percentage of patients with a DAS28-CRP of less than 3.2 at week 12 between adalimumab plus methotrexate (537 patients) and placebo plus methotrexate (688 patients) was equal to 20.0 percentage points (95% CI, 15.3 to 24.6). Therefore, 15.3 percentage points was the absolute largest noninferiority margin that could be justified. In the determination of a clinically meaningful effect, we assumed that 27% of the patients receiving adalimumab would have a DAS28-CRP of less than 3.2 at week 12 and that a minimum of 19.5% of those receiving olokizumab would have such a response. As a result, we used a noninferiority margin of −7.5 percentage points for the percentage of patients with a DAS28-CRP of less than 3.2 at week 12. (Details on noninferiority testing are provided in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix and in Fig. S2.)
For analyses of binary variables, discontinuation of a trial agent was defined as a nonresponse. In case of missing visits or assessments not performed for reasons other than discontinuation of a trial agent, all missing data were imputed with the use of information obtained in surrounding visits (as discussed in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ). Continuous efficacy end points were assessed with the use of an analysis of covariance model, with adjustment for the baseline value of the corresponding variable. In the analyses of these end points, patients who discontinued a trial agent prematurely but remained in the trial were included through the use of collected measurements, including those from assessments after discontinuation of a trial agent. In case of missing values, return-to-baseline values were implemented with the use of multiple imputation, with accounting for the uncertainty of missing data, according to the methods of Rubin for continuous end points (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ). Protocol-specified statistical analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 or higher (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

A total of 1648 patients were randomly assigned to receive 64 mg of olokizumab every 2 weeks (464 patients), 64 mg of olokizumab every 4 weeks (479 patients), 40 mg of adalimumab every 2 weeks (462 patients), or placebo (243 patients). The safety population consisted of 1645 patients; 3 patients underwent randomization but did not receive the assigned trial agent ( Figure 1 ). The trial groups were similar with respect to the demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients at baseline ( Table 1 ). Sex, the mean age of the patients, and disease duration were representative of a European population of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (the percentage of Black patients [3 to 5%] was not representative for the United States, and the percentage of Asian patients [1.5%] was not representative for Asian countries) ( Table 1 , S1, and S3). Missing data are presented in Table S5, and explanations are provided in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix .
A total of 89.7% of the patients (1479) completed the 24-week treatment period: 90.7% (421) with olokizumab every 2 weeks, 91.2% (437) with olokizumab every 4 weeks, 89.4% (413) with adalimumab, and 85.6% (208) with placebo (94.4%, 93.8%, 92.6%, and 89.3%, respectively, completed week 12). The most common reason for discontinuation of a trial agent was an adverse event in the active-treatment groups (with a similar percentage of patients in each group) and withdrawal from the trial in the placebo group ( Figure 1 and Table S2).
At week 12, the proportion of patients with an ACR20 response was 326 of 464 (70.3%) with olokizumab every 2 weeks, 342 of 479 (71.4%) with olokizumab every 4 weeks, and 309 of 462 (66.9%) with adalimumab, as compared with 108 of 243 (44.4%) with placebo (adjusted difference vs. placebo, 25.9 percentage points [97.5% CI, 17.1 to 34.1], 27.0 percentage points [97.5% CI, 18.3 to 35.2], and 22.5 percentage points [95% CI, 14.8 to 29.8], respectively; P<0.001 for all comparisons) ( Table 2 ). As shown in Figure 2A , the percentage of patients with an ACR20 response in the olokizumab groups separated from that in the placebo group by week 2 and increased throughout the trial, but these observations were not formally analyzed. The percentage in the olokizumab groups was similar to that in the adalimumab group.
Both olokizumab doses were noninferior to adalimumab with respect to the percentage of patients with an ACR20 response according to the prespecified margin (difference, 3.4 percentage points [97.5% CI, −3.5 to 10.2] with olokizumab every 2 weeks and 4.5 percentage points [97.5% CI, −2.2 to 11.2] with olokizumab every 4 weeks) ( Table 2 ). The percentage of patients with a DAS28-CRP of less than 3.2 at week 12 was 45.3% with olokizumab every 2 weeks, 45.7% with olokizumab every 4 weeks, and 38.3% with adalimumab, as compared with 12.8% with placebo (adjusted difference vs. placebo, 32.5 percentage points [97.5% CI, 25.0 to 39.1], 32.9 percentage points [97.5% CI, 25.5 to 39.5], and 25.5 percentage points [95% CI, 19.1 to 31.3], respectively; P<0.001 for all comparisons) ( Table 2 and Figure 2B ).
Improvement in physical function as assessed with the use of the HAQ-DI score was greater at week 12 in both olokizumab groups than in the placebo group (P<0.001 for both comparisons); improvement in the adalimumab group was similar to that in the olokizumab groups ( Table 2 and Figure 2C ). The percentage of patients with an ACR50 response at week 24 was 50.4% with olokizumab every 2 weeks and 50.1% with olokizumab every 4 weeks, as compared with 22.6% with placebo (adjusted difference vs. placebo, 27.8 percentage points [97.5% CI, 19.5 to 35.3] and 27.5 percentage points [97.5% CI, 19.2 to 34.9], respectively; P<0.001 for both comparisons) ( Table 2 and Figure 2D ). The percentage of patients with remission as assessed by the ACR-EULAR index-based remission definition of a CDAI score of 2.8 or less at week 24 was higher with olokizumab every 2 weeks (11.2%) and every 4 weeks (12.1%) than with placebo (4.1%) (adjusted difference vs. placebo, 7.1 percentage points [97.5% CI, 2.2 to 11.3] and 8.0 percentage points [97.5% CI, 3.1 to 12.3], respectively; P<0.001 for both comparisons); the percentage in the adalimumab group (13.0%) was similar to that in the olokizumab groups ( Table 2 and Figure 2E ).
The results for other efficacy end points and components of the ACR response criteria with olokizumab as compared with placebo were generally in the same direction as those for the primary end-point analysis (Table S10 and Fig. S3). Exploratory subgroup analyses of the ACR20 response are shown in Tables S7, S8, and S9.
A total of 1118 patients (68.0%) had adverse events that first occurred or worsened in severity after the first dose of a trial agent ( Table 3 and S11). The most common adverse events were infections, with nasopharyngitis, upper respiratory tract infections, and urinary tract infections reported most frequently. In general, adverse events were mild to moderate in severity as assessed by the investigators. Adverse events leading to discontinuation of a trial agent were reported in 4.5% of the patients receiving olokizumab every 2 weeks, 6.3% of those receiving olokizumab every 4 weeks, 5.6% of those receiving adalimumab, and 3.7% of those receiving placebo.
The incidence of serious adverse events was similar across the trial groups: 4.8% with olokizumab every 2 weeks, 4.2% with olokizumab every 4 weeks, 5.6% with adalimumab, and 4.9% with placebo. The most frequently reported serious events were infections, which occurred in 1.3%, 1.5%, 3.5%, and 1.6%, respectively. The types of serious infections are detailed in Table 3 and S12. Adverse events leading to death were reported in three patients receiving olokizumab every 2 weeks, two patients receiving olokizumab every 4 weeks, one patient receiving adalimumab, and one patient receiving placebo ( Table 3 and S12). Further details, including changes in laboratory values, are provided in Figure S5 and Tables S13 and S14.
Positive results for antidrug antibody tests at any time after baseline were reported in 17 of 443 patients (3.8%) receiving olokizumab every 2 weeks and in 23 of 454 patients (5.1%) receiving olokizumab every 4 weeks. Two patients, both of whom were receiving olokizumab every 4 weeks, were positive for neutralizing antibodies, and 1 of these 2 did not have an ACR20 response at week 12.

Section: Discussion

Olokizumab is a direct inhibitor of the interleukin-6 ligand, which differentiates it from the currently approved interleukin-6 receptor inhibitors that bind to its receptor. In this trial involving patients with rheumatoid arthritis, olokizumab plus methotrexate was superior to placebo plus methotrexate with respect to an ACR20 response at week 12 and was noninferior to the combination of adalimumab and methotrexate. Although there was no prespecified plan to test the superiority of olokizumab to adalimumab with respect to an ACR20 response, the confidence interval for the differences between groups included zero.
Olokizumab was also superior to placebo with respect to an ACR50 response (secondary end point). Because the secondary end-point measure of DAS28-CRP includes the acute-phase reactant CRP in its calculation and because interleukin-6 inhibition interferes with CRP production more directly than an anti–tumor necrosis factor (TNF) drug such as adalimumab, it is not an ideal measure for a comparison with a TNF inhibitor but was evaluated on regulatory request. As a prespecified end point, a CDAI score of 2.8 or less, a validated measure of remission in rheumatoid arthritis recommended by the ACR and EULAR, occurred more frequently in the two olokizumab groups and the adalimumab group than in the placebo group; it does not include CRP and may be a more appropriate measure for anti–interleukin-6 or anti–interleukin-6 receptor biologics than those including acute-phase reactants. Few patients had remission after 24 weeks according to the CDAI score, although the enrolled patients had relatively long durations of rheumatoid arthritis and high CDAI scores at baseline; the confidence interval comparing the difference between olokizumab and adalimumab for this end point included zero as well. With either olokizumab dose or adalimumab, approximately half the patients had low disease activity (defined as a score of ≤10) on the CDAI scale (Fig. S4), which is considered to be an important treatment target in rheumatoid arthritis by ACR, EULAR, and the Treat-to-Target Task Force.
An improvement of at least 70% in the ACR response criteria (ACR70 response) was not included in the ranked analysis schema to manage multiple testing but was prespecified as an exploratory end point. Such a response occurred in 28% of the patients who received olokizumab as compared with 11% who received placebo, but no conclusions can be drawn from these results (Table S10). In the placebo group, the percentage of patients who had an ACR20 response or a decrease in the HAQ-DI score was higher than projected; however, these values were similar to those observed in other trials.
The trial was conducted in a relatively small number of patients and over a short duration, especially for the assessment of rare events or events requiring longer durations of exposure (e.g., cancers). With these limitations in mind, serious infections were similar in frequency among the active-treatment groups, occurring in less than 2% of the patients in the two olokizumab groups and in 3.5% of those in the adalimumab group. Few cases of MACE were reported, and such events were similarly distributed among the groups. Anti–interleukin-6 receptor agents are associated with elevations in levels of serum lipids, alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate aminotransferase to a greater extent than anti-TNF drugs; these findings were seen in this trial as well. A trial comparing cardiovascular outcomes between an inhibitor of the interleukin-6 receptor, tocilizumab, and TNF inhibition showed no between-group difference in outcomes. In our trial, overall drop-out rates for safety events in the olokizumab groups were similar to the rate in the adalimumab group. A limitation of the trial was the lack of imaging evaluation of joint disease.
In this phase 3 trial, treatment with olokizumab plus methotrexate resulted in a higher percentage of patients with an ACR20 response over a 12-week period than placebo plus methotrexate, and olokizumab plus methotrexate was noninferior to adalimumab plus methotrexate. Longer and larger trials are required to determine the efficacy and safety of olokizumab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
