Title: Efficacy of Selpercatinib in RET -Altered Thyroid Cancers


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

RET mutations occur in 70% of medullary thyroid cancers, and RET fusions occur rarely in other thyroid cancers. In patients with RET -altered thyroid cancers, the efficacy and safety of selective RET inhibition are unknown.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We enrolled patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer with or without previous vandetanib or cabozantinib treatment, as well as those with previously treated RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer, in a phase 1–2 trial of selpercatinib. The primary end point was an objective response (a complete or partial response), as determined by an independent review committee. Secondary end points included the duration of response, progression-free survival, and safety.

Abstract_Section: Results

In the first 55 consecutively enrolled patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer who had previously received vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both, the percentage who had a response was 69% (95% confidence interval [CI], 55 to 81), and 1-year progression-free survival was 82% (95% CI, 69 to 90). In 88 patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer who had not previously received vandetanib or cabozantinib, the percentage who had a response was 73% (95% CI, 62 to 82), and 1-year progression-free survival was 92% (95% CI, 82 to 97). In 19 patients with previously treated RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer, the percentage who had a response was 79% (95% CI, 54 to 94), and 1-year progression-free survival was 64% (95% CI, 37 to 82). The most common adverse events of grade 3 or higher were hypertension (in 21% of the patients), increased alanine aminotransferase level (in 11%), increased aspartate aminotransferase level (in 9%), hyponatremia (in 8%), and diarrhea (in 6%). Of all 531 patients treated, 12 (2%) discontinued selpercatinib owing to drug-related adverse events.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In this phase 1–2 trial, selpercatinib showed durable efficacy with mainly low-grade toxic effects in patients with medullary thyroid cancer with and without previous vandetanib or cabozantinib treatment. (Funded by Loxo Oncology and others; LIBRETTO-001 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03157128 .)

Section: Introduction

The RET proto-oncogene encodes a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase that is constitutively activated through two distinct mechanisms: mutations involving the cysteine-rich or kinase domains, and structural rearrangements leading to the fusion of RET to a 5′ upstream partner. Collectively, these alterations result in ligand-independent signaling and oncogenesis.
Germline RET mutations result in hereditary multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2A (MEN2A) and MEN2B, resulting in nearly complete penetrance of medullary thyroid cancer in gene carriers. Collectively, these hereditary syndromes account for 25% of all diagnosed cases of medullary thyroid cancer. Of the remaining 75% of cases of sporadic medullary thyroid cancer, approximately 60% harbor somatic RET mutations. RET mutations are associated with more aggressive disease in medullary thyroid cancer, and thus tumors in a majority of patients with metastatic medullary thyroid cancer harbor RET mutations.
In nonmedullary thyroid cancers that arise from follicular cells of the gland, including papillary, poorly differentiated, anaplastic, and Hürthle-cell thyroid cancer, RET fusions are found in fewer than 10% of differentiated thyroid cancers and are even more uncommon in anaplastic carcinomas. The incidence of RET fusions is higher in thyroid cancers diagnosed in children and young adults than in those diagnosed in older persons; the incidence is also increased in patients with cases linked to environmental radiation exposure.
Multitargeted kinase inhibitors are approved for medullary thyroid cancer (vandetanib and cabozantinib) as well as radioiodine-refractory, differentiated thyroid cancer (sorafenib and lenvatinib). These multitargeted kinase inhibitors simultaneously target RET in addition to many other kinases. Although the percentage of patients who have a response to these agents ranges from 12 to 65%, the safety and durability of responses to these agents are at least partially limited by toxic effects. These adverse events are primarily attributed to the more potent inhibition of non-RET kinases, especially vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2).
Currently, no selective RET inhibitors are approved for treating patients with RET -altered cancers. Selpercatinib (formerly known as LOXO-292) is a novel, ATP-competitive, highly selective, small-molecule RET kinase inhibitor. In experimental models, selpercatinib has been shown to have nanomolar potency against diverse RET alterations, including the acquired gatekeeper resistance mutation at residue V804, as well as antitumor activity in the brain. We evaluated the safety and efficacy of selpercatinib in LIBRETTO-001, a phase 1–2 clinical trial involving adolescent and adult patients with any solid tumor type harboring an activating RET alteration. Here, we report the safety and efficacy of selpercatinib in RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer and RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer.

Section: Methods

Full eligibility criteria for the trial are detailed in the protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. Eligible patients were 12 years of age or older (where allowed by regulatory authorities; otherwise, they were ≥18 years of age) and had received a diagnosis of an advanced or metastatic solid tumor. Radiographic tumor progression (either by local or central determination) was not an explicit inclusion criterion, although systemic therapy had to be warranted. A prospectively identified RET alteration (fusion or mutation) was required for patient enrollment after dose escalation proceeded above 20 mg of selpercatinib twice daily, the dose at which steady-state selpercatinib pharmacokinetic exposures were predicted to be efficacious as defined by a trough level that exceeded the 50% inhibitory concentration for RET kinase activity. RET alteration status was determined by means of locally obtained molecular testing performed in a certified laboratory, with the use of either next-generation sequencing, fluorescence in situ hybridization, or polymerase-chain-reaction assay. Central confirmation of the locally identified RET alteration was not required. Other inclusion criteria included an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance-status score of 0 to 2 (on a 5-point scale in which higher scores reflect greater disability), adequate organ function, and a QT interval corrected for heart rate of 470 msec or less. Any number of previous therapies, including multitargeted kinase inhibitors, were allowed. For inclusion in the present analyses, patients had to have either RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer or RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer of any histologic type.
This trial was conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines, the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki, and all applicable country and local regulations. The protocol was approved by the institutional review board at each site. All the patients or guardians provided written informed consent.
This open-label, phase 1–2 trial was conducted at 65 centers in 12 countries (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org). Selpercatinib was administered orally (capsule or liquid), continuously, in 28-day cycles, until disease progression, death, unacceptable toxic effects, or withdrawal of consent. Patients who were enrolled in the phase 1 dose-escalation portion of the trial received selpercatinib at doses ranging from 20 mg once daily to 240 mg twice daily. Intrapatient dose escalation to higher doses that were determined to be safe was permitted after a minimum of one cycle of treatment. All the patients who were enrolled in the phase 2 portion received the recommended dose of 160 mg twice daily. Patients with documented disease progression could continue selpercatinib if they were deriving clinical benefit.
The primary end point was an objective response (complete response or partial response), with response determined by an independent review committee of expert radiologists according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), version 1.1. Secondary end points included progression-free survival, the duration of response, and safety. All responses required confirmation by a second consecutive scan obtained at least 4 weeks after the first scan showing a response. An exploratory end point was a biochemical response.
Radiologic tumor assessments were conducted at baseline, every 8 weeks for 1 year, and every 12 weeks thereafter. Image guidelines for liver metastasis response assessment in patients with medullary thyroid cancer were (in order of preference): magnetic resonance imaging with intravenous contrast, triple-phase computed tomography (CT) (nonenhanced, arterial phase, and portal venous phase), or routine single-phase CT (portal venous phase). For patients with medullary thyroid cancer, serum calcitonin and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels were followed longitudinally. Best biochemical response for serum calcitonin and CEA was defined as follows: complete response, normalization of serum levels; partial response, a decrease of 50% or more from baseline levels; stable disease, a decrease or an increase of less than 50% from baseline; and progression, an increase of 50% or more from baseline (each maintained for ≥4 weeks). Adverse events were assessed from the first dose of selpercatinib (or from the date that informed consent was obtained in the case of patients with serious adverse events) until 28 days after the last dose was administered and were graded according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.03.
This trial was designed jointly by the sponsor (Loxo Oncology, a wholly owned subsidiary of Eli Lilly) and the investigators. The sponsor collected, analyzed, and interpreted the trial data in collaboration with the authors. The first draft of the manuscript was written by the first author and the last three authors in collaboration with the sponsor. All the authors provided critical input for the manuscript and approved the final version. A medical writer who was funded by the sponsor provided writing assistance. All the authors vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the clinical data and for the adherence of the trial to the protocol.
All the analyses were conducted in accordance with the statistical analysis plan, which is available with the protocol at NEJM.org. Figure S1 shows all the patients treated with selpercatinib. The primary analysis set, defined with input from the Food and Drug Administration, comprised the first 55 consecutively treated patients across both the phase 1 and 2 portions of the trial with medullary thyroid cancer harboring a prospectively identified activating RET mutation, who had measurable disease according to RECIST version 1.1, and had received previous therapy with vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both. By agreement with health authorities, patients with nonmeasurable disease who were enrolled in the phase 1 dose-escalation part of the trial were also included in the primary analysis set. Efficacy was also investigated separately in patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer not previously treated with vandetanib or cabozantinib and those with RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer. Patients with RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer also had to have radioiodine-refractory disease (or a histologic subtype in which radioiodine is not used, such as anaplastic thyroid cancer) and had to have received at least one previous systemic therapy other than radioiodine.
Efficacy analyses were performed according to the intention-to-treat principle. We hypothesized that an objective response to selpercatinib would occur in at least 40% of the patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer previously treated with vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both (primary analysis set), and we calculated that a sample of 55 patients would provide the trial with 89% power to establish a lower boundary on the percentage of patients with a response of 20% for a two-sided 95% exact binomial confidence interval. Ruling out a lower limit of 20% for the percentage of patients with an objective response was considered to be clinically meaningful for patients with tumors that had progressed during standard first-line therapy and had limited remaining treatment options. Confidence intervals for objective responses were calculated with the use of the Clopper–Pearson method. Progression-free survival and duration of response were estimated by means of the Kaplan–Meier method. Efficacy analyses for patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer not previously treated with vandetanib or cabozantinib and those with RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer were considered exploratory. Safety was analyzed in the populations of patients with RET -altered medullary thyroid cancer and of those with nonmedullary thyroid cancer as defined above, as well as in the overall cohort of 531 patients who received selpercatinib by June 17, 2019. The data cutoff date was December 16, 2019.

Section: Results

From May 2017 through June 2019, a total of 162 patients were treated across the three efficacy analysis cohorts (55 with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer previously treated with vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both; 88 with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer not previously treated with vandetanib or cabozantinib; and 19 with RET fusion–positive previously treated thyroid cancer). Demographic characteristics for each group are summarized in Table 1 . Among patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer previously treated with vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both, the median number of previous therapies was 2 (range, 1 to 8); 18 patients (33%) had received vandetanib, 13 (24%) had received cabozantinib, and 24 (44%) had received both. Among patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer not previously treated with vandetanib or cabozantinib, 7 patients (8%) had received other previous multitargeted kinase inhibitor therapy, and 9 (10%) had received other previous systemic therapy. Among patients with RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer, subtypes included papillary (in 13 patients [68%]), poorly differentiated (in 3 [16%]), anaplastic (in 2 [11%]), and Hürthle cell (in 1 [5%]). Overall, 15 (79%) of the patients with RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer had received a multitargeted kinase inhibitor, with the remainder receiving other systemic agents.
RET M918T mutation and CCDC6-RET fusion were the most common RET alterations among patients with medullary thyroid cancer and among those with RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer, respectively. In total, 66 unique, locally obtained assays were used to enroll patients across all cohorts (Table S2). After we accounted for intrapatient dose escalation permitted during the phase 1 portion of the trial, 82% of the cohort previously treated with vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both received selpercatinib at the recommended dose of 160 mg twice daily. Almost all the patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer not previously treated with vandetanib or cabozantinib and those with RET fusion–positive thyroid cancer received selpercatinib at a dose of 160 mg twice daily (98% and 95%, respectively).
Efficacy according to investigator assessments and the independent review committee in the 55 patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer previous treated with vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both is summarized in Table 2 and Figure 1 and Figure 2 . The percentage of patients with an objective response (with response determined by the independent review committee) was 69% (95% confidence interval [CI], 55 to 81). Overall, 5 patients (9%) had a complete response, and 33 (60%) had a partial response. Efficacy was observed regardless of the number of previous multitargeted kinase inhibitor therapies received (percentage of patients with a response, 67% with vandetanib only, 69% with cabozantinib only, and 71% with both vandetanib and cabozantinib) (Fig. S2A). Similarly, responses were observed across all qualifying RET mutations, including in 3 patients who had tumors harboring the acquired resistance mutation RET V804 (Fig. S2B). At 1 year, 86% of the responses (95% CI, 67 to 95) were ongoing (Fig. S3A), and 82% (95% CI, 69 to 90) of all the patients remained progression-free (Fig. S3B). Outcomes in this cohort according to investigator assessments are shown in Figure S4. The percentages of patients with a biochemical response were 91% (95% CI, 80 to 97) with respect to the calcitonin level in 54 patients who could be evaluated and 66% (95% CI, 52 to 79) with respect to the CEA level in 53 patients who could be evaluated (Figs. S5 and S6 and Table S3). The median time to calcitonin response was 0.5 months (range, 0.4 to 1.9) and to CEA response 1.8 months (range, 0.4 to 18.8).
Among 88 patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer not previously treated with vandetanib or cabozantinib, the percentage with an objective response (with response determined by the independent review committee) was 73% (95% CI, 62 to 82) ( Table 2 ). Overall, 10 patients (11%) had a complete response, and 54 (61%) had a partial response. Responses were observed across all RET mutations (Fig. S7). At a median follow-up of 7.8 months, 60 of 64 responses were ongoing. At 1 year, 91% of responses (95% CI, 72 to 97) were ongoing, and 92% (95% CI, 82 to 97) of the patients were progression-free (Fig. S8).
Among 19 patients with RET fusion–positive previously treated thyroid cancer, the percentage with an objective response (with response determined by the independent review committee) was 79% (95% CI, 54 to 94). Activity was seen across multiple histologic types of thyroid cancer, including papillary, poorly differentiated, Hürthle-cell, and anaplastic carcinomas, and across different fusion partners ( Figure 1C and Fig. S9). Of 2 patients with anaplastic thyroid cancer who were treated, 1 had a response for 18 months, with the response ongoing. At 1 year, 71% of responses (95% CI, 39 to 88) were ongoing, and 64% (95% CI, 37 to 82) of the patients were progression-free.
Table 3 shows adverse events that occurred during the treatment period, regardless of attribution, as well as the subset of adverse events that were judged by the investigator to be related to selpercatinib treatment. The most common grade 3 or 4 adverse events were hypertension (in 21% of the patients), increased alanine aminotransferase level (in 11%), increased aspartate aminotransferase level (in 9%), hyponatremia (in 8%), and diarrhea (in 6%). Five grade 5 adverse events (hemoptysis, postprocedure hemorrhage, sepsis, cardiac arrest, and cardiac failure) (in 3% of the patients) were observed, all deemed by the investigators to be unrelated to selpercatinib. The adverse-event profile of selpercatinib in patients with RET -altered thyroid cancer was broadly similar to the overall safety profile in all 531 patients treated with selpercatinib (Table S4). Across the entire safety cohort with medullary thyroid cancer, grade 3 tumor lysis developed in 1 patient within 1 week after the initiation of selpercatinib, which led to intravenous hydration, supportive care, and ultimately permanent discontinuation from treatment. Of the 531 patients who received selpercatinib, 160 (30%) had a dose reduction because of treatment-related adverse events, and 12 (2%) discontinued selpercatinib because of treatment-related adverse events, the most common of which were an increased alanine aminotransferase level (in 2 patients) and drug hypersensitivity (in 2 patients).

Section: Discussion

In this phase 1–2 trial, selpercatinib showed marked and durable antitumor activity in patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer with and without previous vandetanib or cabozantinib treatment. In addition, promising activity was observed in a smaller group of patients with RET fusion–positive previously treated thyroid cancers of various histologic types.
The percentage of patients who had an objective response to selpercatinib was broadly consistent across the groups of patients with medullary thyroid cancer at approximately 70%, regardless of previous treatment with vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both. Tumor regressions were seen in nearly all the patients, and activity was observed regardless of the individual RET mutation. Activity also appeared durable in patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer, with 86% and 91% of responses ongoing at 1 year in those previously treated with vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both and in those not previously treated with vandetanib or cabozantinib, respectively. Continued follow-up of the patients involved in this trial will be needed to define the ultimate durability of selpercatinib efficacy across all cohorts.
Both vandetanib and cabozantinib were previously approved for the treatment of metastatic medullary thyroid cancer on the basis of two randomized, placebo-controlled phase 3 trials. In the cabozantinib trial, the percentage of patients with an objective response was 28%, and the median progression-free survival was 11.2 months. In the vandetanib trial, the percentage of patients with an objective response was 45%, and the median progression-free survival was 30.5 months. However, the eligibility criteria of the latter trial resulted in a patient population with a more indolent course of disease, which potentially accounts for some difference in outcomes between the trials. Although both agents meaningfully improve progression-free survival as compared with placebo among patients with medullary thyroid cancer, adverse events led to dose reduction in 35% of the patients receiving vandetanib and 79% of those receiving cabozantinib and permanent discontinuation of therapy in 12% and 16% of the patients, respectively. Inhibition of VEGFR2 in particular has been implicated in many of the dose-limiting toxic effects of these agents, and some patients are simply not eligible for these therapies on the basis of an unacceptable risk of bleeding or concerns about wound healing. By comparison, consistent with the selectivity of selpercatinib for RET, most related adverse events were of grade 1 or 2, dose reductions were relatively uncommon, and treatment discontinuation due to treatment-related adverse events occurred in only 2% of the patients. The percentage of patients with previously treated RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer who had an objective response to selpercatinib appears to exceed the percentage who had an objective response to previously approved first-line agents, while potentially offering a better safety profile. Caution is necessary when interpreting results because comparisons between studies may not take into account important factors that influence the likelihood of response.
Selpercatinib showed a high likelihood of response and durable antitumor activity given the length of follow-up in patients with RET -mutant medullary thyroid cancer, whether or not patients had received previous vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both. Activity was also seen in a small series of patients with RET fusion–positive previously treated thyroid cancer. Activity was seen across all RET alterations and histologic types of thyroid cancer. The implementation of effective molecular screening strategies for patients with either germline or somatic RET mutation in nonfamilial medullary thyroid cancer will be essential in identifying patients who may benefit from RET inhibition.
