Title: Trial of Anti-BDCA2 Antibody Litifilimab for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Antibody-binding of blood dendritic cell antigen 2 (BDCA2), which is expressed exclusively on plasmacytoid dendritic cells, suppresses the production of type I interferon that is involved in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The safety and efficacy of subcutaneous litifilimab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds to BDCA2, in patients with SLE have not been extensively studied.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a phase 2 trial of litifilimab involving participants with SLE. The initial trial design called for randomly assigning participants to receive litifilimab (at a dose of 50, 150, or 450 mg) or placebo administered subcutaneously at weeks 0, 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20, with the primary end point of evaluating cutaneous lupus activity. The trial design was subsequently modified; adults with SLE, arthritis, and active skin disease were randomly assigned to receive either litifilimab at a dose of 450 mg or placebo. The revised primary end point was the change from baseline in the total number of active joints (defined as the sum of the swollen joints and the tender joints) at week 24. Secondary end points were changes in cutaneous and global disease activity. Safety was also assessed.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 334 adults were assessed for eligibility, and 132 underwent randomization (64 were assigned to receive 450-mg litifilimab, 6 to receive 150-mg litifilimab, 6 to receive 50-mg litifilimab, and 56 to receive placebo). The primary analysis was conducted in the 102 participants who had received 450-mg litifilimab or placebo and had at least four tender and at least four swollen joints. The mean (±SD) baseline number of active joints was 19.0±8.4 in the litifilimab group and 21.6±8.5 in the placebo group. The least-squares mean (±SE) change from baseline to week 24 in the total number of active joints was –15.0±1.2 with litifilimab and –11.6±1.3 with placebo (mean difference, –3.4; 95% confidence interval, –6.7 to –0.2; P=0.04). Most of the secondary end points did not support the results of the analysis of the primary end point. Receipt of litifilimab was associated with adverse events, including two cases of herpes zoster and one case of herpes keratitis.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In a phase 2 trial involving participants with SLE, litifilimab was associated with a greater reduction from baseline in the number of swollen and tender joints than placebo over a period of 24 weeks. Longer and larger trials are required to determine the safety and efficacy of litifilimab for the treatment of SLE. (Funded by Biogen; LILAC ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02847598 .)

Section: Introduction

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with diverse manifestations, including arthritis, skin disease, and nephritis. Type I interferons play an important role in the pathogenesis of SLE, as shown by elevated interferon-α levels, the expression of interferon-response genes, and the efficacy of anifrolumab, an antibody against type I interferon receptors. Although plasmacytoid dendritic cells, producers of type I interferons, other cytokines, and chemokines, constitute a small proportion of peripheral blood leukocytes, they accumulate in skin lesions and organs of patients with SLE. The surface receptor blood dendritic cell antigen 2 (BDCA2), a negative regulator of type I interferon production, is unique to plasmacytoid dendritic cells.
Litifilimab is a subcutaneously administered, humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody that binds BDCA2, resulting in the down-regulation of type I interferon, cytokine, and chemokine production. In a phase 1 trial that included 12 participants with SLE and cutaneous lupus erythematosus, biologic activity of litifilimab was shown by a dampened interferon signature in blood and modulated type I interferon–induced proteins in skin.
The Study to Evaluate the Efficacy of BIIB059 in Subjects with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus and Active Skin Manifestations and in Subjects with Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus (LILAC) was a two-part, phase 2, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, controlled trial that evaluated the efficacy and safety of litifilimab. Here, we report the findings from part A, which involved participants with SLE who had both active arthritis and rash. Part B, which focused on cutaneous lupus erythematosus with or without systemic manifestations, has been reported previously.

Section: Methods

We conducted this trial in accordance with the principles of the Good Clinical Practice and Good Pharmacovigilance Practice guidelines of the International Council for Harmonisation and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all the participants before randomization. Trial investigators obtained approval from the ethics committee or institutional review board at each site. An independent data and safety monitoring committee reviewed the trial data twice yearly (see the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The sponsor, Biogen, designed the trial with the academic authors, provided litifilimab and placebo to the trial sites, analyzed the data, and funded professional medical writers to produce an initial draft of the manuscript. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. Confidentiality agreements were in place between the authors and the sponsor.
Adults 18 to 75 years of age were eligible if they had SLE that met the 1997 classification criteria of the American College of Rheumatology at least 24 weeks before they provided written consent to participate in the trial. Eligible participants also had antinuclear antibodies at titers of 1:80 or greater, anti–double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibody levels of 30 IU per milliliter or greater, or both. Prednisone at a dose of 20 mg or less per day (or another glucocorticoid at an equivalent dose) was allowed if the dose had been stable for at least 4 weeks before randomization.
Participants who were enrolled under version 1 of the protocol (available at NEJM.org) had active skin disease at the time they had undergone screening and randomization. Active skin disease was defined as a score of 8 or higher on the Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index–Activity (CLASI-A), a measure of erythema and scaling or hypertrophy in 13 skin regions (total scores range from 0 to 70, with higher scores indicating greater lupus skin-lesion activity).
Eligible participants also had a score of 4 or higher on the Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index–2000 (SLEDAI-2K; scores range from 0 to 105 according to the presence or absence of 24 symptoms [the symptom of fever was excluded at screening and randomization], with scores of 0 to <6 indicating low disease activity, 6 to 12 indicating moderate activity, and >12 indicating high activity ). Descriptions of CLASI-A, SLEDAI-2K, and other indexes of disease activity that were used in the trial are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
Participants who were eligible to be enrolled under version 2 and subsequent versions of the protocol had at least one active skin lesion (as defined by the SLEDAI-2K cutaneous descriptor with no requirement for CLASI-A score), and also had active arthritis, with at least 4 tender joints and at least 4 swollen joints according to a 28-joint assessment (≥4 swollen joints must have been in proximal interphalangeal, metacarpophalangeal, or wrist joints; participants were not required to have coexistent swelling and tenderness of individual joints). Full inclusion and exclusion criteria are provided in the protocol .
Part A of the trial was conducted at 55 centers in Asia, Europe, Latin America, and the United States. Enrollment in part A precluded enrollment in part B (which evaluated litifilimab in the treatment of patients with cutaneous lupus erythematosus), and vice versa. Under protocol version 1, the trial was designed as a dose-ranging evaluation of the effects of litifilimab on skin manifestations of SLE as measured by the CLASI-A score. Participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1:1 ratio, with stratification according to oral glucocorticoid dose (≤10 mg per day vs. >10 mg per day) and CLASI-A score (≤10 vs. >10), to receive litifilimab (at a dose of 50, 150, or 450 mg) or placebo. Owing to slow recruitment and to allow an assessment of the effect of litifilimab on arthritis in SLE, the protocol was amended before the trial data from part A or part B were unblinded to evaluate a single 450-mg dose of litifilimab in participants with active arthritis and lupus skin manifestations, with arthritis representing a new inclusion criterion; the primary end point was changed as described below.
Under protocol version 2 and subsequent versions, after a 28-day screening period, we used an interactive response system to assign participants in a 1:1 ratio, with stratification according to oral glucocorticoid dose (≤10 mg per day vs. >10 mg per day) and geographic region (Asia vs. Europe and Latin America [combined] vs. the United States), to receive litifilimab at a dose of 450 mg or placebo administered subcutaneously at weeks 0, 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20 (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). Participants continued to receive background immunosuppressive therapy at stable dose levels and according to the glucocorticoid-tapering regimen recommended in the protocol. The 24-week regimen of litifilimab or placebo was followed by a 12-week safety observation period. Mandatory tapering of oral glucocorticoids began 4 weeks after randomization and continued until a target level of 10 mg per day or less was reached by week 12, with additional dose reductions allowed until week 16; thereafter, glucocorticoid doses were maintained at stable levels. Background therapy for SLE was permitted if it had been initiated at least 12 weeks before randomization and if dose levels were stable from at least 4 weeks before randomization through the end of the 24-week trial. Further details of background therapy are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
The rationale supporting the litifilimab dose regimen is described in the Supplementary Appendix . Except for the pharmacist and pharmacy monitor, all participants, their families, and trial team members were unaware of participants’ trial-group assignments.
The primary end point (originally, the percent change from baseline in the CLASI-A score at week 12) was changed in the amended protocol to the change from baseline in the total number of active joints (defined as the sum of the swollen joints and the tender joints) at week 24 according to a 28-joint assessment (Table S1). A joint that was both swollen and tender could be counted twice. In a post hoc analysis, the total number of active joints was defined as the sum of the joints that were both swollen and tender.
Secondary efficacy end points that evaluated skin-related disease activity were a decrease of at least 50% from baseline in the CLASI-A score (CLASI-50 response) at week 24; the percent change from baseline in the CLASI-A score at weeks 12 (the original primary end point), 16, and 24; and decreases of at least 4 points and at least 7 points from baseline in the CLASI-A score at week 24.
Changes in overall SLE disease activity were measured as a secondary end point at week 24 by the percentage of participants who had a response on the SLE Responder Index (SRI-4). Response on the SRI-4 was defined as a reduction of at least 4 points from baseline in the SLEDAI-2K score, no new disease activity as measured by one A (severe) score or more than one B (moderate) score on the British Isles Lupus Assessment Group (BILAG) 2004 index (BILAG-2004; an index that incorporates 97 items into nine organ scores, with scores ranging from A [severe] to E [never involved] for each organ system), no increase of 0.3 points or more on the Physician’s Global Assessment (PGA; with scores on a visual-analogue scale ranging from 0 [no disease activity] to 3 [maximal disease]), and no changes in medications or medication dosages from those allowed under the protocol.
Additional secondary end points related to SLE disease activity were the change from baseline in SLEDAI-2K score at week 24, the proportion of patients with no newly affected organ systems (defined as no new A score and ≤1 new B score on the BILAG-2004 from baseline to week 24), and the change from baseline in PGA score to week 24. A post hoc analysis of the time from baseline to the first response on the SRI-4 that was sustained through week 24 was conducted to evaluate the durability of treatment. A list of exploratory end points and descriptions of the disease-activity scoring tools that were used in end-point analyses are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
Adverse events, serious adverse events, and changes in laboratory variables, vital signs, and electrocardiograms were monitored and assessed by trial investigators, who remained unaware of the trial-group assignments, as did the sponsor’s trial team. The sponsor’s safety team was made aware of the trial-group assignments when there were suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions. The members of the independent data and safety monitoring committee, who were aware of the trial-group assignments, monitored and reviewed the safety data.
We calculated that the enrollment of 100 participants would provide the trial with approximately 71% power to detect a significant between-group difference in the absolute change from baseline in the total number of active joints at week 24 (the revised primary end point), assuming a standard deviation of 6, a maximal difference of 2.5 in the effectiveness of litifilimab over placebo, 20% withdrawal from the trial, and testing at a two-sided significance level of 0.2. This phase 2 trial was not powered to assess secondary end points.
Efficacy analyses for all end points that were associated with joint-count assessment included only participants with at least 4 tender joints and at least 4 swollen joints according to a 28-joint assessment. Analyses of end points associated with CLASI-A were performed only in participants with baseline scores of at least 8 on the CLASI-A scale. Analyses of all other end points included the modified intention-to-treat population, defined as all the participants who had undergone randomization under any of the protocol versions and received at least one dose of litifilimab or placebo. The numbers of participants in the litifilimab 50-mg and 150-mg groups who had been enrolled under version 1 of the protocol were too small (6 participants in each group) to allow meaningful conclusions to be drawn for the efficacy analyses; however, these participants were included in the safety and pharmacokinetic evaluations.
A regression model of repeated measures was used to analyze the revised primary end point and other continuous end points with trial group, trial visit (weeks 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24), dose level of glucocorticoids at baseline (≤10 mg per day vs. >10 mg per day), region (Asia vs. Europe and Latin America [combined] vs. the United States), visit-by-treatment interaction, value of the end-point measurement at baseline, and baseline-by-visit interaction as fixed-effect covariates. An unstructured covariance matrix was used to model the within-participant variance–covariance errors. A logistic regression model was used to analyze binary end points according to visit, with the covariates of trial group, dose levels of glucocorticoids at baseline, and region the same as those described for the continuous end points. For binary end points related to CLASI-A, baseline score (≤10 vs. >10) was included as a covariate. For end points that were dichotomized from a continuous end point (such as an increase in PGA score of <0.3 points), the baseline of the continuous end point was added as a covariate.
The time from baseline to the first sustained response on the SRI-4 was analyzed with the use of a Cox proportional-hazards model that included the trial group as well as the covariates of glucocorticoid dose at baseline and region, as described above. Additional details of the statistical analysis are provided in the statistical analysis plan, which is available with the protocol . Two interim analyses were conducted — one for futility (performed by a team separate from the one that conducted the final analysis) and one conducted when all trial participants had completed the double-blind trial period, during which the trial site personnel remained unaware of the data. No alpha was expended as a result of these analyses. A post hoc analysis, with adjustment for the uneven sex distribution between the trial groups, was performed for the primary end point.
There was no prespecified plan to adjust the widths of the confidence intervals of secondary end points for multiple comparisons, and no formal inferences or conclusions can be drawn from these data. For continuous data, missing data were imputed with the worst value observed at baseline or at the last visit before treatment failure; for binary end points, participants who had treatment failure or who discontinued litifilimab or placebo were considered not to have had a response for all remaining visits. Details regarding the imputation of missing data, interim analyses, and treatment failure are provided in the Supplementary Appendix . Safety was evaluated in all the participants who had received at least one dose of litifilimab or placebo and was summarized descriptively.

Section: Results

The trial took place between October 20, 2016, and November 18, 2019. A total of 334 participants underwent screening, and 132 were enrolled (Fig. S2); 22 were enrolled under version 1 of the protocol (6 assigned to receive litifilimab at a dose of 50 mg, 6 to receive 150-mg litifilimab, 5 to receive 450-mg litifilimab, and 5 to receive placebo) (Tables S2 and S3), and 110 participants were enrolled under version 2 and subsequent versions of the protocol (59 assigned to the 450-mg litifilimab group and 51 assigned to the placebo group). Overall, 118 participants completed their assigned regimen of litifilimab or placebo. The 102 participants who received 450-mg litifilimab or placebo and also had at least four tender and at least four swollen joints at baseline as well as a baseline joint-count assessment and at least one postbaseline joint-count assessment were included in the primary analysis. The 77 participants who received 450-mg litifilimab or placebo and had a score of at least 8 on the CLASI-A scale at baseline were included in the secondary analyses of skin-related disease activity. All 132 enrolled participants were included in the safety analyses and the analyses of the remaining efficacy end points. Of the 64 participants who were assigned to the 450-mg litifilimab group and the 56 who were assigned to receive placebo, 91% and 89%, respectively, completed the assigned regimen.
The demographic and disease characteristics of the participants at baseline were generally similar in the two groups ( Table 1 , S4, and S5), with the exception that a higher proportion of participants in the litifilimab group were women (98% in the litifilimab group vs. 88% in the placebo group). Approximately 10% of participants were Black or African American, all of whom were randomly assigned to the litifilimab group; however, owing to local regulations, race and ethnic group were not reported for 35 participants (29%) who were enrolled at sites in Europe.
Elevated anti-dsDNA was more frequent and dose levels of oral glucocorticoids were higher at baseline among participants in the 450-mg litifilimab group than among those in the placebo group. Participants’ demographic characteristics were broadly representative of the wider population with SLE (Table S6).
The mean (±SD) total number of active joints for the primary end point at baseline was 19.0±8.4 in the 450-mg litifilimab group and 21.6±8.5 in the placebo group. The analysis of the revised primary end point ( Table 2 and Figure 1 ) at week 24 showed least-squares mean (±SE) absolute changes from baseline in the total number of active joints of –15.0±1.2 in the litifilimab group and –11.6±1.3 in the placebo group; the least-squares mean difference between litifilimab and placebo was −3.4 joints (95% confidence interval [CI], –6.7 to –0.2; P=0.04). A post hoc additional analysis in which the total number of active joints was redefined as the sum of joints that were both swollen and tender showed a least-squares mean (±SE) absolute change from baseline at week 24 of –6.5±0.5 in the litifilimab group and –4.9±0.6 in the placebo group; the least-squares mean difference was –1.6 joints (95% CI, –2.9 to –0.2) (Fig. S3). In a post hoc supportive analysis of the primary outcome that was adjusted for the imbalance in the sex distribution of participants between the trial groups, the least-squares mean (±SE) for the primary end point was −12.6±1.6 joints for litifilimab and −9.7±1.5 joints for placebo; the least-squares mean difference was −2.9 joints (95% CI, −6.1 to 0.3). No formal inferences or conclusions can be drawn from the data from these two post hoc analyses.
For all but one of the secondary end points associated with skin-related disease activity, including the original primary end point of change from baseline in CLASI-A score, the 95% confidence intervals for the between-group differences included zero ( Table 2 and S7). Among the secondary end points that evaluated skin-related disease activity, a reduction of at least 7 points from baseline in the CLASI-A score (a clinically relevant threshold ) occurred in 56% of the participants in the litifilimab group and 34% of the participants in the placebo group (least-squares mean difference, 21.6 percentage points; 95% CI, 0.1 to 43.1), but no inference can be made from this multiplicity-unadjusted result ( Table 2 ).
For secondary end points related to SLE disease activity, responses on the SRI-4 at week 24 were observed in 36 participants (56%) in the litifilimab group as compared with 16 participants (29%) in the placebo group (least-squares mean difference, 26.4 percentage points; 95% CI, 9.5 to 43.2) ( Table 2 and Fig. S4). A post hoc analysis of the time until the first sustained SRI-4 response is described in Fig. S5. Absolute changes from baseline in SLEDAI-2K scores at week 24, the proportions of participants with no new organ systems affected at week 24 as compared with baseline, and changes from baseline in PGA score at week 24 are shown in Table 2 . Results reported for the individual components of the SRI-4 response at week 24 are shown in Table S8. Exploratory end points are shown in Tables S9 through S12.
The serum-level profiles of litifilimab are shown in Table S13 and Figure S6; the serum concentrations increased in a dose-dependent fashion. Receipt of litifilimab was not associated with changes in immunoglobulin levels (Table S14) or tetanus, diphtheria, or pneumococcal vaccine titers (Table S15). There were no changes in SLE-related autoantibody titers or levels of C3 or C4, erythrocyte sedimentation rates, or C-reactive protein levels in any of the trial groups (Table S16). Of the 75 participants who received litifilimab and who had at least one postdose immunogenicity sample available, 70 (93%) were negative for anti-litifilimab antibodies, regardless of their status at baseline (Table S17).
Adverse events occurred in 45 participants in the pooled litifilimab group (59%) and in 38 (68%) in the placebo group ( Table 3 ). Most adverse events were mild or moderate, as rated by trial investigators according to the severity definitions included in the trial protocol. The most frequently reported adverse events (reported in ≥5% of the participants in the pooled litifilimab group) were diarrhea, nasopharyngitis, urinary tract infection, falls, and headache. Viral infections of influenza (three cases), herpes zoster (two cases), herpes keratitis (one case), and viral gastroenteritis (one case) were reported in the litifilimab groups; herpes zoster and influenza (two cases each) were observed in the placebo group ( Table 3 and S18).
Serious adverse events were reported in four participants (5%) in the litifilimab groups and six participants (11%) in the placebo group. No serious adverse event was reported more than once in any group. Death was reported in 3 participants in the placebo group and in no participants in the litifilimab groups. No clinically significant abnormal laboratory tests or electrocardiogram results related to the receipt of litifilimab were reported.

Section: Discussion

In this phase 2, randomized, placebo-controlled trial that involved participants with SLE, arthritis, and active skin disease, litifilimab at a dose of 450 mg was superior to placebo in the change from baseline in the total number of active joints at week 24. The trial design and analysis plan for the primary end point were revised to adopt an organ-specific approach to assess the effects of litifilimab on arthritis.
Secondary end points included four end points that evaluated skin-related disease activity and four measures of SLE disease activity. The effects of litifilimab on cutaneous disease were also studied in part B of the trial, which enrolled participants with cutaneous lupus erythematosus, with or without systemic manifestations. We used SRI-4 response as a secondary end point to assess global changes in SLE disease activity. This registrational (i.e., supportive of regulatory review) end point is defined as a response on a four-component index in which the driver of efficacy is the reduction in the SLEDAI-2K score by at least 4 points, with a requirement for no worsening of BILAG-2004 and PGA scores.
In general, most of the secondary end points did not support the analysis of the primary end point (owing to the fact that for the least-squares mean difference for 450-mg litifilimab as compared with placebo, 95% confidence intervals included zero for most secondary end points), with the exceptions of a 7-point decrease from baseline in the CLASI-A score, SRI-4 response, and the change from baseline in the SLEDAI-2K score at week 24. There was no prespecified plan to adjust the widths of the confidence intervals of the secondary end points for multiple comparisons, so no formal inferences or conclusions can be drawn from the results. A post hoc analysis of the primary end point to account for an imbalance between the trial groups in the sex of participants provided results in the same direction as those of the primary analysis, with smaller end-point differences between groups; the greater proportion of women in the litifilimab group should not have advantaged that group with respect to the primary outcome.
In vitro studies have shown that litifilimab specifically inhibits the production of interferon-α by plasmacytoid dendritic cells induced by agonists of toll-like receptors 7 and 9. In the context of viral infections, cells that do not express BDCA2 may still be able to produce type I interferon, which may differ from complete inhibition of type I interferon. In our trial, two cases of herpes zoster and one case of herpes keratitis were reported in participants who received litifilimab, and two cases of herpes zoster were reported in participants who received placebo and standard care. Diarrhea, nasopharyngitis, and falls were the adverse events that were reported in 5% or more of the participants in the pooled litifilimab groups and at a higher percentage than among participants who received placebo. No hypersensitivity or herpes meningitis adverse events were observed in this part of the trial. The safety of part B of the current trial has been reported separately.
Our trial has several limitations. As a phase 2 trial, it was not powered to assess the secondary end points, and no conclusions can be drawn from these results. Also, we did not use imaging techniques to assess arthritis and relied on subjective clinical evaluation. To partially mitigate the confounding factors that were introduced by the low numbers of involved joints or the inclusion of active joints not typical of lupus arthritis, the inclusion criteria for this trial not only included at least four swollen joints but also specified the joints that were acceptable for inclusion. Imbalances between groups with regard to participants’ race or sex may have had an effect on the results. The effect of litifilimab will be assessed further in phase 3 trials (the Study to Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of BIIB059 in Adult Participants with Active Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Receiving Background Nonbiologic Lupus Standard of Care [TOPAZ-1; ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT04895241 ] and TOPAZ-2 [ NCT04961567 ]).
Litifilimab administered at a dose of 450 mg was associated with a greater decrease from baseline in the number of swollen and tender joints than placebo over a period of 24 weeks. Larger and longer trials are necessary to determine the effect and safety of litifilimab in patients with SLE.
