Title: Transgenic Epidermal Cultures for Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa — 5-Year Outcomes


Abstract: Summary


Section: Introduction

The skin of patients with generalized junctional epidermolysis bullosa is characterized by recurrent blistering and chronic infected wounds, which markedly impair quality of life. Approximately 40% of persons with severe junctional epidermolysis bullosa die before they reach adolescence. The condition is often caused by mutations in LAMB3 (encoding the β3 chain of laminin 332) that lead to alteration or absence of hemidesmosomes and to the formation of blisters within the lamina lucida of the basement membrane.
We previously reported that autologous transgenic epidermal cultures restored a fully functional epidermis in a 7-year-old boy with a homozygous acceptor splice-site mutation within intron 14 of LAMB3 and a massive exacerbation, with epidermal loss on 80% of his total body-surface area. The patient had been receiving palliative care. After approval on a compassionate basis had been received from regulatory authorities and written informed consent for treatment had been obtained from the child’s parent, we obtained a 4-cm skin-biopsy specimen taken from a nonblistering area of the patient’s skin and cultured keratinocytes from the specimen. We then transduced the keratinocytes with a γ-retroviral vector containing LAMB3 complementary DNA. We transplanted approximately 1 m of transgenic cultures onto the child’s surgically prepared wounds (two transplantation procedures, one performed in October 2015 and one in November 2015). Analysis of a biopsy specimen of the regenerated skin 21 months later showed normal levels of laminin 332 and a normal number of morphologically normal hemidesmosomes. Because γ-retroviral vector integrations serve as clonal genetic marks, we inferred that the human epidermis is sustained solely by a finite number of long-lived, self-renewing stem cells, defined as holoclone-forming cells, generating pools of short-lived progenitors. Here, we report long-term clinical and functional measures of the child’s transgenic skin.

Section: Methods

We performed hematoxylin and eosin staining; fluorescence in situ hybridization; immunofluorescence; immunoperoxidase staining; tests of skin hydration, transepidermal water loss, and sensory functions; and quality-of-life evaluations. Quantitative sensory testing was performed in accordance with the German Research Network on Neuropathic Pain (DFNS) protocol. Details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data in this report.

Section: Results

At 5 years and 5 months after receiving the transplanted autologous transgenic epidermal grafts, the child had recovered well and was engaged in age-appropriate social activities (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). His transgenic epidermis was stable and robust, was not prone to blistering even when exposed to friction, and showed blister-free wound healing ( Figure 1A through 1C and S2). No adverse events or skin contractures were observed on the transplanted areas. His mucosal involvement was minimal. He had neither anogenital nor esophageal lesions (even after having a nasogastric tube placed for >7 months), nor did he have blisters in the upper airways (despite prolonged intubation). He had a mild fragility of the oral mucosa and occasional corneal ulcerations. All these clinical improvements had been maintained as of the time of this report.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization with the use of a vector-specific t- LAMB3 probe confirmed that the regenerated epidermis consisted only of transgenic keratinocytes ( Figure 1E ). Before grafting, laminin 332-β3 was barely detectable, whereas the transgenic epidermis contained an amount of laminin 332-β3, properly located at the epidermal–dermal junction, that was similar to that of a normal epidermis ( Figure 1F ).
Before the beginning of the coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) pandemic, the child had received medication applied weekly to the untreated areas by professional nurses in order to minimize blister formation in untransplanted skin. Subsequently, Covid-19 restrictions precluded treatment for a period of 18 months, and massive blisters developed on the patient’s untransplanted skin, in contrast to the transplanted skin ( Figure 1D ).
The transgenic epidermis was regularly stratified and had normal orthokeratotic horny layers, but the epidermal–dermal junction was flat, with no defined rete ridges, and vascularization of the upper dermis was evident ( Figure 2A ). The dermis contained hair follicles, arrector pili muscle tissue, and sebaceous and sweat glands (Figs. Figure 1E, 1F, and Figure 2A ). LAMB3 messenger RNA and laminin 332 were detected in the epidermal basal layer but not in the outer root sheath of the hair follicle ( Figure 1E and 1F ), which suggests that transgenic epidermal cells were not able to repopulate hair follicles. As with normal epidermis (Fig. S3), keratin 14, keratin 10, and involucrin were regularly expressed in the epidermis (Fig. S4A). Langerhans’ cells, melanocytes, and rare Merkel cells ( Figure 2B ) were contained and properly located in the transgenic epidermis. As in normal skin, collagen IV was expressed along small blood vessels and the basement membrane ( Figure 2B ). The papillary dermis showed vertically oriented blood vessels, a finding typical of mild fibrosis; indeed, CD34-positive dermal cells were present in the lower dermis but not in the fibrotic upper dermis ( Figure 2B ). Elastin microfibrils were barely detectable in the papillary dermis, both before grafting and at the 5-year follow-up, but were detectable in the reticular dermis ( Figure 2B and S4B).
The epidermis in persons with LAMB3 junctional epidermolysis bullosa is marked by progressive depletion of stem cells, a finding consistent with dysregulation of the YAP–TAZ pathway. Indeed, p63 transcription factor, a determinant and marker of epidermal stem cells, was strongly down-regulated in the epidermis of our patient before grafting ( Figure 2B ). In contrast, the transgenic epidermal basal layer contained p63α cells at a density similar to that in healthy skin ( Figure 2B ).
Because quantitative sensory testing cannot be performed on painful blisters, we performed this testing on transgenic skin only. Thermoreception relies on Aδ and C nerve fibers, and mechanoreception requires Aβ fibers. Cold and warm detection thresholds progressively improved from 2 to 5 years after transplantation ( Figure 2C ) and were restored at 5 years. Mechanical pain thresholds were in the normal range throughout the follow-up period, but mechanical detection thresholds remained subnormal, especially in the lower right leg. These results are consistent with a mild mixed neuropathy, which in turn is consistent with a paucity of Aβ fibers and Merkel cells. Indeed, Aβ fibers innervate Merkel-cell complexes and aid in touch sensation. However, according to the patient’s functional score on the Quality of Life in Epidermolysis Bullosa questionnaire (see the Supplementary Appendix ), the patient did not have abnormal perception of mechanical stimuli (Fig. S1).
For comparison with the transplanted skin, some noninvasive functional tests were also performed on blistering skin. The mean (±SD) water loss from the transgenic epidermis remained constant at 2, 3, and 5 years of follow-up (8.14±2.24, 10.94±2.62, and 9.46±2.23 g per hour per square meter, respectively) and was within the normal range (8.95±4.45 g per hour per square meter in a healthy population). In contrast, the observed level of water loss from blistering areas of the epidermis was higher (88.40±24.66 g per hour per square meter) ( Figure 2D ).
The child was classified as having skin phototype 3. Skin pigmentation was homogeneous in his limbs ( Figure 1A through 1E ), but pigmented and hypopigmented areas were detected on his back and flanks, probably because of variation in the numbers of melanocytes in the different grafts. Frozen vials were used to prepare grafts for the back and flanks (but not for the limbs), and melanocytes are sensitive to freezing procedures. Furthermore, a homogeneous population of melanocytes in epidermal cultures requires culture conditions that are optimized for epidermal differentiation and stratification ; these conditions are not appropriate for epidermal cultures that are being used for full-thickness skin burns or epidermolysis bullosa. Narrow-band spectrophotometry was used to measure skin pigmentation on the limbs and erythema (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ). The child’s transgenic epidermis contained similar levels of melanin and hemoglobin at 2, 3, and 5 years of follow-up ( Figure 2D ). Melanin levels were similar to those in normal skin, and levels of hemoglobin were higher than those in normal controls at 2 and 3 years and reached normal values at 5 years. The child’s blistering skin revealed extreme erythema and very low melanin content ( Figure 2D ).
Hydration of transgenic epidermis ( Figure 2D ) remained relatively constant throughout follow-up and at 5 years and was similar to that in a healthy control population. The child did not (and still does not) use ointment or moisturizing medication.

Section: Discussion

This study confirms that transgenic epidermal cultures can restore large areas of epidermis affected by junctional epidermolysis bullosa over the long term. Since the human epidermis is renewed approximately every 1 to 2 months, we infer that the child’s transgenic epidermis has undergone 30 to 60 cycles of renewal. This is consistent with the observation that a patient with junctional epidermolysis bullosa treated in 2006 currently has functional, robust, and blister-free epidermis (on the small treated areas). The detection of a physiologic number of Langerhans’ cells indicates reconstitution of the immune system of the skin. The presence of an intact skin barrier and of sebaceous and sweat glands allows maintenance of skin hydration. The absence of proviruses in hair follicles suggests that under these conditions interfollicular keratinocytes do not repopulate the hair and confirms that bulge keratinocytes do not contribute to epidermal renewal under conditions of normal homeostasis.
The transgenic skin shows mild dermal fibrosis marked by a decrease in elastin microfibrils, as well as mild erythema and neuropathy; the neuropathy was most likely due to potential loss of Aβ fibers, as has already been described in patients with epidermolysis bullosa. At the 2-year follow-up, quantitative sensory testing revealed a generalized dysfunction of the large and small fibers in transplanted areas, most likely worsened by the child’s clinical picture and extensive critical care. However, function was greatly — although not completely — restored at the 5-year follow-up, as shown by virtually normal thermoreception and nociception but still abnormal mechanical detection thresholds.
Some of the features observed in the transgenic epidermis, such as a lack of rete ridges, decreased elastin fibers, and subnormal fine-fiber sensory function, are similar to those observed in full-thickness burns restored by keratinocyte cultures. Because in burns these measures eventually return to normal in the very long term (>5 years), they should be reassessed in future analyses of the skin in children. The preservation of the dermis in patients with junctional epidermolysis bullosa might account for the lack of scarring and roughly ordered dermal and vascular architecture that are normally seen in patients with full-thickness burns.
Alteration of fine-touch sensation was particularly evident in the child’s lower right leg and could be ascribed, at least in part, to wound-bed preparation. Whereas the vast majority of the child’s wounds were surgically prepared with the use of copper filament sponge, his lower right leg was prepared with the aid of a surgical knife. The deeper dermal lesion caused by the knife might have hampered the reinnervation process, as is also suggested by the rareness of Merkel cells, which may have led to a mild neuropathy, as is seen in grafted burns. This impairment might also be due to chronic inflammation associated with recurrent blistering. This raises questions as to whether combined cell and gene therapy should be performed as soon as possible in infants rather than in adults who have chronic wounds, as well as whether only blistering areas should be grafted or whether prophylactic treatment of the areas that are most likely to develop blisters and infection should be taken into account. Early transplantation may in fact improve functional outcomes of the dermal compartment and may also prevent disease exacerbation. An early approach in which epidermal replacement is performed progressively, with 10 to 20% of the total body-surface area replaced during each surgical procedure, may be a practical solution, providing a good wound bed for graft take while minimizing the perioperative risk.
One concern regarding the use of γ-retroviral vectors is the risk of genotoxic effects. Two patients with junctional epidermolysis bullosa received approximately 1×10 transgenic clonogenic keratinocytes, and no adverse events have been reported (at >15 years of follow-up). The child in our study received approximately 1.5×10 transgenic keratinocytes, 3.9×10 of which were clonogenic. None of these cells showed a clonal expansion, developed into a tumor, or caused other adverse events. Furthermore, the vast majority (>95%) of such engrafted clonogenic cells do not survive in the long term, being substituted by progenitors generated by holoclone-forming stem cells, which represent approximately 5% of the entire clonogenic population and are the only cells that persist over time, further minimizing the risk of genotoxic effects. Finally, we have not observed γ-retroviral vector insertional mutagenesis in human epidermal cells in more than 30 years of basic research. In fact, early treatment might ultimately decrease the risk of squamous-cell carcinoma, which is a hallmark of generalized epidermolysis bullosa and is probably due to adhesion defects, continuous wound-healing stimuli, and chronic inflammation, all of which would be restored by regeneration of a functional transgenic epidermis.
Overall, our long-term clinical results show a stable and robust transgenic epidermis and pave the way for a combined cell-and-gene-therapy platform that could be used to tackle other devastating forms of epidermolysis bullosa or different genodermatoses.
