Title: A Non–D2-Receptor-Binding Drug for the Treatment of Schizophrenia


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

An oral compound, SEP-363856, that does not act on dopamine D2 receptors but has agonist activity at trace amine–associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) and 5-hydroxytryptamine type 1A (5-HT 1A ) receptors, may represent a new class of psychotropic agent for the treatment of psychosis in schizophrenia.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We performed a randomized, controlled trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of SEP-363856 in adults with an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia. The patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive once-daily treatment with SEP-363856 (50 mg or 75 mg) or placebo for 4 weeks. The primary end point was the change from baseline in the total score on the Positive and Negative Symptom Scale (PANSS; range, 30 to 210; higher scores indicate more severe psychotic symptoms) at week 4. There were eight secondary end points, including the changes from baseline in the scores on the Clinical Global Impressions Severity (CGI-S) scale and the Brief Negative Symptom Scale (BNSS).

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 120 patients were assigned to the SEP-363856 group and 125 to the placebo group. The mean total score on the PANSS at baseline was 101.4 in the SEP-363856 group and 99.7 in the placebo group, and the mean change at week 4 was −17.2 points and −9.7 points, respectively (least-squares mean difference, −7.5 points; 95% confidence interval, −11.9 to −3.0; P=0.001). The reductions in the CGI-S and BNSS scores at week 4 were generally in the same direction as those for the primary outcome, but the results were not adjusted for multiple comparisons. Adverse events with SEP-363856 included somnolence and gastrointestinal symptoms; one sudden cardiac death occurred in the SEP-363856 group. The incidence of extrapyramidal symptoms and changes in the levels of lipids, glycated hemoglobin, and prolactin were similar in the trial groups.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In this 4-week trial involving patients with an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia, SEP-363856, a non–D2-receptor-binding antipsychotic drug, resulted in a greater reduction from baseline in the PANSS total score than placebo. Longer and larger trials are necessary to confirm the effects and side effects of SEP-363856, as well as its efficacy relative to existing drug treatments for patients with schizophrenia. (Funded by Sunovion Pharmaceuticals; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02969382 .)

Section: Introduction

Antipsychotic drugs have produced clinical benefit in patients with psychosis presumably through antagonist or partial agonist effects at postsynaptic dopamine D2 receptors. The efficacy of D2-receptor–binding antipsychotics is often limited in the treatment of negative symptoms (e.g., blunted affect and anhedonia) and cognitive impairment. Atypical antipsychotics that have antagonist activity at both D2 and serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine type 2A (5-HT 2A ) receptors were shown to have fewer side effects related to movement disorders than first-generation antipsychotics, but they did not improve efficacy and were associated with adverse metabolic effects and weight gain.
SEP-363856 was developed by researchers at Sunovion Pharmaceuticals in collaboration with PsychoGenics. A high-throughput phenotypic screening platform (SmartCube) involving a mouse behavioral model, in combination with in vitro antitarget screening, was used to identify candidate non–D2-receptor-binding compounds that exhibited antipsychotic-like activity. Methods used in medicinal chemistry research were implemented to screen selected compounds and ultimately led to obtaining SEP-363856.
The mechanism of action of SEP-363856 has not been fully elucidated. Preclinical data suggest that agonism at trace amine–associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) and serotonin 5-HT type 1A (5-HT 1A ) receptors contributes to its efficacy. The drug inhibits firing of a subset of neurons in the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain, partly through TAAR1 agonism. This inhibitory effect is consistent with a report of inhibition of dopaminergic neurons through activation of TAAR1. Several studies have suggested that the G-protein–coupled TAAR1 receptor has a role in modulating dopaminergic circuitry and has potential as a therapeutic target in patients with schizophrenia. In addition to its inhibitory effect on neurons in the ventral tegmental area, SEP-363856 attenuates ketamine-induced increases in striatal dopamine synthesis in mice, a finding that suggests that it could modulate presynaptic dopamine dysfunction, a possible contributor to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. The drug also has functional activity at the 5-HT 1A receptor, which in rodent models inhibits dorsal raphe neuron firing and partially attenuates phencyclidine-induced hyperactivity through activation of 5-HT 1A . Preclinical and clinical studies have implicated 5-HT 1A receptor agonists as also having a potential role in the treatment of schizophrenia.
These lines of evidence suggest that SEP-363856 may represent a new class of psychotropic agent with a non–D2-receptor-binding mechanism of action for the treatment of psychosis in schizophrenia. We performed a randomized, placebo-controlled trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of SEP-363856 in patients with an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia.

Section: Methods

The sponsor, Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, designed the trial and provided the trial drug and placebo. All the patients provided written informed consent before trial entry. The trial protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org, was approved by independent ethics committees or institutional review boards at each participating institution, and the trial was conducted in accordance with the International Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice guidelines and the ethical principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The informed consent form and the statistical analysis plan are available with the protocol , and a list of the members of the independent ethics committees and institutional review boards is provided in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org. A contract research organization (IQVIA, formerly Quintiles) paid by the sponsor supervised the conduct of the trial under the direction of the sponsor. The analysis and interpretation of the data were performed by the sponsor. A medical writer paid by the sponsor wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All the authors had full access to the trial data, reviewed and approved the manuscript before submission, and vouch for the adherence of the trial to the protocol, the completeness and accuracy of the data and analyses, and the reporting of adverse events. There are confidentiality agreements in place between the authors and the sponsor.
Patients were eligible for inclusion if they were 18 to 40 years of age, met the criteria for schizophrenia in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , fifth edition (DSM-5), for at least 6 months, and had (at the time of screening) an acute exacerbation of psychotic symptoms with a duration of 2 months or less. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5, Clinical Trials Version (SCID-5-CT), was conducted by a trained clinician to confirm the DSM-5 diagnosis. Eligible patients had a score of at least 4 on the Clinical Global Impression of Severity (CGI-S) scale (scores range from 1 to 7, with higher scores indicating higher global severity of schizophrenic illness) and a total score on the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) of at least 80 (scores range from 30 to 210, with higher scores indicating more severe psychotic symptoms). Patients were excluded if they had three or more prior hospitalizations for treatment of an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia (full inclusion and exclusion criteria are provided in the protocol ). Patients who were receiving treatment with depot neuroleptic agents were excluded unless the neuroleptic drug had been discontinued at least 30 days before the screening visit.
The trial was conducted at 34 clinical sites in five countries in Eastern Europe and North America (Hungary, Romania, Russia, Ukraine, and the United States) from December 2016 through July 2018. The trial consisted of a screening and washout period of up to 14 days, during which all psychotropic medications were discontinued; a double-blind treatment period, during which hospitalized patients who continued to meet entry criteria were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive once-daily SEP-363856 (at flexible doses of 50 mg or 75 mg) or placebo for 4 weeks; and a follow-up period, during which patients who decided not to continue in an optional 26-week, open-label extension study were assessed 7 days after discontinuation of SEP-363856 or placebo (patients who discontinued the trial drug or placebo before week 4 also completed an assessment at day 7).
Randomization was performed centrally by a biostatistician (not otherwise involved in the trial) with the use of a computer-generated random-number sequence. Capsules containing either the 50-mg or 75-mg doses of SEP-363856 or placebo were provided in blister packs that were identical in packaging, labeling, weight, appearance, and schedule of administration. The randomized assignment sequence was concealed from the patients and all the trial personnel and investigators. In addition, the sponsor, clinical team members of the contract research organization involved in the trial, data analysts, and personnel at the central laboratories were unaware of the trial-group assignments.
SEP-363856 or placebo was administered orally once daily at bedtime. Patients received a dose of 50 mg per day of SEP-363856 or matching placebo on day 1 through day 3. On the basis of the investigator’s judgment of the efficacy and safety in individual patients, adjustment of the dose to a maximum of 75 mg per day of SEP-363856 or equivalent placebo was permitted (but not required) on day 4 and at subsequent regularly scheduled weekly trial visits. A dose reduction (from 75 mg to 50 mg per day of SEP-363856 or equivalent placebo) because of unacceptable side effects was permitted at any time.
Treatment with anticholinergic agents or propranolol was permitted for akathisia and movement disorders. Lorazepam, temazepam, and eszopiclone (or their equivalents) were permitted as needed for anxiety or insomnia, but not within 8 hours before any trial assessment.
At the completion of the trial, patients were given the option to enroll in an outpatient study in which they received open-label treatment with SEP-363856 in flexible doses of 25 mg, 50 mg, or 75 mg per day for 26 weeks. The patients provided written informed consent before participation in the extension study. To maintain the double-blind nature of the placebo-controlled trial, the patients enrolled in the extension study received a starting dose of SEP-363856 of 50 mg per day for 3 days, regardless of their initial trial-group assignment. The patients were assessed at weekly intervals for the first 4 weeks and then every 4 weeks thereafter up to week 24; a final assessment was performed at week 26.
Efficacy was assessed with the use of the PANSS, the CGI-S scale, the Brief Negative Symptom Scale (BNSS; total scores range from 0 to 78, with higher scores indicating greater severity of negative symptoms), and the Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS; total scores range from 0 to 60, with higher scores indicating greater severity of symptoms of depression). Training and certification of investigators for all efficacy assessments were provided before trial enrollment.
The primary efficacy end point was the change from baseline in the total score on the PANSS at week 4. Prespecified secondary efficacy end points were the least-squares mean changes from baseline in the CGI-S scale score, the PANSS subscale (positive, negative, and general psychopathology) scores, and the total scores on the BNSS and MADRS; a PANSS response (defined as an improvement of ≥20% in the total score on the PANSS); and the change from baseline in the uncorrelated PANSS score matrix (UPSM)-transformed PANSS factor severity scores. The UPSM-transformed PANSS factors measure drug effects on clinical symptom domains of schizophrenia with greater specificity by correcting for correlated improvements among the individual PANSS items.
Safety assessments included monitoring for adverse events and serious adverse events, evaluation of vital signs and weight, laboratory tests (including fasting lipid and glucose levels), and 12-lead electrocardiography. Extrapyramidal symptoms were assessed with the use of the Simpson–Angus Rating Scale (SAS; scores range from 0 to 40, with higher scores indicating more extrapyramidal signs in 10 domains, each scored from 0 to 4), the Barnes Rating Scale for Drug-Induced Akathisia (BARS; global clinical assessment scores range from 0 to 5, with higher scores indicating greater akathisia), and the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS; scores range from 0 to 44, with higher scores indicating more frequent and severe abnormal involuntary movements). Suicidality was assessed with the use of the Columbia–Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS). Sleep quality was assessed with the use of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI; global scores range from 0 to 21, with higher scores indicating worse sleep quality).
Analyses of efficacy were performed in the modified intention-to-treat population, which included all patients who underwent randomization, received at least one dose of SEP-363856 or placebo, and had a baseline measurement and at least one postbaseline measurement of efficacy based on the PANSS or CGI-S scale. However, all the patients fulfilled these criteria, and the modified intention-to-treat population was the same as the intention-to-treat population. The safety population included all patients who underwent randomization and received at least one dose of SEP-363856 or placebo. No interim analyses or unblinded data monitoring were performed in this trial.
The primary efficacy end point was evaluated with the use of a mixed model for repeated measures; effect sizes were calculated as the absolute value of the difference between the SEP-363856 group and the placebo group in the change in score from baseline at week 4, divided by the pooled standard deviation of the between-group difference in the change in score. In order to assess the robustness of the mixed model for repeated-measures analysis of the primary end point and the potential effect of missing data due to early withdrawals, a tipping-point analysis and pattern-mixture modeling with placebo-based multiple imputation were performed as sensitivity analyses.
The secondary efficacy end points were also evaluated with the use of a mixed model for repeated measures, with the exception of the UPSM-transformed PANSS factors, which were evaluated with the use of a prespecified analysis-of-covariance model to assess domain-specific change in patients who completed the 4-week trial. Because no adjustment for multiple comparisons was performed, no inferences can be drawn regarding the secondary efficacy end points; these results are presented as point estimates with unadjusted 95% confidence intervals only. PANSS response was evaluated with the use of a logistic-regression model with total score on the PANSS at baseline as a covariate.
Descriptive statistics were used to analyze safety data, including adverse events, laboratory values, findings from clinical evaluations, and C-SSRS scores. Changes from baseline in scores on the SAS, BARS, and AIMS were evaluated with the use of a mixed model for repeated measures. Only one postbaseline PSQI assessment was performed, and thus these data were evaluated with the use of analysis of covariance.

Section: Results

A total of 295 patients were screened, of whom 245 underwent randomization, received at least one dose of SEP-363856 or placebo, and had at least one postbaseline efficacy evaluation ( Figure 1 ). The 4-week trial was completed by 78.3% of the patients in the SEP-363856 group and by 79.2% of those in the placebo group; the reasons for discontinuation of SEP-363856 or placebo are summarized in Figure 1 . The percentages of patients in the SEP-363856 group who were receiving the 75-mg-per-day dose were 67.2% at week 1, 70.0% at week 2, and 72.5% at week 3; the SEP-363856 dose was reduced from 75 mg to 50 mg per day in 4 patients. The mean (±SD) duration of exposure to SEP-363856 or placebo was 24.3±7.6 days in the SEP-363856 group and 25.4±6.4 days in the placebo group. The use of concomitant medications included anticholinergic agents (1 patient in the placebo group), antipsychotic agents (1 patient in the placebo group), anxiolytics (32 patients in the SEP-363856 group and 30 in the placebo group), and hypnotics and sedative agents (10 patients in the SEP-363856 group and 15 in the placebo group).
Clinical and demographic characteristics among the patients at baseline were similar in the two trial groups ( Table 1 ); the mean age was 30.3 years, 81.6% were white, 63.7% were male, and the mean time since the onset of schizophrenia was 5 years. The mean total scores on the PANSS at baseline were 101.4 in the SEP-363856 group and 99.7 in the placebo group.
The least-squares mean change from baseline in the total score on the PANSS at week 4 was −17.2 points in the SEP-363856 group and −9.7 points in the placebo group (least-squares mean difference, −7.5 points; 95% confidence interval [CI], −11.9 to −3.0; P=0.001) ( Table 2 and Figure 2 ). The between-group least-squares mean differences in the changes from baseline in the CGI-S scale score and the PANSS positive, negative, and general psychopathology subscale scores at week 4 were −0.5 points (95% CI, −0.7 to −0.2), −1.7 points (95% CI, −3.1 to −0.3), −1.5 points (95% CI, −2.6 to −0.4), and −4.3 points (95% CI, −6.6 to −2.0), respectively ( Table 2 ). Effect sizes with respect to the changes in the uncorrelated UPSM-transformed PANSS factor severity scores are shown in Figure S1 in the Supplementary Appendix . The between-group least-squares mean differences in the changes from baseline in the total scores on the BNSS and MADRS at week 4 were −4.3 points (95% CI, −6.8 to −1.8) and −1.8 points (95% CI, −3.2 to −0.3), respectively ( Table 2 ). A PANSS response at week 4 was observed in 64.6% of the patients in the SEP-363856 group and in 44.0% of those in the placebo group (odds ratio, 2.6; 95% CI, 1.4 to 4.9). Because of the lack of a prespecified plan for adjustment for multiple comparisons of secondary end points, the confidence intervals are not adjusted for multiple comparisons and no inferences can be drawn from any secondary end-point data. The results of planned sensitivity analyses were in the same direction as the results of the primary efficacy analysis (Table S2). A trial-group-by-country analysis showed no significant interaction effect at week 4 (Fig. S2).
Adverse events are summarized in Table 3 . Severe adverse events occurred in seven patients (5.8%) in the SEP-363856 group and in two patients (1.6%) in the placebo group. The incidence of insomnia was 3.3% in the SEP-363856 group and 10.4% in the placebo group, and concomitant hypnotics were used by 8.3% and 12.0% of the patients, respectively. Treatment with SEP-363856, as compared with placebo, was associated with an improvement in sleep quality, with a least-squares mean (±SE) change from baseline in the PSQI global score at week 4 of −2.5±0.4 points in the SEP-363856 group and −1.7±0.4 points in the placebo group.
The incidence of extrapyramidal symptoms (akathisia, restlessness, musculoskeletal or joint stiffness, tremor, and nuchal rigidity) was 3.3% in the SEP-363856 group and 3.2% in the placebo group. At week 4, the least-squares mean changes from baseline in the scores on the SAS, the BARS, and the AIMS, which were used to determine the effects on movement disorders, were −0.01±0.01 points, 0.0±0.06 points, and 0.0±0.01 points, respectively, in the SEP-363856 group and 0.01±0.01 points, 0.1±0.05 points, and 0.0±0.01 points, respectively, in the placebo group. A concomitant medication to treat extrapyramidal symptoms was prescribed to one patient in the SEP-363856 group (lorazepam for restlessness) and one patient in the placebo group (trihexyphenidyl for hand tremor and restlessness).
The two serious adverse events that occurred in the SEP-363856 group were worsening of schizophrenia and acute cardiovascular insufficiency in a 37-year-old woman that resulted in sudden death 7 days after she had taken the first 50-mg dose of SEP-363856. The patient had a history of essential hypertension and was found on autopsy to have coronary artery disease and pulmonary embolism. There were four serious events in the placebo group (three patients had worsening of schizophrenia and one patient attempted suicide). According to the scores on the C-SSRS, no suicidal ideation or behavior was present among the patients in the SEP-363856 group, and there were two instances of suicidality among those in the placebo group.
Differences in vital signs (including orthostatic hypotension or tachycardia), weight, body-mass index, and laboratory values (including prolactin and fasting metabolic measures) between the SEP-363856 group and the placebo group are shown in Table 3 . There were no clinically significant electrocardiographic abnormalities after baseline, and no patient in the SEP-363856 group or the placebo group had a prolongation of the corrected QT interval, calculated with the use of Fridericia’s formula (QTcF), of more than 450 msec or an increase in the QTcF interval of more than 60 msec.
A total of 156 patients (80.8% of those who completed the 4-week trial) were enrolled and received treatment with SEP-363856 in the 26-week, open-label extension study. Among 77 patients who had initially been randomly assigned to receive SEP-363856 in the double-blind trial and then continued to receive treatment in the open-label extension, the mean (±SD) change from the extension-study baseline in the PANSS total score at week 26 was −17.1±12.4 points (Fig. S3). Among 79 patients who had initially been randomly assigned to receive placebo and then switched to open-label SEP-363856, the mean change from the extension-study baseline in the PANSS total score at week 26 was −27.9±16.4 points. The adverse events related to extrapyramidal symptoms that occurred among the 156 patients included parkinsonism (2 patients), dyskinesia (1 patient), tremor (1 patient), and restlessness (1 patient). Additional safety data are summarized in Table S3.

Section: Discussion

In this 4-week, flexible-dose trial involving patients with an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia, SEP-363856, a drug that does not bind to the dopamine D2 receptor, resulted in a greater reduction from baseline in the PANSS total score at week 4 (the primary efficacy end point) than placebo. Treatment with SEP-363856 was associated with changes in the severity scores on the secondary efficacy measures (including the CGI-S scale and the PANSS positive, negative, and general psychopathology subscales) at week 4 that were in the same direction as the scores in the primary efficacy analysis. Treatment with SEP-363856 was also associated with changes in severity scores of negative symptoms of schizophrenia at week 4 (as measured by both the BNSS total score and the UPSM-transformed PANSS negative symptom factor scores) that were in the same direction as the scores in the primary efficacy analysis. Changes in the UPSM-transformed PANSS negative symptom factor scores (apathy or avolition and deficit of expression) were shown previously to have minimal correlations with change in the UPSM-transformed PANSS positive symptom factor score, a finding that suggests that specific effects on negative symptoms are measured by the UPSM negative symptom factors. However, because there was no plan for adjustment for multiple comparisons with respect to secondary efficacy outcomes, no inferences can be drawn from any of these secondary outcome data. A reduction in the total score on the PANSS was observed during the additional 26-week extension study of open-label treatment with SEP-363856 (Fig. S2); however, because no control group was available for comparison, no conclusions can be drawn from this reduction in PANSS score.
The percentage of patients who discontinued SEP-363856 or placebo was similar in the two groups (21.7% vs. 20.8%) and was similar to or lower than the percentage of patients who had dropped out of previous short-term trials of first- and second-generation antipsychotics; however, the design of the previous trials does not allow direct comparison with our trial. The incidence of adverse events was generally similar in the SEP-363856 group and the placebo group, with a difference of 2.5% or less for each event. The SEP-363856 and placebo groups were similar with respect to the percentage of patients who reported extrapyramidal symptoms (3.3% vs. 3.2%), the percentage who used medications to treat extrapyramidal symptoms, and the findings on movement disorder scales. In addition, minimal effects on prolactin were observed in the SEP-363856 group. These findings are consistent with the absence of D2-receptor binding for SEP-363856. Short-term treatment with SEP-363856 was associated with a mean increase in body weight of 0.3 kg, reductions in total and LDL cholesterol levels, and no change in other metabolic laboratory values. No clinically significant electrocardiographic abnormalities, including prolongation in the QTcF interval, were present after baseline.
A limitation of the trial should be noted. The generalizability of the findings from this trial is limited by its short duration and by enrollment criteria that excluded persons older than 40 years of age and those who had more than two prior hospitalizations for exacerbation of schizophrenia.
In conclusion, in this 4-week trial involving patients with an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia, SEP-363856, a drug with a non–D2-receptor-binding mechanism of action but with agonist activity at TAAR1 and 5-HT 1A receptors, led to a greater reduction in the total score on the PANSS than placebo. Longer and larger trials are necessary to determine the effects and safety of SEP-363856, as well as its efficacy relative to existing drug treatments for schizophrenia.
