Title: Evinacumab in Patients with Refractory Hypercholesterolemia


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Patients with refractory hypercholesterolemia, who have high low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels despite treatment with lipid-lowering therapies at maximum tolerated doses, have an increased risk of atherosclerosis. In such patients, the efficacy and safety of subcutaneous and intravenous evinacumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody against angiopoietin-like 3, are not known.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial, we enrolled patients with or without heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia who had refractory hypercholesterolemia, with a screening LDL cholesterol level of 70 mg per deciliter or higher with atherosclerosis or of 100 mg per deciliter or higher without atherosclerosis. Patients were randomly assigned to receive subcutaneous or intravenous evinacumab or placebo. The primary end point was the percent change from baseline in the LDL cholesterol level at week 16 with evinacumab as compared with placebo.

Abstract_Section: Results

In total, 272 patients were randomly assigned to the following groups: subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 450 mg weekly (40 patients), 300 mg weekly (43 patients), or 300 mg every 2 weeks (39 patients) or placebo (41 patients); or intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram of body weight every 4 weeks (39 patients) or 5 mg per kilogram every 4 weeks (36 patients) or placebo (34 patients). At week 16, the differences in the least-squares mean change from baseline in the LDL cholesterol level between the groups assigned to receive subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 450 mg weekly, 300 mg weekly, and 300 mg every 2 weeks and the placebo group were −56.0, −52.9, and −38.5 percentage points, respectively (P<0.001 for all comparisons). The differences between the groups assigned to receive intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram and 5 mg per kilogram and the placebo group were −50.5 percentage points (P<0.001) and −24.2 percentage points, respectively. The incidence of serious adverse events during the treatment period ranged from 3 to 16% across trial groups.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In patients with refractory hypercholesterolemia, the use of evinacumab significantly reduced the LDL cholesterol level, by more than 50% at the maximum dose. (Funded by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03175367 .)

Section: Introduction

Lifelong exposure to elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels is associated with an increased risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. In the United States, approximately 7% of adults receive a diagnosis of severe hypercholesterolemia, defined as having untreated LDL cholesterol levels of 190 mg per deciliter (4.91 mmol per liter) or higher. In one study, a familial hypercholesterolemia mutation was present in 1.7% of 1386 patients with severe hypercholesterolemia. In a meta-analysis involving 11 million adults, the worldwide prevalence of familial hypercholesterolemia among those with severe hypercholesterolemia was 7.2%.
Heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder that is most often caused by mutations in the LDL receptor gene, resulting in decreased or absent hepatic clearance of LDL cholesterol from the circulation and in an elevated plasma LDL cholesterol level. In the general population, the estimated prevalence of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia is 0.32%, which suggests that 1 in 313 people is affected. In the aforementioned meta-analysis, the worldwide prevalence of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia among people with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, or severe hypercholesterolemia was determined to be 10, 20, and 23 times as high, respectively, as the prevalence in the general population. Data from 1493 patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia in the Spanish SAFEHEART registry showed that 22.1% had atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and 10.3% had cardiovascular events during a mean follow-up of 3.9 years. As compared with the risk of coronary artery disease in a reference group of patients with LDL cholesterol levels of less than 130 mg per deciliter (3.36 mmol per liter) and no familial hypercholesterolemia mutation, the risk was 6.0 times as high among patients with LDL cholesterol levels of 190 mg per deciliter or higher and no mutation and was 22.3 times as high among patients with LDL cholesterol levels of 190 mg per deciliter or higher and a mutation, findings that reflect the detrimental effect of lifelong exposure to elevated LDL cholesterol levels. Familial hypercholesterolemia mutations are associated with an increase in the odds of early-onset (≤55 years of age) myocardial infarction by a factor of 3.8.
The 2019 European Society of Cardiology (ESC)–European Atherosclerosis Society (EAS) clinical guidelines recommend target LDL cholesterol levels of less than 55 mg per deciliter (1.42 mmol per liter), less than 70 mg per deciliter (1.81 mmol per liter), and less than 100 mg per deciliter (2.59 mmol per liter) in patients with very high, high, and moderate risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, respectively. The 2018 American College of Cardiology (ACC)–American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines recommend that clinicians use an LDL cholesterol threshold of 70 mg per deciliter or higher to prompt intensification of lipid-lowering therapies in patients with very high risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. These treatment goals are difficult to achieve in some patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia despite treatment with a statin at a maximum tolerated dose, ezetimibe, and a proprotein convertase subtilisin–kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitor. Although additional lowering of the LDL cholesterol level may be done with LDL apheresis, the use of this invasive approach is restricted by limited accessibility to apheresis centers, high procedural costs, inconvenience to patients, the lack of insurance coverage support, and adverse events.
Angiopoietin-like 3 (ANGPTL3) plays a prominent role in the regulation of lipid metabolism by inhibiting lipoprotein lipase and endothelial lipase. Patients with loss-of-function variants of ANGPTL3 have a hypolipidemic phenotype, with substantially reduced levels of LDL cholesterol, triglycerides, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Moreover, the risk of coronary artery disease among patients with ANGPTL3 loss-of-function variants is 41% lower than the risk in the general population. Functional analyses conducted in a phase 2 proof-of-concept study suggest that evinacumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody against ANGPTL3, is effective in lowering the LDL cholesterol level with a mechanism independent of the LDL receptor. In the phase 3 Evinacumab Lipid Studies in Patients with Homozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia (ELIPSE HoFH), involving 65 patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, patients who received treatment with evinacumab had a 47.1% reduction from baseline in the LDL cholesterol level at week 24, whereas those who received placebo had a 1.9% increase, resulting in a between-group least-squares mean difference of –49.0 percentage points (P<0.001); results were similar even among those with null variants of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (<2% LDL receptor activity).
In the phase 2 proof-of-concept study and the phase 3 ELIPSE HoFH trial, evinacumab was infused intravenously, over a period of 60 minutes, at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram of body weight every 4 weeks. However, subcutaneous administration of evinacumab can be more convenient for patients. In this trial, we assessed the efficacy and safety of subcutaneous and intravenous evinacumab, as compared with placebo, in patients with refractory hypercholesterolemia who had been treated with maximum tolerated doses of statins and other lipid-lowering therapies, including a PCSK9 inhibitor.

Section: Methods

This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial was conducted at 85 sites across 20 countries. The trial protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org, was approved by the institutional review board or ethics committee at each participating site. The trial was conducted in accordance with ethical principles originating from the Declaration of Helsinki and was consistent with International Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice guidelines and applicable regulatory requirements. The principal investigators and sponsor (Regeneron Pharmaceuticals) designed the trial protocol and selected the participating sites. Clinical trial monitoring and site supervision were performed by a contract research organization with oversight by the sponsor. The sponsor was also involved in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data and checked the information provided in the manuscript. The first author wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All the authors had unrestricted access to the trial data, contributed to the first draft of the manuscript, participated in revisions, and vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. Editorial support for the writing of the manuscript was provided by Prime Global and paid for by the sponsor.
The trial included a run-in period of variable duration for patients who were not receiving a PCSK9 inhibitor or background lipid-lowering therapy at a maximum tolerated dose on a regular basis. The run-in period was followed by a 2-week screening period, a double-blind treatment period lasting 16 weeks for subcutaneous treatment and 24 weeks for intravenous treatment, a 48-week open-label treatment period for intravenous treatment only, and a 24-week follow-up period after the last dose of the trial drug (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org).
Patients 18 to 80 years of age were eligible for inclusion in the trial if they had primary hypercholesterolemia, defined as either heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia or non–heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia with clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. The hypercholesterolemia was refractory to treatment with a PCSK9 inhibitor and a statin at a maximum tolerated dose, with or without ezetimibe. A diagnosis of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia was based on genotyping or clinical criteria. For patients who did not undergo genotyping, the clinical diagnosis was based on the Simon Broome criteria for definite familial hypercholesterolemia or the World Health Organization–Dutch Lipid Clinic Network criteria, with a score of more than 8 points (range of possible scores, 0 to 32) indicating a certain diagnosis of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (see the Supplementary Appendix ). Refractory hypercholesterolemia was defined as an LDL cholesterol level of 70 mg per deciliter or higher with clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease or a level of 100 mg per deciliter or higher without clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. The full list of eligibility criteria is provided in the Supplementary Appendix . Written informed consent was obtained from each patient in the trial.
Patients were randomly assigned to receive subcutaneous treatment (one of three evinacumab regimens or placebo, assigned in a 1:1:1:1 ratio) or intravenous treatment (one of two evinacumab regimens or placebo, assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio). Randomization was stratified according to the presence or absence of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (2:1 ratio) and to the receipt or nonreceipt of a high-intensity statin. The subcutaneous regimens were evinacumab at a dose of 450 mg weekly, 300 mg weekly, or 300 mg every 2 weeks or placebo weekly. The intravenous regimens were evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram of body weight every 4 weeks or 5 mg per kilogram every 4 weeks or placebo every 4 weeks. All patients who were assigned to the intravenous-treatment groups entered the 48-week open-label treatment period, in which they received intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram every 4 weeks, regardless of their treatment assignment in the double-blind treatment period. In this article, we present the results from the double-blind treatment period.
The primary end point was the percent change from baseline in the LDL cholesterol level at week 16 with subcutaneous or intravenous evinacumab as compared with placebo. The LDL cholesterol level was calculated with the use of the Friedewald formula. Secondary end points included lipid levels. Safety was evaluated on the basis of the incidence of adverse events that occurred during the double-blind treatment period. Lists of secondary end points and protocol-defined adverse events of special interest are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
We calculated that a sample of 36 patients per trial group would provide the trial with 90% power to detect a between-group difference in the mean percent change in the LDL cholesterol level of 20 percentage points in any one pairwise comparison with the use of an independent group t-test with a 0.05 two-sided significance level, under the assumption of a common standard deviation of 25%, with adjustment to account for a 5% dropout rate. The primary efficacy end point of the percent change from baseline in the calculated LDL cholesterol level at week 16 during the double-blind treatment period was analyzed in the intention-to-treat population with the use of a mixed-effect model with a repeated-measures approach. The model included the categorical fixed effects of treatment (evinacumab or placebo), randomization strata (receipt of a high-intensity statin [yes or no] and presence of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia [yes or no]), time point up to week 16, strata-by-time point interaction, and treatment-by-time point interaction, as well as the continuous fixed covariates of the calculated LDL cholesterol level at baseline and baseline LDL cholesterol level-by-time point interaction. The model provided baseline-adjusted least-squares mean estimates at week 16 with corresponding 95% confidence intervals and standard errors.
Four between-group comparisons were performed with regard to the primary end point: intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram every 4 weeks was compared with intravenous placebo, and each of the three doses of subcutaneous evinacumab (450 mg weekly, 300 mg weekly, and 300 mg every 2 weeks) was compared with subcutaneous placebo. The statistical testing of these four pairwise comparisons with regard to the primary end point was performed with the use of a hierarchical inferential approach to adjust for multiplicity; testing was to be performed in the order shown above, with each subsequent test performed when the primary end-point results were significant at an alpha level of 0.05. The regimen of intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 5 mg per kilogram every 4 weeks was added to allow for an initial assessment of the dose–response relationship with the intravenous route of administration. Secondary efficacy end points and the comparison of intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 5 mg per kilogram with placebo were assessed descriptively. Baseline and safety data were assessed with the use of descriptive statistics. The statistical analysis plan did not include a provision for correction for multiplicity in tests for secondary or other outcomes; results for these outcomes are reported as point estimates and 95% confidence intervals. Because the widths of the confidence intervals have not been adjusted for multiplicity, they should not be used to infer definitive treatment effects with regard to secondary outcomes.

Section: Results

Overall, 272 patients were randomly assigned to receive subcutaneous evinacumab or placebo (163 patients) or intravenous evinacumab or placebo (109 patients) (Fig. S2). The subcutaneous regimens were evinacumab at a dose of 450 mg weekly (40 patients), 300 mg weekly (43 patients), or 300 mg every 2 weeks (39 patients) or placebo weekly (41 patients). The intravenous regimens were evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram every 4 weeks (39 patients) or 5 mg per kilogram every 4 weeks (36 patients) or placebo every 4 weeks (34 patients). Six patients (3 assigned to a subcutaneous regimen and 3 assigned to an intravenous regimen) did not receive the trial agent. Thus, the intention-to-treat population included 266 patients (160 assigned to a subcutaneous regimen and 106 assigned to an intravenous regimen).
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients at baseline were generally well balanced among the subcutaneous-treatment groups ( Table 1 ). In total, 116 patients (72%) had heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia and 44 (28%) did not. The baseline mean (±SD) LDL cholesterol level was similar among patients assigned to receive evinacumab at a dose of 450 mg weekly (146.3±84.6 mg per deciliter [3.78±2.19 mmol per liter]), evinacumab at a dose of 300 mg weekly (159.1±73.0 mg per deciliter [4.11±1.89 mmol per liter]), and placebo (157.8±92.4 mg per deciliter [4.08±2.39 mmol per liter]) but was lower among patients assigned to receive evinacumab at a dose of 300 mg every 2 weeks (136.2±70.2 mg per deciliter [3.52±1.82 mmol per liter]). All the patients were receiving a PCSK9 inhibitor, 44% were receiving a high-intensity statin (with all these patients receiving a maximum tolerated dose of the statin), and 30% were receiving ezetimibe.
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients at baseline were also generally well balanced among the intravenous-treatment groups ( Table 2 ). In total, 86 patients (81%) had heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia and 20 (19%) did not. The baseline mean LDL cholesterol level was similar among patients assigned to receive evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram (143.1±54.4 mg per deciliter [3.70±1.41 mmol per liter]), evinacumab at a dose of 5 mg per kilogram (146.0±61.0 mg per deciliter [3.78±1.58 mmol per liter]), and placebo (144.5±46.6 mg per deciliter [3.74±1.21 mmol per liter]). Most of the patients (96%) were receiving a PCSK9 inhibitor, 49% were receiving a high-intensity statin (with all these patients receiving a maximum tolerated dose of the statin), and 38% were receiving ezetimibe.
At week 16, the change from baseline in the LDL cholesterol level was −47.2% with subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 450 mg weekly and −44.0% with subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 300 mg weekly, as compared with 8.8% with placebo, with a least-squares mean difference (each of these evinacumab regimens vs. placebo) of –56.0 and −52.9 percentage points, respectively (P<0.001 for both comparisons) ( Figure 1 and Table 3 ). A smaller reduction from baseline in the LDL cholesterol level at week 16 was observed with subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 300 mg every 2 weeks, with a least-squares mean difference (vs. placebo) of −38.5 percentage points (P<0.001) ( Figure 1 and Table 3 ). The reduction in the LDL cholesterol level with all three subcutaneous-evinacumab regimens was observed as early as the first postbaseline lipid assessment (week 2) and was maintained through week 16.
At week 16, the change from baseline in the LDL cholesterol level was –49.9% with intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram, as compared with 0.6% with placebo, with a least-squares mean difference of –50.5 percentage points (P<0.001) ( Figure 1 and Table 3 ). The change was –23.5% with intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 5 mg per kilogram, with a least-squares mean difference (vs. placebo) of –24.2 percentage points ( Figure 1 and Table 3 ). The reduction in the LDL cholesterol level with the two intravenous-evinacumab regimens was observed as early as the first postbaseline lipid assessment (week 2) and was maintained through week 16.
Lipid levels were substantially lower with subcutaneous and intravenous evinacumab than with placebo (Tables S1 and S2). With the exception of the lipoprotein(a) level, all atherogenic lipoprotein levels decreased in a dose-dependent manner. At week 16, the change from baseline in the HDL cholesterol level was −27.9%, −30.3%, and −19.5% with subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 450 mg weekly, 300 mg weekly, and 300 mg every 2 weeks, respectively, as compared with −1.7% with subcutaneous placebo. In addition, at week 16, the change from baseline in the mean HDL cholesterol level was −31.4% and −14.9% with intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram and 5 mg per kilogram, respectively, as compared with 1.9% with intravenous placebo.
During the double-blind treatment period, adverse events occurred in 68%, 67%, and 82% of the patients who received subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 450 mg weekly, 300 mg weekly, and 300 mg every 2 weeks, respectively, as compared with 54% of the patients who received subcutaneous placebo ( Table 4 ). Adverse events that occurred in at least 5% of the patients in the subcutaneous-treatment groups are described in Table S3. Adverse events that occurred in at least 5% of the patients who received subcutaneous evinacumab (any of the three regimens) and occurred more frequently with subcutaneous evinacumab than with subcutaneous placebo included urinary tract infection (11% vs. 8%), injection-site erythema (6% vs. 3%), arthralgia (5% vs. 3%), and myalgia (5% vs. 0%).
During the double-blind treatment period, adverse events occurred in 84% and 75% of the patients who received intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram and 5 mg per kilogram, respectively, as compared with 70% of the patients who received intravenous placebo ( Table 4 ). Adverse events that occurred in at least 5% of the patients who received intravenous evinacumab (either of the two regimens) and occurred more frequently with intravenous evinacumab than with intravenous placebo included abdominal pain (6% vs. 0%), back pain (7% vs. 6%), dizziness (7% vs. 0%), fatigue (7% vs. 6%), pain in an arm or leg (7% vs. 6%), nausea (7% vs. 0%), and nasopharyngitis (12% vs. 6%).
In patients who received subcutaneous or intravenous evinacumab, few high-grade adverse events were observed. Overall, there were no clinically significant differences between the subcutaneous-treatment groups and the intravenous-treatment groups with respect to serious adverse events, adverse events resulting in treatment discontinuation, or adverse events of special interest that occurred during the double-blind treatment period.
In the subcutaneous-treatment groups, the only adverse event resulting in treatment discontinuation that was considered by the investigator to be related to the trial drug was dyspnea, which occurred with subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 300 mg every 2 weeks and resolved fully. Adverse events resulting in death occurred in one patient who was treated with subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 300 mg weekly (heart failure or cardiogenic shock) and one patient who was treated with subcutaneous evinacumab at a dose of 300 mg every 2 weeks (sudden cardiac death). These events occurred in patients with underlying heart disease and were not considered by the investigator to be related to the trial drug. In the intravenous-treatment groups, the only adverse event resulting in treatment discontinuation that was considered by the investigator to be related to the trial drug was anaphylactic reaction (an adverse event of special interest), which occurred with the second dose of intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram. This event, which occurred in a patient with a relevant medical history of asthma and seasonal allergies, involved multiple symptoms, including dizziness, chest pressure, tingling in the arms and legs, shortness of breath, pruritus, decreased blood pressure, and increased heart rate. The evinacumab infusion was discontinued and the event resolved on the same day after treatment with oral diphenhydramine. No patients who received intravenous treatment had adverse events resulting in death.

Section: Discussion

In this phase 2 trial, we found that the use of evinacumab reduced levels of LDL cholesterol and atherogenic lipoproteins in patients with refractory hypercholesterolemia. The response to treatment, or reduction in the LDL cholesterol level, with subcutaneous and intravenous evinacumab was observed as early as the first postbaseline lipid assessment (week 2) and was maintained through week 16. Serious adverse events were observed in 3 to 16% of patients across trial groups.
To reduce the risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, patients who have heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia are typically treated with lipid-lowering therapies, which may include a statin, ezetimibe, and a PCSK9 inhibitor. Although each standard-of-care therapy contributes to overall lowering of the LDL cholesterol level, there remains a residual unmet need among patients who have a high baseline LDL cholesterol level. This is particularly relevant in the context of the 2019 ESC–EAS lipid-management guidelines, which specify a target LDL cholesterol level of less than 55 mg per deciliter for patients with very high risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease ; the 2016 ESC–EAS guidelines and the 2018 ACC–AHA guidelines recommended a target LDL cholesterol level of less than 70 mg per deciliter in patients with very high risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. In addition, some patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia may have adverse events associated with standard-of-care lipid-lowering therapies, which limit the optimization of treatment regimens. Data from a pooled analysis of eight phase 3 ODYSSEY trials involving 4629 patients with hypercholesterolemia (with or without heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia) showed that 41% were not receiving a high-dose statin, with a frequent investigator-assessed reason (in 32% of cases) being statin-associated muscle symptoms, an increased creatine kinase level, or both.
The use of PCSK9 inhibitors in combination with other lipid-lowering therapies reduces the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events and reduces the LDL cholesterol level by 50 to 60%. However, a real-world study involving 204 patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia and very high risk for cardiovascular disease showed that only 39% had an LDL cholesterol level of less than 55 mg per deciliter despite treatment with PCSK9 inhibitors. Of the 143 patients who were receiving triple therapy (a high-intensity statin, ezetimibe, and a PCSK9 inhibitor), 45% had an LDL cholesterol level of less than 55 mg per deciliter. Given the significant reduction in levels of LDL cholesterol and atherogenic lipoproteins observed in our trial, the addition of evinacumab to standard-of-care lipid-lowering therapies that include PCSK9 inhibitors in patients with refractory hypercholesterolemia may potentially facilitate a greater number of patients attaining guideline-defined target LDL cholesterol levels and, in doing so, reduce the risk of cardiovascular events and overall mortality. In contrast to cholesterylester transfer protein and apolipoprotein C3 inhibition, which results in a small reduction in the apolipoprotein B level as compared with the reduction in the LDL cholesterol level, ANGPTL3 inhibition lowers both the LDL cholesterol level and the apolipoprotein B level substantially. In view of the strong genetic data supporting a decrease in the risk of cardiovascular disease proportional to the reduction in the apolipoprotein B level, the results of this trial support a potential cardiovascular-disease benefit of ANGPTL3 inhibition.
Treatment with subcutaneous or intravenous evinacumab prompted a reduction in the HDL cholesterol level. Reduction in the HDL cholesterol level has been observed in dyslipidemic or normolipidemic mouse models after targeted inactivation of ANGPTL3; this reduction is due to derepression of endothelial lipase, which is a consequence of ANGPTL3 blockade. In the phase 3 ELIPSE HoFH trial involving patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, there was a 29.6% decrease in the HDL cholesterol level after inhibition of ANGPTL3 with evinacumab, as compared with a 0.8% increase with placebo. The importance of the reduction in the HDL cholesterol level observed with evinacumab remains to be fully elucidated, but in patients with a naturally occurring genetic ANGPTL3 deficiency, low HDL cholesterol levels are not associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease.
Elevated levels of triglycerides have been reported to be an independent risk factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Many studies show that PCSK9 inhibitors induce moderate reductions in levels of triglycerides that are not always statistically significant. Our trial shows that the use of subcutaneous or intravenous evinacumab could potentially lead to a clinically significant reduction in the risk of cardiovascular disease by substantially reducing levels of LDL cholesterol and triglycerides.
The reductions in the LDL cholesterol level observed with subcutaneous evinacumab (450 mg weekly and 300 mg weekly) were similar to the reduction seen with intravenous evinacumab at a dose of 15 mg per kilogram every 4 weeks. The efficacy of this intravenous evinacumab regimen has been shown previously in the pivotal phase 3 ELIPSE HoFH trial. Because intravenous administration occurs in a health care setting, it ensures greater adherence to treatment. However, subcutaneous administration may be a viable alternative, given that some patients may prefer to administer the treatment at home despite the increased frequency of dosing, in order to prevent loss of work productivity and personal time. Moreover, subcutaneous administration is often preferred by health care providers, because it lowers health care costs related to drug delivery.
The limitations of this trial include the small sample size and the short treatment duration. Moreover, the racial backgrounds of the patients were not as diverse as we had intended. Thus, robust conclusions pertaining to the long-term safety of evinacumab cannot be established. In addition, we noted that the percentage of patients who were taking ezetimibe appeared to be low, both among those assigned to receive subcutaneous treatment (30%) and among those assigned to receive intravenous treatment (38%). The percentage of patients who were taking ezetimibe in our trial was higher than the percentage of patients who were taking ezetimibe at baseline (24%) in the ODYSSEY HIGH FH trial, which assessed alirocumab in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, but was lower than the percentage of patients with severe heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia who were taking ezetimibe (62%) in TAUSSIG (Trial Assessing Long-Term Use of PCSK9 Inhibition in Subjects with Genetic LDL Disorders), which assessed evolocumab in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia.
In conclusion, results of this trial and previous studies suggest that evinacumab is effective in lowering LDL cholesterol levels in patients with refractory hypercholesterolemia, including homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, refractory heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, and hypercholesterolemia of an undetermined cause.
