Title: Early Active Mobilization during Mechanical Ventilation in the ICU


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Intensive care unit (ICU)–acquired weakness often develops in patients who are undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation. Early active mobilization may mitigate ICU-acquired weakness, increase survival, and reduce disability.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We randomly assigned 750 adult patients in the ICU who were undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation to receive increased early mobilization (sedation minimization and daily physiotherapy) or usual care (the level of mobilization that was normally provided in each ICU). The primary outcome was the number of days that the patients were alive and out of the hospital at 180 days after randomization.

Abstract_Section: Results

The median number of days that patients were alive and out of the hospital was 143 (interquartile range, 21 to 161) in the early-mobilization group and 145 days (interquartile range, 51 to 164) in the usual-care group (absolute difference, −2.0 days; 95% confidence interval [CI], −10 to 6; P=0.62). The mean (±SD) daily duration of active mobilization was 20.8±14.6 minutes and 8.8±9.0 minutes in the two groups, respectively (difference, 12.0 minutes per day; 95% CI, 10.4 to 13.6). A total of 77% of the patients in both groups were able to stand by a median interval of 3 days and 5 days, respectively (difference, −2 days; 95% CI, −3.4 to −0.6). By day 180, death had occurred in 22.5% of the patients in the early-mobilization group and in 19.5% of those in the usual-care group (odds ratio, 1.15; 95% CI, 0.81 to 1.65). Among survivors, quality of life, activities of daily living, disability, cognitive function, and psychological function were similar in the two groups. Serious adverse events were reported in 7 patients in the early-mobilization group and in 1 patient in the usual-care group. Adverse events that were potentially due to mobilization (arrhythmias, altered blood pressure, and desaturation) were reported in 34 of 371 patients (9.2%) in the early-mobilization group and in 15 of 370 patients (4.1%) in the usual-care group (P=0.005).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Among adults undergoing mechanical ventilation in the ICU, an increase in early active mobilization did not result in a significantly greater number of days that patients were alive and out of the hospital than did the usual level of mobilization in the ICU. The intervention was associated with increased adverse events. (Funded by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia and the Health Research Council of New Zealand; TEAM ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03133377 .)

Section: Introduction

Approximately 13 million to 20 million people worldwide receive treatment in intensive care units (ICUs) annually. ICU-acquired weakness, which is defined as clinically detected weakness with no plausible explanation except for critical illness, occurs in approximately 40% of such patients and is associated with an increased risk of death, prolonged hospitalization, and impaired recovery.
Among patients in the ICU who have undergone mechanical ventilation for more than 48 hours, wasting of skeletal muscles occurs rapidly. Although immobilization may contribute to ICU-acquired weakness, such weakness appears to be part of the pathophysiology of critical illness and is not just due to disuse. It is associated with disruption of myofilament organization, damage to the sarcoplasmic reticulum, decreased electrical excitability, and mitochondrial dysfunction. Although some data suggest that early mobilization of patients in the ICU may reduce the length of hospital stay and improve function at the time of hospital discharge, many barriers to early mobilization exist. Moreover, early mobilization may not be sufficient to prevent ICU-acquired weakness affecting patient-important outcomes and may be associated with risks. The Pain, Agitation–Sedation, Delirium, Immobility, and Sleep Disruption in Adult Patients in the ICU (PADIS) guidelines recommended mobilization of critically ill adults but do not offer advice on the appropriate timing or regimen.
Accordingly, we conducted a clinical trial, called Treatment of Mechanically Ventilated Adults with Early Activity and Mobilization (TEAM), to test the hypothesis that early active mobilization would increase the number of days that patients were alive and out of the hospital at day 180 as compared with the usual level of mobilization in the ICU in adults who were undergoing mechanical ventilation.

Section: Methods

In this international, multicenter, randomized, controlled trial, we evaluated the effects of early mobilization (sedation minimization and daily physiotherapy) or usual care (mobilization level that was normally provided in each ICU) among adults in the ICU who were undergoing mechanical ventilation that was expected to continue beyond the calendar day after randomization. In the early-mobilization group, senior physiotherapists led the intervention and participated in interdisciplinary discussions and reviews of a safety checklist. The trial was funded by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia and the Health Research Council of New Zealand. The management committee designed the trial, which was endorsed by the Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society and the Irish Critical Care Trials Group. The institutions that managed the trial and monitored data quality are listed in the Supplementary Appendix (available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). An independent data and safety monitoring committee oversaw the trial and reviewed a planned interim analysis after 400 patients had reached 28 days of follow-up. No commercial support was provided.
The protocol (available at NEJM.org), which was reported before the completion of enrollment, was approved by the ethics committee at each participating institution. Written informed consent for enrollment, or consent to continue and to use data, was obtained from each patient or from a legal surrogate. In cases in which a patient died before consent could be obtained, data were included if such inclusion was allowed by local regulations and approved by an ethics committee. The authors all contributed to the writing of the article and the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. They also vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol.
Eligible patients were adults (≥18 years of age) who were expected to undergo mechanical ventilation in the ICU beyond the calendar day after randomization and whose condition was sufficiently stable to make mobilization potentially possible. Key exclusion criteria were dependency in any activity of daily living in the month before hospitalization, rest-in-bed orders, and proven or suspected acute primary brain or spinal injury. A full list of the inclusion and exclusion criteria is provided in the Supplementary Appendix . We defined subgroups using baseline characteristics including prehospitalization disability level, age, illness severity, diagnosis, and frailty, as described in the Supplementary Appendix .
We randomly assigned patients in a 1:1 ratio to receive early mobilization or usual care using a centralized Web-based interface. The trial statistician generated the assignment sequence using computer-generated random numbers stratified according to the trial center with variable block sizes.
We followed the guidelines of the Medical Research Council for evaluating complex interventions and the Template for Intervention Description and Replication. Our intervention, which included minimization of sedation as required, was hierarchical and began after randomization with daily physiotherapy, which could be provided in one or more sessions. The sessions were individually tailored to achieve the highest possible level of mobilization that was deemed to be safe for the patient at the initiation of daily therapy. The highest level of mobilization was provided for as long as possible before a step-down to lower levels of activity if the patient became fatigued, as measured on the ICU Mobility Scale. This validated scale rates the level of mobilization from 0 to 10, with 0 indicating no mobilization and 10 indicating independent walking. Patients who were assigned to the usual-care group received a level of mobilization that was normally provided at each site. In both groups, concomitant care was guided by treating clinicians. Details regarding the treatments and monitoring are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
Patients received the trial treatment while they were in the ICU for up to 28 days after randomization. Blinding of mobilization in the ICU was not possible; however, trained staff who were unaware of trial-group assignments ascertained patient-reported outcomes, and the statistical analysis was performed in a blinded manner.
The primary outcome was the number of days that patients were alive and out of the hospital at day 180. The time that patients were out of the hospital was defined as the number days that they were at home or in an accommodation that was not a health care facility (i.e., a rehabilitation hospital or nursing home). Patients who had died by day 180 were defined as having zero days alive and out of the hospital.
Key secondary outcomes were mortality at 180 days, the number of ventilator-free days and days out of the ICU from randomization to day 28, and patient-reported outcome measures, including quality of life and function in survivors at day 180. We defined ventilator-free days as the number of days of unassisted breathing during the first 28 days after randomization; deaths by day 28 were assigned zero ventilator-free days. ICU-free days were defined analogously.
We assessed health-related quality of life using the EuroQol Group 5-Dimension Self-Report Questionnaire (EQ-5D-5L), which evaluates mobility, personal care, usual activities, pain or discomfort, and anxiety or depression and categorizes each of these into five levels that range from no problems to extreme problems, and the EQ utility score, which ranges from −0.6 to 1.0, with 1.0 indicating the best health state. The EQ Visual Analogue Scale provided a global rating of patient-perceived health from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating better health. Independent activities of daily living were measured with the Barthel Activities of Daily Living (ADL) Index, which scores 10 activities of daily living that include feeding, bathing, and dressing from 0 (dependent) to 100 (independent), and the Lawton Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scale (IADL), which scores 8 independent living skills that include shopping, laundry, and housekeeping from 0 (dependent) to 8 (independent). The 12-item World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) measured generic function for mobility, self-care, life activities, and participation. It incorporated scores from 0 (no difficulty) to 4 (extreme difficulty) for each item on a scale of 0 to 48, with higher scores representing greater disability; this score is expressed as a percentage of maximum disability. Details regarding additional outcomes, including cognitive and psychological function, are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
Prespecified serious adverse events were falls to the floor, cardiac arrest, atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of more than 150 bpm, other dangerous arrhythmias, oxygen-saturation level on pulse oximetry of less than 80% for more than 3 minutes, and unplanned extubation or removal of the intravascular line resulting in urgent replacement. Site investigators reported other adverse events that were potentially caused by active mobilization, as described in the Supplementary Appendix .
The statistical analysis plan was reported before the completion of enrollment. The sample size was based on the standard deviation of the primary outcome in the pilot study. We determined that the enrollment of 750 patients would provide 90% power to detect a 7-day between-group difference with a two-sided alpha of 0.05 after allowing for 15% inflation to account for a nonparametric distribution and 5% loss to follow-up.
The analysis of the primary outcome was performed in the intention-to-treat population, which was defined as all the patients who had been enrolled except for those who had withdrawn consent for use of data. Between-group differences in the primary outcome and continuous secondary outcomes were calculated with the use of median regression with cluster-robust standard errors to account for site; results were reported as a difference of medians with 95% confidence intervals. Further analyses of the primary outcome included evaluating the intervention effect across the range of quantiles, ordinal logistic regression, and sensitivity to missingness. Prespecified subgroup analyses were conducted with the use of median regression with heterogeneity determined by fitting an interaction between treatment assignment and subgroup with results reported in a forest plot. Binomial secondary outcomes were compared with the use of logistic regression to derive odds ratios with cluster-robust standard errors reported with 95% confidence intervals, according to the statistical analysis plan; however, odds ratios may overestimate the relative risk.
Analyses were conducted with the use of R software, version 4.0.2, and SAS statistical software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute). Statistical significance for the primary outcome was determined with the use of a two-sided hypothesis test with an alpha of 0.05. Because there was no correction for multiple comparisons in secondary outcomes, P values have not been reported for these comparisons and the results are considered to be exploratory. Multiple imputation was performed for all outcomes without complete data. Additional details regarding the analyses are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Results

From February 27, 2018, to November 19, 2021, a total of 750 patients at 49 hospitals in 6 countries underwent randomization to the early-mobilization group (372 patients) or usual-care group (378 patients) ( Figure 1 ). Full consent was withdrawn by 1 patient in the early-mobilization group and 8 patients in the usual-care group, which left 371 in the early-mobilization group and 370 in the usual-care group. Three patients in the usual-care group were lost to follow-up, and 5 patients — 2 in the early-mobilization group and 3 in the usual-care group — withdrew consent for follow-up of the primary outcome but not for the use of other data. Accordingly, the primary outcome was available for 733 of 736 patients (99.6%) in the intention-to-treat population (369 in the early-mobilization group and 364 in the usual-care group). The trial groups had similar characteristics at baseline ( Table 1 and Tables S1 through S5 in the Supplementary Appendix ). Table S6 describes the representativeness of the population.
Mobilization milestones of active exercise, standing, and walking according to treatment group are shown in Table 2 and Figure 2 . The mean (±SD) daily duration of active mobilization per patient in the ICU was 20.8±14.6 minutes in the early-mobilization group and 8.8±9.0 minutes in the usual-care group (absolute difference, 12 minutes per day; 95% confidence interval [CI], 10.4 to 13.6). Additional details regarding mobilization according to group are shown in Table S7 and Figures S1, S2, and S3. Compliance with the intervention was high (Fig. S4). The major barriers to mobilization in the early-mobilization group were protocol-compliant and included sedation, agitation, and physiological instability.
At day 180, the median number of days that patients were alive and out of the hospital was 143 days (interquartile range, 21 to 161) in the early-mobilization group and 145 days (interquartile range, 51 to 164) in the usual-care group (absolute difference, −2 days; 95% CI, −10 to 6; P=0.62) ( Table 3 ). Consistent with the results of the primary analysis were the findings in complete-case analyses, sensitivity analyses for missingness, evaluation of the intervention effect estimate across quantiles and according to country, and analyses of the primary outcome as an ordinal categorical variable (Tables S8 through S10 and Fig. S5).
By day 180, deaths were reported in 83 of 369 patients (22.5%) in the early-mobilization group and in 71 of 364 (19.5%) in the usual-care group (odds ratio, 1.15; 95% CI, 0.81 to 1.65) ( Table 3 and Fig. S6). The number of ventilator-free days and ICU-free days at day 28 were similar in the two groups.
The scheduled 180-day follow-up occurred at a median of 186 days (interquartile range, 182 to 194) after randomization. Among the 579 survivors, patient-reported outcomes were evaluated in 286 patients in the early-mobilization group and 293 in the usual-care group. The numbers of patients who completed each assessment and findings regarding quality of life, activities of daily living, and disability were similar in the two groups (Tables S11 and S12). Additional secondary outcomes, including 28-day mortality and cognitive and psychological function, were also similar (Table S13).
Process-of-care measures — which included the use of tracheostomy, neuromuscular blockers, glucocorticoids, new renal-replacement therapy, reintubation, and vasopressor-free days — were similar in the two groups (Table S14). Daily sedation scores are shown in Figure S7, and the proportion of patients in the ICU with delirium each day is shown in Figure S8. Daily ventilatory support is shown in Figure S9. There was no evidence of heterogeneity in the effect of early mobilization on the primary outcome among patients in any of the prespecified subgroups (Fig. S10).
Adverse events that were potentially due to mobilization were reported in 34 of 371 patients (9.2%) in the early-mobilization group and in 15 of 370 (4.1%) in the usual-care group (P=0.005); cardiac arrhythmia, altered blood pressure, and oxygen desaturation were the most commonly reported events ( Table 3 ). A total of 8 serious adverse events were reported, of which 7 occurred in the early-mobilization group (5 arrhythmias, a desaturation episode, and a cerebrovascular accident), and 1 occurred in the usual-care group (a desaturation episode) (Table S15). All serious adverse events required medical intervention. All events resolved except for the cerebrovascular accident, which resulted in persistent unilateral weakness. No instances of falling to the floor, cardiac arrest, unplanned extubation, or intravascular line removal resulting in urgent replacement were reported.

Section: Discussion

In this international, randomized, controlled trial involving adults who were undergoing mechanical ventilation, the numbers of days that patients were alive and out of the hospital at 180 days were similar in the early-mobilization group and the usual-care group. Adverse events and serious adverse events were reported more commonly in the early-mobilization group.
Our findings are at variance with a meta-analysis showing that active mobilization in the ICU, particularly when delivered early, significantly increased the number of days that patients were alive and out of the hospital at 180 days. However, in this meta-analysis, both the intensity and duration of mobilization in the control groups varied greatly, a factor that made it difficult to draw comparisons across the trials. Our trial avoided some of the methodologic shortcomings of studies that were included in this meta-analysis, such as small sample sizes, single-center designs, and use of historical controls.
Some randomized, controlled trials of early mobilization that have shown potential benefits have focused on outcomes other than days alive and out of the hospital. In a trial that involved patients being treated in a medical ICU, early mobilization with an interruption of sedation increased the level of independent function at the time of hospital discharge. In that trial, mobilization milestones in the usual-care group were met at a similar time as were those in our trial. However, in contrast to the previous trial, which began mobilization sessions with low levels of activity, we sought to begin mobilizing patients at the highest level of activity possible. In one study involving patients in a surgical ICU, early mobilization reduced the length of stay in the ICU and increased functional mobility at hospital discharge. However, as in our trial, patients in the early-mobilization group in that trial had an increased risk of adverse events. Moreover, the interpretation of that study in surgical patients was complicated by markedly higher in-hospital mortality in the early-mobilization group.
Our findings are broadly consistent with the results of three randomized, controlled trials that were conducted during the past 6 years. In two of these trials, investigators compared intensive physiotherapy with usual care among patients in the ICU and reported no between-group difference among survivors with respect to physical function at 1 month and at 6 months, respectively. The third trial compared standardized rehabilitation therapy with usual ICU care in adults with acute respiratory failure and showed no difference between groups in the length of hospital stay.
Our trial has some limitations. Patients in our usual-care group received a higher level of mobilization than those in some cohort studies and in the control groups of some previous trials. However, the mobilization levels that were achieved in our usual-care group were consistent with those outlined in international guidelines, were similar to those in a recent multicenter cohort study, and were similar to those in the control group of a previous clinical trial showing benefits from early mobilization. Although practitioners in our trial provided treatments according to the protocol, changes in practice that could have affected treatment in the usual-care group may have occurred in specific sites or countries. Our protocol stipulated that whenever it was feasible to do so, patients in the usual-care group should receive treatment from physiotherapy staff members who were not involved in delivering early mobilization in the intervention group, but we did not record whether this occurred. Despite separation between groups in timing and duration of mobilization, factors including sedation, agitation, and physiological instability often precluded mobilization. This meant that some patients were not actively mobilized in the ICU. Patients who were not mobilized reduced the statistical power to detect a difference between groups. Our protocol did not stipulate details regarding rehabilitation beyond the ICU or call for an assessment of function at hospital discharge. The observation of a greater frequency of adverse events with early mobilization than with usual care may have been subject to surveillance bias because the treatment assignments were unblinded. In contrast, for patient-reported outcomes at day 180, we used centralized assessors who were unaware of trial-group assignments to avoid bias. Because these outcomes could be compared only among survivors, they do not represent randomized comparisons. Some data related to patient-reported outcomes at day 180 were missing. These data may not have been missing at random because patients with better (or worse) outcomes might have been harder to contact or less likely to complete interviews. For our primary outcome, missing data were rare and our findings were consistent in a range of sensitivity analyses. Odds ratio may overestimate the relative risk and be misinterpreted.
Mobilizing critically ill patients early requires clinical expertise, time, and resources. Although we used a safety checklist, conducted interdisciplinary discussion with the medical team, and required that senior physiotherapists direct early active mobilization, our trial suggests greater safety with usual care than with the additional early mobilization that was provided in our trial. Thus, for adults undergoing mechanical ventilation in the ICU, increased early active mobilization did not affect the number of days that they were alive and out of the hospital as compared with the usual level of mobilization received in the ICU.
