Title: Trial of Anti-BDCA2 Antibody Litifilimab for Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Blood dendritic cell antigen 2 (BDCA2) is a receptor that is exclusively expressed on plasmacytoid dendritic cells, which are implicated in the pathogenesis of lupus erythematosus. Whether treatment with litifilimab, a humanized monoclonal antibody against BDCA2, would be efficacious in reducing disease activity in patients with cutaneous lupus erythematosus has not been extensively studied.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this phase 2 trial, we randomly assigned adults with histologically confirmed cutaneous lupus erythematosus with or without systemic manifestations in a 1:1:1:1 ratio to receive subcutaneous litifilimab (at a dose of 50, 150, or 450 mg) or placebo at weeks 0, 2, 4, 8, and 12. We used a dose–response model to assess whether there was a response across the four groups on the basis of the primary end point, which was the percent change from baseline to 16 weeks in the Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index–Activity score (CLASI-A; scores range from 0 to 70, with higher scores indicating more widespread or severe skin involvement). Safety was also assessed.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 132 participants were enrolled; 26 were assigned to the 50-mg litifilimab group, 25 to the 150-mg litifilimab group, 48 to the 450-mg litifilimab group, and 33 to the placebo group. Mean CLASI-A scores for the groups at baseline were 15.2, 18.4, 16.5, and 16.5, respectively. The difference from placebo in the change from baseline in CLASI-A score at week 16 was −24.3 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI] −43.7 to −4.9) in the 50-mg litifilimab group, −33.4 percentage points (95% CI, −52.7 to −14.1) in the 150-mg group, and −28.0 percentage points (95% CI, −44.6 to −11.4) in the 450-mg group. The least squares mean changes were used in the primary analysis of a best-fitting dose–response model across the three drug-dose levels and placebo, which showed a significant effect. Most of the secondary end points did not support the results of the primary analysis. Litifilimab was associated with three cases each of hypersensitivity and oral herpes infection and one case of herpes zoster infection. One case of herpes zoster meningitis occurred 4 months after the participant received the last dose of litifilimab.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In a phase 2 trial involving participants with cutaneous lupus erythematosus, treatment with litifilimab was superior to placebo with regard to a measure of skin disease activity over a period of 16 weeks. Larger and longer trials are needed to determine the effect and safety of litifilimab for the treatment of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. (Funded by Biogen; LILAC ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02847598 .)

Section: Introduction

Cutaneous lupus erythematosus, an autoimmune disease with heterogeneous skin manifestations, can occur in the presence or absence of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Major subtypes of the disorder include chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus (of which approximately 80% of cases are discoid lupus erythematosus), subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus, and acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Cutaneous lupus erythematosus causes irreversible damage and disfigurement, impairs patients’ quality of life, and is associated with depression, anxiety, and fatigue. In patients with coexistent SLE, systemic manifestations such as nephritis or central nervous system disease are infrequent. However, SLE will not develop in most patients with subacute and chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus.
First-line therapies for cutaneous lupus erythematosus include topical glucocorticoids and antimalarial medications. The evidence for benefit from treatment with topical glucocorticoids is limited, and a meta-analysis showed varied responses to antimalarial medications, such as hydroxychloroquine, across cutaneous lupus erythematosus subtypes. Escalation of treatment with immunosuppressive agents in a patient with cutaneous lupus erythematosus who has not had a response to hydroxychloroquine is common, and long-term use of oral glucocorticoids is limited by side effects. A few randomized, clinical trials of investigational therapies (e.g., AMG 811, PD-0360324, R333, and pulsed-dye laser) have not shown clinical benefits in patients with cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Anifrolumab, a type I interferon receptor monoclonal antibody for the treatment of SLE, showed efficacy in patients with cutaneous disease in randomized trials, but cutaneous lupus erythematosus subtypes (acute, subacute, and chronic) were not characterized in these trials, and cutaneous lupus erythematosus was not studied independently of SLE.
In cutaneous lupus erythematosus skin lesions, type I interferon and other inflammatory mediators are secreted by recruited plasmacytoid dendritic cells, cytotoxic T-cell–mediated apoptotic keratinocytes, or both. In both cutaneous lupus erythematosus and SLE, blood type I interferon expression correlates with disease activity and severity.
Litifilimab (formerly BIIB059) is a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody that engages blood dendritic cell antigen 2 (BDCA2), a receptor that is expressed solely on the surface of plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Litifilimab binding to BDCA2 results in the inhibition of type I interferon, inflammatory cytokines, and chemokines. In a phase 1 trial of litifilimab administered in a single intravenous infusion at a dose of 20 mg per kilogram of body weight, participants with SLE and active skin lesions showed decreased expression of interferon response genes in blood and type I interferon–modulated myxovirus resistance protein in skin. In an exploratory analysis, participants with reduced myxovirus resistance protein expression observed in skin biopsies also had a 4-point reduction in a measure of cutaneous lupus erythematosus skin disease activity at week 4, week 12, or both.
The Study to Evaluate BIIB059 in Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus with or without Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (LILAC) was a two-part, phase 2 trial that investigated the efficacy and safety of litifilimab. Part A, which will be reported separately, involved participants who had SLE with active joint and skin manifestations. Here, we report findings from Part B, which involved participants who primarily had moderate-to-severe active subacute and chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus with or without systemic manifestations.

Section: Methods

We conducted this trial in accordance with the Good Clinical Practice and Good Pharmacovigilance Practice guidelines of the International Council for Harmonisation and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all the participants before randomization. An independent data and safety monitoring committee reviewed the trial data twice yearly (see the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The sponsor, Biogen, designed the trial with the academic authors, provided litifilimab and placebo to the trial sites, analyzed the data, and funded professional medical writers to produce an initial draft of the manuscript. The trial investigators obtained approvals from ethics committees. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. Confidentiality agreements were in place between the authors and the sponsor.
Adults 18 to 75 years of age were eligible if they had cutaneous lupus erythematosus that was histologically confirmed by previous biopsy or by biopsy at screening. The participants had active cutaneous lupus erythematosus, defined as a score of at least 8 on the Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index–Activity scale (CLASI-A), a measure of erythema and scaling or hypertrophy in 13 skin regions (total scores range from 0 to 70, with higher scores indicating greater lupus skin-lesion activity). Participants had either subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLASI-A erythema score of ≥2, with scores ranging from 0 [absent] to 3 [dark red; purple, violaceous, crusted, or hemorrhagic]) or chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus, including discoid lupus erythematosus (with at least one active discoid lupus erythematosus lesion with a minimum CLASI-A erythema score of ≥2 and a score of ≥1 on the CLASI-Damage scarring scale), or both subacute and chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus. The latter scale ranks the degree of scarring, atrophy, and panniculitis on a scale of 0 to 2 (with 0 indicating no scarring and 2 indicating severely atrophic scarring or panniculitis). The scores were adjudicated by an independent committee during screening. Eligible participants had also previously received treatment with topical agents or antimalarial drugs (or both) that had failed or were associated with unacceptable side effects.
Participants with or without SLE were eligible for enrollment. Concomitant treatment for cutaneous lupus erythematosus and SLE (including oral glucocorticoids [prednisone at a dose of ≤15 mg per day, or equivalent], antimalarial drugs, and immunosuppressant agents) was permitted if treatment had been initiated at least 12 weeks before randomization and if the dose had been stable for at least 4 weeks before randomization and remained stable throughout the treatment period. High-potency topical or intralesional injected glucocorticoids were not allowed. Full inclusion and exclusion criteria are provided in the protocol , available at NEJM.org.
Part B of this trial was conducted in 54 centers in Asia, Europe, Latin America, and the United States. Enrollment in Part B precluded enrollment in Part A, and vice versa. The 16-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled period preceded a 12-week observational period (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). We used an interactive response technology to assign participants in a 1:1:1:1 ratio, with stratification according to CLASI-A score (≤10 vs. >10) and the presence or absence of discoid lupus erythematosus, to receive litifilimab (at a dose of 50, 150, or 450 mg) or placebo administered subcutaneously at weeks 0, 2, 4, 8, and 12. Participants, their families, and trial team members were unaware of the trial-group assignments; pharmacists and pharmacy monitors were aware of participants’ trial-group assignments.
Part B initially had a single-dose efficacy design. A total of 31 participants were enrolled and underwent randomization in a 2:1 ratio to receive litifilimab at a dose of 450 mg or placebo (see version 1 in the protocol ). Owing to slow recruitment in Part A and to allow a dose-ranging assessment of litifilimab in participants with cutaneous lupus erythematosus, Part B was modified to a dose-ranging trial that included two additional litifilimab doses, 50 and 150 mg, with randomization planned in equal proportions to each dose and placebo; in addition, the treatment period was extended to 16 weeks, and the sample size was increased to approximately 130. A total of 7 participants who had enrolled under protocol version 1 reenrolled under the modified protocol (which included protocol version 2 and subsequent versions; 3 of the participants who reenrolled were assigned to receive litifilimab at a dose of 450 mg and 4 were assigned to receive placebo), but 24 participants (18 who had been assigned to receive 450-mg litifilimab and 6 to receive placebo) remained enrolled under protocol version 1. These changes account for more participants assigned to the 450-mg and placebo groups (48 and 33, respectively) overall than the other dose groups; most participants in the 450-mg and placebo groups were enrolled under the amended protocol (30 and 27, respectively; see Tables S1 and S2 for details on participant enrollment under each version of the protocol). Protocol amendments, described in Section 4 of the Supplementary Appendix , were implemented before the trial data were unblinded.
The primary end point (originally, the percent change from baseline to week 12 in the CLASI-A score in the 450-mg litifilimab group as compared with the placebo group) was changed in the modified version of the protocol to the percent change in CLASI-A score from baseline to week 16 among participants in the 50-mg, 150-mg, and 450-mg litifilimab groups and the placebo group. The revised primary analysis was a test of the dose response on the basis of the revised primary end point. Secondary end points were a decrease of at least 50% from baseline in the CLASI-A score (CLASI-50 response) at weeks 12 and 16; the percent change from baseline in the CLASI-A score at week 12; reductions from baseline in the CLASI-A score of at least 4 points at weeks 12 and 16 and of at least 7 points at weeks 12 and 16; and changes in pharmacokinetic measures. A list of exploratory end points is available in the Supplementary Appendix .
Adverse events, serious adverse events, changes in laboratory variables, vital signs, and electrocardiograms were monitored and assessed by trial investigators, who remained unaware of the trial-group assignments. The sponsor’s trial team remained unaware of the trial-group assignments, and the sponsor’s safety team was made aware of the trial-group assignments when there were suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions. The members of the independent data monitoring committee, who were aware of the trial-group assignments, monitored and reviewed the safety data.
We calculated that the enrollment of 100 participants would provide the trial with approximately 90% power to test against the null hypothesis of a flat dose–response relationship in the revised primary analysis, assuming a standard deviation of 30%, a maximal absolute difference of 27.5% in the effectiveness of litifilimab as compared with placebo, and a 20% dropout rate. This phase 2 trial was not powered to assess secondary end points. Analyses of the primary and secondary end points were based on the modified intention-to-treat population, which included all the participants who underwent randomization under any of the protocol versions and received at least one dose of litifilimab or placebo. Data from all the participants who were enrolled under any of the protocol versions were included according to trial group and were analyzed for safety and efficacy.
Under the initial protocol, a Bayesian informative prior approach that was based on the power prior distribution method was intended because of the small sample size. After the trial design was amended with the addition of 50-mg and 150-mg doses of litifilimab and the increased sample size, the revised primary analysis was a test for dose response by means of the multiple comparison procedure and modeling method, which was tested at the two-sided 10% significance level. This method was devised to test for a nonflat dose–response relationship to support dose selection in clinical development programs. It uses a two-step process: a multiple comparison step to test for the presence of a significant dose–response relationship, in which placebo serves as a dose of 0 mg, and a modeling step to fit the best dose–response curve. The multiple comparison step was applied to five prespecified dose–response models (four sigmoid Emax models and a Beta model) on the basis of the treatment effect on the percent change in the CLASI-A score from baseline to week 16 obtained from the regression model of repeated measures. The sigmoid Emax model is a four-parameter Emax model that uses E0, Emax, ED50, and the Hill parameter. The model with the smallest Akaike information criterion was selected, and a dose–response curve was estimated in the modeling step. This two-step process is an omnibus trend test, in which a single contrast test is constructed for each prespecified candidate model, that rejects the null hypothesis of no effect (i.e., no dose–response relationship) if at least one test is different from zero, and therefore shows a significant dose–response signal. This test is not a pairwise comparison, which means that it does not test for treatment effects between two drug doses or between a drug dose and placebo. Further details of the multiple comparison procedure and modeling analysis, which was used only for the analysis of the primary end point, are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
For the continuous secondary end points, confidence intervals of treatment effect were calculated with the use of a mixed model with repeated measures. For the categorical secondary end points, confidence intervals were calculated with the use of a generalized linear regression model with an identity link function with adjustment for CLASI-A score (≤10 or >10) and the presence or absence of discoid lupus erythematosus for a comparison of each drug dose with placebo.
There was no prespecified plan to adjust the widths of the confidence intervals of secondary end points for multiple comparisons, and no formal inferences or conclusions can be drawn from these data. For continuous data, missing data were imputed with the worst value observed at baseline or at the last visit before treatment failure; for binary end points, participants who had treatment failure or who discontinued litifilimab or placebo were considered not to have had a response for all remaining visits. Details regarding missing data imputation, interim analyses, and treatment failure are provided in the Supplementary Appendix . Two interim analyses were conducted — one for futility (performed by a team separate from the one that conducted the final analysis) and one conducted when all trial participants had completed the double-blind treatment period, for which the trial personnel involved remained unaware of the data. No alpha was expended as a result of these analyses. Safety was evaluated in all the participants who had received at least one dose of litifilimab or placebo and was summarized descriptively.

Section: Results

The trial took place between October 20, 2016, and November 18, 2019. A total of 300 participants underwent screening, and 132 were enrolled. We randomly assigned 26 participants to receive litifilimab at a dose of 50 mg, 25 to receive 150-mg litifilimab, 48 to receive 450-mg litifilimab, and 33 to receive placebo; 23, 24, 42, and 31 in the respective groups completed the placebo-controlled treatment period (Fig. S2). Overall, 12 participants (9%) did not complete the assigned regimen: 8 participants (3 in the 50-mg group, 1 in the 150-mg group, and 4 in the 450-mg group) owing to adverse events and 4 participants (2 each in the placebo and 450-mg groups) owing to withdrawal of consent. Six of these participants were enrolled under the original 12-week protocol, so their primary end-point results were not imputed. The other six participants were enrolled under the 16-week modified protocol, and their primary end-point results were imputed.
The characteristics of the participants at baseline were similar among the groups ( Table 1 and S3), with the exceptions of mean oral glucocorticoid dose, sex, and race. Participants’ demographic characteristics were broadly representative of the wider population with cutaneous lupus erythematosus (Table S4). Approximately 10% of participants were Black or African American, but owing to local regulations, race and ethnic group were not reported for 36 participants (27%) who were enrolled at sites in Europe.
Concomitant SLE had been diagnosed in 42 to 48% of the participants who received litifilimab as compared with 42% of the participants who received placebo. Participants with SLE had low-to-moderate disease activity as measured according to the Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index 2000 (SLEDAI-2K; scores range from 0 to 105 according to the presence or absence of 24 symptoms, with scores of 0 to <6 indicating low disease activity, 6 to 12 indicating moderate activity, and >12 indicating high activity ) ( Table 1 ). A similar distribution of cutaneous lupus erythematosus subtypes was observed among participants with and those without concomitant SLE (Table S5). A total of 118 participants (approximately 90% overall) were taking medications for cutaneous lupus erythematosus and SLE at baseline, including antimalarial agents, glucocorticoids, immunosuppressants, or other agents; the percentages were similar across the trial groups ( Table 1 and the Supplementary Results section). Baseline mean CLASI-A scores were 15.2 in the 50-mg litifilimab group, 18.4 in the 150-mg group, 16.5 in the 450-mg group, and 16.5 in the placebo group ( Table 1 ).
Least-squares mean (±SE) percent changes in CLASI-A scores from baseline to week 16 were –38.8±7.5 in the 50-mg litifilimab group, –47.9±7.5 in the 150-mg litifilimab group, –42.5±5.5 in the 450-mg litifilimab group, and –14.5±6.4 in the placebo group, with negative values indicating improvement from baseline ( Table 2 and Fig. S3). Least-squares mean differences between litifilimab and placebo in CLASI-A score changes from baseline to week 16 were –24.3 percentage points for 50-mg litifilimab (95% confidence interval [CI], –43.7 to –4.9), –33.4 percentage points for 150-mg litifilimab (95% CI, –52.7 to –14.1), and –28.0 percentage points for 450-mg litifilimab (95% CI, –44.6 to –11.4). The primary dose–response analysis, which was based on the percent change in CLASI-A score from baseline to week 16 (Table S6), showed significance when we used the best-fit dose–response model, which was derived from candidate models that included the placebo group and all the dose groups. However, the summary dose–response analysis included analyses of each drug dose as compared with placebo (Table S7 and Fig. S4) but did not include comparisons of the three drug dose levels with each other.
Secondary end points are shown in Table 2 and S8. For the least-squares mean differences for each litifilimab dose as compared with placebo, 95% confidence intervals included zero for most secondary end points with the exceptions of a CLASI-50 response at week 12, a CLASI-50 response at week 16 for the 450-mg litifilimab dose only, and a 4-point or greater decrease in CLASI-A scores at weeks 12 and 16 for the 150-mg litifilimab dose only. Because there was no prespecified plan for adjustment for multiple comparisons, no inferences can be made from the four results that exclude zero in the confidence intervals. Exploratory end points are shown in Figure S5 and Tables S9, S10, and S11.
The plasma and serum concentration profiles of litifilimab are shown in Table S12 and Figure S6; the serum concentrations increased in a dose-dependent fashion. Small changes were observed in SLE-related autoantibody titers, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein levels across the trial groups; however, after 16 weeks, no clinically relevant changes in complement C3 or C4 levels were observed in any trial group (Table S13). Of the 99 participants who received litifilimab and who had at least one post-dose immunogenicity sample available, 85 (86%) were negative for anti-litifilimab antibodies, regardless of their status at baseline (Table S14). Additional pharmacodynamic biomarkers are shown in Tables S15 and S16.
A total of 71 participants (72%) who received litifilimab and 22 participants (67%) who received placebo had adverse events ( Table 3 ). Most adverse events were mild or moderate, as rated by trial investigators according to the severity definitions included in the trial protocol. The most frequently reported adverse events (reported in ≥5% of the participants in the pooled litifilimab groups) were nasopharyngitis, headache, injection-site erythema, SLE, arthralgia, upper respiratory tract infection, influenza, pruritus, and cough. Three cases of hypersensitivity, including one serious event, were observed in the litifilimab groups and resulted in treatment withdrawal. Viral infections of influenza, oral herpes, and herpes zoster; viral upper respiratory tract infection; systemic viral infection (not otherwise specified); and viral rash were reported in the litifilimab groups, and systemic viral infection and herpes simplex infection were observed in the placebo group ( Table 3 and S17).
Serious adverse events were reported in seven participants (7%) who received litifilimab and in three (9%) who received placebo. Flares of SLE were reported in one participant in the placebo group and in two participants in the 150-mg litifilimab group. One participant in the 50-mg litifilimab group had a serious adverse event of herpes zoster meningitis approximately 4 months after the last dose was received. Sporadic out-of-range laboratory test values were reported across the treatment groups, but no apparent specific trends were observed. No litifilimab-related changes in vital signs or electrocardiogram results were observed.

Section: Discussion

This phase 2, randomized, placebo-controlled trial that involved participants with active, histologically confirmed cutaneous lupus erythematosus with or without SLE manifestations showed a significant dose–response relationship for the primary end point of a measure of skin disease activity over a period of 16 weeks. The trial design and the analysis plan for the primary end point were revised to use an omnibus trend test for a dose–response relationship across litifilimab doses and placebo. Within the limits of this model, treatment with litifilimab showed a significant dose–response relationship; however, the model does not test for treatment effects between two drug doses or between a drug dose and placebo. The dose–response model that was applied to the primary analysis was not used for the secondary end points. In general, the analyses of the secondary end points did not support the primary analysis.
Most trial participants had moderate-to-severe disease at baseline despite approximately 90% having received concomitant background therapy and 80% of those participants having received antimalarial drugs, either alone or with other agents. The antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine, often used as a first-line therapy for cutaneous lupus erythematosus, leads to decreased production of interferon-α by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. There are limited data from clinical trials regarding the potential effects of litifilimab administered with hydroxychloroquine; however, ex vivo experiments indicate no blunting of the inhibition of interferon-α levels by litifilimab in the presence of hydroxychloroquine.
Owing to the role of type I interferon in controlling responses to viral infections, patients who receive litifilimab could be at increased risk for infections. However, litifilimab targets plasmacytoid dendritic cell production of type I interferon by way of BDCA2, whereas the protective type I interferon response by cells that do not express BDCA2 is not likely to be directly influenced. In this trial, three cases of oral herpes infection and one case of herpes zoster infection were reported in participants who received litifilimab, and one case of herpes zoster meningitis occurred 4 months after administration of the participant’s last 50-mg dose of litifilimab.
The results of this 16-week, phase 2 trial involving participants with cutaneous lupus erythematosus suggest that treatment with litifilimab improved CLASI-A scores, a measure of skin disease activity. Larger and longer trials are necessary to determine the effect and safety of litifilimab in patients with cutaneous lupus erythematosus.
