Title: Efficacy of a Cell-Culture–Derived Quadrivalent Influenza Vaccine in Children


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Cell-culture–derived influenza vaccines may enable a closer antigenic match to circulating strains of influenza virus by avoiding egg-adapted mutations.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We evaluated the efficacy of a cell-culture–derived quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV4c) using a Madin–Darby canine kidney cell line in children and adolescents 2 to less than 18 years of age. During three influenza seasons, participants from eight countries were enrolled in an observer-blinded, randomized clinical trial comparing IIV4c with a noninfluenza vaccine (meningococcal ACWY). All the participants received a dose of a trial vaccine. Children 2 to less than 9 years of age without previous influenza vaccination who were assigned to the IIV4c group received a second dose on day 29; their counterparts who were assigned to the comparator group received placebo. Participants were followed for at least 180 days for efficacy and safety. The presence of influenza virus in nasopharyngeal swabs from participants with influenza-like illness was confirmed by reverse-transcriptase–polymerase-chain-reaction assay and viral culture. A Cox proportional-hazards model was used to evaluate the efficacy of IIV4c as measured by the first occurrence of laboratory-confirmed type A or B influenza (primary end point).

Abstract_Section: Results

Between 2017 and 2019, a total of 4514 participants were randomly assigned to receive IIV4c or the meningococcal ACWY vaccine. Laboratory-confirmed influenza occurred in 175 of 2257 participants (7.8%) in the IIV4c group and in 364 of 2252 participants (16.2%) in the comparator group, and the efficacy of IIV4c was 54.6% (95% confidence interval [CI], 45.7 to 62.1). Efficacy was 80.7% (95% CI, 69.2 to 87.9) against influenza A/H1N1, 42.1% (95% CI, 20.3 to 57.9) against influenza A/H3N2, and 47.6% (95% CI, 31.4 to 60.0) against influenza B. IIV4c showed consistent vaccine efficacy in subgroups according to age, sex, race, and previous influenza vaccination. The incidences of adverse events were similar in the IIV4c group and the comparator group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

IIV4c provided protection against influenza in healthy children and adolescents across seasons, regardless of previous influenza vaccination. (Funded by Seqirus; EudraCT number, 2016-002883-15 ; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03165617 .)

Section: Introduction

Influenza is a common cause of respiratory tract infections in children worldwide and places substantial burdens on health care resources. Although influenza vaccines prevent influenza disease in randomized trials, vaccine effectiveness is frequently suboptimal. Egg-adaptive mutations in the globular head of the hemagglutinin protein in egg-based vaccine viruses may contribute to observed low vaccine effectiveness. Genetic changes can be avoided through the use of manufacturing platforms that do not rely on eggs, including a mammalian Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cell line; thus, such platforms have the potential to improve protection against influenza disease. In addition, such platforms may decrease the response time when new influenza viruses emerge.
The inactivated quadrivalent subunit influenza vaccine prepared from virus propagated in MDCK cells (IIV4c; Flucelvax Quadrivalent, Seqirus) was immunogenic and had an acceptable side-effect profile in pediatric patients, but the efficacy of the vaccine against clinical influenza disease in children and adolescents has not been confirmed in a randomized clinical trial. We investigated the efficacy of IIV4c against laboratory-confirmed influenza in children and adolescents during three influenza seasons.

Section: Methods

We conducted a phase 3–4, observer-blinded, stratified, randomized clinical trial comparing the efficacy, immunogenicity, and safety of IIV4c with those of a noninfluenza vaccine (meningococcal ACWY [Groups A, C, W-135, and Y] vaccine) in healthy children and adolescents, 2 to less than 18 years of age, across different geographic regions in eight countries: Australia, the Philippines, and Thailand (season 1); Estonia and Finland (season 2); and Estonia, Finland, Lithuania, Poland, and Spain (season 3).
All the parents or legal representatives of the children gave written informed consent for participation; as appropriate, the children gave assent or consent according to their age and local laws. When children reached the age of majority in their country during the trial, they were asked to give consent to continue their participation. The trial was approved by ethics committees and regulatory agencies at each institution (39 trial sites) and was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and other international standards (see the trial protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The trial was funded by Seqirus. Employees of Seqirus were involved in the conception and design of the trial. All the authors contributed to protocol development and were involved in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data and in the preparation of the manuscript. Parents, participants, investigators, the trial sponsor, and trial staff remained unaware of the trial-group assignments until trial completion and database lock. Vaccines or placebo were administered by designated trial staff who were aware of the trial-group assignments but who had no role in assessment of participants and who were instructed not to reveal the identity of trial vaccines to anyone involved in the monitoring or conduct of the trial, except in an emergency. Unblinded safety data were reviewed by an independent data monitoring committee. The authors assume responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol.
The trial included healthy children and adolescents 2 to less than 18 years of age. Among the major exclusion criteria were clinically significant acute illness within 3 days before enrollment, receipt of immunosuppressive treatment, contraindications to trial vaccines, influenza vaccination or laboratory-confirmed influenza disease within 6 months before enrollment, participation in the trial in a previous season, and pregnancy or breast-feeding. Female persons of childbearing potential agreed to continue using a reliable birth-control method. (All eligibility criteria are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org.)
Eligible participants were randomly assigned (in a 1:1 ratio) to receive either IIV4c or meningococcal ACWY vaccine through an interactive response technology (IRT) system, with age (2 to <9 years or 9 to <18 years) and the receipt or nonreceipt of previous influenza vaccination as stratification factors. Immunogenicity was assessed in a subgroup of children (2 to <9 years of age at enrollment) randomly selected at the time of enrollment and balanced with respect to influenza vaccination history and treatment group by the IRT system. Follow-up was conducted for 6 months after the last vaccination or until the end of the influenza season, whichever was longer. The end of each influenza season was December 31, 2017 (season 1; 2017 Southern Hemisphere influenza season), June 30, 2018 (season 2; 2017–2018 Northern Hemisphere influenza season), and June 30, 2019 (season 3; 2018–2019 Northern Hemisphere influenza season).
IIV4c contained 15 μg of hemagglutinin per 0.5-ml dose for each of the two influenza type A subtypes (H1N1 and H3N2) and each of the two influenza type B lineages (Yamagata and Victoria) as recommended by the World Health Organization for the 2017 Southern Hemisphere, 2017–2018 Northern Hemisphere, and 2018–2019 Northern Hemisphere influenza seasons (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). The comparator was a meningococcal (ACWY) oligosaccharide diphtheria CRM197 conjugate vaccine (Menveo, GSK Vaccines), administered at a dose of 0.5 ml. All the participants received an intramuscular dose of a trial vaccine, preferably in the deltoid muscle of the nondominant arm. Children 2 to less than 9 years of age without previous influenza vaccination who were assigned to the IIV4c group received a second 0.5-ml dose on day 29; their counterparts who were assigned to the comparator group received placebo (saline for injection: sodium chloride, 4.5 mg; water, a sufficient quantity to make 0.5 ml) on day 29 to maintain blinding.
Active surveillance for influenza-like illness by weekly telephone calls from a call center began after vaccination and continued through the end of each influenza season. Influenza-like illness was defined as a body temperature of 100.0°F or higher (≥37.8°C) plus at least one of the following symptoms on the same day: cough, sore throat, nasal congestion, or rhinorrhea. Flocked nasopharyngeal swab collection was performed within 6 days after the onset of influenza-like illness. Influenza was confirmed by reverse-transcriptase–polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-PCR) assay, and all RT-PCR–positive samples also underwent viral culture for antigenic characterization. The result of the RT-PCR assay was presented as influenza virus type A/H1N1, A/H3N2, or B. Testing was conducted by Viroclinics Biosciences (Rotterdam, the Netherlands).
Immunogenicity was assessed with the use of serum samples from the participants who were recruited during seasons 2 and 3; the samples were collected before vaccination on day 1 and after vaccination on day 22 (for participants with previous influenza vaccination) or before vaccination on day 1 and after vaccination on days 29 and 50 (for those without previous influenza vaccination). Immunogenicity was assessed by hemagglutination inhibition assays, which were conducted at Viroclinics Biosciences, with the use of standard methods.
Participants were observed in the clinic for at least 30 minutes after vaccination. Solicited adverse events were reported by participants or caregivers for 7 days after vaccination with the use of a diary card. All unsolicited adverse events were captured for 28 days after each vaccination, and all serious adverse events, adverse events leading to withdrawal from the trial, and new-onset chronic diseases were captured through safety assessment by telephone for at least 180 days after vaccination. Medically attended adverse events were collected for 30 days after the onset of influenza-like illness.
The primary end point was the first occurrence of laboratory-confirmed influenza (combined findings from RT-PCR assay and viral culture) due to any type or subtype of influenza virus from more than 14 days after the last vaccination to the end of the influenza season in the overall trial population (participants 2 to <18 years of age). The coprimary end point was the first occurrence of any laboratory-confirmed influenza in participants 3 to less than 18 years of age, which was evaluated to fulfill a postmarketing requirement for the Food and Drug Administration.
Secondary efficacy end points included separate evaluation of RT-PCR–confirmed influenza and culture-confirmed influenza caused by any influenza virus type or subtype as well as by virus strains antigenically similar (matched) to those of the vaccine viruses. The secondary end points were assessed in the overall trial population (2 to <18 years of age), other prespecified age cohorts (4 to <18 years, 2 to <9 years, and 9 to <18 years), and in participants with or without previous influenza vaccination.
Other secondary end points included serologic responses to vaccination that were measured by hemagglutination-inhibition assay and presented as geometric mean titers (GMT) at days 1 and 22 (for participants with previous influenza vaccination) or at days 1, 29, and 50 (for participants without previous influenza vaccination) for each of the four vaccine strains in serum samples collected. Safety and reactogenicity were assessed in terms of the percentage of participants with solicited and unsolicited adverse events, including serious adverse events, new-onset chronic diseases, medically attended adverse events within 30 days after the onset of influenza-like illness, and adverse events leading to withdrawal from the trial.
Efficacy was assessed in the full analysis population and then in the per-protocol population. Immunogenicity was evaluated in a subgroup of the full analysis population, and safety was evaluated in the overall safety population. (Definitions of the populations and methods of sample-size calculation are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .)
The efficacy of IIV4c was calculated with the use of a time-to-event method based on a Cox proportional-hazards model adjusted for age, country, influenza vaccination history, and season, with 95% confidence intervals for the primary and secondary efficacy end points and with age and vaccination history as covariates. Vaccine efficacy was defined as 1 minus the hazard ratio for laboratory-confirmed influenza type A or B disease in participants receiving IIV4c as compared with those receiving the comparator vaccine. The prespecified criterion for declaring efficacy with respect to the primary end point was a lower limit of the two-sided 95% confidence interval for the vaccine efficacy greater than 20%. In a hierarchical testing procedure, after the criterion for efficacy was met with respect to the primary end point, efficacy with respect to the coprimary end point was declared if the lower limit of the two-sided 95% confidence interval for vaccine efficacy was greater than 30%. No other adjustment for multiple comparisons was made.
All statistical analyses for immunogenicity assessment were performed with logarithmically transformed titers. Individual titers below the detection limit (<10) were arbitrarily set to half of that limit (5). The 95% confidence intervals for secondary outcomes were not adjusted for multiple comparisons, and therefore inferences should be drawn cautiously from these intervals. All analyses for efficacy, immunogenicity, and safety were done without adjustments for missing values. Safety and adverse-event profile were assessed in terms of the number and percentage of participants who received a trial vaccine and reported an adverse event without formal statistical comparison. All statistical analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.2 or higher, and sample-size calculations were performed with the use of PASS software, version 12.0.2.

Section: Results

During three influenza seasons, 4514 participants (mean [±SD] age, 8.8±4.1 years; mean duration of follow-up, 225±28 days) were enrolled between May 25, 2017, and November 5, 2018. As shown in Table 1 , 2188 of 4514 participants (48.5%) were female; most were previously vaccinated against influenza (2975 of 4514 [65.9%]), and 2289 of 4514 (50.7%) were 2 to less than 9 years of age. The distribution of demographic and clinical characteristics of the participants at baseline was similar in the two trial groups.
Of 4514 enrolled participants, 1 did not receive any vaccine, and 4 were excluded from all efficacy analyses owing to early termination from the trial, leaving 4509 participants in the full analysis population (2 to <18 years of age) and 4409 in the cohort of participants 3 to less than 18 years of age ( Figure 1 ).
Of the 4509 participants who were assessed for efficacy, 1576 participants reported 2186 influenza-like illnesses from more than 14 days after vaccination to the end of the influenza season. Swabs were obtained in 2129 of 2186 (97.4%) of these influenza-like illnesses. Overall, the first occurrence of laboratory-confirmed influenza was detected in 539 participants, with 231 cases of influenza B (in 42.9% of these participants), 162 cases of influenza A/H3N2 (in 30.1%), 126 cases of influenza A/H1N1 (in 23.4%), and 22 cases of influenza A of undetermined subtype (in 4.1%). For 2 participants, a type A virus and a type B virus were detected by RT-PCR assay as part of one swab (coinfection). For 2 other participants, an influenza A/H1N1 virus and an influenza A/H3N2 virus were detected by viral culture as part of one swab. These coinfections were counted as one event per participant in the analysis of the primary end point. Laboratory-confirmed influenza occurred in 175 of 2257 participants who received IIV4c, for an incidence of 7.8% (range, 6.5 to 10.2 across three seasons), and in 364 of 2252 participants who received the meningococcal ACWY vaccine, for an incidence of 16.2% (range, 15.2 to 17.4 across three seasons) ( Table 2 ). Influenza was antigenically identified by viral culture in 115 of 2257 participants (5.1%) in the IIV4c group and in 279 of 2252 participants (12.4%) in the comparator group ( Table 2 ).
The efficacy of IIV4c against any RT-PCR– or culture-confirmed influenza was 54.6% (95% confidence interval [CI], 45.7 to 62.1) in the overall population (primary end point) ( Figure 2 and Table 2 ) and 54.0% (95% CI, 44.8 to 61.7) in participants 3 to less than 18 years of age (coprimary end point) (Table S2). IIV4c showed efficacy against influenza disease caused by A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and type B viruses ( Table 2 ). IIV4c showed efficacy against culture-confirmed influenza B/Yamagata; the limited number of influenza B/Victoria isolates (six) prevented a calculation of benefit for this subtype ( Table 2 ). The efficacy against any culture-confirmed strain regardless of antigenic match was 60.8% (95% CI, 51.3 to 68.5) and against antigenically matched strains was 63.6% (95% CI, 53.6 to 71.5) ( Table 2 ). No substantial differences between the full analysis population and per-protocol population were observed (Table S2). In prespecified subgroup analyses, IIV4c showed consistent vaccine efficacy with respect to age, sex, race, previous influenza vaccination, and season ( Figure 2B ). The results of additional efficacy analyses with stratification according to age, season, and country are shown in Tables S3, S4, and S5.
The full analysis population for immunogenicity included 721 participants (364 in the IIV4c group and 357 in the comparator group) (Fig. S1). Across the two seasons (seasons 2 and 3) in which serologic samples were obtained, the postvaccination GMT for the four vaccine strains in participants in the IIV4c group was 283.5 to 380.7 against influenza A/H1N1, 67.6 to 168.7 against influenza A/H3N2, 45.3 to 66.8 against influenza B/Victoria, and 52.8 to 108.5 against influenza B/Yamagata. No increase in postvaccination GMTs was observed in the comparator group (Table S6).
Between 6 hours and 7 days after vaccination, solicited adverse events were reported by 1159 of 2255 participants (51.4%) in the IIV4c group and by 1096 of 2254 participants (48.6%) in the comparator group ( Table 3 ). Similar patterns of local and systemic solicited adverse events, including fever, were observed in each trial group (Table S7). Fever (defined as a body temperature of ≥38.0°C) occurred in 118 of 2247 participants (5.3%) in the IIV4c group and in 102 of 2242 participants (4.5%) in the comparator group; severe fever (defined as a body temperature of ≥40.0°C) occurred in 7 participants (0.3%) and 5 participants (0.2%) in the respective groups. Serious adverse events occurred in 25 of 2258 participants (1.1%) in the IIV4c group and in 30 of 2255 participants (1.3%) in the comparator group. None were considered to be vaccine-related by the investigator, and no adverse event led to withdrawal from the trial. Overall, one death, due to cerebral edema, occurred in the comparator group. Respiratory illnesses, including influenza-like illness, were the most commonly reported unsolicited adverse events (Table S8), and new-onset chronic diseases occurred in less than 1% of the participants in both trial groups.

Section: Discussion

In this trial, IIV4c vaccination prevented laboratory-confirmed influenza in children and adolescents. Consistent with expectations of a specific immune response attributable to IIV4c, the efficacy was highest against antigenically matched culture-confirmed strains; 99% and 97% of culture-confirmed A/H1N1 and B types, respectively, were antigenic matches. A cell-culture–derived trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine was previously shown to prevent influenza illness in adults. The present trial extends those findings to children and adolescents.
This trial included children 2 to less than 9 years of age with or without previous influenza vaccination; 33% of such children were not previously vaccinated. Given that IIV4c was not licensed in Europe or Asia at the time the trial was conducted, it is unlikely that any participants had been previously vaccinated with this formulation. Regardless of influenza vaccination history, IIV4c provided consistent protection against influenza. Post hoc analysis showed that efficacy in younger children (2 to <4 years of age) was similar to that in the entire trial population, an important finding given the substantial influenza burden in young children and given the absolute vaccine efficacy in randomized clinical trials that evaluated standard, egg-based quadrivalent influenza vaccines, which showed a vaccine efficacy of 50% and 51% among children.
The efficacy of IIV4c was consistent — approximately 50% — during the three seasons in the trial. The unpredictable nature of seasonal influenza epidemics is a logistic challenge to reliably estimate the efficacy of new vaccines. Because circulating influenza types and subtypes varied over the seasons, without a single predominating subtype or strain, estimates of vaccine efficacy against each of the detected subtypes and types over the course of the trial were robust. Nevertheless, variability in vaccine efficacy against influenza A/H3N2 varied from 28.3% in season 3 to 46.2% in season 1 and 49.0% in season 2. Reasons for lower vaccine efficacy against influenza A/H3N2 may be partly explained by a higher mutation rate or reproductive number as well as greater glycosylation of hemagglutinin than with influenza A/H1N1, although vaccine and host factors probably also contribute. For egg-based vaccines, estimates of vaccine effectiveness against influenza A/H3N2 in children are lower than with the cell-based vaccine during the 2017–2018 Northern Hemisphere season of this trial.
This trial showed protection against influenza in a pediatric population using a vaccine produced with an emerging platform. However, although the trial design and choice of comparator enabled an estimate of absolute efficacy of IIV4c, the absence of an influenza vaccine as a comparator does not permit an estimate of relative vaccine efficacy. Recently published studies of the relative effectiveness of egg-derived and non–egg-derived vaccines on the basis of real-world evidence may address the need for comparative assessments of benefit between vaccine platforms. Such studies may help us understand to what extent newer technology offers more effective prevention. Another limitation was that the immune response was assessed in a subgroup of participants, because previous studies already confirmed the immunogenicity of IIV4c and its predecessor in pediatric populations.
We found that IIV4c provided protection against laboratory-confirmed influenza in healthy children and adolescents across three seasons, regardless of previous influenza vaccination. Influenza vaccine manufacturing platforms that do not rely on eggs offer certain advantages, including avoidance of egg-adaptive hemagglutinin mutations and a shorter response time when a new influenza virus emerges.
