Title: Patient and Plan Spending after State Specialty-Drug Out-of-Pocket Spending Caps


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Specialty drugs are used to treat complex or life-threatening conditions, often at high financial costs to both patients and health plans. Three states — Delaware, Louisiana, and Maryland — passed legislation to cap out-of-pocket payments for specialty drugs at $150 per prescription. A concern is that these caps could shift costs to health plans, increasing insurance premiums. Estimates of the effect of the caps on patient and health-plan spending could inform future policies.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We analyzed a sample that included 27,161 persons under 65 years of age who had rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, hepatitis C, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease, or ulcerative colitis and who were in commercial health plans from 2011 through 2016 that were administered by three large nationwide insurers. The primary outcome was the change in out-of-pocket spending among specialty-drug users who were in the 95th percentile for spending on specialty drugs. Other outcomes were changes in mean out-of-pocket and health-plan spending for specialty drugs, nonspecialty drugs, and nondrug health care and utilization of specialty drugs. We compared outcomes in the three states that enacted caps with neighboring control states that did not, 3 years before and up to 3 years after enactment of the spending cap.

Abstract_Section: Results

Caps were associated with an adjusted change in out-of-pocket costs of −$351 (95% confidence interval, −554 to −148) per specialty-drug user per month, representing a 32% reduction in spending, among users in the 95th percentile of spending on specialty drugs. This finding was supported by multiple sensitivity analyses. Caps were not associated with changes in other outcomes.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Caps for spending on specialty drugs were associated with substantial reductions in spending on specialty drugs among patients with the highest out-of-pocket costs, without detectable increases in health-plan spending, a proxy for future insurance premiums. (Funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Health Data for Action Program.)

Section: Introduction

Specialty drugs such as direct-acting antiviral agents for hepatitis C and biologic agents for multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis are important therapeutic advances because they are more effective and less toxic than previous treatments for these conditions. However, over the past decade, health-plan spending for such treatments increased from an estimated 26% of total drug spending to 49%, while the treatments remained below 2.5% of total prescriptions dispensed. As plan spending has increased, so have plan attempts to keep premiums affordable by shifting the costs to patients. From 2009 to 2018, the percentage of employer-sponsored plans using high cost-sharing drug tiers (fourth or specialty tiers) rose from 11% to 51%, and the disparity in out-of-pocket spending between specialty-drug users and nonspecialty-drug users also increased, becoming 3 times as large as that in an earlier 10-year period. This spending increase imposes substantial financial burdens on a small population of patients who already bear a serious disease burden.
Since 2018, at least 21 states and the federal government have introduced legislation to limit patient out-of-pocket costs for prescription drugs, with 11 state laws specifically targeting specialty drugs (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). These patient spending caps are promising for improving drug access. However, caps may increase health-plan spending, which could raise future insurance premiums and reduce insurance affordability for all enrollees. Of the 11 states that introduced specialty-drug spending-cap legislation, Delaware, Louisiana, and Maryland succeeded in passing the legislation, capping monthly out-of-pocket payments for patients with commercial health plans at $150 per 30-day supply of specialty medication. These caps apply to copayments and coinsurance but not to deductibles. Empirical evidence regarding the effect of caps on patient and plan spending on specialty drugs or other health care has been lacking. Addressing this gap will help to inform state and federal policies that aim to balance patient and plan spending for these important treatments. Our objective was to estimate the effects of state-mandated cost-sharing caps for specialty drugs on patient and health-plan spending.

Section: Methods

We used a quasi-experimental design with a difference-in-interrupted-trends model to estimate policy effects. For this analysis, we used variation across the states that did or did not enact the caps, in the periods before and after enactment. Our study period was 2011 through 2016, which included 3 years before and 1 to 3 years after the policy was enacted in Delaware (2014), Louisiana (2015), and Maryland (2016). The controls were neighboring states that did not enact caps and were closest in demographic characteristics to the intervention states: New Jersey (for Delaware), Arkansas (for Louisiana), and Virginia (for Maryland) (see page 4 in the Supplementary Appendix and Table S2).
We constructed a data set at the patient-month level using administrative claims data from Aetna, Humana, and UnitedHealthcare commercial plans provided by the Health Care Cost Institute. The data contained information on enrollment, demographic characteristics, health-plan characteristics, pharmaceutical and medical utilization, and costs for more than 50 million members per year. We linked members’ five-digit ZIP Codes to area-level socioeconomic status using data from the 2015 American Community Survey.
Our sample included persons who were younger than 65 years of age and had prescription drug and medical benefits covered by plans that were subject to the state caps: fully insured commercial individual, family, and employer-sponsored plans. Persons were required to have two or more outpatient medical claims (on separate dates) with diagnoses for the same disease of interest or one or more inpatient or emergency department claims with diagnoses for diseases of interest: rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, hepatitis C, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease, or ulcerative colitis (Table S3 lists the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision and 10th Revision [ICD], codes). We required 12 months of continuous enrollment before inclusion in the sample. Hence, the index date for sample inclusion was the date when a person satisfied both the diagnosis criterion and the continuous-enrollment criterion. We included members’ data for the period from the index date until December 31, 2016, until a break in enrollment of 1 month or greater, or until the member reached the age of 65 years. We excluded persons who had two claims with cancer ICD codes (except codes for nonmelanoma skin cancer) to avoid including orally administered anticancer treatments that were subject to oncology parity laws over the same period, since we could not distinguish between the effects of specialty drug caps and oncology parity laws for these drugs.
We applied the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 2011–2016 definition for specialty drugs to our data set: unique drugs with a median total claim cost during any continuous 12-month period that exceeded $600 per 30-day equivalent. We further restricted our definition to include only branded drugs with a Food and Drug Administration indication as systemic therapy for the diseases of interest. For psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis, we required drug indications to be for moderate or severe disease in order to exclude glucocorticoids or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (the included drugs are listed in Table S4).
Since we hypothesized that caps (which were intended to limit copayment and coinsurance spending above $150) would have differential effects depending on a person’s previous spending level, we measured out-of-pocket spending (the sum of copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles; the data set does not separate these out-of-pocket subcategories) among users of specialty drugs who were in the 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th, and 95th percentiles of specialty-drug out-of-pocket spending. Our prespecified primary outcome was the change in specialty-drug out-of-pocket spending among users who were in the 95th percentile of spending. We also measured mean out-of-pocket spending and health-plan spending separately for specialty drugs, nonspecialty drugs, and nondrug health care (i.e., the total cost of care minus drug spending). Because at least 50% of the study population did not fill a prescription for a specialty drug in a given month, estimations for quantiles were performed with the sample of persons who were specialty-drug users in a given month, whereas mean estimates were calculated with the entire inclusion sample. Estimates were inflation-adjusted to 2016 dollars with the Medical Component of the Consumer Price Index during the study period. We also measured mean specialty-drug utilization (i.e., number of days’ supply) overall and among specialty-drug users who were in or above the 95th percentile of out-of-pocket spending.
We included individual-level measures of age (grouped as 0 to 17, 18 to 24, 25 to 34, 35 to 44, 45 to 54, and 55 to 64 years), sex, health-plan size (large, small, or other, as defined by the Health Care Cost Institute), plan type (health maintenance organization, preferred provider organization, point-of-service plan, or other), and residence in a metropolitan statistical area. We constructed baseline Charlson comorbidity index scores, using diagnoses from 12 months before the sample inclusion index date. To account for potential changes in disease prevalence and adjust for seasonal fluctuations in outcomes, we used indicators for diseases of interest and indicators for calendar month. Finally, we included quartile indicators for ZIP Code–level measures of population size, percentage of the population that was white, percentage of the population with a bachelor’s degree, and median household income.
For our analysis, we used a difference-in-interrupted-trends approach, which is similar to a difference-in-differences approach but with an additional time-trend term interacted with the main effect terms to account for potential differences in preperiod trends (the model specification is provided in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ). Our independent variable of interest was the interaction between whether a state had implemented a specialty cap or not (matching intervention and neighboring control states) and whether the period of observation was before or after the cap. This provided a comparison of changes in outcomes in pairs of intervention and control states before and after enactment of the cap, with adjustment for covariates as described above. We used quantile regression to estimate specialty-drug out-of-pocket spending at quantiles of this measure among users in a given month. To estimate mean associations for all other outcomes among all included persons, we used generalized linear models with two-part models. First, we estimated the probability of observing a positive value for each outcome, using a binomial distribution and logistic link. Second, we estimated the outcome value among observations with positive values, using a gamma distribution with log link to model cost outcomes and a Poisson distribution with log link to model days’ supply of medication. We used recycled predictions to generate adjusted estimates of the effect of the caps. We modeled serial correlation using first-order autoregressive correlation structures for mean models and robust variance estimators for quantile models. Standard errors were generated with the use of 1000 bootstrap replications clustering on the individual person. No adjustment was made for multiplicity, and 95% confidence intervals do not reflect this source of uncertainty.
We conducted several analyses to evaluate model assumptions and the sensitivity of our primary outcome results (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix ). First, we conducted a falsification test of policy effects on persons enrolled in self-insured plans. Like the fully insured plans, these are commercial plans that cover employees and dependents but are exempted from state caps by federal legislation. This test used the same analysis as our base model specification but was restricted to persons in self-insured plans. Second, similar to a difference-in-difference-in-differences model, we included an indicator for membership in self-insured as compared with fully insured plans that was fully interacted with our main effect terms.
Third, our measures of out-of-pocket spending did not account for the use of copayment coupons, which pharmaceutical manufacturers offer to patients to reduce out-of-pocket costs. In a sensitivity analysis, we incorporated published estimates of the prevalence of coupon use and dollar values for coupons for specialty drugs used to treat each disease of interest to estimate true patient out-of-pocket spending. Fourth, we excluded the 3 months immediately before and after enactment of the cap to avoid measuring potential anticipatory or delayed health care utilization behavior. Fifth, we standardized out-of-pocket costs to a 30-day supply, since the legislation specifically caps out-of-pocket costs at $150 for a 30-day supply for each specialty-drug prescription. Sixth, we censored observations for persons 17 years of age or younger because of potentially different behaviors among younger beneficiaries. Seventh, we censored observations for persons in consumer-directed or high-deductible health plans (since deductibles are not subject to state caps). Finally, we used additional neighboring control states (adding Mississippi for Louisiana and West Virginia for Maryland).
In exploratory analyses, we evaluated whether the effects of the policy varied according to state, disease of interest, and ZIP Code–level socioeconomic factors. After conducting our base-case regression, we used recycled predictions to generate state- and disease-specific estimates and confidence intervals. For the ZIP Code–level socioeconomic factors, we interacted the main policy effect terms with quartiles of each factor, modeling household income, percentage who had a bachelor’s degree, and percentage who were white separately. This study was approved by the institutional review board at the Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data.

Section: Results

The final sample included 6050 specialty-drug users (60,504 person-months of data) and 27,161 persons with diagnoses of interest (570,344 person-months of data) ( Table 1 and Table S5). Specialty-drug out-of-pocket spending in the 95th percentile appeared to increase more rapidly in the intervention states than in the control states in the period before enactment of the cap (Fig. S3). In our difference-in-interrupted-trends model, this difference in preperiod trends was accounted for by a continuous time variable that was interacted with our main effect terms.
For specialty-drug users in the 95th percentile of specialty-drug out-of-pocket spending overall (evaluating all three intervention states and years together), caps were associated with a change in specialty-drug out-of-pocket spending of −$351 (95% confidence interval [CI], −554 to −148) per user per month, representing a 32% reduction in spending ( Figure 1 and Table 2 ). The changes in spending in years 1, 2, and 3 were, respectively, −$290 (95% CI, −396 to −184), −$540 (95% CI −900 to −181), and −$237 (95% CI, −2,392 to 1,918); only Delaware has 3 years of postpolicy observations. In contrast, caps were not associated with changes in other out-of-pocket spending outcomes ( Table 3 ), health-plan spending outcomes ( Table 4 ), or specialty-drug utilization outcomes, with the exception of an increase in the utilization of specialty drugs in Delaware (mean increase, 3 days’ supply [95% CI, 1 to 4]) and in the third postpolicy year (mean increase, 3 days’ supply [95% CI, 1 to 5]) (Table S12).
Our falsification test showed no significant effect of cap policies on self-insured plans (Table S14). All sensitivity analyses of our primary outcome produced estimates that were within the 95% confidence intervals of the base-case result. Exploratory analyses suggested that there was heterogeneity according to state, disease of interest, and socioeconomic factors (Table S15 and S16).

Section: Discussion

We found that among patients with the highest levels of specialty-drug spending, state legislation capping out-of-pocket costs at $150 per 30-day specialty-drug prescription was associated with a reduction of $351 per person per month in out-of-pocket spending. The caps were not associated with changes in out-of-pocket spending for specialty-drug users at the lower spending quantiles, in mean out-of-pocket spending, or in overall specialty-drug utilization (which increased only in Delaware). Exploratory analyses revealed a larger change in spending for persons with a diagnosis of hepatitis C than for persons with other diseases of interest, which suggests that the policies may be more effective at protecting against very high out-of-pocket prices incurred over a shorter duration.
Our results suggest that the policies may be well aligned with health economic principles for insurance coverage. Insurance functions best when it provides coverage for treatments that are high-cost, that are for rare conditions, and that patients value (e.g., treatments for which changes in out-of-pocket prices do not substantially alter utilization behavior). Aside from being used to treat relatively rare conditions and being expensive, specialty drugs may be good candidates for generous coverage because they tend to be clinically important medicines, and previous research has shown limited price sensitivity for specialty drugs, given their clinical importance and lack of appropriate substitutes. Some treatments, such as those for hepatitis C, are curative therapies with minimal side effects. Other treatments, such as those for multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, or Crohn’s disease, substantially improve quality of life and activities of daily living and have few viable alternatives.
Despite these features, one concern about specialty-drug caps is that reductions in out-of-pocket spending could increase health-plan spending, leading to higher future insurance premiums. Our results suggest that the caps affected only a small proportion of the study population (note that the quantile regressions excluded person-months without specialty-drug use). Since a primary function of insurance is to spread the financial risk of catastrophically high spending for a small population, we interpret the caps as strengthening this risk-spreading function without detectably increasing spending for the broader population.
Our study has several limitations. First, confounding is possible with any observational study. The difference-in-interrupted-trends approach assumed that there were no unobserved confounding factors that coincided with the caps. This assumption was supported by the fact that we studied three different caps enacted in three different states in different years: a confounding factor would have needed to coincide with the three events. Furthermore, our falsification test suggested that for bias to occur, unobserved confounding must not have affected self-insured groups at the same time. Moreover, our results were robust to multiple alternative model specifications.
Second, our data set consisted of total out-of-pocket payments (i.e., deductible plus copayment plus coinsurance dollar amounts) and did not disaggregate deductibles (which are not subject to the caps) from copayments and coinsurance, which reduced the precision (but not necessarily the accuracy) of our estimates. In addition, the deductibles and the use of multiple drugs by a person within a single month accounted for why specialty-drug out-of-pocket spending per user per month remained above $150 in some postpolicy observations.
Third, the preperiod outcome trends in our primary outcome diverged visually for all three states and were significantly different for one intervention–control pair (Maryland and Virginia) (Fig. S3). We accounted for these differences in our model by including a time-trend term that was interacted with our main effect terms.
Fourth, we evaluated outcomes 1 to 3 years after implementation of the policies. Subsequent effects may include health plans restricting the use of specialty drugs, through more stringent prior authorizations or higher deductibles, or manufacturers increasing drug prices because of reduced out-of-pocket costs. Finally, we were unable to differentiate beneficiaries who disenrolled because they died from those who disenrolled for reasons other than death. It would be useful to evaluate the effects on these outcomes over a longer period.
In conclusion, increasing specialty-drug spending for patients and health plans is motivating policy proposals that manage individual-level and population-level financial burden. Many states and the federal government have considered out-of-pocket caps to reduce the spending burden on patients, but a concern is that these caps could increase insurance premiums. The results we obtained with a quasi-experimental approach suggest that caps targeting out-of-pocket spending on specialty drugs can reduce the financial burden on the patients with the highest levels of spending without increasing spending on drugs or other care for the larger population. It would be useful to evaluate these caps in the longer term, as well as spending caps of other types and magnitudes, to inform the balance of individual and population financial burdens of these important medicines.
