Title: FDA Initiative for Drug Facts Label for Over-the-Counter Naloxone


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

The opioid crisis highlights the need to increase access to naloxone, possibly through regulatory approval for over-the-counter sales. To address industry-perceived barriers to such access, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed a model drug facts label for such sales to assess whether consumers understood the key statements for safe and effective use.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this label-comprehension study, we conducted individual structured interviews with 710 adults and adolescents, including 430 adults who use opioids and their family and friends. Eight primary end points were developed to assess user comprehension of each of the key steps in the label. Each of these end points included a prespecified target threshold ranging from 80 to 90% that was evaluated through a comparison of the lower boundary of the 95% exact confidence interval.

Abstract_Section: Results

The results for performance on six primary end points met or exceeded thresholds, including the steps “Check for a suspected overdose” (threshold, 85%; point estimate [PE], 95.8%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 94.0 to 97.1) and “Give the first dose” (threshold, 85%; PE, 98.2%; 95% CI, 96.9 to 99.0). The lower boundaries for four other primary end points ranged from 88.8 to 94.0%. One exception was comprehension of “Call 911 immediately,” but this instruction closely approximated the target of 90% (PE, 90.3%; 95% CI, 87.9 to 92.4). Another exception was comprehension of the composite step of “Check, give, and call 911 immediately” (threshold, 85%; PE, 81.1%; 95% CI, 78.0 to 83.9).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Consumers met thresholds for sufficient understanding of six of eight components of the instructions in the drug facts label for naloxone use and came close on two others. Overall, the FDA found that the model label was adequate for use in the development of a naloxone product intended for over-the-counter sales.

Section: Introduction

Timely administration of naloxone can save lives in the event of opioid overdose. Thus, emergency treatment provided by persons who may be at the scene of an overdose plays a crucial role in addressing the ongoing global opioid crisis. World Health Organization guidelines recommend that all persons who are likely to witness an overdose — not only medical professionals but also people who use drugs and their family and friends — have access to naloxone. However, jurisdictional policies related to the availability of naloxone vary across the world, and all too frequently legal and regulatory barriers limit access. In the United States, all 50 states and the District of Columbia have enacted policies to expand access to naloxone, in many instances providing for standing orders and third-party prescribing. Such expanded access allows naloxone to be prescribed both to people who may themselves be at risk for overdose and to people who are in a position to administer naloxone to others. However, both pharmacists and consumers are often either unaware of these options or are aware but associate opioid use and naloxone with stigma, which creates a barrier to purchase. Consequently, many health care professionals and policy makers have called for the availability of over-the-counter naloxone in the United States, which would facilitate direct purchase of the product from the store shelf by anyone, eliminating the gatekeeper.
The regulatory challenge for any industry sponsor seeking approval of an over-the-counter drug product in the United States is to provide evidence through consumer studies that consumers can safely and effectively use the product without guidance from medical professionals. Currently, the over-the-counter drug facts label is the primary means through which instructions for safe and effective use are conveyed to consumers. Potential industry sponsors have previously stated that the requirements for developing a label for over-the-counter naloxone and for assessing the effectiveness of the label through comprehension studies present barriers to bringing naloxone to the over-the-counter market. Our aim was to determine whether the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) could create and test a model label that could be assessed as adequately facilitating appropriate use of naloxone.
As a foundation for the model label, the FDA used the prescribing information for the two prescription products that had been approved for community use as of 2016: Evzio, a prefilled autoinjector, and Narcan, a nasal spray. FDA clinicians, in consultation with experts on the treatment of addiction, distilled the prescribing information for naloxone (which consists of more than 6300 words contained in 18 pages) into what were deemed to be critical elements in instructions for emergency use, limiting the text to the amount that would fit into the format for drug facts labels. The communication experts at the FDA further enhanced label usability by adding white space and boldface type, by “chunking” the information (i.e., breaking up information into small units, or chunks, that make it easier to notice), and by incorporating adjacent pictograms to clarify the stepwise directions for use. FDA social scientists, statisticians, and clinicians designed a label-comprehension study that incorporated best practices from the FDA’s Guidance for Industry: Label Comprehension Studies for Nonprescription Drug Products.
The research began with a qualitative phase in which the pictograms and language in the label were iteratively revised on the basis of information obtained during in-depth, sequential, one-on-one interviews with 36 participants. This phase was followed by a pilot label-comprehension study involving another 36 participants. These preliminary phases enabled us to craft our label, refine study questions, and determine the sample size for the pivotal study, which is the focus of this article.

Section: Methods

RTI and Concentrics, the study contractor and subcontractor, respectively, conducted all recruitment and fieldwork, performed prespecified analyses, and prepared a final study report. An independent FDA team then reviewed the data and findings to confirm the results. Under Title 42 Part 11 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), this label-comprehension study did not require registration at ClinicalTrials.gov since it is not regarded as a clinical investigation under Title 21 Part 312.3 of the CFR.
The pivotal study was designed to include 710 adults and adolescents who met the inclusion criteria and answered at least one comprehension question (see the data-collection instruments in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). Three key research subpopulations were identified a priori as representing likely groups of potential over-the-counter naloxone users: adults who had recently used opioids (prescription opioids, heroin, or both) and their family and friends, the general population of adults who had not been screened for opioid use, and the general population of adolescents 15 to 17 years of age who had not been screened for opioid use (see the section on recruitment and data-collection instruments in the Supplementary Appendix ). The study plan was to include 430 adults who had used opioids and their family and friends, 140 adults from the general population, and 140 adolescents from the general population (see the section on sample-size justification and handling missing data in the Supplementary Appendix ).
The FDA also specified that approximately one third of participants should have limited health literacy, as determined by results on the Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine (REALM) test and the REALM-Teen test. Although the REALM test does not provide an exhaustive assessment of either literacy or health literacy, it is often used by industry sponsors and so provides an important benchmark for this study as compared with similar previous studies.
Recruitment of opioid users and their family and friends was conducted through community-based organizations, online advertisements, and participant referral. Recruitment of adults and adolescents in the general population was conducted through market-research sites with the use of their continuously refreshed, large-scale databases, compiled through community outreach. Once participants arrived at the interview site, informed consent was obtained and documented and the REALM test was administered. The one-on-one interview then began. Participants were randomly assigned to receive one of the two drug facts labels that the FDA had developed. The content of the labels was identical except that one was adapted for the use of a nasal spray and one for the use of an autoinjector ( Figure 1 ). The interviewer then left the room, and the participant had as much time as needed to read the label, at which point the participant called the interviewer back into the room and the interview started. The interview began with a “cognitive walkthrough,” a tool that had not been used in previous studies of nonprescription label comprehension and is intended to help the interviewer discern whether participants understand the stepwise sequence involved in the administration of naloxone. During the cognitive walkthrough, participants were asked to imagine that they were in a situation in which they had to use a product on a friend and to state how they would do this, on the basis of the instructions on the label. The interviewer documented the steps mentioned in the walkthrough as well as the order in which they were mentioned. A standard label-comprehension interview then followed, in which participants were asked to apply their understanding of the drug facts label to mainly open-ended questions involving third-party scenarios (see the data-collection instruments in the Supplementary Appendix ).
Table 1 lists the a priori end points and target thresholds established for label comprehension. For studies of consumer behavior in areas such as label comprehension, the specific target threshold is driven by the magnitude of clinical concern that a labeled statement will not be well understood. Primary end points in our study corresponded to participant understanding of the key steps in naloxone administration as depicted on the label. The most important end point, “call 911,” was assessed at a prespecified threshold of 90% for the lower boundary of the confidence interval given the rationale that a person who is overdosing should always receive emergency care from trained medical professionals and that the 911 call needs to be made quickly. The remaining four steps, as well as the composite of steps 1 through 3 (check, give, and call 911), were assessed at a threshold of 85% to denote their slightly lower level of importance as compared with the 911 call. Two messages on the drug facts label (product use for opioid overdose and signs of an overdose) were also determined to be important but less critically so, and these thresholds were set at 80%.
The secondary end points listed in Table 1 encompassed labeled statements that were considered to be not quite as critical to effective use as the primary end points. There were no a priori, prespecified thresholds of comprehension for these end points. The study also included qualitative and exploratory end points regarding the timing between doses, ease of navigation within the label, familiarity with naloxone, and the definition of opioid.
In the primary analysis for primary and secondary end points, the comprehension rate was defined as the number of participants with an overall correct or acceptable response divided by the number of participants in the study population. A correct response was defined as demonstration of a complete understanding of the objective of safe and effective administration of the drug, whereas an acceptable response was defined as demonstration of a sufficient understanding of this objective. In accordance with the statistical analysis plan, estimates of comprehension rate were calculated along with 95% confidence intervals with the use of the Clopper–Pearson exact method for both primary and secondary end points. A primary end point was considered to be met if the lower boundary of the confidence interval was greater than the prespecified target threshold.
Because the step “call 911” was considered to be so important, an analysis of the baseline characteristics of participants whose responses did not reflect an understanding of its importance was conducted. For qualitative and exploratory end points, counts and percentages were reported for each response category. Subgroup analyses that were conducted according to user group, literacy, familiarity with naloxone, and use of opioids were also planned.

Section: Results

A total of 720 participants were enrolled in the study; 9 gave consent but did not meet the inclusion criteria at the time of the interview, and 1 chose not to participate. A total of 710 participants completed the interview. As shown in Table 2 , 430 adults who used opioids as well as family members and friends of those who used opioids completed the interview. Most participants who used opioids were recruited from medication-assisted treatment programs in the cities of San Francisco, Chicago, and Charleston, West Virginia; in the Raleigh–Durham area of North Carolina; and in Vance County, also in North Carolina. A total of 280 adults and adolescents from the general population completed the interview. Recruitment was conducted by market-research firms in Tampa, Florida, and in Dallas, Los Angeles, Indianapolis, the Raleigh–Durham area, and New York City. Across all subpopulations, 33.4% had limited literacy. There were similar percentages of male and female participants (51% and 49%, respectively). The mean age was 37.6 years. Participants identified themselves as white (65.4%), black (31.1%), American Indian or Alaska Native (2.8%), Asian (0.7%), or Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander (0.7), with the remainder recorded as “other” (see Table 2 for details). In addition, 10% of participants identified themselves as Latino or Hispanic; 84% of all adults had attained at minimum a high school diploma. (See the section on baseline and demographic characteristics in the Supplementary Appendix .)
Among the eight primary end points, six met or exceeded the prespecified target threshold, and the point estimate (PE) scores for seven of the primary end points exceeded 90%. The primary end point that did not meet the 90% threshold was the third step in the sequence: call 911 immediately (PE, 90.3%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 87.9 to 92.4). Analyses of the interview transcripts indicated that in most incorrect responses, participants stated that the respondent would call 911 but did not state that they would call immediately after giving the first dose. Common reasons for incorrect responses included statements that they would call 911 only if the person did not wake up, if the person did wake up, or after waiting to see if the dose worked (44 participants for all such responses). An additional 25 participants did not mention calling 911 at all. Participants with lower comprehension were more likely to have limited literacy, to have educational attainment below the high school level, to be black, or to be unfamiliar with naloxone.
The primary end point that did not meet the 85% target threshold was the composite of the first three steps (PE, 81.1%; 95% CI, 78.0 to 83.9). Among the 134 participants who had an incorrect response, the reasons that were unrelated to “call 911” included not mentioning checking the person at all (18 of 134 [13.4%]), not mentioning administering a dose (13 of 134 [9.7%]), and mentioning administering a dose before checking the person (7 of 134 [5.2%]). The FDA was intentionally conservative with regard to the coding of the end points involving the 911 call. For example, if a participant did not explicitly state that he or she would call 911 and instead voiced the passive assumption that 911 had been called, the answer was still coded as being incorrect.
Results for the secondary end points are shown in Table 3 . The results indicate that the messages were well understood by the participants, with PEs exceeding 80% for all secondary end points except the composite score for reporting all five steps correctly, which was somewhat lower (PE, 74.6%; 95% CI, 71.3 to 77.8).
For the qualitative and exploratory end points, 675 (95.1%) mentioned waiting 2 to 3 minutes between doses; only 23 (3.2%) did not mention a time period, whereas 9 (1.3%) referenced 1.5 to 4 minutes, “a few minutes,” or “a couple of minutes.” There were 591 participants (83.2%) who reported that the label was easy to navigate; only 5 participants (0.7%) mentioned having trouble locating information, only 14 participants (2.0%) mentioned having confusion regarding words, and just 5 participants (0.7%) mentioned having confusion regarding pictograms. Approximately half of participants (379, or 53.4%) reported awareness of naloxone before the study, with just under one third (213, or 30%) stating that they or someone they knew had previously used naloxone.
Participants provided varying responses when asked to define “opioid.” The majority did understand the type of overdoses for which naloxone is effective. It appears that the word “opioid” is not universally understood, even by people who use opioids, although most understood the general concept and definition.
All primary and secondary end points were analyzed according to key research subpopulations, literacy level, familiarity with naloxone, opioid subgroup, and interview site. (See the section on baseline and demographic characteristics in the Supplementary Appendix .) Comprehension was similar across the three key research subpopulations, although the adolescent general population had higher scores on three end points (a composite of steps 1 through 3, the order of the “call 911” step, and the instruction to stay with the person until help arrived) than people who used opioids or their family members or friends who used opioids. Comprehension was lower among participants with limited literacy and similar across the groups of people who used opioids, whether prescribed or unprescribed (i.e., heroin or illicit fentanyl), although there were high levels of participant overlap across these subgroups. Participants familiar with naloxone had higher scores on five end points (giving the first dose, calling 911, safety of continuing to give doses, use of product, and recognition of signs of overdose) than those who were not familiar with naloxone.

Section: Discussion

Overall, comprehension of the model naloxone drug facts label met our predefined criteria for acceptability on six of eight primary end points. Although comprehension of the other two end points did not meet predefined criteria, it was within an acceptable range. Label comprehension is often associated with lower scores in persons with limited literacy, and this study had a sizable subgroup with limited literacy. We did not control for multiple testing in this evaluation and only mitigated type 1 error inflation by prespecifying a hierarchy of end points (primary vs. secondary).
In studies involving consumer behavior regarding the potential use of over-the-counter drugs, it is often the case that target thresholds for primary end points are closely approximated but not fully met. Industry sponsors are encouraged to scrutinize the data for explanations of the failure to meet the predefined goal that can be subsequently addressed in labeling; overall, the FDA considers benefit in conjunction with risk. In the case of over-the-counter naloxone, since 44 of 69 participants’ incorrect responses for the end point “call 911” included mention of calling 911 at some point in the process because of a particular anticipated outcome, and since naloxone is a potentially life-saving treatment, we determined that it was reasonable to consider 88% to be an acceptable lower boundary of the confidence interval. In addition, since the coding of this end point was conservative, reported scores are probably underestimates of true comprehension. If naloxone is administered and most users call 911, we reason that many lives may be saved, and this is far preferable to the alternative of not administering naloxone at all. Moreover, as a result of this finding, we think that industry sponsors should continue to consider additional ways to highlight “call 911” on the label. It should be noted that performance on this end point was similar to that observed in many other successful label-comprehension studies in which the labels were ultimately approved on the basis of the overall assessment of benefit as compared with risk.
Our decision to develop a model drug facts label and the conduct of our study to assess consumer comprehension represent a considerable departure from the typical drug development process, in which the sponsor conducts all testing and comes to the agency for approval. This label performed well in facilitating understanding of the important steps needed in evaluating a person who appears to have overdosed and in administering naloxone. The success of this label-comprehension study has enabled much of the regulatory work needed to secure the over-the-counter availability of naloxone and will be key to leveraging over-the-counter product development as a possible means to increasing access to a life-saving drug. We encourage industry sponsors to use this model label to accelerate development initiatives that will ultimately allow for wider access to naloxone. We also anticipate that state and local governments, as well as community-based organizations, will be able to use the tested model label as a component of their training on naloxone administration.
