Title: Year 1 of the Bundled Payments for Care Improvement–Advanced Model


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

The Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation launched the Medicare Bundled Payments for Care Improvement–Advanced (BPCI-A) program for hospitals in October 2018. Information is needed about the effects of the program on health care utilization and Medicare payments.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a modified segmented regression analysis using Medicare claims and including patients with discharge dates from January 2017 through September 2019 to assess differences between BPCI-A participants and two control groups: hospitals that never joined the BPCI-A program (nonjoining hospitals) and hospitals that joined the BPCI-A program in January 2020, after the conclusion of the intervention period (late-joining hospitals). The primary outcomes were the differences in changes in quarterly trends in 90-day per-episode Medicare payments and the percentage of patients with readmission within 90 days after discharge. Secondary outcomes were mortality, volume, and case mix.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 826 BPCI-A participant hospitals were compared with 2016 nonjoining hospitals and 334 late-joining hospitals. Among BPCI-A hospitals, the mean baseline 90-day per-episode Medicare payment was $27,315; the change in the quarterly trends in the intervention period as compared with baseline was −$78 per quarter. Among nonjoining hospitals, the mean baseline 90-day per-episode Medicare payment was $25,994; the change in quarterly trends as compared with baseline was −$26 per quarter (difference between nonjoining hospitals and BPCI-A hospitals, $52 [95% confidence interval {CI}, 34 to 70] per quarter; P<0.001; 0.2% of the baseline payment). Among late-joining hospitals, the mean baseline 90-day per-episode Medicare payment was $26,807; the change in the quarterly trends as compared with baseline was $4 per quarter (difference between late-joining hospitals and BPCI-A hospitals, $82 [95% CI, 41 to 122] per quarter; P<0.001; 0.3% of the baseline payment). There were no meaningful differences in the changes with regard to readmission, mortality, volume, or case mix.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

The BPCI-A program was associated with small reductions in Medicare payments among participating hospitals as compared with control hospitals. (Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.)

Section: Introduction

The health care system in the United States is in the midst of a transformation from paying for volume to paying for value. One key vehicle in this transformation is alternative payment models. Generally, these models incorporate capitation, shared savings, or episode-based payment along with financial incentives for high-quality care. The Medicare Bundled Payments for Care Improvement–Advanced (BPCI-A) initiative, which was launched in October 2018, is a voluntary alternative payment model in which hospitals or clinician groups elect to assume accountability for the total costs of care during a specified “episode,” which is anchored on a hospitalization or procedure and extends for 90 days thereafter. Under the BPCI-A program, participating hospitals are paid fee-for-service rates, but payments are reconciled against targets on a quarterly basis. Target prices are based on a model that includes historical utilization, hospital type, regional averages, and other factors. Hospitals in which the total allowed Medicare payments per episode are below target prices receive a reconciliation payment, whereas those in which the payments per episode are higher than target prices must pay a reconciliation payment to Medicare.
The BPCI-A initiative builds on the modest success of its predecessor, the BPCI (Bundled Payments for Care Improvement) program, which ran from 2013 through 2018. The BPCI-A initiative differs from the original BPCI program in a few important ways: cost targets are set differently, derived from a model that includes hospital and patient characteristics and historical hospital costs and regional costs; the program is simpler, offering only episodes of 90 days’ duration (rather than 30, 60, or 90 days) and fewer choices of conditions; and quality measures, most notably readmission rates, are built into the program. These quality measures are used to adjust the reconciliation payments, such that hospitals with perfect quality scores would earn 100% of their reconciliation payments, whereas hospitals with quality scores of zero would earn only 90% of their reconciliation payments. In this study, we evaluated the association between BPCI-A participation and changes in the total allowed Medicare payments, in readmission and mortality, and in volume and case mix.

Section: Methods

BPCI-A participation began on October 1, 2018; we obtained a publicly available list of the participating hospitals from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Participating hospitals selected 1 or more conditions in which to participate from 29 inpatient and 3 outpatient options; there was no maximum number a hospital could select. We included all inpatient conditions in this study.
We then selected two control groups. The first control group comprised eligible hospitals that never elected to join BPCI-A (nonjoining hospitals). The second control group comprised hospitals that joined BPCI-A in January 2020 (late-joining hospitals); these hospitals served as a useful control group because they joined after the end of the intervention period, but given that they eventually elected to join the program, were likely to be more similar in unmeasured ways to the early-joining hospitals than to nonjoining hospitals.
We linked participation data to the American Hospital Association (AHA) 2017 annual survey to obtain information on hospital characteristics and to the Area Health Resources File to obtain information on market characteristics. Hospitals that did not match to AHA data were excluded from the analyses. Market share was calculated as the proportion of all admissions in a county for the condition of interest to each hospital, and market competitiveness was calculated by means of the Herfindahl–Hirschman Index (see the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The study was approved by the Office of Human Research Administration at the Harvard School of Public Health.
We used Medicare inpatient files from January 1, 2017, to September 30, 2019, to identify index admissions for BPCI-A conditions. We included fee-for-service beneficiaries who had been continuously enrolled in Medicare Parts A and B during their episode of care as well as during the year before, and we excluded beneficiaries who were eligible for Medicare because of end-stage renal disease. At participating hospitals, we included patients from only the conditions selected by the hospital. At control hospitals, we included patients from all 29 BPCI conditions. Coexisting conditions were quantified with the use of the Medicare Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse (CCW), which identifies 27 chronic conditions from beneficiaries’ inpatient and outpatient claims. (CCW scores range from 0 to 27, with higher scores indicating more coexisting conditions.) According to CMS definitions, patient episodes begin with the index admission and extend through 90 days after discharge. Patients who die during the index admission are not considered to have initiated an episode, and their data are not included in the program and analysis.
Our primary outcomes were the differences between BPCI-A hospitals and control hospitals with respect to changes in quarterly trends in the standardized allowed Medicare payments per patient episode and in the percentage of patients with readmission within 90 days after discharge (90-day readmission) from baseline to the intervention period. Standardized payments remove differences in payment that are based on the Medicare wage index and other special payments. All Medicare payments across all care settings (inpatient, outpatient, postacute, physician billing, and durable medical equipment) were included. Total payments were Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles of national episode payments annually, in accordance with the program specifications, and were adjusted for inflation to prices in 2019.
Secondary outcomes included between-group differences in the changes in quarterly trends in individual components of payment, the number of healthy days at home during a 90-day window, 30-day and 90-day mortality, and a composite of 90-day readmission and mortality. Healthy days at home is a measure of the number of days during the 90-day window that a patient is alive and at home (i.e., not in a hospital, emergency department, skilled nursing facility, or other postacute facility). We also examined a number of indicators of case mix, including age, sex, disability, race or ethnic group, mean number of CCW coexisting conditions, the diagnosis-related–group (DRG) complexity (the proportion of patients at each complexity level within a given DRG, such as heart failure), and the percentage of patients with outlier payments, which is a marker for very high clinical complexity or unexpected complications.
We compared the group of BPCI-A–participating hospitals with two control groups (nonjoining hospitals and late-joining hospitals) with respect to hospital and market characteristics. Full details are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , but in brief, we used a modified segmented regression approach to examine the difference in quarterly trend for each outcome from baseline to the intervention period. We then compared those changes between BPCI-A hospitals and nonjoining hospitals and between BPCI-A hospitals and late-joining hospitals. For payments, we calculated the percentage change by dividing the difference in quarterly trends by the baseline payment. Cost and clinical-outcome analyses were run at the patient-episode level, with each outcome in a separate model. For each outcome, our primary analyses included all 29 conditions as a group, but we also examined the 10 most prevalent conditions individually.
In each model, time 0 was set as program initiation. The time 1 variable was an indicator for quarter, from −6 to 4 (i.e., the 6 quarters before the intervention and the 4 quarters after). The time 2 variable was set to zero until October 2018 and thereafter was set from 1 to 4. Interaction terms between time 1 and nonjoining hospitals, and between time 1 and late-joining hospitals, allowed for different quarterly trends in the three groups in the preintervention period. The effect of the intervention was captured by interaction terms between time 2 and nonjoining hospitals and between time 2 and late-joining hospitals; significance determined whether there had been a greater change in any outcome in episodes at BPCI-A hospitals than at either group of control hospitals. A marginal, generalized estimating equation approach to modeling (the GENMOD procedure in the SAS statistical package) was used to allow for correlation over time within hospitals. We included indicator variables for month, DRG (which indicates the condition as well as its relative complexity), individual patient–level CCW coexisting conditions, and hospital characteristics such as ownership, teaching status, rural location, and region. We conducted sensitivity analyses with alternative measure specifications such as modeling payments with a log link and gamma distribution rather than the CMS method of a linear approach, including a random effect for hospital, and comparing BPCI-A hospitals with hospitals in each control group individually rather than comparing one model with both control groups.
For the primary outcomes of our study, the difference in change in trend in total Medicare payments per episode and 90-day readmissions among participating hospitals as compared with nonjoining and late-joining hospitals, a P value of 0.0125 (i.e., 0.05÷4) was considered to indicate statistical significance. Secondary end points and analyses should be considered exploratory, and the 95% confidence intervals are not adjusted for multiplicity.

Section: Results

In total, 832 hospitals joined BPCI-A in October 2018. Congestive heart failure was the most commonly chosen condition, selected by 508 BPCI-A hospitals, followed by sepsis, cardiac arrhythmia, pneumonia, and acute myocardial infarction (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ).
The characteristics of the hospitals and of the patients with episodes are shown in Table 1 (for the analysis sample of hospitals with AHA descriptive information) and Table S2. Six of the 832 BPCI-A hospitals, 6 of the 340 late-joining hospitals, and 182 of the 2198 nonjoining hospitals, which together comprised 81,246 of 7,614,297 patient episodes (1.1%), did not match to AHA data and were excluded from the analyses (Fig. S1). Hospitals that participated in the BPCI-A program were larger, were more often for-profit in ownership, were more often teaching hospitals, were less often rural, and were slightly differently distributed in terms of region than either the late-joining or nonjoining hospitals, although differences between the BPCI-A hospitals and the late-joining hospitals were generally smaller in magnitude than those between the BPCI-A hospitals and the nonjoining hospitals. The patient populations were well-matched among the groups.
Unadjusted total Medicare payments according to study group over time are shown in Figure 1 . Formal testing compared the changes from baseline to the intervention period in the adjusted quarterly trends in Medicare payments between the intervention group and each control group ( Table 2 ). Among the BPCI-A hospitals, the mean baseline payment was $27,315; the change in quarterly trend in the intervention period as compared with baseline was −$78 per quarter. Among the nonjoining hospitals, the mean baseline payment was $25,994; the change in quarterly trend was −$26 per quarter. The difference between nonjoining hospitals and BPCI-A hospitals in the changes in quarterly trends was significant (difference, $52 [95% confidence interval {CI}, 34 to 70] per quarter; P<0.001; 0.2% of the baseline payment). Of this difference, 46.2% ($24 of $52) was related to payments to skilled nursing facilities. Because our models assumed a linear change during participation, the $52 in savings per patient per quarter at BPCI-A hospitals, as compared with nonjoining hospitals, would be projected to grow to $208 (95% CI, 136 to 280) by the fourth quarter of participation (0.8% of the baseline payment).
Among the late-joining hospitals, the mean baseline payment was $26,807; the change in quarterly trend was $4 per quarter. The difference between late-joining hospitals and BPCI-A hospitals was significant (difference, $82 [95% CI, 41 to 122] per quarter; P<0.001; 0.3% of the baseline payment). Of this difference, 65.9% ($54 of $82) was related to payments to skilled nursing facilities ( Table 2 ). The $82 in savings per patient per quarter at BPCI-A hospitals, as compared with late-joining hospitals, would be projected to grow to $328 (95% CI, 166 to 488) per patient by the fourth quarter (1.2% of the baseline payment).
Findings were similar when we ran our models with alternative specifications, including when we used a log link with a gamma distribution, added hospital random effects, and ran separate models for each comparison group (Tables S3 and S4). In individual analyses that were focused on the 10 most commonly selected conditions, the patterns were directionally similar for 7 of the 10 comparisons with the nonjoining hospitals and for 9 of the 10 comparisons with the late-joining hospitals, although many 95% confidence intervals crossed zero (Table S5).
The unadjusted 90-day readmission rates according to study group over time are shown in Figure S2. There were no meaningful differences in the changes in trends in 30-day or 90-day readmission rates or mortality, or in the composite of 90-day readmission and mortality, between BPCI-A hospitals and either the nonjoining or late-joining hospitals ( Table 3 ). However, our analyses suggested that patients at BPCI-A hospitals gained more healthy days at home (0.06 days per quarter) than did patients at nonjoining hospitals (0.02 days per quarter; difference, −0.04 days; 95% CI, −0.06 to −0.01) or at late-joining hospitals (−0.03 days per quarter; difference, −0.08 days; 95% CI, −0.13 to −0.03). There were no meaningful differences in the changes in trends between BPCI-A hospitals and nonjoining or late-joining hospitals in the quarterly volume or measures of patient selection and case mix, including age, sex, disability, race and ethnic group, mean number of coexisting conditions, DRG complexity, and the percentage of patients with outlier payments (Table S6).

Section: Discussion

We found that BPCI-A participation was associated with small, favorable changes in Medicare payments when compared with either nonjoining hospitals (i.e., hospitals that at no point joined the BPCI-A program) or late-joining hospitals (i.e., hospitals that joined the BPCI-A program after the intervention period in the current study). BPCI-A hospitals had small improvements in cost trends, which were driven by reductions in spending by skilled nursing facilities; this finding is consistent with previous results in the original BPCI program. In contrast to results in the original BPCI program, our finding that changes in spending emerged within the first year is notable. It is possible that hospitals joining the BPCI-A program had better knowledge about condition-specific best practices that could be implemented to reduce spending than did hospitals in the original BPCI experiment. In addition, a majority of hospitals joined in partnership with a third-party bundled-payment convening organization; such organizations typically provide infrastructure, data analysis, and strategic direction and thus may have sped the diffusion of knowledge across participating institutions.
We did not compare hospital spending with target prices of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (CMMI), because neither the prices nor the methods that have been used to calculate the targets have been released. Our findings reflect changes in the unique cost curves of hospitals rather than in changes in spending relative to a calculated target. CMMI has publicly stated that its target prices were probably too high and thus that more hospitals than anticipated met the spending targets. Medicare has announced that it will recalculate target prices for future years of the program, but details of these calculations have not been released.
We did not find evidence of negative effects in terms of clinical outcomes or patient selection, but our measures were relatively blunt. Nonetheless, it is reassuring that reductions in spending for postacute care and total spending were not associated with higher readmission rates, which is one measure of poorly coordinated postdischarge care. It is also reassuring that we did not find evidence that hospitals responded to participation in the BPCI-A program by reducing the proportion of their patients who were older or had more medically complex conditions or by increasing volume.
This study should be interpreted in the context of other studies in this field. Whereas a growing body of research has examined the original BPCI program, showing evidence of success with regard to major joint replacement, late but not early success with regard to medical conditions, and no evidence that hospitals preferentially shifted their case mix away from higher-risk patients and toward lower-risk patients (termed “adverse selection”), previous studies of the BPCI-A program have focused on participation rather than performance.
There are limitations to our findings. Most important, the BPCI-A program is voluntary. There is selection with regard to which hospitals join the program, and among the participating hospitals, there is selection in terms of which conditions the hospitals elect to join. We attempted to address selection in enrollment by controlling for a number of hospital characteristics and also by including a second control group that consisted of late-joining hospitals, which are probably more similar to the early-joining hospitals than to the nonjoining hospitals in both measurable and unmeasurable characteristics. We were unable to address selection with regard to which conditions the hospitals elected to join, and we were unable to account for whether hospitals changed their behavior in anticipation of joining. All the hospitals in our sample were also subject to participation in mandatory value-based payment programs that would have probably dissuaded them from artificially inflating their own costs, and it seems unlikely that hospitals would have asked postacute facilities to increase their costs, but we cannot rule out this possibility. Our estimates therefore probably represent a best-case scenario for the effect of bundled payments, and our findings should not be assumed to generalize beyond the specific group of hospitals and conditions we studied.
Our analyses are based on claims data and depend on accurate coding practices, which could vary according to hospital or over time, and do not contain important information related to functional status or interpersonal aspects of care. We did not assess performance on quality measures that are included in the program, other than readmission, because they do not apply to all conditions, for the most part they cannot be calculated from claims data, and data on measures not related to claims are available from Medicare only on the basis of a 2-to-3-year rolling average, with the most recent performance including data from the periods of 2016–2018 or 2017–2019, depending on the measure. The BPCI-A program is new, and we had a limited follow-up period; longer-term follow-up may be necessary for a full evaluation of how care evolves. However, owing to the coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) pandemic, CMS designated 2020 as an exempt year for this and other federal value-based and alternative payment models, and decisions are still pending with regard to how 2021 will be handled. Thus, it is likely that the next realistic opportunity to evaluate the effect of this program will be in 2022.
In this study, we found that the BPCI-A program was associated with small reductions in Medicare payments among participating hospitals. Longer-term evaluation is needed to determine the full effect of the program.
