Title: Bimekizumab versus Secukinumab in Plaque Psoriasis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Bimekizumab is a monoclonal IgG1 antibody that selectively inhibits both interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F. The efficacy and safety of bimekizumab as compared with secukinumab, which selectively inhibits interleukin-17A alone, in patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis have not been extensively examined.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this phase 3b trial, we randomly assigned patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis, in a 1:1 ratio, to receive bimekizumab subcutaneously at a dose of 320 mg every 4 weeks or secukinumab subcutaneously at a dose of 300 mg weekly to week 4, followed by every 4 weeks to week 48. At week 16, patients receiving bimekizumab underwent rerandomization, in a 1:2 ratio, to receive maintenance dosing every 4 weeks or every 8 weeks to week 48. The primary end point was 100% reduction from baseline in the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score at week 16. The primary analysis was first tested for the noninferiority of bimekizumab to secukinumab at a margin of −10 percentage points and then tested for superiority.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 1005 patients were screened and 743 were enrolled; 373 patients were assigned to receive bimekizumab and 370 to receive secukinumab. At week 16, a total of 230 patients (61.7%) in the bimekizumab group and 181 (48.9%) in the secukinumab group had a 100% reduction from baseline in the PASI score (PASI 100) (adjusted risk difference, 12.7 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 5.8 to 19.6); bimekizumab was shown to be noninferior and superior to secukinumab (P<0.001 for noninferiority and superiority). At week 48, a total of 250 patients (67.0%) treated with bimekizumab had a PASI 100 response, as compared with 171 patients (46.2%) treated with secukinumab (adjusted risk difference, 20.9 percentage points; 95% CI, 14.1 to 27.7; P<0.001). At the week 4 time point, 265 patients (71.0%) in the bimekizumab group had 75% or greater reduction from baseline in the PASI score, as compared with 175 patients (47.3%) in the secukinumab group (adjusted risk difference, 23.7; 95% CI, 17.0 to 30.4; P<0.001). Oral candidiasis occurred more often with bimekizumab (72 patients, 19.3%) than with secukinumab (11 patients, 3.0%).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis, treatment with bimekizumab resulted in greater skin clearance than treatment with secukinumab over 16 and 48 weeks but was associated with oral candidiasis (predominantly mild or moderate as recorded by the investigator). Longer and larger trials are required to determine the comparative effect and risks of interleukin-17 inhibitors in psoriasis. (Funded by UCB Pharma; BE RADIANT ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03536884 .)

Section: Introduction

The interleukin-17 isoforms interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F are implicated in the pathophysiology of psoriasis and are overexpressed in psoriatic tissue. These cytokines form homodimers and heterodimers (interleukin-17A/A, 17A/F, and 17F/F) that signal through the interleukin-17RA/RC receptor complex. Although interleukin-17A is the more potent cytokine, interleukin-17F may be more highly expressed in psoriatic lesional skin. Bimekizumab is a humanized monoclonal IgG1 antibody that selectively inhibits both interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F, which, as compared with inhibitors of interleukin-17A alone, results in the additional inhibition of interleukin-17F/F. Some evidence indicates that interleukin-17F contributes independently to the pathobiology of plaque psoriasis, and blocking both interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F may lead to more complete suppression of inflammation and superior clinical outcomes than blocking interleukin-17A alone.
In the phase 3 BE READY, BE VIVID, and BE SURE trials, bimekizumab led to greater clinical improvements in patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis than placebo, than the interleukin-12/23 inhibitor ustekinumab, and than the tumor necrosis factor inhibitor adalimumab but was associated with a greater incidence of oral candidiasis. Here, we present results of the BE RADIANT phase 3b trial, which examined the efficacy of dual interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F inhibition as compared with interleukin-17A inhibition alone in psoriasis. We compared bimekizumab, which selectively inhibits both interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F, with secukinumab, which selectively neutralizes interleukin-17A, through 48 weeks in patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis.

Section: Methods

We recruited patients by means of letters mailed to patients and to physicians, patient flyers and posters placed in waiting rooms, a 4-week social media outreach campaign (in the United States), local advertisements, and a website. Eligibility assessments were performed by the trial site investigators.
Eligible patients were persons 18 years of age or older who had had plaque psoriasis for at least 6 months before screening and had moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis at screening and baseline. Moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis was defined by a score on the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) of 12 or higher (range, 0 to 72, with higher scores indicating worse disease), at least 10% body-surface area affected by psoriasis, and a score on the Investigator’s Global Assessment (IGA) of 3 or higher (on a 5-point scale, with 0 representing complete clearance and 4 representing the most severe psoriasis). Patients with previous exposure to bimekizumab or secukinumab were excluded, as were patients who had had no response within 12 weeks to an anti–interleukin-17 biologic agent (brodalumab or ixekizumab) or to more than one biologic agent of any other class. (Full eligibility criteria are provided in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.)
The sponsor, UCB Pharma, funded and designed the trial with the participation of authors employed by the sponsor. UCB Pharma provided the trial drug and conducted the statistical analyses. Six of the authors not employed by the sponsor gathered the data. All the authors had full access to the trial data and vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol . Confidentiality agreements were in place between UCB Pharma and the authors. All the authors collaborated on writing the manuscript with the assistance of professional medical writers funded by UCB Pharma. There were no restrictions by the sponsor on publication by academic authors of the trial results. All patients provided written informed consent documented in accordance with local regulations, the International Council for Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice guidelines, and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
This is a phase 3b multicenter, randomized, double-blind, active-comparator–controlled, parallel-group trial conducted across 77 sites (clinics, hospitals, research units, and private practices) in 11 countries. After a screening period of 2 to 5 weeks, the trial included a 16-week initial treatment period, followed by a 32-week maintenance treatment period (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). Patients who completed the 48-week double-blind period could enroll in an ongoing 96-week open-label extension period.
After the screening period, patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive bimekizumab at a dose of 320 mg every 4 weeks or secukinumab at a dose of 300 mg weekly to week 4 followed by once every 4 weeks. At week 16, patients in the bimekizumab group underwent rerandomization, in a 1:2 ratio, to receive a maintenance dose of bimekizumab (320 mg) either once every 4 weeks or once every 8 weeks to week 48; patients in the secukinumab group continued to receive secukinumab to week 48.
The maintenance dosing regimen of once every 8 weeks was added through a protocol amendment, with the first rerandomization occurring approximately 7 months after the trial began, by which time a total of 82 patients had passed week 16; when the protocol was amended, 39 of the 82 patients who had completed week 16 were in the bimekizumab group and continued receiving doses every 4 weeks, and 43 were in the secukinumab group. Data that became available from the phase 2b BE ABLE 2 trial showed that responses with bimekizumab were maintained at doses lower than 320 mg once every 4 weeks, and the dosing regimen of once every 8 weeks was being evaluated in the ongoing phase 3 BE READY and BE SURE trials. Therefore, a dosing regimen of once every 8 weeks was added to provide a test of this reduced maintenance dosing regimen. Since some patients had undergone randomization at the time the amendment was made, the 8-week dosing regimen was included by rerandomization at week 16 in all patients who had not reached this point in the trial, rather than as an additional treatment group from baseline.
Randomization was performed with the use of an interactive response technology, stratified by region (North America, Western Europe, Central and Eastern Europe, or Asia and Australia) and previous exposure to biologic agents (yes or no). To maintain double blinding, patients randomly assigned to the bimekizumab group received placebo at relevant study visits to account for differences in dosing schedules between the treatment groups (Fig. S1).
All trial medication was administered by subcutaneous injection in the clinic. All sponsor and investigator site personnel involved in the trial were unaware of the treatment assignments except site staff responsible for the preparation and administration of trial treatments and bioanalytic sample analysis. Efficacy outcomes were assessed by the investigator, another delegated physician, or an appropriately qualified medical professional, all of whom were unaware of the patients’ treatment assignments.
The primary end point was the rate of complete skin clearance, defined as 100% reduction from baseline in the PASI score (PASI 100) at week 16; bimekizumab was compared first for noninferiority to secukinumab and then for superiority. The ranked secondary efficacy end points were PASI 75 (≥75% reduction from baseline score) at week 4 and PASI 100 at week 48, which was evaluated on the basis of all patients assigned to bimekizumab, followed by separate tests for the bimekizumab every-4-week and every-8-week maintenance treatment regimens. Additional secondary end points were PASI 90 (≥90% reduction from baseline) at week 16 and an IGA score of 0 or 1 (clear or almost clear with improvement of ≥2 categories from baseline) at week 16. Exploratory end points included a score on the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) of 0 or 1 (range, 0 to 30, with higher scores indicating a greater effect of psoriasis on daily life) to assess the effect of skin disease on health-related quality of life. The original secondary end-point hierarchy was updated by protocol amendment before the data were unmasked, with the original end points of IGA score of 0 or 1 and PASI 90 at week 16 replaced by PASI 100 at week 48 for the every-4-week and every-8-week dose groups.
Safety end points were adverse events, serious adverse events, and adverse events leading to discontinuation of treatment that occurred during the treatment period. Adverse events that occurred during the treatment period were defined as any adverse event with an onset at or after the first dose of trial treatment up to 140 days after the final dose. All such adverse events were coded according to the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities , version 19.0. A serious adverse event was defined as any adverse event that led to one or more of the following: death, life-threatening event, substantial or persistent disability or incapacity, congenital anomaly or birth defect (including any occurring in a fetus), important medical event, or initial hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization. The intensity of adverse events was recorded at each trial visit by the investigator as mild (the patient is aware of the sign or symptom, but it does not interfere with usual activities), moderate (the adverse event interferes with the usual activities of the patient), or severe (the patient is unable to work normally or to carry out usual activities). The prespecified safety topics of interest for the trial were infections (serious, opportunistic, and fungal infections and tuberculosis), neutropenia, hypersensitivity, suicidal ideation and behavior, depression, major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), changes in liver function tests or enzyme elevations, cancer, and inflammatory bowel disease.
Sample size calculations were based on the testing of superiority of bimekizumab to secukinumab with respect to PASI 100 at week 16. We calculated that with sample sizes of 350 patients each in the bimekizumab and secukinumab groups, the power to show statistical superiority of bimekizumab to secukinumab would be 98%, on the basis of a two-group continuity-corrected chi-square test of equal proportions and with the assumption that 60% in the bimekizumab group and 44% in the secukinumab group would have a PASI 100 response at week 16 (on the basis of phase 2 [BE ABLE 1] and phase 3b [CLEAR] studies ).
The primary efficacy analysis included all patients who underwent randomization (intention-to-treat population). Up to week 16, all patients assigned to the bimekizumab group received the same dose (320 mg once every 4 weeks). For the week 48 intention-to-treat analyses, we pooled the every-4-week and every-8-week bimekizumab maintenance dosing regimens for the comparison with secukinumab. Efficacy analyses to compare the two individual bimekizumab maintenance dose regimens with secukinumab at week 48 were performed with data from the maintenance population, which consisted of patients who received at least one dose of trial treatment at week 16 or later. Since patients in the bimekizumab group who discontinued treatment before rerandomization at week 16 could not be assigned to a maintenance dosing group, the maintenance population allowed for a comparison of both bimekizumab dosing regimens with the secukinumab regimen. For efficacy and quality-of-life variables, patients with missing data were considered not to have had a response (nonresponder imputation).
For the primary end point, noninferiority was assessed with a margin of −10 percentage points and was evaluated on the basis of the confidence interval for the stratified Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel adjusted risk difference between bimekizumab and secukinumab. For the primary and secondary (ranked and nonranked) efficacy end points, treatment comparisons between bimekizumab and secukinumab were based on the Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel test, stratified by geographic region and previous exposure to biologic agents. For the primary and ranked secondary end points included in the testing hierarchy (Fig. S2), statistical comparisons were two-sided and were performed at the 0.05 level of significance (the testing hierarchy, described in Methods, was updated by protocol amendment and before unmasking of the trial data to include bimekizumab every-8-week maintenance dosing); these analyses are presented as point estimates with stratified Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel adjusted risk differences for bimekizumab as compared with secukinumab and their corresponding 95% confidence intervals. Furthermore, sensitivity analyses of the primary end point were conducted and are reported in Table S1. Comparisons for nonranked secondary end points are summarized as adjusted risk differences and confidence intervals. Confidence intervals for end points not included in the statistical testing hierarchy were not multiplicity-controlled; thus they cannot be used to infer treatment effects. Safety analyses are presented through week 48 for all patients who received at least one dose of trial treatment (safety population), and for weeks 16 through 48 according to the bimekizumab dosing regimen in the maintenance population.

Section: Results

Between June 13, 2018, and May 7, 2019, a total of 1005 patients were screened, and 743 patients were enrolled; 373 were randomly assigned to receive bimekizumab once every 4 weeks and 370 to receive secukinumab once a week to week 4, followed by once every 4 weeks ( Figure 1 ). The last week 48 visit was on May 6, 2020. Among patients in the bimekizumab group, 97.1% completed the initial 16-week period; at week 16, a total of 147 patients continued to receive bimekizumab once every 4 weeks and 215 were randomly assigned to receive bimekizumab once every 8 weeks. Of patients receiving secukinumab, 95.7% (354 patients) completed the initial period to week 16 and continued secukinumab treatment ( Figure 1 ). Overall, 92.0% and 87.8% of patients randomly assigned to receive bimekizumab and secukinumab, respectively, completed the trial to week 48 ( Figure 1 ). Patient demographics and baseline disease characteristics were similar across treatment groups ( Table 1 ).
At week 16, a total of 230 patients (61.7%) who received bimekizumab, as compared with 181 patients (48.9%) who received secukinumab, had a PASI 100 response (the primary end point) (adjusted risk difference, 12.7 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 5.8 to 19.6; P<0.001 for noninferiority and superiority) ( Figure 2A and Table 2 ). At week 4, after one dose of bimekizumab, 265 patients (71.0%) in that group, as compared with 175 patients (47.3%) in the secukinumab group, had a PASI 75 response (adjusted risk difference, 23.7 percentage points; 95% CI, 17.0 to 30.4; P<0.001) ( Table 2 ). At week 48, a total of 250 patients (67.0%) who received bimekizumab as compared with 171 (46.2%) who received secukinumab had a PASI 100 response (adjusted risk difference, 20.9 percentage points; 95% CI, 14.1 to 27.7; P<0.001) ( Figure 2A and Table 2 ).
In the maintenance population at week 48, a total of 108 patients (73.5%) who continued to receive bimekizumab every 4 weeks and 142 (66.0%) who transitioned to receive bimekizumab every 8 weeks, as compared with 171 (48.3%) who continued to receive secukinumab after week 16, had a PASI 100 response (adjusted risk difference, bimekizumab every 4 weeks vs. secukinumab, 26.5 percentage points; 95% CI, 17.9 to 35.1; P<0.001; and adjusted risk difference, bimekizumab every 8 weeks vs. secukinumab, 17.3 percentage points; 95% CI, 9.3 to 25.3; P<0.001) ( Figure 2B and Table 2 ).
By week 16, a total of 319 patients (85.5%) receiving bimekizumab, as compared with 275 patients (74.3%) receiving secukinumab, had a PASI 90 response (adjusted risk difference, 11.3 percentage points; 95% CI, 5.8 to 16.8) ( Figure 2A ). Furthermore, at week 16, a total of 319 patients (85.5%) in the bimekizumab group as compared with 291 (78.6%) in the secukinumab group had an IGA score of 0 or 1 (adjusted risk difference, 7.0 percentage points; 95% CI, 1.6 to 12.4), and 348 patients (93.3%) in the bimekizumab group as compared with 337 (91.1%) in the secukinumab group had a PASI 75 response (adjusted risk difference, 2.3 percentage points; 95% CI, −1.5 to 6.1) ( Figure 2A ). The proportions of patients with a PASI 90 response and an IGA score of 0 or 1 at week 48 were greater with bimekizumab than with secukinumab, regardless of the dosing schedule ( Figure 2 ).
At week 48, a DLQI score of 0 or 1 was recorded for 290 patients (77.7%) who had been randomly assigned to receive bimekizumab and 260 (70.3%) randomly assigned to secukinumab; 335 patients in the bimekizumab group and 318 patients in the secukinumab group had valid DLQI assessments at week 48. Results of sensitivity analyses of the primary end point were consistent with those of the primary analysis (Table S1).
The incidences of adverse events, serious adverse events, and discontinuations due to adverse events that occurred during the treatment period were similar in the two treatment groups ( Table 3 ). Through 48 weeks, adverse events were reported in 86.1% of patients receiving bimekizumab and in 81.4% of patients receiving secukinumab. The incidences of serious adverse events (5.9% with bimekizumab and 5.7% with secukinumab) and adverse events leading to discontinuation (3.5% with bimekizumab and 2.7% with secukinumab) that occurred during the treatment period were similar in the two treatment groups.
Two deaths occurred, both during the maintenance period of the trial: one patient receiving bimekizumab every 8 weeks was a pedestrian killed in a road traffic accident, and a 70-year-old woman in the secukinumab group had fatal asphyxia and aspiration (asphyxia was adjudicated as MACE) approximately 23 weeks after she received the first dose of secukinumab.
The most common adverse events that occurred during the treatment period, reported in more than 5% of patients in any group, were upper respiratory tract infection, oral candidiasis, and urinary tract infection. Oral candidiasis infections were more common among patients receiving bimekizumab than among those receiving secukinumab (19.3% [72 patients] vs. 3.0% [11 patients]). Oral candidiasis infections with bimekizumab were predominantly mild (36 of 72 cases) or moderate (34 of 72 cases); none were classified by the site investigators as serious (according to the criteria defined in Methods), and none led to discontinuation of treatment. Among patients who had oral candidiasis, 31 (43.1%) treated with bimekizumab and 4 (36.4%) treated with secukinumab reported more than one instance of the infection. More than 85% of oral candidiasis cases were treated with antifungal therapy and resolved during the trial period; in the remaining cases, oral candidiasis did not resolve during the trial period.
The rate of serious infections was similar in the two treatment groups. There was one case of new-onset ulcerative colitis each in the bimekizumab and secukinumab groups, two cases of adjudicated MACE in the secukinumab group, and no cases of MACE in the bimekizumab group. One suicide attempt was reported in a 50-year-old woman 70 days after the first bimekizumab dose, which led to her withdrawal from the trial and was assessed by the investigator as not related to treatment. The patient had a history of depression and two previous suicide attempts more than 5 years before screening, which had not been disclosed to the investigator at enrollment.

Section: Discussion

In this trial, bimekizumab was noninferior and superior to secukinumab with respect to complete clearance of psoriatic lesions through 48 weeks of treatment. These data suggest that inhibition of both interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F with bimekizumab may provide greater clinical benefit for patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis than inhibition of interleukin-17A alone. An alternative explanation for these results is that bimekizumab has a higher affinity for interleukin-17A than secukinumab in vitro ; however, in affinity-matched interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F human functional assays, the inhibition of both interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F showed a greater response than the inhibition of interleukin-17A alone. This finding suggests that the antiinflammatory effects of bimekizumab may rely, in part, on the anti–interleukin-17F component in these models.
The percentage of patients with complete skin clearance at week 48 was higher in both bimekizumab maintenance dosing groups than in the secukinumab group. The responses in the two bimekizumab dose groups were numerically similar, in agreement with the BE READY and the BE SURE phase 3 trials, although the trial reported here was not powered to detect differences between the maintenance treatment groups.
Oral and oropharyngeal candidiasis occurred more frequently with bimekizumab than with secukinumab, a finding consistent with the contributions of interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F to host protection against candida infections at the oral mucosa and with observations from previous studies of bimekizumab. New diagnoses of inflammatory bowel disease have been reported with interleukin-17A inhibitors, and across the BE READY, BE VIVID, and BE SURE phase 3 trials, one case of ulcerative colitis was reported with bimekizumab. In the current trial, one case of ulcerative colitis was reported with bimekizumab and one with secukinumab.
A limitation of this trial is the lack of a placebo control group, although the percentage of patients who had a response to bimekizumab was similar to that in previous placebo-controlled studies of bimekizumab. In addition, the patients included in the trial were of limited racial diversity, and patients were excluded if they had had no response to treatment with an anti–interleukin-17 biologic agent or more than one biologic agent of any other class within 12 weeks; both these limitations may reduce generalizability to the real-world population of patients with psoriasis. We used a nonresponder imputation for missing data, which has the potential to underestimate the standard error and alter estimates of differences between treatment groups. Results of sensitivity analyses with multiple imputation were consistent with those of the primary analysis.
Dual inhibition of interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F with bimekizumab was superior to inhibition of interleukin-17A with secukinumab for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis but was associated with oral candidiasis. Longer and larger trials are required to determine the relative effects of interleukin-17A and interleukin-17F inhibition as compared with inhibition of interleukin-17A alone in psoriasis.
