Title: Targeting CD38 with Daratumumab in Refractory Systemic Lupus Erythematosus


Abstract: Summary


Section: Introduction

Systemic lupus erythematosus is a chronic systemic autoimmune disease characterized by autoantibody production and immune-complex–mediated tissue damage. Autoantibody-secreting plasma cells are increasingly recognized as essential drivers of chronic inflammation in lupus, but targeting them represents a therapeutic challenge. Unlike short-lived plasmablasts, nondividing long-lived plasma cells reside in dedicated survival niches in the bone marrow or inflamed tissue. They are unresponsive to immunosuppressive and B-cell–directed therapies and thus represent an innovative therapeutic target.
The relevance of targeting long-lived plasma cells in lupus has already been shown in preclinical models and was further substantiated in clinical studies with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, which provided substantial therapeutic benefit but in some cases showed considerable toxic effects as well. CD38 is a glycoprotein with ectoenzymatic functions that is highly expressed on plasma cells. Daratumumab, a CD38-directed monoclonal antibody, has been shown to cause a substantial depletion of malignant plasma cells in the bone marrow and is approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma. In a recent study involving patients with lupus, daratumumab effectively depleted plasma cells isolated from peripheral blood of the patients ex vivo and induced a down-regulation of CD38 on remaining plasma cells. Although circulating plasmablasts in those patients had CD38 expression levels similar to those of healthy persons, an expanded CD38 CD8+ T-cell type with decreased cytotoxic capacity was recently described in a subgroup of patients with lupus in association with an increased propensity to infections.
We now report the cases of two patients with life-threatening lupus who received treatment with daratumumab. We also performed analyses of immunologic changes that provide mechanistic insights into the mode of action of daratumumab and examined CD38 expression patterns in immune-cell subsets from peripheral blood and inflamed tissues in other patients with lupus to evaluate the therapeutic potential of targeting CD38.

Section: Methods

Both patients provided written informed consent before receiving daratumumab as off-label treatment. All trial procedures were approved by the local institutional review board and were performed in accordance with the Good Clinical Practice guidelines of the International Council for Harmonisation. No commercial sponsor was involved. Daratumumab was administered according to protocols approved for multiple myeloma. Details are provided in Section S2.1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
Immunophenotyping after daratumumab treatment was performed by flow and mass cytometry of cryopreserved peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with the use of an anti-CD38 multitope antibody (Cytognos) that binds to an epitope distinct from the epitope bound by daratumumab. To examine the CD38 expression patterns in immune cells from other patients with lupus, we analyzed freshly isolated PBMCs by flow cytometry using an anti-CD38 antibody (IB6, Miltenyi Biotec) in 35 patients with lupus and 20 healthy controls. Details are provided in Section S2.2.
Freshly isolated PBMCs from Patient 1 were enriched for CD3+ memory T cells by means of fluorescence-activated cell sorting. For single-cell transcriptome and T-cell receptor repertoire profiling, libraries were prepared with the use of the 10X Genomics platform with the Chromium Single Cell 5′ Library and Gel Bead Kit and sequenced on a NextSeq500 device (Illumina), as described previously. Technical details are provided in Section S2.4.

Section: Results

Two patients with severe and life-threatening lupus received an infusion of daratumumab at a dose of 16 mg per kilogram of body weight once a week for 4 weeks, in addition to receiving continued immunosuppression; this regimen was complemented by maintenance therapy with the antibody belimumab, which targets B-cell activating factor, starting 4 months after the initiation of daratumumab treatment. Details of the patient characteristics are provided in Table S1.
Patient 1, a 50-year-old woman, had active lupus nephritis (World Health Organization class III and V) with nephrotic syndrome, pericarditis, arthritis, and skin rash, despite treatment with mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine A, and glucocorticoids. Previous therapy with bortezomib, mycophenolate mofetil, and cyclophosphamide failed to induce sustainable remission ( Figure 1A ). The patient’s maintenance therapy was continued except for cyclosporine A. After the patient received daratumumab, the protein in her urine gradually declined from 6362 to 1197 mg per gram of creatinine ( Figure 1A ), and her initially elevated serum creatinine levels normalized during the 12-month follow-up period ( Figure 1B ). Echocardiography revealed complete resolution of pericarditis with improved cardiac output function (Fig. S1A), and the patient’s arthritis and skin rash resolved and her C3 complement consumption normalized (Fig. S1B). Scores on the Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index 2000 (SLEDAI-2K, a 24-item weighted score of lupus activity that ranges from 0 to 105, with higher scores indicating greater disease activity) decreased from 22 at baseline to 8 within 12 weeks and remained stable throughout follow-up despite a reduction in the patient’s prednisolone dose from 20 mg per day to 4 mg per day ( Figure 1C and Fig. S1D). Daratumumab produced no adverse effects, and no infusion-related reactions were noted. Serologic analysis revealed a significant reduction (approximately 50%) in both anti–double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) and vaccine-induced antibodies for tetanus toxoid ( Figure 2A and 2B ), with the tetanus toxoid antibodies still remaining within the protective range. Serum IgG concentrations declined below normal values within 1 week after daratumumab treatment was initiated and stabilized after two doses of intravenous immune globulin ( Figure 2C ).
Patient 2, a 32-year-old woman, presented with autoimmune hemolytic anemia, for which she had received repeated blood transfusions, as well as immune thrombocytopenia, cutaneous vasculitis, arthritis, alopecia, and mucosal ulcers. Previous treatments with cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, belimumab, rituximab, azathioprine, methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, plasmapheresis, immune globulin, and bortezomib were insufficient or had to be discontinued owing to unacceptable side effects or infectious complications, including four episodes of septicemia, three episodes of pneumonia, and one episode of acute respiratory distress syndrome within 3 years before daratumumab treatment. The patient’s maintenance therapy was prednisolone at a dose of 10 mg once daily. The patient’s direct antiglobulin level normalized within 66 days after initiation of daratumumab treatment and remained negative throughout the 11-month follow-up period ( Figure 1A ). Subsequently, the hemolytic anemia gradually resolved and her platelet counts reached normal levels ( Figure 1B ). In addition, vasculitic skin lesions as well as musculoskeletal and mucocutaneous manifestations resolved (Fig. S1D). The SLEDAI-2K score declined from 21 to 6 within 12 weeks and further improved to 4 with belimumab treatment ( Figure 1C and Fig. S1D). Other than an upper respiratory tract infection at day 90, no adverse drug reactions occurred. Serum titers for anti-dsDNA and tetanus toxoid antibodies gradually declined by approximately 60% ( Figure 2A and 2B ), accompanied by a reduction in total serum antinuclear antibody titers (Fig S1C). Although the patient’s IgG levels decreased markedly, they still remained within normal limits ( Figure 2C ).
To assess the effect of daratumumab on CD38+ immune cell subsets, we first performed immune monitoring using cytometry. As expected, daratumumab induced a rapid but transient reduction of cells with the highest CD38 surface expression — natural killer cells, plasmacytoid dendritic cells, and plasmablasts (Fig. S2A and S2B). In addition, CD19+ B-cell counts were gradually reduced, with the reduction most pronounced before treatment with belimumab. In contrast, CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell numbers remained stable, although their surface CD38 expression was transiently reduced (Fig. S2C and S2D). Daratumumab promoted a substantial reduction of type I interferon activity, which was reflected by reduced expression levels of its surrogate marker Siglec-1 on monocytes (Fig. S2A).
To investigate the effect of daratumumab on T-cell activation and function, we performed combined T-cell receptor and single-cell transcriptome analysis of peripheral CD3+ T cells in samples obtained from Patient 1 (Fig. S3). Within the CD8+ memory T-cell compartment, the transcriptional profiles of cells with the 10 most prominent T-cell receptor clones were analyzed over time, with most of the cells confined to the CD38+ T-cell cluster at baseline (Fig. S4B). Sequencing revealed a decrease in the expression of CD38, along with a decrease in the expression of genes associated with T-cell activation and interferon signaling (e.g., IRF7 ) (Fig. S4C). In parallel, up-regulation of expression of NKG7 and genes encoding granzymes was evident, which suggests a restoration of cytotoxic function that was initially disturbed. Similar changes were observed on CD4+ T cells (Fig. S5).
To further evaluate the therapeutic potential of targeting CD38 in lupus, we investigated CD38 expression patterns across various immune cell types from peripheral blood and inflamed tissue using flow cytometry. We observed significantly greater expression levels of CD38 on circulating CD19 CD27 plasmablasts, mature CD19+ B cells (Fig. S6A), and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (Fig. S6B) in patients with lupus than in healthy controls. Likewise, CD38-expressing memory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were substantially expanded, as compared with those found in healthy persons (Fig. S6C). CD38+ memory T cells were enriched in the urine of patients with lupus nephritis and highly coexpressed CXCR3 (Fig. S7), a chemokine receptor that guides T-cell migration into inflammatory lesions.

Section: Discussion

We found that in two patients with refractory lupus, the use of daratumumab was associated with excellent clinical and serologic responses. Once long-lived plasma cells develop, they contribute to the maintenance of autoimmunity by the persistent secretion of autoantibodies. Since long-lived plasma cells highly express CD38, and anti-CD38 therapy with daratumumab is effective in multiple myeloma, we hypothesized that this treatment could induce a therapeutically relevant elimination of pathogenic long-lived plasma cells. Supporting evidence for this notion was derived from previous reports of daratumumab treatment for autoimmune hemolytic anemia and autoantibody-mediated delayed red-cell engraftment after hematopoietic transplantation.
Indeed, daratumumab was associated with a significant reduction (approximately 60%) in both pathogenic anti-dsDNA and vaccine-induced antibodies, along with a decrease in antinuclear antibody titers, findings that suggest an effective depletion of long-lived plasma cells. These effects were associated with a profound amelioration of various disease manifestations, including lupus nephritis, pericarditis, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, arthritis, and mucocutaneous symptoms. The fact that lupus in both patients was refractory to previous immunosuppressive and B-cell–directed therapies further emphasizes the therapeutic relevance of targeting long-lived plasma cells in lupus, as noted previously. The degree of autoantibody reduction achieved with daratumumab was similar to that observed when the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib was used, yet without the toxic effects of bortezomib. Daratumumab, in this limited sample, was not associated with a greater incidence of infections, despite hypogammaglobulinemia in one patient. However, greater numbers of treated patients are required to define safety. Adverse events most commonly observed in patients receiving daratumumab for the treatment of multiple myeloma include infusion-related reactions, fatigue, allergic rhinitis, pyrexia, diarrhea, upper respiratory tract infections, and dyspnea.
Our integrative analyses suggest additional effects of daratumumab — apart from plasma cell depletion — that may have contributed to the clinical improvements observed in these patients. First, flow cytometry and transcriptome analyses showed a reduction in interferon type I activity. This could be the direct result of a transient depletion of plasmacytoid dendritic cells, which express high levels of CD38 and are regarded as a major source of interferon type I in lupus, or the consequence of reduced immune complex or autoantibody formation that may drive interferon production. The relevance of targeting interferons in lupus has recently been shown in a randomized phase 3 trial of anifrolumab, a human monoclonal antibody to interferon type I receptors. Second, absolute numbers of CD19+ B cells were reduced by approximately 50% without evidence of recurrent plasmablast expansion, as observed after bortezomib treatment, which suggests a beneficial effect of daratumumab on the autoreactive B-cell compartment. Third, daratumumab treatment resulted in alterations of the transcriptional profile of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells — in particular, down-regulation of gene transcripts associated with recent activation and repeated antigenic stimulation. T cells have a central role in the pathogenesis of lupus nephritis and are easily detectable in the urine of patients with the disease. We observed that urinary lupus T cells most abundantly coexpress CD38, which suggests that they, too, may be killed or blocked by daratumumab treatment. Nevertheless, the clinical significance of surface CD38 expression density on immune-cell subsets is unclear, and the precise mechanisms ultimately mediating the beneficial responses of daratumumab in lupus remain speculative. Further investigations are required to decipher potential lineage-specific mechanisms of action of daratumumab.
Responses to daratumumab are transient in the treatment of myeloma. Similarly, effecting sustained responses in lupus will depend on preventing regeneration of autoreactive formation of long-lived plasma cells, which may be achieved by continued immunosuppression or by maintenance therapy with belimumab, as our patients received. In fact, belimumab treatment was associated with a further reduction in anti-dsDNA antibodies, and although most of the clinical responses were achieved within the first 12 weeks after initiation of daratumumab treatment, belimumab maintenance treatment may have contributed to the favorable long-term outcomes. Although our results provide a conceptual rationale for targeting CD38 in lupus, they need to be confirmed in clinical trials, and the appropriate treatment schedule and target population still remain to be determined.
We found that daratumumab treatment provided clinical and serologic responses in two patients who had manifestations of treatment-refractory lupus. Daratumumab promoted depletion of autoreactive long-lived plasma cells and was associated with a reduction in interferon type I activity and with modulation of effector T-cell responses.
