Title: A Randomized Trial of Closed-Loop Control in Children with Type 1 Diabetes


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

A closed-loop system of insulin delivery (also called an artificial pancreas) may improve glycemic outcomes in children with type 1 diabetes.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a 16-week, multicenter, randomized, open-label, parallel-group trial, we assigned, in a 3:1 ratio, children 6 to 13 years of age who had type 1 diabetes to receive treatment with the use of either a closed-loop system of insulin delivery (closed-loop group) or a sensor-augmented insulin pump (control group). The primary outcome was the percentage of time that the glucose level was in the target range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter, as measured by continuous glucose monitoring.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 101 children underwent randomization (78 to the closed-loop group and 23 to the control group); the glycated hemoglobin levels at baseline ranged from 5.7 to 10.1%. The mean (±SD) percentage of time that the glucose level was in the target range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter increased from 53±17% at baseline to 67±10% (the mean over 16 weeks of treatment) in the closed-loop group and from 51±16% to 55±13% in the control group (mean adjusted difference, 11 percentage points [equivalent to 2.6 hours per day]; 95% confidence interval, 7 to 14; P<0.001). In both groups, the median percentage of time that the glucose level was below 70 mg per deciliter was low (1.6% in the closed-loop group and 1.8% in the control group). In the closed-loop group, the median percentage of time that the system was in the closed-loop mode was 93% (interquartile range, 91 to 95). No episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis or severe hypoglycemia occurred in either group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In this 16-week trial involving children with type 1 diabetes, the glucose level was in the target range for a greater percentage of time with the use of a closed-loop system than with the use of a sensor-augmented insulin pump. (Funded by Tandem Diabetes Care and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03844789 .)

Section: Introduction

The glycemic target of a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7% (as recommended by the American Diabetes Association) is attained by less than 20% of children with type 1 diabetes. The use of a closed-loop system that automates insulin delivery in a glucose-responsive manner (also referred to as an automated insulin delivery system or artificial pancreas) has the potential to improve glycemic outcomes and quality of life in these children. Currently available systems require engagement of the user to inform the system of the insulin bolus dose at mealtimes. A single closed-loop system (MiniMed 670G, Medtronic) was approved in the United States for children 6 to 13 years of age; however, to date, published studies on its efficacy and safety have been limited to single-group studies with no randomization. One other system (t:slim X2 insulin pump with Control-IQ Technology, Tandem Diabetes Care) was recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for clinical use in the treatment of type 1 diabetes in patients 14 years of age or older on the basis of the results of a 6-month randomized trial involving 168 adolescents and adults with type 1 diabetes. Whether the significant benefit shown in that trial of glycemic control would be present in younger patients is uncertain. We conducted a randomized trial involving children with type 1 diabetes who were 6 to 13 years of age to assess the efficacy and safety of this closed-loop system in this age range.

Section: Methods

This multicenter, randomized, open-label, parallel-group trial was conducted at four pediatric diabetes centers in the United States. The protocol , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org, was approved by a central institutional review board. Written informed consent was obtained from the parent or guardian of each patient, and assent was obtained from each patient when applicable. An investigational device exemption was approved by the FDA. An independent data and safety monitoring board established by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases provided trial oversight. The first three authors and the last author wrote the first draft of the manuscript and vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. Funding was provided by Tandem Diabetes Care, which also provided the closed-loop systems and supplies used in the trial and provided technical expertise with respect to device issues. Representatives of Tandem Diabetes Care reviewed the manuscript before submission for publication, but the company was not otherwise involved in the design or conduct of the trial or in the analysis of the data. Additional funding was provided by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
Patients were eligible for inclusion in the trial if they were 6 to 13 years of age, had received a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes at least 1 year before enrollment, had received treatment with insulin for at least 6 months, had a body weight of 25 to 140 kg, and had a total daily insulin dose of at least 10 units (complete eligibility criteria are provided in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org). After consent and assent forms were signed and eligibility determined, patients who were not currently using an insulin pump or a Dexcom continuous glucose monitor were required to complete a run-in phase of 2 to 4 weeks that was customized on the basis of whether the patient was already using a pump or continuous glucose monitor. These patients were required to use an insulin pump and continuous glucose monitor daily for at least 11 of 14 days during the run-in phase, which was successfully completed by all patients (Fig. S1). Patients who were already using an insulin pump and a Dexcom continuous glucose monitor for least 11 of 14 days before the trial were not required to complete the run-in phase (68 patients). Patients who were allowed to skip or who successfully completed the run-in phase were randomly assigned in a 3:1 ratio to the closed-loop group or the control group on the trial website with the use of a computer-generated sequence with a permuted block design (block sizes of 4 and 8), stratified according to trial site.
The patients in the closed-loop group were trained in the use of the closed-loop system, which consisted of a t:slim X2 insulin pump with Control-IQ Technology (a software algorithm developed at the University of Virginia ) and a continuous glucose monitor (Dexcom G6, Dexcom), which transmitted glucose values to the pump. Additional information about the closed-loop system is provided in the Supplementary Appendix . The patients in the control group used Dexcom G6 sensors, which were provided by the trial investigators. Those who had been using an insulin pump before the trial continued to use their personal pumps, and those who had been receiving insulin injections before the trial were provided with a t:slim X2 pump with a predictive low-glucose suspend feature. Adjustments to pump settings could be made in accordance with the judgment of the investigator. The patients in both groups received blood glucose meters and strips (Roche Accu-Chek Guide, Roche Diabetes Care) and ketone meters and strips (Abbott Precision Xtra, Abbott Diabetes Care).
The patients in both groups had trial visits at 2, 8, and 16 weeks and were contacted by telephone at 1, 4, 6, 10, 12, and 14 weeks. Data from the devices were downloaded and reviewed at each visit and during the telephone contacts. Glycated hemoglobin level was measured at the time of randomization and at 16 weeks by a central laboratory at the University of Minnesota Advanced Research and Diagnostic Laboratory. Questionnaires on quality of life and treatment satisfaction were completed at baseline and at 16 weeks (results not reported here).
Reportable adverse events included serious adverse events, adverse events occurring in association with a trial device or procedure, severe hypoglycemia (defined as hypoglycemia leading to the need for assistance because of altered consciousness), diabetic ketoacidosis as defined according to the criteria of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial, and hyperglycemia with ketonemia for which a health care provider was contacted.
The primary outcome was the percentage of time that the glucose level was in the target range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter (3.9 to 10.0 mmol per liter), as measured by continuous glucose monitoring. The main secondary outcomes, tested in a hierarchical fashion to maintain the type 1 error at 5%, included the percentage of time that the glucose level was above 180 mg per deciliter (>10.0 mmol per liter); mean glucose level; glycated hemoglobin level at 16 weeks; the percentage of time that the glucose level was below 70 mg per deciliter (3.9 mmol per liter), below 54 mg per deciliter (3.0 mmol per liter), or above 250 mg per deciliter (13.9 mmol per liter); and the coefficient of variation in the sensor glucose measurement. Continuous glucose-monitoring data from the time of randomization through the 16-week visit were pooled in the calculation of each metric. Additional secondary outcomes are listed in the statistical analysis plan, which is included with the protocol . Key safety outcomes included the frequency of severe hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis.
We calculated that a sample size of 60 patients and a randomization ratio of 3:1 between the closed-loop group and control group would provide the trial with 90% power to reject the null hypothesis that there would be no between-group difference with respect to the primary outcome, with the following assumption: the mean percentage of time with the glucose level in the target range in the closed-loop group would be 10 percentage points higher than that in the control group, with a standard deviation of 10% and a two-sided, type 1 error rate of 0.05. The sample size was increased to 100 to increase the number of patients with exposure to the closed-loop system and thereby enhance the safety and feasibility assessments.
Statistical analyses were performed on an intention-to-treat basis, and all the patients were included in the primary and all secondary analyses unless otherwise noted. For the primary analysis, the percentage of time that the glucose level was in the target range during the 16-week trial period was compared between the two groups with the use of a linear mixed-effects regression model. Analyses of the secondary continuous outcomes were conducted by the same method that was used in the primary analysis. Modifications of the treatment effect on the percentage of time with the glucose level in the target range, the percentage of time with the glucose level below 70 mg per deciliter, and the glycated hemoglobin level were assessed according to baseline variables in exploratory subgroup analyses by including an interaction term in the linear mixed-effects regression models. Binary outcomes were analyzed with the use of a logistic-regression model. All models and reported between-group differences included adjustment for the baseline level of the dependent variable, age, previous use of a continuous glucose monitor and pump, and clinical center (random effect). Additional details about the statistical methods are provided in the Supplementary Appendix . All P values are two-tailed. Analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

Between June 21, 2019, and August 30, 2019, a total of 101 patients (19 to 28 per trial site) were randomly assigned to the closed-loop group (78 patients) or the control group (23 patients). At baseline, the ages of the patients ranged from 6 to 13 years, the duration of diabetes from 1 to 12 years, and the glycated hemoglobin level from 5.7 to 10.1%. Before the trial, 81 patients (80%) had been using insulin pumps, and 20 patients (20%) had been receiving multiple daily injections; 93 patients (92%) had been using a continuous glucose monitor ( Table 1 ). During the trial, 15 of the 23 patients in the control group used the t:slim X2 pump with a predictive low-glucose suspend feature. The 16-week trial was completed by all the patients in the closed-loop group and by all but 1 patient in the control group (Fig. S2).
Among the 100 patients who completed the trial, 99.3% of the trial visits and 99.2% of the telephone contacts were completed. A total of 19 unscheduled visits occurred in the closed-loop group and 1 in the control group (Table S2). In the closed-loop group, all the patients were using the closed-loop system at the end of 16 weeks; the median percentage of continuous glucose monitor use over the 16 weeks was 97% (interquartile range, 95 to 98), and the median percentage of time that the system was in the closed-loop mode was 93% (interquartile range, 91 to 95) (Table S3 and Fig. S3). The reported problems with the use of the closed-loop system are summarized in Table S4. In the control group, the median percentage of continuous glucose monitor use over the 16 weeks was 96% (interquartile range, 91 to 98) (Table S3), and all patients (excluding the 1 patient who did not complete the trial) were using a sensor-augmented pump at the end of 16 weeks.
In the primary analysis, the mean (±SD) percentage of time that the glucose level was in the target range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter increased from 53±17% at baseline to 67±10% (the mean over 16 weeks of treatment) in the closed-loop group and from 51±16% to 55±13% in the control group, with a mean adjusted difference (the value in the closed-loop group minus the value in the control group) of 11 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI], 7 to 14; P<0.001) ( Table 2 ). The results of the sensitivity analyses were similar to those of the primary analysis (Table S5). The treatment effect was evident in the first month and appeared to be consistent over 4 months ( Figure 1A ). The mean percentage of time that the glucose level was in the target range during the daytime (6 a.m. to midnight) was 63% in the closed-loop group and 56% in the control group, and the corresponding values during the nighttime (midnight to 6:00 a.m.) were 80% and 54% ( Figure 1B ). A similar pattern was seen for mean glucose level, with lower daytime and nighttime values in the closed-loop group than in the control group (Fig. S4). The percentage of time that the glucose level was in the target range consistently favored the closed-loop group over the control group across a broad range of baseline characteristics, including age, sex, body-mass index, household income, parental education, previous insulin pump or injection use, and glycated hemoglobin level (Table S6). The results of subgroup analyses of the changes in the percentage of time with the glucose level below 70 mg per deciliter and the glycated hemoglobin level from baseline to 16 weeks are provided in Tables S7 and S8, respectively.
Treatment effects that favored the closed-loop group over the control group were also observed for the percentage of time with the glucose value above 180 mg per deciliter and for the mean glucose level ( Table 2 ). The mean adjusted between-group difference in the glycated hemoglobin level at 16 weeks was −0.4 percentage points (95% CI, −0.9 to 0.1; P=0.08), which did not meet the threshold for statistical significance. Therefore, the remaining outcomes in the hierarchical analysis were not formally compared between groups (percentages of time with the glucose level <70 mg per deciliter, <54 mg per deciliter, and >250 mg per deciliter and the coefficient of variation in the sensor glucose measurement). In both groups, the median percentage of time with the glucose level below 70 mg per deciliter was low (1.6% and 1.8% in the closed-loop group and the control group, respectively) ( Table 2 ).
The glycemic target of a glycated hemoglobin level of less than 7% (as recommended by the American Diabetes Association) was met in 39 patients (51%) in the closed-loop group and in 4 patients (18%) in the control group at 16 weeks (Table S9). The goal of a percentage of time with the blood glucose level in target range (70 to 180 mg per deciliter) of at least 70% plus a percentage of time with the glucose level below 70 mg per deciliter of less than 4% was attained in 33 patients (42%) in the closed-loop group and in 3 patients (14%) in the control group (Table S10). The results of the other secondary and exploratory outcome analyses are provided in Tables S10 and S11.
The median number of fingerstick blood glucose measurements performed per day was 0.37 (interquartile range, 0.18 to 0.64) in the closed-loop group and 0.36 (interquartile range, 0.13 to 0.72) in the control group. The daily insulin amount per kilogram of body weight and the change in body weight appeared to be similar in the treatment groups (Tables S12 and S13).
A total of 16 adverse events were reported in 15 patients (19%) in the closed-loop group, and 3 adverse events were reported in 2 patients (9%) in the control group (number of events per 100 person-years, 65.3 and 41.3, respectively; P=0.50) ( Table 3 ). Severe hypoglycemia or diabetic ketoacidosis did not occur in either treatment group. A total of 14 events of hyperglycemia or hyperketosis that met the reporting criteria in the protocol (but that did not meet the criteria for diabetic ketoacidosis) were reported in the closed-loop group, and 1 such event was reported in the control group. Other safety-related events are listed in Table 3 .

Section: Discussion

During our multicenter, randomized trial involving children with type 1 diabetes who were 6 to 13 years of age, the percentage of time that the glucose level was in the target range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter (as measured by continuous glucose monitoring) was 11 percentage points higher among those who used the closed-loop system than among those who used a sensor-augmented pump, a difference that reflects 2.6 hours less time per day in a hyperglycemic state with closed-loop control. The magnitude of the treatment effect was virtually identical to that observed in a randomized trial involving adults and adolescents who used the same closed-loop system. The beneficial effect was evident within the first month of closed-loop use and was more prominent overnight than during the day. The frequency of hypoglycemia was low in both groups, a finding that is perhaps related to the fact that about two thirds of the patients in the control group used an insulin pump with a predictive low-glucose suspend feature, which has been shown to reduce hypoglycemia. Although the change from baseline in the glycated hemoglobin level did not differ significantly between the treatment groups, the results suggested that a glycated hemoglobin level below 7% was attained by a higher percentage of patients in the closed-loop group than in the control group, and the recently established goal of a percentage of time with the blood glucose level in the target range (70 to 180 mg per deciliter) of at least 70% plus a percentage of time with the blood glucose level below 70 mg per deciliter of less than 4% was attained by a substantially higher percentage of patients in the closed-loop group than in the control group.
The closed-loop system was used without apparent difficulty, with no reported events of severe hypoglycemia or diabetic ketoacidosis. More adverse events, primarily associated with hyperglycemia and ketonemia caused by pump infusion set failure, were reported in the closed-loop group than in the control group. Because the control group mostly used the same pump and infusion set as the closed-loop group, this difference probably reflects variation in reporting, possibly related to instructions to patients using the closed-loop system to contact staff at their trial site about device problems.
A few randomized trials of closed-loop systems in an outpatient setting have been conducted in this age range with a similar number of participants and trial duration (>1 month). In a 12-week crossover trial, Thabit et al. reported that the percentage of time overnight with the glucose level in the range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter was 25 percentage points higher with a closed-loop system than with a sensor-augmented pump in 25 children (6 to 18 years of age) with type 1 diabetes, a percentage-point difference that is very similar to the overnight result in the current trial. In an uncontrolled 3-month study involving 105 children 7 to 13 years of age using the 670G closed-loop system, Forlenza et al. reported an increase from baseline in the percentage of time with the glucose level in the range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter, a decrease in the percentage of time with the glucose level below 70 mg per deciliter, and a decrease in the glycated hemoglobin level, but there was no comparison group. Our results compare favorably with both of these studies.
Strengths of the current trial include the enrollment of patients with no restriction based on glycated hemoglobin level or prior severe hypoglycemia or diabetic ketoacidosis, near 100% patient retention, and a high level of adherence to the use of the assigned devices in both treatment groups. Our trial also had certain limitations. Although eligibility criteria were broad, the trial population was not fully representative of the general population with respect to socioeconomic status, glycated hemoglobin levels, and the use of devices (pumps and continuous glucose monitors) in diabetes management. However, the trial results suggested a similar treatment effect on the percentage of time in the target glycemic range across a broad spectrum of baseline characteristics, including among patients who had not previously used insulin pumps. Further studies will be needed to explore whether the effectiveness of the closed-loop system shown in the current trial would be similar in groups with lower socioeconomic status and less familiarity with technology. The amount of hypoglycemia at baseline was unrepresentatively low in both treatment groups, which, in addition to the fact that most of the patients in the control group used a pump with a predictive low-glucose suspend feature, limited the ability of the trial to assess the effect of the closed-loop system on hypoglycemia. The trial period was 4 months, and it is unknown whether the treatment effect would be sustained over a longer period.
In this 16-week trial involving children 6 to 13 years of age who had type 1 diabetes, the glucose level was in the target range for a greater percentage of time with the use of a closed-loop system than with the use of a sensor-augmented insulin pump.
