Title: Fostemsavir in Adults with Multidrug-Resistant HIV-1 Infection


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Among some patients with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection who have undergone multiple antiretroviral therapies and have limited options for treatment, new classes of antiretroviral drugs with novel mechanisms of action are needed. Fostemsavir is the prodrug of temsavir, a first-in-class investigational HIV-1 attachment inhibitor.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this ongoing phase 3 trial in 23 countries, we enrolled patients with multidrug-resistant HIV-1 infection in two cohorts, according to their remaining treatment options. In the first cohort, we assigned (in a 3:1 ratio) patients who had the option of using at least one fully active, approved antiretroviral drug in at least one but no more than two antiretroviral classes to add either fostemsavir (at a dose of 600 mg twice daily) or placebo to their failing regimen for 8 days, followed by open-label fostemsavir plus optimized background therapy (randomized cohort). In the second cohort, patients who had no remaining antiretroviral options were started on open-label fostemsavir plus optimized background therapy on day 1 (nonrandomized cohort). The primary end point was the mean change in the HIV-1 RNA level from day 1 through day 8 in the randomized cohort.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 371 patients were treated, including 272 in the randomized cohort and 99 in the nonrandomized cohort. At day 8, the mean decrease in the HIV-1 RNA level was 0.79 log 10 copies per milliliter in the fostemsavir group and 0.17 log 10 copies in the placebo group (P<0.001). At week 48, a virologic response (HIV-1 RNA level, <40 copies per milliliter) had occurred in 54% of the patients in the randomized cohort and in 38% of those in the nonrandomized cohort; the mean increase in the CD4+ T-cell count was 139 cells per cubic millimeter and 64 cells per cubic millimeter, respectively. Adverse events led to the discontinuation of fostemsavir in 7% of the patients. In the randomized cohort, glycoprotein 120 (gp120) substitutions were found in 20 of 47 patients (43%) with virologic failure.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In patients with multidrug-resistant HIV-1 infection with limited therapy options, those who received fostemsavir had a significantly greater decrease in the HIV-1 RNA level than those who received placebo during the first 8 days. Efficacy was sustained through 48 weeks. (Funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb and GSK/ViiV Healthcare; BRIGHTE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02362503 .)

Section: Introduction

Among some patients with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection who have undergone multiple antiretroviral therapies, options are limited for future treatment owing to multidrug resistance, contraindications to or unacceptable side effects with various drugs, or other safety concerns. These patients have a pressing need for new classes of antiretroviral drugs with novel mechanisms of action.
Fostemsavir (previously BMS-663068/GSK3684934) is an investigational prodrug that has been developed specifically for use in patients with HIV-1 infection who have undergone multiple therapies. Temsavir, the active metabolite of fostemsavir, is a first-in-class attachment inhibitor that binds directly to the viral envelope glycoprotein 120 (gp120), close to the CD4+ binding site. This novel mechanism of action locks gp120 into a closed state that prohibits the conformational change necessary for initial interaction between the virus and the surface receptors on CD4 cells, thereby preventing attachment and subsequent entry into host T cells and other immune cells (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). Fostemsavir has no in vitro cross-resistance with other classes of antiretroviral drugs, including entry inhibitors. In addition, fostemsavir can be used regardless of HIV-1 tropism and has a favorable drug–drug interaction profile. Previous studies have identified amino acid substitutions at four positions in gp120 (S375H/I/N/M/T, M426L/P, M434I/K, and M475I) that affect the susceptibility of the virus to temsavir. Among clinical isolates of HIV-1, a broad range of in vitro susceptibility to temsavir has been observed, which may be due to the substantial diversity in HIV-1 gp120.
In a substudy of a phase 2b dose-ranging trial in moderately pretreated adults with HIV-1 infection, fostemsavir monotherapy was associated with a median decrease in plasma HIV-1 RNA ranging from 0.69 log 10 copies to 1.44 log 10 copies per milliliter after 7 days. During 192 weeks of therapy, combination therapy with fostemsavir plus raltegravir and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate had a favorable safety profile and efficacy that was similar to the results with ritonavir-boosted atazanavir plus raltegravir and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. Here, we present the results of the 48-week analysis of the ongoing phase 3 BRIGHTE trial involving patients with multidrug-resistant HIV-1 infection who have limited treatment options.

Section: Methods

Eligible patients were adults (≥18 years of age) who had undergone multiple treatments for HIV-1 infection. All the patients had failure of their current antiretroviral regimen (as defined by an HIV-1 RNA count of ≥400 copies per milliliter), and no viable antiretroviral combination therapy was available to them because of exhaustion of at least four of six antiretroviral classes (nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors, non–nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors, integrase inhibitors, protease inhibitors, CCR5 antagonists, and entry inhibitors). Exhaustion was defined as the elimination of all agents within a given class as a fully active option to pair with fostemsavir because of resistance, previous side effects, contraindications, or unwillingness to use enfuvirtide (a twice-daily injectable). Susceptibility to temsavir was not a criterion for inclusion in the trial. All the patients provided written informed consent. Detailed eligibility criteria are provided in the protocol , available at NEJM.org.
From February 2015 through May 2016, we enrolled patients at 108 investigational sites in 23 countries on six continents. The patients were assigned to one of two cohorts, depending on their remaining fully active, approved antiretroviral treatment options ( Figure 1A ). In the first cohort, patients who had the option of receiving at least one fully active, approved antiretroviral drug in at least one but no more than two antiretroviral classes at baseline were randomly assigned in a 3:1 ratio to receive blinded fostemsavir (at a dose of 600 mg twice daily) or placebo along with their current failing regimen from day 1 to day 8 (randomized cohort). These patients were stratified according to the baseline HIV-1 RNA level (≤1000 copies or >1000 copies per milliliter). After day 8, all the patients who had undergone randomization received open-label fostemsavir with optimized background therapy (based on resistance testing and treatment history). In the second cohort, patients who had no fully active, approved antiretroviral options received open-label fostemsavir (600 mg twice daily) and optimized background therapy starting on day 1 (nonrandomized cohort). These patients were permitted to enroll in other trials of antiretroviral drugs, which allowed for the inclusion of additional investigational antiretroviral drugs in their optimized background therapy.
All the end points were evaluated in the randomized cohort. The primary end point was the mean change in the log 10 level of HIV-1 RNA (Abbott RealTime HIV-1 Assay) from day 1 to day 8. Key secondary end points were the percentage of patients with a decrease in the HIV-1 RNA level of more than 0.5 log 10 copies and of more than 1.0 log 10 copies per milliliter at day 8; a virologic response (HIV-1 RNA level, <40 copies per milliliter) at weeks 24, 48, and 96; the mean change in the CD4+ T-cell count through week 96; the development of genotypic or phenotypic resistance to temsavir (Monogram Biosciences) among the patients who met the protocol definition of virologic failure; and the frequency of serious adverse events, adverse events leading to discontinuation, grade 3 or 4 laboratory abnormalities, events resulting in a diagnosis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS, class C of the classification system of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]), and death.
Before week 24, virologic failure was defined as an HIV-1 RNA level of at least 400 copies per milliliter after previous confirmed suppression to less than 400 copies per milliliter or an increase of at least 1.0 log 10 in the HIV-1 RNA level above the nadir (i.e., ≥40 copies per milliliter). During or after week 24, virologic failure was defined as an HIV-1 RNA level of at least 400 copies per milliliter. For both definitions, the value was either confirmed or was the last available value before discontinuation of the trial regimen.
The trial was initially funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb, and company representatives designed the trial and participated in the initial data collection. In February 2016, funding of the trial and all aspects of trial management were assumed by GSK/ViiV Healthcare, and company representatives participated in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data.
The trial was performed in accordance with international laws and guidelines and designed and conducted according to the protocol (and any amendments) jointly by trial investigators and sponsors. Investigators at each site conducted the trial with oversight from the local institutional review board or ethics committee. All the authors had full access to the data and attest to the completeness and accuracy of the data and analyses presented and to the fidelity of the trial to the protocol.
We used one-way analysis of covariance with homogeneous slopes and variances to estimate the primary end point, using the log 10 change in the HIV-1 RNA level from day 1 to day 8 as the dependent variable, treatment as an independent variable, and the day 1 log 10 HIV-1 RNA level as a continuous covariate. We also performed a post hoc analysis of the primary end point in which unequal variance was assumed for the standard-error calculation. In the intention-to-treat population (all the patients who had received ≥1 dose of a trial regimen), we determined the virologic response rate (i.e., the percentage of patients with an HIV-1 RNA level of <40 copies per milliliter) using the Food and Drug Administration Snapshot algorithm, in which patients who had missing HIV-1 RNA values or who changed the composition of their optimized background therapy were classified as having had virologic failure. Prespecified efficacy analyses according to subgroup were also performed. Additional details regarding the statistical methods are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Results

Of 731 patients who underwent screening, 371 were treated: 272 in the randomized cohort and 99 in the nonrandomized cohort. At the data cutoff for the week 48 analysis on March 4, 2018, a total of 57 of 272 patients (21%) in the randomized cohort and 32 of 99 patients (32%) in the nonrandomized cohort had been withdrawn from the trial ( Figure 1B ).
In the randomized cohort, the patients’ demographic and disease characteristics at baseline were similar in the fostemsavir group and the placebo group during the blinded phase ( Table 1 and Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). In this cohort, 83% of the patients had received at least five antiretroviral regimens before enrollment, 85% had received a diagnosis of AIDS, 26% had a baseline CD4+ T-cell count of less than 20 cells per cubic millimeter, and 29% had an HIV-1 RNA level of at least 100,000 copies per milliliter. The patients had a high rate of previous exposure to available antiretroviral drug classes and a correspondingly high frequency of antiretroviral class exhaustion. In their initial optimized background therapy, 52% of the patients received one fully active antiretroviral drug and 42% received two fully active antiretroviral drugs. The most commonly used antiretroviral drugs were dolutegravir (in 84% of the patients), darunavir (in 49%), and tenofovir (in 43%) (Table S2).
In the nonrandomized cohort, the patients were older and had more severe immunosuppression at baseline than those in the randomized cohort; 90% had received a diagnosis of AIDS ( Table 1 and Table S1). In this cohort, 81% of the patients had no fully active antiretroviral drug in their initial optimized background therapy; 19 had one fully active antiretroviral drug, including 15 who had received investigational ibalizumab.
The randomized cohort and the nonrandomized cohort were both diverse with respect to sex and race. The percentage of women was 26% and 10% in each cohort, respectively; 22% and 23% of the patients, respectively, were black, and 29% and 28% were Hispanic.
With respect to the primary end point at day 8, the mean (±SE) reduction from baseline in the HIV-1 RNA level was 0.79±0.05 log 10 copies per milliliter in the fostemsavir group and 0.17±0.08 log 10 copies per milliliter in the placebo group (between-group difference, −0.63 log 10 copies per milliliter in the fostemsavir group; 95% confidence interval, −0.81 to −0.44; P<0.001) (Table S3). The post hoc analysis, in which unequal variance was assumed, showed an estimate for the between-group difference in the change from baseline to day 8 in the HIV-1 RNA level (−0.63 log 10 copies per milliliter) that was identical to the difference in the primary analysis, in which equal variance was assumed; in addition, the P value (P<0.001) was the same in the two analyses, and the 95% confidence interval (−0.80 to −0.45) was similar.
Among the 241 patients who had a baseline HIV-1 RNA level of more than 1000 copies per milliliter, the mean reduction from baseline at day 8 in the HIV-1 RNA level was 0.86 log 10 copies per milliliter in the fostemsavir group and 0.20 log 10 copies per milliliter in the placebo group (Table S3). For comparison, the median reduction in this group was 1.02 log 10 copies per milliliter with fostemsavir and 0.00 log 10 copies per milliliter with placebo (Table S4). A decrease in the viral load of more than 0.5 log 10 copies per milliliter from baseline to day 8 occurred in 68% of the patients in the fostemsavir group and in 19% of those in the placebo group; the corresponding decrease of more than 1.0 log 10 copies per milliliter occurred in 50% and 12% of the patients in the two groups, respectively. Subgroup analysis of the primary end point showed no effect on the between-group differences in the decrease in the HIV-1 RNA level on the basis of age, sex, race, or geographic region (Table S5).
In the randomized cohort, the rate of virologic response (HIV-1 RNA level, <40 copies per milliliter) was 53% at week 24 and 54% at week 48 ( Table 2 ). Virologic response rates at week 48 were similar across most prespecified subgroups (Table S6). Response rates were numerically higher among patients who were 50 years of age or older (59%) and female (61%) and whose self-reported race was black (65%); higher response rates were also seen among patients who had one fully active antiretroviral drug in their initial optimized background therapy (56%) (Table S6). Conversely, patients who had a high baseline viral load (≥100,000 copies per milliliter) or a low baseline CD4+ T-cell count (<20 cells per cubic millimeter) had a reduced response rate (35% in both subgroups). Observed analysis (which included only patients with HIV-1 RNA measurements that were monitored at each visit) showed a steady increase over time in the percentage of patients with an HIV-1 RNA level of less than 40 copies per milliliter (62%) or less than 200 copies per milliliter (84%) at week 48 ( Figure 2A ). CD4+ T-cell counts increased steadily over time, reaching a mean (±SD) increase of 139±135 cells per cubic millimeter ( Figure 2B ). Patients who had a baseline CD4+ T-cell count of less than 20 cells per cubic millimeter had a mean increase in the CD4+ count through week 48 that was similar to that among the patients with a baseline CD4+ count of 200 cells or more per cubic millimeter and those with a CD4+ count ranging from 145 to 150 cells per cubic millimeter (Table S6).
In the nonrandomized cohort, the rate of virologic response was 37% at week 24 and 38% at week 48 ( Table 2 ). In this cohort, CD4+ T-cell counts continued to improve over time, with a mean increase of 63.5 cells per cubic millimeter from baseline to week 48 ( Figure 2B ). Among the 15 patients who received ibalizumab in their initial optimized background therapy, 8 (53%) had a response at weeks 24 and 48.
In the randomized cohort during the 8-day double-blind period, the frequencies of adverse events and serious adverse events were similar in the two groups (Table S7). At 48 weeks, 92% of the patients reported having had at least one adverse event. More patients in the nonrandomized cohort than in the randomized cohort had grade 3 or 4 adverse events (47% vs. 26%) and serious adverse events (44% vs. 31%) ( Table 3 ). Most serious adverse events were due to infections or complications associated with advanced AIDS (Table S8). Few serious adverse events that were assessed by the investigators as being associated with a trial drug were reported in either cohort (Table S8). The most common drug-related adverse events of grade 2 through 4 were nausea (4%) and diarrhea (3%) (Table S9). Adverse events led to the discontinuation of a trial treatment in 27 patients (7%). Most of the adverse events that led to the discontinuation of a trial drug were associated with infections (Table S10). Overall, 10% of the patients had a CDC class C AIDS-defining event. There were low rates of clinically relevant laboratory abnormalities (Table S11) and no important safety signals related to electrocardiographic abnormalities during the trial period.
By the data cutoff at 48 weeks, 25 patients had died: 11 (4%) in the randomized cohort and 14 (14%) in the nonrandomized cohort. Of the 25 deaths, 17 (68%) were attributed to AIDS-related events or acute infections, including 1 case of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (recurrent atypical mycobacterial infection) (Table S12). The median baseline CD4+ T-cell count of the patients who died was 7 cells per cubic millimeter.
In the randomized cohort, 49 of 272 patients (18%) met the protocol-defined criteria for virologic failure through week 48. Among these patients, we obtained data regarding susceptibility to temsavir both at baseline and during treatment for 47 patients (96%) using genotypic assays and for 44 patients (90%) using phenotypic assays. We found gp120 substitutions that occurred during treatment at one or more of the four amino acid positions that have been associated with reduced phenotypic susceptibility to temsavir in 20 of 47 patients (43%) with virologic failure; of these substitutions, S375N and M426L were the most frequent (Table S13). From baseline to virologic failure, the median change in the 50% maximal inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) of temsavir relative to a reference virus was an increase by a factor of 2.3; in 23 of 44 patients (52%), the change was within the variability inherent in the test (a factor of 3). After virologic failure, 12 of 49 patients (24%) had suppression of the viral load to less than 40 HIV-1 RNA copies per milliliter.
In the nonrandomized cohort, 46 of 99 patients (46%) had virologic failure through week 48; among these patients, we obtained data regarding susceptibility to temsavir both at baseline and during treatment for all 46 patients using genotypic assays and for 43 (93%) using phenotypic assays. During the course of treatment, gp120 substitutions were found in 32 patients (70%); the median change in the IC 50 of temsavir relative to a reference virus from baseline until virologic failure was an increase by a factor of 470.
In this trial involving adults with multidrug-resistant HIV-1 infection with limited treatment options, fostemsavir had significantly better efficacy than placebo after 8 days of functional monotherapy. All the patients in the trial had exhausted all approved agents in at least four classes of antiretroviral drugs and had a low CD4+ T-cell count. Among the patients in the randomized cohort who had a baseline HIV-1 RNA level of more than 1000 copies per milliliter (a common criterion for entry in other trials involving patients with multidrug-resistant HIV-1 infection), the median decrease in the HIV-1 RNA level from baseline to day 8 was 1.02 log 10 copies per milliliter in the fostemsavir group and no log 10 copies in the placebo group. At the same time, HIV-1 RNA levels were lower by more than 0.5 log 10 copies per milliliter for 68% of the patients in the randomized cohort. Systematic reviews of data from HIV clinical trials have shown a correlation between this level of decline in the HIV-1 RNA level and a meaningful clinical benefit in patients with HIV-1 infection.
In the randomized cohort, after subsequent administration of open-label fostemsavir in combination with optimized background therapy, the percentage of patients with a virologic response was 54% at week 48. The durability of response was shown by the maintenance of response rates from week 24 to week 48, despite the ongoing loss of patients from the trial for reasons other than efficacy. Response rates in the randomized cohort were consistent across most baseline subgroups, including black patients and older patients, who are disproportionately represented in the heavily pretreated population in the United States and in parts of Europe. Response rates were reduced among the patients who had a high baseline viral load (>100,000 copies per milliliter) or a very low baseline CD4+ T-cell count (<20 cells per cubic millimeter), two well-established factors in limiting virologic response. In the randomized cohort, the rates of virologic suppression were similar regardless of whether the patients had one or two antiretroviral drugs in their initial optimized background therapy.
The virologic failure rate of 18% through week 48 in the randomized cohort was similar to the rates of virologic failure that have been reported in other trials involving patients with multidrug-resistant HIV-1 infection. Virologic failure was not consistently associated with changes in genotypic substitutions or changes in temsavir susceptibility during the trial. Genotypic substitutions at positions that have been associated with reduced susceptibility to temsavir were found during treatment in 70% of the patients in the nonrandomized cohort who met the criteria for virologic failure. However, among the patients with virologic failure in the randomized cohort, more than half had no genotypic substitutions at these positions and had changes from baseline in the IC 50 of temsavir that were within the variability limit of the test. A phenotypic cutoff for temsavir has not yet been determined. The range of baseline susceptibilities to temsavir, differences in optimized background therapy, and the degree of previous treatment experience and multidrug resistance in this trial complicate the identification of clear correlates of virologic failure. Notably, 24% of the patients in the randomized cohort who met the criteria for virologic failure by week 48 subsequently were found to have an HIV-1 RNA level of less than 40 copies per milliliter. Additional analyses are ongoing to define the factors that most influence virologic response and failure with fostemsavir.
The use of fostemsavir also resulted in progressive improvements in the CD4+ T-cell count through week 48 in the randomized cohort, including among the patients who had the highest level of immunosuppression at baseline (mean increase from baseline of 145 cells per cubic millimeter among patients with <20 CD4+ T cells per cubic millimeter at baseline).
The rates of adverse events and serious adverse events in this trial were consistent with rates reported in previous trials of antiretroviral drugs conducted in similar populations. Few of the adverse events led to the discontinuation of a trial drug. The most common adverse events of grades 2 through 4 that were deemed by investigators to be drug-related — nausea and diarrhea — were consistent with those observed during the fostemsavir phase 2b trial, which was conducted in a healthier, less heavily pretreated population.
In this international trial, we enrolled patients who had received multiple treatments for HIV-1 infection, with most of the patients having received at least five antiretroviral regimens over more than 15 years, and who were diverse with respect to sex and race. In alignment with current regulatory guidance, the trial included a short comparative phase followed by an open-label phase with the addition of individualized optimized background therapy. The lack of standardized background therapy is reflective of real-world practice. Furthermore, in the nonrandomized cohort, patients were allowed to enroll in clinical trials of other investigational antiretroviral drugs to improve their therapeutic options.
Trial limitations include the inability to include a comparator group beyond the analysis of the primary end point and the confounder of highly individualized optimized background therapy. These limitations are unavoidable and inherent to the needs of patients with multidrug-resistant HIV-1 infection who have limited treatment options. The trial is expected to continue until the patients can access fostemsavir through an additional option or rollover study or until marketing approval is in place.
In conclusion, we found that in adults who had received multiple treatments for HIV-1 infection, fostemsavir had better efficacy than placebo in the mean change in the HIV-1 RNA level from baseline to day 8 in the randomized cohort (the primary end point). Efficacy was sustained through 48 weeks, which supports further development of fostemsavir as a therapeutic option for patients with multidrug-resistant HIV-1 infection and few remaining options for active therapy. Fostemsavir has a novel mechanism of action with no in vitro cross-resistance to currently available classes of antiretroviral drugs, has a favorable drug–drug interaction profile, and has shown both immunologic and virologic responses.
