Title: Dual Antiplatelet Therapy after PCI in Patients at High Bleeding Risk


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

The appropriate duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients at high risk for bleeding after the implantation of a drug-eluting coronary stent remains unclear.

Abstract_Section: Methods

One month after they had undergone implantation of a biodegradable-polymer sirolimus-eluting coronary stent, we randomly assigned patients at high bleeding risk to discontinue dual antiplatelet therapy immediately (abbreviated therapy) or to continue it for at least 2 additional months (standard therapy). The three ranked primary outcomes were net adverse clinical events (a composite of death from any cause, myocardial infarction, stroke, or major bleeding), major adverse cardiac or cerebral events (a composite of death from any cause, myocardial infarction, or stroke), and major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding; cumulative incidences were assessed at 335 days. The first two outcomes were assessed for noninferiority in the per-protocol population, and the third outcome for superiority in the intention-to-treat population.

Abstract_Section: Results

Among the 4434 patients in the per-protocol population, net adverse clinical events occurred in 165 patients (7.5%) in the abbreviated-therapy group and in 172 (7.7%) in the standard-therapy group (difference, −0.23 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], −1.80 to 1.33; P<0.001 for noninferiority). A total of 133 patients (6.1%) in the abbreviated-therapy group and 132 patients (5.9%) in the standard-therapy group had a major adverse cardiac or cerebral event (difference, 0.11 percentage points; 95% CI, −1.29 to 1.51; P=0.001 for noninferiority). Among the 4579 patients in the intention-to-treat population, major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding occurred in 148 patients (6.5%) in the abbreviated-therapy group and in 211 (9.4%) in the standard-therapy group (difference, −2.82 percentage points; 95% CI, −4.40 to −1.24; P<0.001 for superiority).

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

One month of dual antiplatelet therapy was noninferior to the continuation of therapy for at least 2 additional months with regard to the occurrence of net adverse clinical events and major adverse cardiac or cerebral events; abbreviated therapy also resulted in a lower incidence of major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding. (Funded by Terumo; MASTER DAPT ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03023020 .)

Section: Introduction

Randomized trials have established the superiority of drug-eluting stents over bare-metal stents in patients at high bleeding risk receiving 1 month of dual antiplatelet therapy after undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Nevertheless, these trials were not designed to assess the appropriate duration of dual antiplatelet therapy after the implantation of a drug-eluting stent. Studies of 1 month of dual antiplatelet therapy after the implantation of a drug-eluting stent have suggested that this regimen may mitigate bleeding risk without compromising safety, as compared with longer durations of treatment. Some of these studies were nonrandomized, did not select patients at high bleeding risk, or included patients at low ischemic risk.
Therefore, the appropriate duration of dual antiplatelet therapy for preventing ischemic complications, while limiting bleeding risk, in unselected patients at high bleeding risk after the implantation of a drug-eluting stent remains unclear. We conducted a randomized trial involving patients at high risk for bleeding who had undergone implantation of a biodegradable-polymer sirolimus-eluting stent, in order to evaluate 1 month of dual antiplatelet therapy as compared with a longer course of dual antiplatelet therapy with respect to clinical outcomes including ischemic events and bleeding.

Section: Methods

The Management of High Bleeding Risk Patients Post Bioresorbable Polymer Coated Stent Implantation with an Abbreviated versus Standard DAPT Regimen (MASTER DAPT) trial was an investigator-initiated, multicenter, randomized, open-label, noninferiority trial with sequential superiority testing. The trial was designed by the first and last authors and was approved by the institutional review board at each center. The European Cardiovascular Research Institute acted as the trial sponsor and received grant support from Terumo (see the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The European Cardiovascular Research Institute and Terumo had no role in the trial design; in the collection, monitoring, analysis, or interpretation of the data; or in the writing of the manuscript. Editorial assistance was provided by a medical writer and was funded by the European Cardiovascular Research Institute. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol , available at NEJM.org.
Patients were considered to be candidates for participation in the trial if they had an acute or chronic coronary syndrome; had undergone successful PCI for one or more coronary-artery stenoses with implantation of a biodegradable-polymer sirolimus-eluting stent (Ultimaster, Terumo), and no further revascularization of additional coronary-artery stenoses, if present, was planned ; and met one or more of the criteria for high bleeding risk (see the Supplementary Appendix ). In addition, eligible patients were required to be free from adverse cardiovascular events (including a new acute coronary syndrome, symptomatic restenosis, stent thrombosis, stroke, or any revascularization resulting in the prolonged use of dual antiplatelet therapy) during the first month after the index PCI. Key exclusion criteria were the implantation of a stent other than the Ultimaster stent within 6 months before the index procedure, the implantation of a bioresorbable scaffold at any time before the index procedure, and treatment for in-stent restenosis or stent thrombosis. A full list of the inclusion and exclusion criteria is provided in the Supplementary Appendix . All the patients provided written informed consent.
Patients who were free from ischemic and active (i.e., not resolved at the time of randomization) bleeding events and who adhered to a dual antiplatelet therapy regimen were screened for inclusion in the trial 30 to 44 days after the index procedure (defined either as a single procedure or as the last installment of a planned staged procedure). Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio with the use of a central system to receive either open-label abbreviated dual antiplatelet therapy (abbreviated-therapy group) or standard dual antiplatelet therapy (standard-therapy group). Randomization was concealed with the use of a Web-based system. Randomization sequences were computer-generated with randomly selected block sizes of two, four, or six and stratified according to trial site, history of acute myocardial infarction within the past 12 months, and clinical indication for 12 months of oral anticoagulation. Follow-up visits occurred at 60 days (within a window of ±14 days) and 150 days (±14-day window) after randomization, preferably as on-site visits, and at 335 days (±14-day window) after randomization, exclusively as an on-site visit. Follow-up data were obtained with a standardized questionnaire.
Patients who had been randomly assigned to the abbreviated-therapy group immediately discontinued dual antiplatelet therapy and continued single antiplatelet therapy until the completion of the trial, except for patients who were receiving clinically indicated oral anticoagulation, who continued single antiplatelet therapy up to 6 months after the index procedure. Patients who had been randomly assigned to the standard-therapy group continued dual antiplatelet therapy for at least 5 additional months (6 months after the index procedure) or, for those receiving clinically indicated oral anticoagulation, for at least 2 additional months (3 months after the index procedure) with the continuation of single antiplatelet therapy thereafter. Single antiplatelet therapy consisted of aspirin or a P2Y 12 inhibitor. Antiplatelet and anticoagulant treatments were administered according to authorizations for use and locally approved regimens; detailed descriptions of the two treatment regimens are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
The trial protocol prespecified three ranked primary outcomes: net adverse clinical events (a composite of death from any cause, myocardial infarction, stroke, or major bleeding), major adverse cardiac or cerebral events (a composite of death from any cause, myocardial infarction, or stroke), and major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding, occurring between randomization and 335 days. Major bleeding was defined as a bleeding event of Bleeding Academic Research Consortium (BARC) type 3 or 5, and major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding was defined as a bleeding event of BARC type 2, 3, or 5.
Secondary outcomes included the individual components of the three primary outcomes; a composite of death from cardiovascular causes, myocardial infarction, or stroke; death from cardiovascular or noncardiovascular causes; definite or probable stent thrombosis; and all bleeding events. Outcome events were adjudicated according to definitions of the Academic Research Consortium and BARC by a committee whose members were unaware of the trial-group assignments (see the Supplementary Appendix ).
The trial was designed to test hierarchically whether the abbreviated dual antiplatelet regimen, as compared with the standard dual antiplatelet regimen, would be noninferior with regard to net adverse clinical events, noninferior with regard to major adverse cardiac or cerebral events, and superior with regard to major or clinically relevant bleeding, as determined by the difference in the cumulative incidence at 335 days (abbreviated-therapy group minus standard-therapy group). The upper limit of the two-sided 95% confidence interval for the difference in the cumulative incidence had to exclude 3.6 percentage points for net adverse clinical events and 2.4 percentage points for major adverse cardiac and cerebral events to define noninferiority and had to exclude 0.0 percentage points for major or clinically relevant bleeding events to define superiority. These hypotheses were hierarchically tested, with preservation of alpha (a one-sided alpha of 0.025, corresponding to a two-sided alpha of 0.05).
We calculated that the enrollment of 4100 patients would provide the trial with 90% power to show noninferiority with regard to net adverse clinical events under an assumed cumulative incidence of 12.0% in each group, with 80% power to show noninferiority with regard to major adverse cardiac and cerebral events under an assumed incidence of 8.0% in each group, and with 90% power to show superiority with regard to major or clinically relevant bleeding under an assumed incidence of 6.5% in the standard-therapy group and 4.2% in the abbreviated-therapy group. The final sample size was increased to 4300 to account for an anticipated 5% of the patients withdrawing (owing to loss to follow-up, withdrawal of consent, or lack of adherence to the assigned regimen).
The primary analyses of net adverse clinical events and major adverse cardiac and cerebral events were performed in the per-protocol population, which excluded patients who did not meet the selection criteria or did not implement the protocol-mandated therapy within 14 days after randomization. The primary analysis of bleeding outcomes was performed in the intention-to-treat population, which included all the patients who had undergone randomization. Differences in the cumulative incidences at 335 days and P values were calculated with the use of the Com-Nougue method. Kaplan−Meier curves were created for the first two primary outcomes, and cause-specific Kaplan−Meier curves were created for the third primary outcome (with censoring at the time of the competing risk event of death not related to bleeding). Additional details about the statistical analysis are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Results

From February 28, 2017, to December 5, 2019, a total of 5204 patients (at 140 sites in 30 countries) underwent screening; 4520 patients underwent screening during the 1-month period after the index procedure, of whom 202 (5.2%) withdrew consent and 33 were lost to follow-up, and 684 underwent screening at the time of randomization ( Figure 1 ). A total of 4579 patients (88.0%) were randomly assigned to either the abbreviated-therapy group (2295 patients) or the standard-therapy group (2284 patients); the median time from the index PCI to randomization was 34 days in each group. A screening log for a sample subgroup of trial candidates showed that, of 2847 patients who underwent screening, 109 (3.8%) were enrolled in the trial (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix ). Details regarding the 625 patients who provided written informed consent but did not undergo randomization and regarding the patients in the per-protocol population are provided in Tables S2 through S4.
The characteristics of the patients at baseline and their clinical presentation are shown in Table 1 . Overall, the mean age of the patients was 76.0 years, 69.3% of the patients were men, 33.6% had diabetes, 19.1% had chronic kidney disease, 18.9% had heart failure, 12.4% had previously had a cerebrovascular event, and 10.6% had peripheral vascular disease; 36.4% of the patients were receiving concomitant oral anticoagulation. The distribution of the high-bleeding-risk criteria is shown in Table S5 (mean [±SD] number of criteria met per patient, 2.1±1.1). Of the 4579 patients who were included in the trial, 2211 (48.3%) had undergone coronary intervention for an acute coronary syndrome. Information on the lesion and procedural characteristics is provided in Tables S6 and S7.
After randomization, 2250 patients (98.0%) in the abbreviated-therapy group discontinued dual antiplatelet therapy, and 2276 patients (99.6%) in the standard-therapy group continued the treatment for a median of 157 days (interquartile range, 65 to 335). The median duration of dual antiplatelet therapy from the index PCI was 34 days (interquartile range, 31 to 39) in the abbreviated-therapy group and 193 days (interquartile range, 102 to 366) in the standard-therapy group. After randomization, clopidogrel was used as monotherapy in 53.9% of the patients in the abbreviated-therapy group and as part of dual antiplatelet therapy in 78.7% of the patients in the standard-therapy group. Medication use is shown in Tables S8 and S9 and Figure S1. Adherence to the assigned regimen was high in each group (Figs. S2 and S3).
Complete follow-up data at 335 days were available for 4547 patients (99.3%). A total of 32 patients (0.7%) either withdrew consent (22 patients) or were lost to follow-up (10) and had their data censored at the last contact ( Figure 1 ). In the per-protocol population, net adverse clinical events occurred in 165 patients (7.5%) in the abbreviated-therapy group and in 172 (7.7%) in the standard-therapy group (hazard ratio, 0.97; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.78 to 1.20), for a difference in risk of −0.23 percentage points (95% CI, −1.80 to 1.33; P<0.001 for noninferiority). In the same population, 133 patients (6.1%) in the abbreviated-therapy group and 132 patients (5.9%) in the standard-therapy group had a major adverse cardiac and cerebral event (hazard ratio, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.80 to 1.30), for a difference in risk of 0.11 percentage points (95% CI, −1.29 to 1.51; P=0.001 for noninferiority). In the intention-to-treat population, the incidence of major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding was lower among patients in the abbreviated-therapy group than among those in the standard-therapy group (148 patients [6.5%] vs. 211 [9.4%]; hazard ratio, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.55 to 0.84), for a difference in risk of −2.82 percentage points (95% CI, −4.40 to –1.24; P<0.001 for superiority). Details are shown in Table 2 and Figure 2 .
The Kaplan–Meier cumulative incidence of death from any cause was similar in the abbreviated-therapy group and the standard-therapy group (3.3% and 3.6%, respectively), as were the cumulative incidences of myocardial infarction (2.7% and 2.2%, respectively) and definite or probable stent thrombosis (0.6% and 0.4%) ( Table 2 ). A cerebrovascular event occurred in 17 patients (0.8%) in the abbreviated-therapy group and in 32 (1.4%) in the standard-therapy group. Stroke occurred in 12 patients (0.5%) in the abbreviated-therapy group and in 23 (1.0%) in the standard-therapy group; hemorrhagic stroke occurred in 1 and 5 patients, respectively.
The cumulative incidence of BARC type 2 bleeding was lower in the abbreviated-therapy group than in the standard-therapy group (4.5% vs. 6.8%; difference, −2.25 percentage points; 95% CI, −3.59 to −0.90), but the cumulative incidence of bleeding of type 3, 4, or 5 was similar in the two groups (2.3% and 2.6%, respectively). Fatal bleeding (BARC type 5) occurred in 2 patients (0.1%) in the abbreviated-therapy group and in 8 (0.4%) in the standard-therapy group ( Table 2 ).
Sensitivity analyses for noninferiority testing in the intention-to-treat population and for superiority testing in the per-protocol population yielded consistent results for the primary and secondary outcomes ( Table 2 and Figs. S4 through S6). The effects of abbreviated therapy as compared with standard dual antiplatelet therapy on the incidences of the three primary outcomes were largely consistent across subgroups (Figs. S7 through S9).

Section: Discussion

Among patients at high risk for bleeding who had undergone implantation with a biodegradable-polymer sirolimus-eluting stent for an acute or chronic coronary syndrome, the discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy at a median of 34 days after PCI was noninferior to the continuation of dual antiplatelet therapy for a median duration of 193 days with regard to net adverse clinical events and major adverse cardiac or cerebral events and was superior with regard to major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding. Secondary efficacy outcomes were generally similar in the two groups. Treatment effects with regard to the three primary outcomes were consistent across subgroups.
The incidence of major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding in the intention-to-treat population (the third primary outcome) was 6.5% in the abbreviated-therapy group and 9.4% in the standard-therapy group (difference, −2.82 percentage points). The lower risk of bleeding in the abbreviated-therapy group was mainly due to the lower incidence of clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding events (BARC type 2) in this group than in the standard-therapy group (4.5% vs. 6.8%).
We recruited patients with a high bleeding risk regardless of clinical presentation and did not restrict the number, type, or location of target coronary lesions, provided that the lesions had been uniformly treated with a biodegradable-polymer sirolimus-eluting stent and were not due to in-stent restenosis or stent thrombosis. Patients were screened primarily at the time of stent implantation, and only a few of the potentially eligible patients (5.2%) withdrew before or at randomization. Our trial population differs from those in studies that excluded patients with acute coronary syndrome and that limited the number, location, or complexity of treated lesions. Our results therefore inform treatment decisions regarding dual antiplatelet therapy at 1 month after coronary intervention in patients at high risk for bleeding who do not have postprocedural ischemic events, including patients with clinical or angiographic features indicating a high ischemic risk.
The choices of the type of P2Y 12 inhibitor for dual antiplatelet therapy and the type of monotherapy after the discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy were at the discretion of the investigator. Clopidogrel was the most frequently used P2Y 12 inhibitor in the standard-therapy group and was the most frequently used monotherapy in the abbreviated-therapy group at the time of randomization and thereafter. This finding is consistent with those of previous trials that exclusively enrolled patients at high bleeding risk and is consistent with guidelines.
Two trials have compared 1 month of dual antiplatelet therapy with at least 12 months of dual antiplatelet therapy after PCI with drug-eluting stents. The GLOBAL LEADERS trial showed that 1 month of dual antiplatelet therapy followed by ticagrelor monotherapy for an additional 23 months was not associated with lower all-cause mortality or with a lower incidence of new Q-wave myocardial infarction than 12 months of dual antiplatelet therapy followed by aspirin monotherapy for an additional 12 months. In the STOPDAPT-2 trial, 1 month of dual antiplatelet therapy followed by clopidogrel monotherapy was associated with a lower risk of a composite of cardiovascular and bleeding events than 12 months of dual antiplatelet therapy. However, patients in that trial were at low risk for ischemic events. In both these trials, patients were enrolled immediately after the PCI, and those at high risk for bleeding were not selected. The ISAR-TRIPLE trial, which compared 6 weeks of clopidogrel therapy with 6 months of clopidogrel therapy in 614 patients receiving oral anticoagulation who were also receiving aspirin after the implantation of a drug-eluting stent, showed no significant difference between the two treatment strategies with regard to a composite outcome of death, myocardial infarction, stroke, stent thrombosis, or major bleeding.
Some limitations of our trial should be considered. Although the exclusion criteria were intended to be minimal, limited screening-log data suggested that approximately 4% of the patients who underwent screening (representing 21.5% of the eligible patients) were enrolled. Treatments were open-label, which reflects the impossibility of masking three oral P2Y 12 inhibitors and aspirin in a treatment-strategy trial. The duration of dual antiplatelet therapy was heterogeneous in the standard-therapy group. The type of monotherapy after the discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy in the abbreviated-therapy group also varied. The duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in the two trial groups was longer than is now recommended in patients receiving oral anticoagulation. However, a very short duration of triple antithrombotic therapy is associated with higher rates of ischemic events than longer treatment.
Our trial included patients at high bleeding risk who had undergone implantation of a biodegradable-polymer sirolimus-eluting stent; consequently, our results may not extend to patients who are not at high bleeding risk or who receive other stent types. Patients with in-stent restenosis or stent thrombosis were ineligible for this trial. The incidences of net adverse clinical events and major adverse cardiac and cerebral events were lower than expected, and noninferiority margins were wide; therefore, a modest increase in the incidence of such events cannot be ruled out with this duration of abbreviated therapy.
In this trial involving patients at high risk for bleeding who had undergone implantation of a biodegradable-polymer sirolimus-eluting stent, the discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy at a median of 34 days after PCI was noninferior to the continuation of treatment for a median duration of 193 days with regard to the incidence of net adverse clinical events and major adverse cardiac or cerebral events and was associated with a lower incidence of major or clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding.
