Title: Multicenter, Randomized Trial of a Bionic Pancreas in Type 1 Diabetes


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Currently available semiautomated insulin-delivery systems require individualized insulin regimens for the initialization of therapy and meal doses based on carbohydrate counting for routine operation. In contrast, the bionic pancreas is initialized only on the basis of body weight, makes all dose decisions and delivers insulin autonomously, and uses meal announcements without carbohydrate counting.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In this 13-week, multicenter, randomized trial, we randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio persons at least 6 years of age with type 1 diabetes either to receive bionic pancreas treatment with insulin aspart or insulin lispro or to receive standard care (defined as any insulin-delivery method with unblinded, real-time continuous glucose monitoring). The primary outcome was the glycated hemoglobin level at 13 weeks. The key secondary outcome was the percentage of time that the glucose level as assessed by continuous glucose monitoring was below 54 mg per deciliter; the prespecified noninferiority limit for this outcome was 1 percentage point. Safety was also assessed.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 219 participants 6 to 79 years of age were assigned to the bionic-pancreas group, and 107 to the standard-care group. The glycated hemoglobin level decreased from 7.9% to 7.3% in the bionic-pancreas group and did not change (was at 7.7% at both time points) in the standard-care group (mean adjusted difference at 13 weeks, −0.5 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], −0.6 to −0.3; P<0.001). The percentage of time that the glucose level as assessed by continuous glucose monitoring was below 54 mg per deciliter did not differ significantly between the two groups (13-week adjusted difference, 0.0 percentage points; 95% CI, −0.1 to 0.04; P<0.001 for noninferiority). The rate of severe hypoglycemia was 17.7 events per 100 participant-years in the bionic-pancreas group and 10.8 events per 100 participant-years in the standard-care group (P=0.39). No episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis occurred in either group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In this 13-week, randomized trial involving adults and children with type 1 diabetes, use of a bionic pancreas was associated with a greater reduction than standard care in the glycated hemoglobin level. (Funded by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT04200313 .)

Section: Introduction

The current glycated hemoglobin goal of less than 7.0% is met in only approximately 20% of patients with type 1 diabetes in the United States. Automated and semiautomated insulin-delivery systems have the potential to increase the number of persons with diabetes in whom this goal would be met. Commercially available hybrid closed-loop systems, which partially automate insulin delivery, require the inputting of basal rates, insulin-sensitivity factors, carbohydrate-to-insulin ratios, the total daily dose of insulin, or a subset of these metrics on initialization. Insulin doses at mealtime are determined by having the user enter the number of grams of carbohydrate in the meal, and effective therapy may be dependent on user-initiated correction doses for hyperglycemia. A warm-up period, during which the system gathers information about insulin doses that are controlled by the user, may be required before automation can begin.
In contrast, the iLet bionic pancreas (Beta Bionics) does not use information about the patient’s previous insulin regimen (e.g., basal and bolus dose settings), is initialized only on the basis of body weight, and automates the determination and delivery of all insulin doses immediately after body-weight data have been entered, with no warm-up period. Meal announcements consist of a qualitative estimate of carbohydrate content (“usual for me,” “more,” or “less”) as compared with a typical meal of that type (“breakfast,” “lunch,” or “dinner”). The algorithms that determine the insulin dose by the bionic pancreas were designed to continually adapt to the user’s insulin needs. Because all the therapeutic insulin doses are determined by the bionic pancreas (including basal, correction, and meal-announcement doses), it is not possible for the user to determine or modify insulin doses.
The bionic pancreas that we used in this trial was developed as both an insulin-only system and a bihormonal system that administers both insulin and glucagon. Here, we report the results of a multicenter, randomized trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of the insulin-only configuration of the bionic pancreas in adults and children 6 years of age or older with type 1 diabetes. We compared the bionic pancreas with standard care, which was defined as any method of insulin delivery combined with unblinded, real-time continuous glucose monitoring.

Section: Methods

We conducted this parallel-group, unblinded trial at 16 centers in the United States. The trial protocol , which is available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org, was approved by a central institutional review board. Written informed consent was obtained from all adult participants (≥18 years of age), with parental consent and participant assent obtained for children. An investigational device exemption was approved by the Food and Drug Administration. An independent data and safety monitoring board provided trial oversight.
Trial funding was provided by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases and others. The Jaeb Center for Health Research was the trial coordinating center and was responsible for the randomization scheme, the database, data validation, analyses, and trial coordination. The steering committee was responsible for the design of the trial and for the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The first three authors wrote the first draft of the manuscript and vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol.
Beta Bionics provided the experimental bionic-pancreas devices that were used in the trial. Fast-acting insulin aspart and insulin aspart were provided by Novo Nordisk, and insulin lispro was provided by Eli Lilly. Blood-glucose meters and test strips (Contour Next One Blood Glucose Monitoring System) were provided by Ascensia Diabetes Care. Continuous-glucose-monitor sensors and transmitters were purchased from Dexcom at a discounted price.
Two authors were involved in the design of the trial before the founding of Beta Bionics and were involved in the oversight of the trial as Beta Bionics employees and shareholders. Otherwise, no external funder had a role in the design or conduct of the trial, the collection or analysis of the data, or the preparation of the manuscript. There were no agreements concerning the confidentiality of the data with respect to publication rights between the funders and the authors or their institutions.
Eligible participants were at least 6 years of age, had received a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, and had used insulin for at least 1 year. The complete criteria are listed in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org. Participants who were not already using the Dexcom G6 continuous glucose monitor used a blinded Dexcom G6 monitor in order to obtain 2 weeks of baseline glucose data just before randomization.
Participants 18 years of age or older were randomly assigned in a 2:2:1 ratio to use the bionic pancreas with insulin aspart or insulin lispro (bionic-pancreas group), the bionic pancreas with fast-acting insulin aspart, or standard-care insulin delivery plus use of the unblinded Dexcom G6 continuous glucose monitor (standard-care group). Analyses of the fast-acting insulin-aspart group were prespecified as secondary analyses and are not reported here. Participants 6 to 17 years of age were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to the bionic-pancreas group or the standard-care group. Randomization was performed separately for adults and children with the use of a computer-generated sequence, with a permuted block design and with stratification according to site (see the Supplementary Appendix ).
Participants who were assigned to the bionic-pancreas group were trained on the use of the system, which included the iLet device with embedded bionic-pancreas insulin-dose algorithms, the Dexcom G6 continuous glucose monitor, and the Inset I infusion set (Unomedical), which is an insulin-infusion set with a Teflon cannula inserted at a 90° angle to the skin surface. The algorithms were initialized by entering the participant’s body weight; there was no run-in or warm-up period before automated insulin delivery commenced. The default glucose target was “usual” (120 mg per deciliter [6.7 mmol per liter]) and could be shifted by 10 mg per deciliter (0.6 mmol per liter) down to “lower” or up to “higher”; a different target could be set for part of the day. In response to qualitative meal announcements to the system by the user, the system delivered approximately 75% of the autonomously estimated insulin immediately, a dose that could not be modified by the user (see the Supplementary Appendix ). All glucose-correction boluses were fully automated; there was no mechanism for manual administration of insulin through the bionic pancreas.
When data from continuous glucose monitoring were not available, the bionic pancreas continued to administer insulin on the basis of a basal profile that had been autonomously determined by the bionic pancreas when such data were available. The bionic pancreas administered meal doses as usual in response to meal announcements and delivered glucose-correction doses on the basis of entered blood-glucose values. Information about adaptation and changes in body weight is provided in the Supplementary Appendix . Participants in the bionic-pancreas group were provided with a blood glucose meter (Contour Next One, Ascensia Diabetes Care), a ketone meter (Precision Xtra, Abbott Diabetes Care), and guidelines for identifying and managing infusion-set failure (Fig. S1).
Participants who were assigned to the standard-care group continued to use the insulin-delivery method they were using at the time of enrollment (which could include hybrid closed-loop systems) and used a real-time unblinded Dexcom G6 continuous glucose monitor that was provided by the trial. They were not provided with blood-glucose or ketone meters, nor were they given guidelines regarding infusion-set failure. Participants were instructed to contact their own health care provider for guidance on diabetes management.
Scheduled visits and contacts were the same in each group. Participants were contacted by telephone on day 1 or 2 and had follow-up visits, which could be completed by means of video conference, at 2, 6, 10, and 13 weeks. Glycated hemoglobin was measured at a central laboratory at randomization and at the completion of 6 weeks and 13 weeks.
The primary outcome was the glycated hemoglobin level at 13 weeks. The key secondary outcome, which was second in the hierarchical analysis, was the percentage of time that the glucose level as measured by the continuous glucose monitor was below 54 mg per deciliter (3.0 mmol per liter); the testing for noninferiority of this outcome was a margin of 1 percentage point. Other secondary outcomes that were included in the hierarchy were ordered as follows: the mean glucose level; the percentage of time with the glucose level in the range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter (3.9 to 10.0 mmol per liter); the percentage of time with the glucose level above 180 mg per deciliter; the percentage of time with the glucose level above 250 mg per deciliter (13.9 mmol per liter); the glucose-level standard deviation; the percentage of time with the glucose level below 70 mg per deciliter; the percentage of time with the glucose level below 54 mg per deciliter, to be tested for superiority; and the glucose coefficient of variation. Additional secondary and exploratory outcomes are listed in the Supplementary Appendix . Safety outcomes included the incidence of severe hypoglycemia (defined as hypoglycemia with cognitive impairment requiring the assistance of a third party for treatment), diabetic ketoacidosis, and other serious adverse events.
An overall sample size of 440 was selected for regulatory purposes; 110 participants were to be enrolled in the fast-acting insulin-aspart group, the results for which are not reported here. We calculated that if 200 participants in the bionic-pancreas group using insulin aspart or insulin lispro and 100 participants in the standard-care group completed the trial, the trial would have more than 99% power for the primary analysis, assuming a difference in the mean glycated hemoglobin level of 0.4 percentage points between the bionic-pancreas group and the standard-care group, a standard deviation of the 13-week glycated hemoglobin level of 0.8 percentage points in each group, and a correlation between the glycated hemoglobin levels at baseline and 13 weeks of 0.40 with a two-sided type I error of 5%.
Statistical analyses, except for the per-protocol efficacy analysis (see the Supplementary Appendix ), were performed on an intention-to-treat basis and included all the participants who had undergone randomization. In the primary and key secondary analyses, we compared the bionic pancreas and standard care using a linear mixed-effects regression model with adjustment for the baseline value, age, and site (random factor); 95% confidence intervals are reported. For the key secondary outcome, noninferiority was assessed by comparing the upper boundary of the confidence interval to a noninferiority margin of 1 percentage point. Secondary outcomes were tested in a hierarchical fashion, as specified in the protocol, to maintain a type I error rate of 5%; an outcome was tested only if the previous outcome met significance criteria. Per-protocol analyses, sensitivity analyses, and subgroup analyses were performed for the primary outcome, and on-treatment analyses were performed for all hierarchical outcomes as described in the Supplementary Appendix . Other additional statistical methods are described in the Supplementary Appendix .

Section: Results

Between January 4, 2021, and July 7, 2021, a total of 326 adults and children were randomly assigned to the bionic-pancreas group (219 participants) or the standard-care group (107 participants) (Fig. S2). The age of the participants ranged from 6 to 79 years, and the baseline glycated hemoglobin level ranged from 5.5 to 13.1% ( Table 1 and S2). A total of 74% of the participants identified as being non-Hispanic White, 10% as non-Hispanic Black, 10% as Hispanic, and 6% as another or more than one race or ethnic group. The relevance and representativeness of the trial population is discussed in Table S3.
At screening, 100 participants (31%) were using a hybrid closed-loop system, 14 (4%) a system with predictive low-glucose suspension, 102 (31%) an insulin pump without automation, and 110 (34%) multiple daily injections of insulin. In the standard-care group, 30% of the participants were using a hybrid closed-loop system (with 19% using a t:slim X2 insulin pump with the Control-IQ system [Tandem Diabetes Care] and 11% using a MiniMed 670G or 770G system [Medtronic]).
Of the enrolled participants, 323 (99%) completed the trial. A total of 19 participants (9%) in the bionic-pancreas group stopped using the bionic pancreas before the completion of the trial; 16 of these participants completed the trial (Table S4). Insulin was administered autonomously by the bionic pancreas for a median of 96% of the possible time during the 13-week trial (97% of the time when the bionic pancreas was in use), with input from the continuous glucose monitor available for dose decisions for 89% of the possible time during 13 weeks (90% of the time when the bionic pancreas was in use) (Table S5). Glucose-level targets that were used during the trial are shown in Table S6. The mean (±SD) number of meal announcements per day was 3.0±1.2, and the proportions of qualitative meal sizes that were used for announcements are reported according to meal type in Table S7. In the standard-care group, continuous-glucose-monitoring data were available for 96% of the possible time during 13 weeks. There were 64 unscheduled visits by 53 participants in the bionic-pancreas group and 12 unscheduled visits by 9 participants in the standard-care group (Tables S8 and S9).
The mean glycated hemoglobin level at 13 weeks (primary outcome) decreased from 7.9% at baseline to 7.3% in the bionic-pancreas group at week 13 and did not change (was 7.7% at both time points) in the standard-care group ( Table 2 and Figure 1A and S3 through S5). The mean adjusted between-group difference in the glycated hemoglobin level at 13 weeks was −0.5 percentage points (95% confidence interval [CI], −0.6 to −0.3; P<0.001).
In the key secondary analysis, the percentage of time that the glucose level as assessed by continuous glucose monitoring was below 54 mg per deciliter was noninferior in the bionic-pancreas group as compared with the standard-care group. The median values at baseline and over the 13-week period were 0.2% and 0.3%, respectively, in the bionic-pancreas group and 0.2% and 0.2%, respectively, in the standard-care group; the 13-week adjusted between-group difference was 0.0 percentage points (95% CI, −0.1 to 0.0; P<0.001 for noninferiority) ( Table 2 and Figure 1B , S6, and S7)
The mean adjusted difference between the bionic-pancreas group and the standard-care group in the mean glucose level at 13 weeks as assessed by continuous glucose monitoring was −16 mg per deciliter (−0.9 mmol per liter; 95% CI, −19 to −12 mg per deciliter [−1.1 to −0.7 mmol per liter]; P<0.001) ( Table 2 and Figure 2A and S8). The difference in the percentage of time that the glucose level was in the target range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter was 11 percentage points (95% CI, 9 to 13; P<0.001) ( Table 2 and Figure 2B and S9), which equated to an increase of 2.6 hours per day in the bionic-pancreas group. The percentages of time that the glucose level as assessed by continuous glucose monitoring was above 180 mg per deciliter and above 250 mg per deciliter and the standard deviation of the glucose level were all lower in the bionic-pancreas group than in the standard-care group (P<0.001 for all comparisons) ( Table 2 and Figs. S10 through S12). The percentage of time that the glucose level was below 70 mg per deciliter did not differ significantly between the two groups (P=0.51) ( Table 2 and Fig. S13), so significance was not tested for the remaining items in the hierarchy.
Secondary outcomes regarding the glycated hemoglobin and glucose levels that were reflective of hyperglycemia were consistent with the primary and secondary hierarchical analyses, with all favoring the bionic-pancreas group overall and during daytime and nighttime. In addition, the incidence of prolonged hyperglycemia (defined as a glucose level >300 mg per deciliter [16.6 mmol per liter] for ≥90 minutes during a 120-minute period) also favored the bionic-pancreas group. The hypoglycemia and coefficient of variation outcomes as assessed by continuous glucose monitoring were similar in the two groups (Tables S10 through S13 and Figs. S14 through S16). Differences in the outcomes that were assessed by continuous glucose monitoring were apparent in the first 4 weeks and were stable throughout the trial period (Table S14 and Figs. S17 and S18). Analyses that excluded participants who had been using a hybrid closed-loop system before the trial and analyses that were restricted to participants with a baseline glycated hemoglobin level of more than 7.0% showed a larger treatment effect, with mean adjusted between-group differences in the glycated hemoglobin level of −0.6 percentage points (95% CI, −0.7 to −0.4) and −0.7 percentage points (95% CI, −0.9 to −0.5), respectively (Tables S15 and S16).
The mean adjusted difference in the glycated hemoglobin level at 13 weeks was similar in the adult cohort (participants ≥18 years of age: between-group difference, −0.5 percentage points; 95% CI, −0.6 to −0.3) and in the pediatric cohort (participants 6 to <18 years of age: between-group difference, −0.5 percentage points; 95% CI, −0.7 to −0.2). The 13-week adjusted difference between the treatment groups in the percentage of time with the glucose level below 54 mg per deciliter was 0.02 percentage points (95% CI, –0.04 to 0.08) in the adult cohort and –0.04 percentage points (95% CI, –0.13 to 0.03) in the pediatric cohort. The treatment effect of the bionic pancreas on the glycated hemoglobin level was greater among participants with a higher baseline glycated hemoglobin level and was greater among participants with a lower baseline time in the range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter (Table S17). The benefit of the bionic pancreas over standard care was evident in the subgroups that were defined according to education status (higher and lower) and in the subgroups involving users of multiple daily injections and users of insulin pumps without automation (Table S17). The per-protocol, on-treatment, and sensitivity analyses produced results very similar to those of the primary intention-to-treat analysis (Tables S18 through S20). Treatment effects according to site for the glycated hemoglobin level and for the time with the glucose level below 54 mg per deciliter are shown in Tables S21 and S22. Data regarding the total daily insulin dose, body weight, and body-mass index are provided in Tables S23 and S24.
A total of 244 adverse events were reported in 126 participants in the bionic-pancreas group, and 10 adverse events were reported in 8 participants in the standard-care group ( Table 3 ). There were 214 episodes of hyperglycemia with or without ketosis in the bionic-pancreas group and 2 episodes in the standard-care group; nearly all the events in the bionic-pancreas group were adjudicated by the medical monitor as being due to infusion-set failure. There were no episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis. The incidence of presumed infusion-set failure associated with prolonged hyperglycemia is shown in Table S25. There were 10 episodes of severe hypoglycemia in 10 participants in the bionic-pancreas group and 3 episodes in 2 participants in the standard-care group (incidence rate, 17.7 events and 10.8 events per 100 participant-years, respectively; P=0.39). Two children received prescriptions to use insulin glargine with the bionic pancreas owing to prolonged periods of hyperglycemia despite the bionic pancreas administering the maximum amount of insulin allowed by its algorithms. A summary of the device issues that occurred in the bionic-pancreas group is provided in Table S26.

Section: Discussion

In this multicenter, randomized trial involving adults and children with type 1 diabetes, the use of the insulin-only configuration of a bionic pancreas was associated with a lower glycated hemoglobin level, a lower mean glucose level, an increase of 2.6 hours per day in the target glucose range, and less time in a hyperglycemic state without an increase in the incidence of hypoglycemia as assessed by continuous glucose monitoring. The glycated hemoglobin level was 0.5 percentage points lower in the bionic-pancreas group than in the standard-care group, overall and in both the pediatric and adult subgroups. Further data regarding the age cohorts have been reported separately.
Inappropriate insulin regimens and errors in estimation and calculation can lead to suboptimal glycemic control. Since all insulin doses, including for meals, were autonomously determined by the bionic pancreas, the results of this trial suggest that good glycemic control can be achieved by the bionic pancreas with only qualitative meal announcements and without a prespecified insulin regimen, carbohydrate counting, user-initiated correction doses, or any adjustment of the insulin dose by the user or health care provider.
Randomized trials involving adolescents and adults and children 6 to 13 years of age showed a mean difference of 11 percentage points in the percentage of time in the target range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter with the Control-IQ system as compared with a pump plus continuous glucose monitoring; the mean adjusted difference in the glycated hemoglobin level was –0.3 percentage points among adults and adolescents, and there was a nonsignificant difference in the glycated hemoglobin level of –0.4 percentage points among children. The use of the bionic pancreas in our trial was associated with a greater effect on the glycated hemoglobin level than in these previous trials and with a similar increase in the time in the range of 70 to 180 mg per deciliter while requiring only body weight for initialization and no quantitative input or carbohydrate counting from the user, even though 31% of the cohort had been using a hybrid closed-loop system, such as the Control-IQ system, at baseline.
The most frequently reported adverse event in the bionic-pancreas group was hyperglycemia, which was often attributed to infusion-set failure and which occurred at an incidence that was similar to that reported for Teflon infusion sets having a 90° angle of insertion in another automated insulin-delivery system. According to the protocol, infusion-set failures were reportable adverse events only in the bionic-pancreas group. In addition, only participants in the bionic-pancreas group were provided with blood glucose and ketone meters, as well as guidelines on managing ketosis that required notification of the trial staff. Participants in the standard-care group followed their usual practices and were instructed to contact their diabetes health care provider for guidance on diabetes management. Therefore, infusion-set failures were not reported as adverse events in the standard-care group.
There were fewer episodes of prolonged hyperglycemia and less time with a glucose level of more than 180 mg per deciliter and more than 250 mg per deciliter with the bionic pancreas than with standard care. These findings indicate that the infusion-set failures did not adversely affect glycemia in the bionic-pancreas group.
The rates of severe hypoglycemia events did not differ significantly between the bionic-pancreas group and the standard-care group and were lower in both groups than the rate of 24.1 events per 100 participant-years that has been reported in the general type 1 diabetes population by the T1D Exchange registry, despite the use of a more-demanding definition of severe hypoglycemia requiring unconsciousness or seizure in that study. In addition, the percentage of time with the glucose level below 54 mg per deciliter did not differ significantly between the groups.
Strengths of this trial included a randomized, controlled design and the use of hybrid closed-loop systems by 30% of the participants in the standard-care group. This trial also had a larger population that was more diverse with respect to race and ethnic group and educational and economic status than previous trials of hybrid closed-loop systems.
Our trial has certain limitations. First, the low frequency of baseline hypoglycemia precluded determination of whether the insulin-only bionic pancreas could reduce the risk and severity of hypoglycemia as assessed with continuous glucose monitoring, although the bionic pancreas did not increase the risk of such hypoglycemia. Second, the trial used different approaches for the management and reporting of hyperglycemia and ketosis in the two groups. Third, a single type of infusion set was used by the participants in the bionic-pancreas group, which, despite its being a commonly used set, may have contributed to the frequency of infusion-set failures. Fourth, the number of unscheduled contacts was greater in the bionic-pancreas group than the standard-care group; this situation was inherent to the trial design, in which participants in the standard-care group followed their usual care guidelines and contacted their own health care provider with questions.
In this 13-week, multicenter, randomized trial, adults and children with type 1 diabetes who had been randomly assigned to automated glycemic control with a bionic pancreas had lower glycated hemoglobin levels than participants in the standard-care group, who were using insulin therapy augmented by continuous glucose monitoring.
