Title: Atogepant for the Preventive Treatment of Migraine


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Atogepant is an oral, small-molecule, calcitonin gene–related peptide receptor antagonist that is being investigated for the preventive treatment of migraine.

Abstract_Section: Methods

In a phase 3, double-blind trial, we randomly assigned adults with 4 to 14 migraine days per month in a 1:1:1:1 ratio to receive a once-daily dose of oral atogepant (10 mg, 30 mg, or 60 mg) or placebo for 12 weeks. The primary end point was the change from baseline in the mean number of migraine days per month across the 12 weeks. Secondary end points included headache days per month, a reduction from baseline of at least 50% in the 3-month average of migraine days per month, quality of life, and scores on the Activity Impairment in Migraine–Diary (AIM-D).

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 2270 participants were screened, 910 were enrolled, and 873 were included in the efficacy analysis; 214 were assigned to the 10-mg atogepant group, 223 to the 30-mg atogepant group, 222 to the 60-mg atogepant group, and 214 to the placebo group. The mean number of migraine days per month at baseline ranged from 7.5 to 7.9 in the four groups. The changes from baseline across 12 weeks were −3.7 days with 10-mg atogepant, −3.9 days with 30-mg atogepant, −4.2 days with 60-mg atogepant, and −2.5 days with placebo. The mean differences from placebo in the change from baseline were −1.2 days with 10-mg atogepant (95% confidence interval [CI], −1.8 to −0.6), −1.4 days with 30-mg atogepant (95% CI, −1.9 to −0.8), and −1.7 days with 60-mg atogepant (95% CI, −2.3 to −1.2) (P<0.001 for all comparisons with placebo). Results for the secondary end points favored atogepant over placebo with the exceptions of the AIM-D Performance of Daily Activities score and the AIM-D Physical Impairment score for the 10-mg dose. The most common adverse events were constipation (6.9 to 7.7% across atogepant doses) and nausea (4.4 to 6.1% across atogepant doses). Serious adverse events included one case each of asthma and optic neuritis in the 10-mg atogepant group.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Oral atogepant once daily was effective in reducing the number of migraine days and headache days over a period of 12 weeks. Adverse events included constipation and nausea. Longer and larger trials are needed to determine the effect and safety of atogepant for migraine prevention. (Funded by Allergan; ADVANCE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03777059 .)

Section: Introduction

Migraine attacks may be frequent, disabling, or both. Preventive treatments are used to reduce the frequency and severity of attacks. Approved oral preventive medications include divalproex sodium, flunarizine, topiramate, propranolol, and timolol. Injectable treatments, such as monoclonal antibodies that target calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP) and onabotulinumtoxinA, are also used. Other medications are used in the United States and elsewhere without regulatory approval.
CGRP appears to be involved in the pathophysiology of migraine, as evidenced by increased blood levels of CGRP during migraine attacks, the induction of migrainelike headaches by infusion of CGRP, and the effects of CGRP-targeted therapies in the treatment of migraine attacks and preventive treatment of migraine. Currently approved CGRP-targeted preventive treatments are monoclonal antibodies administered by injection that target the CGRP receptor or ligand. Oral CGRP receptor antagonists (gepants) are approved for the treatment of migraine attacks but not for preventive treatment of migraine.
Atogepant is an orally available, small-molecule CGRP receptor antagonist with an elimination half-life of approximately 11 hours; maximum plasma concentrations are reached by 1 to 2 hours. The efficacy of atogepant in reducing migraine days was shown in a phase 2–3 dose-ranging trial involving 834 participants. The current phase 3 trial (ADVANCE) examines the efficacy and safety of atogepant administered once daily at a dose of 10 mg, 30 mg, or 60 mg as compared with placebo for the prevention of migraine in participants with episodic migraine.

Section: Methods

This was a multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group, randomized, placebo-controlled trial conducted from December 14, 2018, to June 19, 2020, in the United States. A total of 128 sites enrolled at least one participant. Participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1:1 ratio to receive a once-daily dose of atogepant (10 mg, 30 mg, or 60 mg) or placebo. Randomization was stratified according to the participants’ previous exposure to an oral migraine-prevention medication with efficacy shown in trials, including approved and investigative treatments such as antiepileptic agents, tricyclic antidepressants, beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers, angiotensin-receptor blockers or angiotensin-converting–enzyme inhibitors, and serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. An automated interactive Web-response system was used to generate the stratified randomization sequence. Each site was dynamically assigned entire blocks on the basis of strata, and the atogepant dose or placebo was assigned sequentially within a block.
The trial included a 4-week screening and baseline period, a 12-week double-blind treatment period, and a 4-week safety follow-up period. There were eight scheduled clinic visits. After screening (visit 1) and randomization (visit 2), participants returned to the clinic for five visits during the double-blind treatment period, at week 2 (visit 3), week 4 (visit 4), week 6 (visit 5), week 8 (visit 6), and week 12 (visit 7). The final visit occurred at week 16 (visit 8), 4 weeks after the end of the treatment period. Owing to the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, the protocol was amended to allow remote visits for up to 8 weeks without an in-person visit; safety laboratory assessments were required every 8 weeks, at a minimum. Trial visit 8 was conducted remotely for all participants after the protocol amendment, including the following safety assessments: urine pregnancy tests, Columbia–Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS), adverse events, and concomitant medications. Investigators were allowed to conduct an in-person follow-up visit at their discretion if there were safety concerns. The protocol is available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
All participating sites obtained approval from a local or central institutional review board. Participants provided written informed consent before enrollment in the trial. The sponsor, Allergan (before acquisition by AbbVie), developed the trial protocol in collaboration with external consultants, provided atogepant and placebo, collected and analyzed the data, and funded the trial. The authors vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data, the comprehensive reporting of adverse events, and the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. A medical writer who was employed by the sponsor assisted the authors in preparing the article. Confidentiality agreements were in place between the external authors and the sponsor. The authors agreed to delay submission for 30 days to allow the sponsor the right to address any factual inaccuracies regarding the data or to request the redaction of information that the sponsor deemed to be confidential or proprietary.
Adults 18 to 80 years of age with 4 to 14 migraine days per month in the 3 months before visit 1 and 4 to 14 migraine days during the 28-day baseline period according to an electronic diary were deemed to be appropriate candidates for preventive therapy and were allowed to enroll. Participants had to have at least a 1-year history of migraine with or without aura, diagnosed as specified in the International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition (ICHD-3), and with migraine onset before 50 years of age.
Participants were excluded if they had a current diagnosis of chronic migraine, new daily persistent headache, trigeminal autonomic cephalalgia (e.g., cluster headache), or painful cranial neuropathy as defined by the ICHD-3 or if they averaged 15 or more headache days per month across the 3 months before visit 1 or during the 28-day baseline period. Participants were also excluded if they had had an inadequate response to more than four oral medications prescribed for the preventive treatment of migraine, two of which needed to have different mechanisms of action. Participants who used opioids or barbiturates on more than 2 days per month, triptans or ergots on 10 or more days per month, or simple analgesic agents (e.g., aspirin, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], or acetaminophen) on 15 or more days per month in the 3 months before visit 1 or during the 28-day baseline period were also excluded. Use of barbiturates was also not permitted 30 days before screening and throughout the duration of the trial. Any female participant who was pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or lactating was excluded; participants had to use a medically acceptable and effective method of birth control during the trial.
Participants were instructed to take three tablets of the assigned atogepant or placebo orally at approximately the same time once daily for 12 weeks. The tablets were provided in identical blister cards: participants in the atogepant groups received one tablet of atogepant at a dose of 10 mg, 30 mg, or 60 mg and two placebo tablets, and participants in the placebo group received three placebo tablets. Sites assessed adherence to the trial regimen at every clinic visit; blister cards were collected, and participants were interviewed to assess adherence. Details on the composition of the atogepant tablets and placebo tablets are provided in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available at NEJM.org. Participants were allowed to take treatments for migraine attacks, which included triptans, ergot derivatives, opioids, analgesics, NSAIDs, and antiemetic agents. Participants were not allowed to take any preventive treatments for migraine 30 days before visit 1 and throughout the trial.
Participants, site personnel, and trial sponsor personnel were unaware of the trial-group assignments. Efficacy assessments, including baseline values, were recorded by the participant in an electronic diary at home or through an electronic tablet at the trial site during trial visits. The electronic diaries had daily reminder alarms set to repeat if data were not entered. Data were allowed to be entered within a 24-hour recall window and closed every evening at 11:59 p.m., with the entry window for the following day opening at midnight. Headache duration, headache clinical features (pain severity, unilateral location, and aggravated by or causing avoidance of routine physical activity), non–headache-associated symptoms (nausea or vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, and aura), and use of medication for the treatment of migraine attacks were recorded.
Data from additional health outcome measures were collected. The Activity Impairment in Migraine–Diary (AIM-D) is an 11-item daily diary measure that assesses the effect of migraine on two domains: Performance of Daily Activities (7 items) and Physical Impairment (4 items). The AIM-D domain scores range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating greater effect of migraine and with reductions from baseline in scores indicating improvement. The Migraine-Specific Quality of Life Questionnaire (MSQ), version 2.1, is a 14-item questionnaire that measures health-related quality-of-life impairments attributed to migraine and includes three domains: Role Function–Restrictive, Role Function–Preventive, and Emotional Function. Scores on the Role Function–Restrictive domain range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating a lesser effect of migraine on daily activities.
The primary efficacy end point was the change from baseline in the mean number of migraine days per month across the 12-week treatment period (the average of month 1, month 2, and month 3) as recorded in the diaries or reported during visits. Secondary efficacy end points, which were tested in hierarchical order, were the change from baseline in the mean number of headache days per month across the 12-week treatment period; the change from baseline in the mean number of days of use of medication for the treatment of migraine attacks across the 12-week treatment period; a reduction from baseline of at least 50% in the 3-month average of migraine days per month; the change from baseline in the score on the Role Function–Restrictive domain of the MSQ, version 2.1, at week 12; the change from baseline in the mean monthly score on the Performance of Daily Activities domain of the AIM-D across the 12-week treatment period; and the change from baseline in the mean monthly score on the Physical Impairment domain of the AIM-D across the 12-week treatment period. An exploratory analysis of the time course of efficacy for atogepant according to 4-week intervals, which was based on the least-squares mean change from baseline in the number of migraine days per month over the 12-week treatment period, was also conducted. The full list of additional prespecified end points is available in the trial protocol.
Adverse events were reported by the participants throughout the trial and at each 4-week follow-up visit. Information on adverse events was collected and documented during each clinic visit. Participants could also report adverse events by telephone call between visits. During clinic visits, participants were queried in a general, nondirected manner. The severity and causality of each adverse event were determined by the investigator, who was unaware of the trial-group assignments. Serious adverse events were defined as those that resulted in death, were considered to be life-threatening, resulted in hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, resulted in persistent disability or incapacity, or were congenital anomalies or birth defects. In addition, clinical laboratory tests, vital signs, electrocardiograms, and the score on the C-SSRS were evaluated. Because of the potential hepatotoxicity of previous gepants, elevated levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) that were at least 3 times the upper limit of the normal range, as well as cases that met the criteria for potential Hy’s law, were evaluated as prespecified adverse events of special interest and were reviewed by an independent panel of liver experts who were unaware of the trial-group assignments.
We calculated that a sample size of 218 participants per trial group would provide at least 98% power to detect a difference of 1.5 migraine days between each of the three atogepant doses (assumed to be equally effective for power analysis) and placebo for the primary efficacy end point, assuming a common standard deviation of 3.5 days. The sample size was selected to provide at least 89% power for the first three secondary end points for each dose. Assumptions of between-group differences and standard deviations were based on the results of other trials of preventive migraine treatment involving participants with episodic migraine. The power calculation considered multiplicity adjustment in a conservative way with the use of an alpha level of 0.05÷3 for each dose. All efficacy analyses used the modified intention-to-treat population, defined as all randomly assigned participants who received at least one dose of atogepant or placebo, had a baseline period of electronic-diary data that could be evaluated, and had at least one postbaseline 4-week period (weeks 1 to 4, 5 to 8, or 9 to 12) of electronic-diary data that could be evaluated during the double-blind treatment period. The statistical analysis plan is available with the protocol at NEJM.org.
To test the three primary hypotheses that each dose of atogepant is superior to placebo for the primary efficacy end point, the change from baseline to each postbaseline month in migraine days per month was analyzed with the use of a general linear model for repeated measures with model terms including trial group, visit, previous exposure (yes or no) to a migraine-prevention medication with proven efficacy, interaction between trial group and visit, baseline score, and interaction between baseline score and visit. An unstructured covariance matrix was used to model the covariance of within-participant repeated measurements. Pairwise contrasts in the general linear model for repeated measures were used to make the pairwise comparisons of each atogepant dose with placebo for the primary end point.
For repeated measures that used the general linear model, the model variables were estimated with the use of restricted likelihood estimation that incorporated all observed data. Data after the discontinuation of atogepant or placebo were assumed to be missing at random and handled by a general linear model for repeated measures with an unstructured covariance matrix — that is, information from the observed outcomes was used by means of the within-participant correlation structure to provide information about the unobserved outcomes, but missing data were not explicitly imputed. Sensitivity analyses that imputed missing data under a missing-not-at-random assumption were conducted to assess the robustness of the primary analysis for possible violation of the missing-at-random assumption. Robust regression was conducted to evaluate possible violation of the normality assumption. (Details on sensitivity analyses and robust regression are provided in Table S2.)
The six secondary end points were analyzed in the same manner as that used to analyze the primary end point. For the score on the Role Function–Restrictive domain of the MSQ, the analysis focused on the pairwise contrasts of each dose group with placebo at week 12, the primary analysis time point for this end point. The occurrence of a reduction from baseline of at least 50% in the 3-month average of migraine days per month (one of the six prespecified secondary end points) was assessed for each participant. A logistic-regression model was used to analyze the data for participants who had such a reduction across the 12-week treatment period. This model assumes a binary distribution for the response and uses a logit link. The analysis model included trial group, previous exposure (yes or no) to a migraine-prevention medication with proven efficacy, and migraine days per month at baseline.
The overall type I error rate for multiple comparisons across the three atogepant doses and the primary and secondary efficacy end points was controlled at the 0.05 level with the use of a graphical approach with a weighted Bonferroni test procedure. The three doses were treated equally. The initial allocation of the overall significance level to the three primary hypotheses was one third of the overall significance level for each dose, and no initial alpha level was allocated to the hypotheses for secondary end points. Within each individual dose, testing started from the primary end point, and the secondary end points were then tested in a prespecified order. Further details on the testing hierarchy and alpha propagation among hypotheses across doses are provided in Figure S1. Safety analyses involved all randomly assigned participants who received at least one dose of atogepant or placebo. Statistical analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Section: Results

A total of 2270 persons were screened, and 910 participants were randomly assigned to a trial group: 222 to the 10-mg atogepant group, 230 to the 30-mg atogepant group, 235 to the 60-mg atogepant group, and 223 to the placebo group. The safety population included 902 participants, and the modified intention-to-treat population that was used in the efficacy analyses included 873 participants ( Figure 1 ). Of the 910 participants who underwent randomization, 805 (88.5%) completed the trial, with a similar frequency of completion across trial groups. The most common reason for discontinuation was withdrawal of consent by the participant (in 35 of 910 participants [3.8%]).
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the participants at baseline were similar across trial groups in the safety population ( Table 1 ) and in the modified intention-to-treat population (Table S3). The participants were between 18 and 73 years of age, with a mean age of 41.6 years. Most of the participants were female (88.8%), and the majority were White (83.4%); the mean body-mass index (the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters) at baseline was 30.6. Overall, the participants reported an average of 7.4 migraine days per month in the past 3 months. At screening, 99.3% of the participants reported current use of medication for the treatment of migraine attacks, and 70.3% reported having previously used a preventive treatment for migraine.
The mean number of migraine days per month at baseline ranged from 7.5 to 7.9 in the four trial groups ( Table 2 ). The mean change from baseline in the mean number of migraine days per month across the 12-week treatment period (the primary efficacy end point) was −3.7 with 10-mg atogepant, −3.9 with 30-mg atogepant, −4.2 with 60-mg atogepant, and −2.5 with placebo. The mean difference from placebo was −1.2 days with 10-mg atogepant (95% confidence interval [CI], −1.8 to −0.6), −1.4 days with 30-mg atogepant (95% CI, −1.9 to −0.8), and −1.7 days with 60-mg atogepant (95% CI, −2.3 to −1.2) (P<0.001 for all comparisons with placebo). The results of sensitivity analyses were consistent with those of the primary analysis (Table S4).
Results for the secondary efficacy end points are shown in Table 2 . The mean change from baseline in the mean number of headache days per month across the 12-week treatment period was −3.9 for 10-mg atogepant, −4.0 for 30-mg atogepant, −4.2 for 60-mg atogepant, and −2.5 for placebo (P<0.001 for all comparisons with placebo). The mean change from baseline in the mean number of days of use of medication for the treatment of migraine attacks per month across the 12-week treatment period was −3.7 for 10-mg atogepant, −3.7 for 30-mg atogepant, −3.9 for 60-mg atogepant, and −2.4 for placebo (P<0.001 for all comparisons with placebo). A reduction of 50% or more in the 3-month average of migraine days per month occurred in 55.6% of the participants in the 10-mg atogepant group, 58.7% of those in the 30-mg atogepant group, 60.8% of those in the 60-mg atogepant group, and 29.0% of those in the placebo group (P<0.001 for all comparisons with placebo). Significant differences between all three atogepant doses and placebo were observed for the secondary end points, with the exception of the score on the Performance of Daily Activities domain of the AIM-D (difference, −1.2; 95% CI, −2.6 to 0.2) and the score on the Physical Impairment domain of the AIM-D (difference, −1.1; 95% CI, −2.3 to 0.1) for 10-mg atogepant. Additional end-point measures are shown in Table 2 .
In a prespecified exploratory analysis, the atogepant groups visually separated from the placebo group in a graphical representation of the mean change from baseline in the number of migraine days for each 4-week interval during the treatment period, but no definite conclusions can be drawn from these data ( Figure 2 ). Differences from placebo were observed within the first 4 weeks after the initiation of treatment and were maintained during each subsequent 4-week interval.
Adverse events that began or worsened on or after the date of the first dose of atogepant or placebo until 30 days after the last dose were reported in 486 of 902 participants (53.9%); the frequency of events was similar between the placebo and atogepant groups, and no dose relationship was observed ( Table 3 ). In the atogepant groups, the most commonly reported adverse events were constipation (6.9 to 7.7% across doses), nausea (4.4 to 6.1% across doses), and upper respiratory tract infection (3.9 to 5.7% across doses). In the placebo group, the most common adverse events were upper respiratory tract infection (4.5%), urinary tract infection (3.6%), and nasopharyngitis (3.6%). The incidence of constipation was higher in the atogepant groups (6.9 to 7.7%) than in the placebo group (0.5%); no cases were reported as serious as determined by the investigators and defined as serious in the protocol. Serious adverse events were reported in 2 participants who received 10-mg atogepant (asthma attack and optic neuritis in 1 participant each) and in 2 participants who received placebo (gastric ulcer hemorrhage in 1 participant and postsurgical laryngospasm with hypoxic brain injury in 1 participant) (Table S5). The incidence of discontinuation due to adverse events was similar across the trial groups.
Postbaseline ALT and AST values were assessed at various cutoff points from 1 to 20 times the upper limit of the normal range (Table S6). Two participants in the 10-mg atogepant group, two participants in the 30-mg atogepant group, one participant in the 60-mg atogepant group, and four participants in the placebo group had elevated ALT or AST levels that were at least 3 times the upper limit of the normal range (Table S7). No serious cases of liver disease were reported, and no case met the criteria for potential Hy’s law.

Section: Discussion

Oral atogepant at doses of 10 mg, 30 mg, and 60 mg once daily resulted in significantly greater reductions in the number of migraine days than did placebo in this 12-week trial. For the primary end point, atogepant was associated with a reduction of 3.7 to 4.2 days in the mean number of migraine days per month, as compared with a 2.5-day reduction with placebo. For the secondary end points, significant differences between all three doses of atogepant and placebo occurred across the 12-week treatment period, with the exception of the scores on the Performance of Daily Activity domain and the Physical Impairment domain of the AIM-D for the 10-mg dose. These results extend those of a previous phase 2–3 trial.
The percentage of participants with a reduction of at least 50% in the 3-month average of the mean number of migraine days per month has been recommended as an alternative primary end point in controlled trials of preventive treatment. In our trial, the percentage of participants who met this criterion ranged from 55.6% for the 10-mg dose to 60.8% for the 60-mg dose of atogepant, as compared with 29.0% for placebo.
Adverse events were reported by 52.2 to 53.7% of the participants across atogepant doses and by 56.8% of those who received placebo. Constipation, the most commonly reported adverse event, was observed in 6.9 to 7.7% of the participants across atogepant doses and in 0.5% of those who received placebo. Previous studies have indicated an association between CGRP receptor blockade and a decrease in gastrointestinal motility. Although no serious cases of constipation were reported in this trial, continued monitoring and evaluation for this adverse event in clinical practice will be appropriate. Two participants in the 10-mg atogepant group, two participants in the 30-mg atogepant group, one participant in the 60-mg atogepant group, and four participants in the placebo group had elevated ALT or AST levels that were at least 3 times the upper limit of the normal range.
Other CGRP-targeted therapies are available for the preventive treatment of migraine. CGRP-targeted monoclonal antibodies, administered parenterally, reach peak plasma concentrations in 5 to 7 days after subcutaneous injection and immediately after a 30-minute intravenous infusion and have half-lives of 21 to 27 days. The longer half-lives of monoclonal antibodies make monthly or quarterly injections feasible, with the drug being largely eliminated within approximately 105 to 135 days. Atogepant is administered orally, reaching maximum plasma concentrations by 1 to 2 hours, with a half-life of approximately 11 hours. The shorter half-life of atogepant indicates that daily dosing, as was used in the current trial, is needed and that the drug is largely eliminated within approximately 2 days.
This trial included participants with 4 to 14 migraine days per month and excluded participants with 15 or more headache days per month, so the results cannot be generalized to the latter group. The trial also excluded participants with clinically significant coexisting conditions, participants taking triptans or ergots on 10 or more days per month, and participants who did not have a response to more than four preventive treatments; trials and real-world studies that include these patients are needed. The safety of atogepant in pregnant women was not evaluated in this trial. The 12-week treatment duration is not adequate to assess the long-term safety and side effects of atogepant. The findings of a 52-week safety trial ( NCT03939312 ) will be reported separately; these findings were consistent with the data reported here, and no new safety concerns have been identified.
In our trial, atogepant once daily was effective for reducing the number of migraine days and headache days in the preventive treatment of migraine over 12 weeks. Adverse events included constipation, nausea, and upper respiratory tract infection. Longer and larger trials are needed to determine the effect and safety of atogepant for migraine prevention.
