Title: Apgar Score and Risk of Neonatal Death among Preterm Infants


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Gestational age is the major determinant of neonatal death (death within the first 28 days of life) in preterm infants. The joint effect of gestational age and Apgar score on the risk of neonatal death is unknown.

Abstract_Section: Methods

Using data from the Swedish Medical Birth Register, we identified 113,300 preterm infants (22 weeks 0 days to 36 weeks 6 days of gestation) born from 1992 through 2016. In analyses stratified according to gestational age (22 to 24 weeks, 25 to 27 weeks, 28 to 31 weeks, 32 to 34 weeks, and 35 or 36 weeks), we estimated adjusted relative risks of neonatal death and absolute rate differences in neonatal mortality (i.e., the excess number of neonatal deaths per 100 births) according to the Apgar scores at 5 and 10 minutes and according to the change in the Apgar score between 5 minutes and 10 minutes. Scores range from 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating a better physical condition of the newborn.

Abstract_Section: Results

There were 1986 neonatal deaths (1.8%). The incidence of neonatal death ranged from 0.2% (at 36 weeks of gestation) to 76.5% (at 22 weeks of gestation). Lower Apgar scores were associated with higher relative risks of neonatal death and greater absolute rate differences in neonatal mortality in all gestational-age strata. For example, among infants born at 28 to 31 weeks, the adjusted absolute rate differences according to the 5-minute Apgar score, with those who had a score of 9 or 10 serving as the reference group, were 51.7 (95% confidence interval [CI], 38.1 to 65.4) for a score of 0 or 1, 25.5 (95% CI, 18.3 to 32.8) for a score of 2 or 3, 7.1 (95% CI, 5.1 to 9.1) for a score of 4 to 6, and 1.2 (95% CI, 0.5 to 1.9) for a score of 7 or 8. An increase in the Apgar score between 5 minutes and 10 minutes was associated with lower neonatal mortality than a stable Apgar score.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In this study, Apgar scores at 5 and 10 minutes provided prognostic information about neonatal survival among preterm infants across gestational-age strata. (Funded by the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life, and Welfare and Karolinska Institutet.)

Section: Introduction

Preterm birth (≤36 completed gestational weeks) is the leading cause of neonatal death, and the risk of neonatal death increases with the degree of preterm birth. However, other factors also influence the risk of neonatal death. In a systematic review of studies involving very preterm infants (≤31 completed gestational weeks), the risk of death was lower among infants with a normal birth weight for gestational age, female infants, infants receiving glucocorticoids prenatally, and infants with higher 5-minute Apgar scores.
In the early 1950s, Dr. Virginia Apgar developed a score to assess the physical condition of the newborn and the need for resuscitation. Initially, the score was measured at 1 minute, but the Apgar score at 5 minutes was later shown to be a better predictor of neonatal survival. The Apgar score consists of five components (heart rate, respiratory effort, muscle tone, reflex irritability, and color), each given a value from 0 to 2. Thus, total scores range from 0 to 10, with higher scores indicating a better physical condition. A low Apgar score, commonly defined as less than 4 or less than 7, is associated with an increased risk of neonatal death among term infants (≥37 weeks). We recently reported that, among term infants with 5-minute Apgar scores in the normal range (7 to 10), the risk of neonatal death was higher among those with a score of 7 or 8 than among those with a score of 9 or 10.
The Apgar score was developed primarily to assess term infants during a time when neonatal mortality was very high among preterm infants. The frequency of low Apgar scores increases with decreasing gestational age and may reflect biologic immaturity in preterm infants. Extremely preterm infants (<28 weeks) and very preterm infants (28 to 31 weeks) in particular may seem less vigorous and be assigned a lower score because of an immature breathing drive and lower muscle tone. The value of the Apgar score to assess the condition of the preterm infant has therefore been questioned. Previous studies involving preterm infants, which used broad categories of Apgar score values (0 to 3, 4 to 6, and 7 to 10, or 0 to 3 and 4 to 10), showed increased relative risks of neonatal death with decreasing 5-minute Apgar score. A low Apgar score (0 to 3) has also been associated with a substantially increased risk of death among extremely preterm infants.
Nevertheless, a current policy statement of the American Academy of Pediatrics includes an overall recommendation that “the Apgar score does not predict individual neonatal mortality or neurologic outcome and should not be used for that purpose,” with no specific recommendation regarding the use of the Apgar score in preterm infants. Because neonatal mortality increases substantially with decreasing gestational age, we hypothesized that absolute rate differences (i.e., the excess number of neonatal deaths per 100 births) related to Apgar score values may increase with decreasing gestational age in preterm infants. We used a nationwide Swedish database to investigate associations between the risk of neonatal death and Apgar scores at 5 and 10 minutes and the change in the Apgar score from 5 to 10 minutes among preterm infants in analyses stratified according to gestational age.

Section: Methods

From January 1, 1992, through December 31, 2016, the Swedish Medical Birth Register included information for 2,534,467 live-born singleton infants; information on gestational age was available for 2,532,254 of these infants (99.9%). We identified 125,183 preterm infants (22 weeks 0 days to 36 weeks 6 days of gestation) and excluded 2817 births with missing or invalid person-unique national registration numbers of the mother or infant and 9066 infants with major congenital malformations (Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). The study population included 113,300 nonmalformed, live-born preterm infants.
The nationwide Swedish Medical Birth Register includes prospectively recorded information from prenatal, delivery, and neonatal care, and the validity of most variables has been assessed as being high. With the use of the national registration numbers of mothers and infants, the Birth Register was linked to the nationwide Swedish Cause of Death Register and the Patient Register, including information on all inpatient care and all outpatient hospital care from 2000. Information about diseases and deaths is coded according to the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision and 10th Revision . We also retrieved information from the yearly updated Education Register and from the Total Population Register.
All women in Sweden are offered an ultrasonographic investigation to estimate gestational age no later than in the early second trimester. The following hierarchy of estimating gestational age was used: an ultrasonographic investigation (82.6% of the mothers), the last menstrual period (10.0%), and a postnatal clinical assessment by the midwife or the pediatrician (7.4%).
Preterm birth is commonly categorized as extremely preterm (22 to 27 weeks), very preterm (28 to 31 weeks), and moderately preterm (32 to 36 weeks). We categorized gestational age as 22 to 24 weeks, 25 to 27 weeks, 28 to 31 weeks, 32 to 34 weeks, and 35 or 36 weeks. We split the extremely preterm group into 22 to 24 weeks and 25 to 27 weeks, because infants born at 22 to 24 weeks have the highest neonatal mortality. We also split the moderately preterm group, since practically all infants born at 32 to 34 weeks are admitted to neonatal intensive care units in Sweden, whereas infants born at 35 or 36 weeks usually stay in the maternity ward.
In Sweden, Apgar scores are routinely measured at 1, 5, and 10 minutes after birth. In preterm births, Apgar scores are most commonly measured by the attending neonatologist or pediatrician. Information on the Apgar score at 5 and 10 minutes was available for 98.1% and 92.1% of all preterm births, respectively.
We also obtained information about maternal, pregnancy, and birth characteristics (Table S2). Information about birth weight for gestational age was based on the ultrasonography-based Swedish reference curve for normal fetal growth.
Neonatal death was defined as death within the first 27 completed days of life, as recorded in the Cause of Death Register. In supplementary analyses, we also analyzed early neonatal death (death within the first 6 completed days of life).
To investigate dose–response relationships between Apgar scores and the risk of neonatal death, the highest Apgar score group (9 or 10, or 7 to 10) was, for consistency, used as the referent in all analyses stratified according to gestational-age categories. Multivariable log-linear regression models with robust variance estimates were used to examine associations between the risk of neonatal death and maternal and infant characteristics, Apgar scores at 5 and 10 minutes, and gestational age. Results were expressed as crude and adjusted relative risks and absolute rate differences with 95% confidence intervals. The absolute rate difference represents the excess number of neonatal deaths per 100 births among infants receiving a 5-minute or 10-minute Apgar score of less than 9, as compared with those receiving a score of 9 or 10.
Covariates were categorized as described in Table S2. In multivariable analyses, confounders were selected on the basis of their hypothesized relationship with Apgar score and neonatal mortality or on the basis of statistical significance (P<0.10). Adjustments were made for maternal age, parity, smoking status, country of birth, body-mass index, the presence or absence of hypertensive diseases (i.e., essential hypertension or preeclampsia), mode of delivery, birth weight for gestational age, hospital level (regional or general hospital), year of birth (continuous), and gestational age (in days within each stratum). We conducted supplementary analysis using multiple imputation of missing values. We repeated the Poisson regression analysis with missing values imputed through multiple imputation using chained equation. Results from 10 multiple-imputation cycles were combined with the use of the MIANALYZE procedure in SAS software. We performed supplemental analysis of neonatal mortality, with stratification according to calendar year of birth. Because of statistical-power concerns, we categorized gestational age into three groups and Apgar score into four groups, and we provided only crude estimates. We also analyzed associations between Apgar score values and early neonatal mortality. No adjustments were made for multiple comparisons. Because the 95% confidence intervals around the relative risks and absolute rate differences are not adjusted for multiple comparisons, these estimates may not be reproducible.

Section: Results

Among 113,300 nonmalformed preterm infants, there were 1986 neonatal deaths (1.8%). Neonatal mortality increased with decreasing gestational age, from 0.2% at 36 weeks to 76.5% at 22 weeks ( Table 1 ). Neonatal mortality also increased with decreasing Apgar score at 5 and 10 minutes, even within the “normal” range of Apgar score values (7 to 10) ( Table 1 and Table S3). Adjusted relative risks of neonatal death increased substantially with decreasing gestational age and Apgar scores at 5 and 10 minutes.
The prevalence of low Apgar scores (0 to 3 or 4 to 6) at 5 minutes appeared higher among infants of mothers with placental abruption or hypertensive diseases, infants delivered by cesarean section, and infants with a low birth weight for gestational age (<10th percentile) (Table S4). Associations between maternal, pregnancy, and birth characteristics and relative risks of neonatal death are shown in Table S5. Infants born from 1992 through 1997 had a higher relative risk of neonatal death than infants born later. Low Apgar score values (0 or 1, 2 or 3, and 4 to 6) at 5 and 10 minutes were most common among the most immature infants (gestational age, 22 to 24 weeks), and the percentage of infants with low scores gradually decreased with increasing gestational age (Table S6).
In analyses stratified according to gestational age, relative risks of neonatal death increased with decreasing Apgar score at 5 minutes ( Table 2 ), but the increase appeared markedly higher among infants with an older gestational age. Among infants born at 22 to 24 weeks, those with an Apgar score of 0 or 1 had almost 5 times the relative risk of neonatal death as those with an Apgar score of 9 or 10. Among infants born at 35 or 36 weeks, the corresponding relative risk was more than 300 times higher ( Table 2 ). Similar associations were observed between the Apgar score at 10 minutes and relative risks of neonatal death (Table S7).
The absolute rate difference in neonatal mortality from the rate among infants with a 5-minute Apgar score of 9 or 10 increased substantially with decreasing Apgar scores in all gestational-age strata ( Figure 1A ). The adjusted rate differences in neonatal mortality according to Apgar score were highest among infants born extremely preterm (22 to 24 weeks or 25 to 27 weeks) and gradually declined with increasing gestational age. These associations appeared more pronounced for the Apgar score at 10 minutes ( Figure 1B ). Similar results were obtained with multiple imputation of missing data (Table S8).
In analyses stratified according to year of birth and gestational age, relative risks of neonatal death according to Apgar score were consistent with those in the entire cohort, including the results for the most recent time interval (2010 through 2016). Absolute rate differences in neonatal mortality tended to be lower in the later birth cohorts than in corresponding analyses of the entire cohort (Table S9).
Owing to power concerns, analyses of changes in Apgar score values from 5 to 10 minutes were stratified into three gestational age groups and four Apgar score groups. Increased Apgar scores from 5 to 10 minutes were associated with lower relative risks of neonatal death than scores that remained stable, and the absolute rate differences in neonatal mortality were smaller ( Table 3 ).
Early neonatal death (within the first 6 completed days of life) occurred in 1566 infants (1.4%) (Table S10). The associations between Apgar scores at 5 and 10 minutes and adjusted relative risks of early neonatal death and absolute rate differences in early neonatal mortality appeared similar to or stronger than those in corresponding analyses of neonatal mortality.

Section: Discussion

In this nationwide study, we found that Apgar scores provided substantial information about the risk of neonatal death among preterm infants across gestational-age strata. The relative risk of neonatal death consistently increased according to decreasing Apgar score in all gestational-age strata, but the increases in relative risk were markedly higher among infants with an older gestational age. The absolute rate differences (i.e., the excess number of neonatal deaths per 100 births) also increased with decreasing Apgar score in all gestational-age strata. The greater increase in absolute rate differences in neonatal mortality according to decreasing Apgar score in extremely preterm infants is explained by their higher baseline neonatal mortality. An increase in the Apgar score from 5 to 10 minutes was, even within the normal range (i.e., an increase from 7 or 8 to 9 or 10), associated with lower neonatal mortality than scores that remained stable.
The consistent finding that relative risks of neonatal death gradually increased with decreasing Apgar score values also raises questions about the commonly used broad categorizations of Apgar score values. Taken together, our findings support the hypothesis that Apgar scoring is useful in evaluating the health of preterm infants across gestational age.
Our findings challenge the view that the Apgar score may be of limited use in preterm infants. We acknowledge that the Apgar score reflects the condition of the infant only shortly after birth and may reflect a variety of underlying factors and preceding events. Apgar scoring as such may be more challenging in preterm infants who, owing to immaturity, may appear less vigorous than term infants. In agreement with other studies, we also found that the percentage of infants with low Apgar scores increased with decreasing gestational age. Several components of the Apgar score — including respiratory effort, irritability, muscle tone, and color — may be influenced by gestational age. Consequently, it has been argued that a low Apgar score in preterm infants may reflect biologic immaturity rather than fetal depression in an otherwise healthy infant. However, to the extent that physiological response patterns that are reflected by Apgar scores in preterm infants may be a proxy for vulnerability related to immaturity, Apgar scores may provide useful prognostic information for the survival of preterm infants.
The findings of this large, nationwide study of neonatal mortality among preterm infants extend the findings of previous studies in several ways. By using more granular categorizations of Apgar score and gestational age than previous studies, we were able to show dose–response associations between Apgar score and risks of neonatal death across gestational age. In addition to relative risks, we also estimated absolute rate differences in neonatal mortality according to Apgar score, which is of substantial prognostic importance. We also included population-based information about the Apgar score at 10 minutes, which enabled us to estimate how risks of neonatal death changed with Apgar score values from 5 to 10 minutes. The risk of bias was reduced by the virtually complete follow-up and by adjustment for confounders in multivariate analyses.
Limitations of our study include the substantial interobserver and international variability in assessing the Apgar score. We found a higher percentage of infants with an Apgar score of 9 or 10 than might be expected, especially for extremely preterm infants. Still, the percentage of infants with available data who had Apgar score values of 7 to 10 at 5 minutes in our cohort of preterm infants (94.7%) is in agreement with the percentages in two American studies (95.2% of infants born at 26 to 36 weeks and 96.0% of infants born at 24 to 36 weeks). Among preterm infants born at 22 to 31 weeks who were admitted to 200 neonatal intensive care units in Europe, 81.5% of those with information on the Apgar score had a 5-minute score of 7 to 10 ; the corresponding percentage in our study was 77.8%. We found no published percentages of a 5-minute Apgar score of 9 or 10 in preterm infants. The percentage in the current study (83.9%) is in agreement with the corresponding percentage among singleton preterm infants (22 to 36 weeks) born in Norway from 1999 through 2015 (79.4%) (Skjaerven R: personal communication).
We lacked information about interventions during the initial stabilization, which may have influenced Apgar score values, changes in Apgar scores, and neonatal survival. The finding that an increase in the Apgar score from 5 minutes to 10 minutes was associated with lower neonatal mortality may reflect a better health status at 5 minutes in infants whose scores subsequently increased than in those whose scores did not increase; still, this may be valuable prognostic information. Infants with missing information on the Apgar score at 5 or 10 minutes (1.9% and 7.9% of the population, respectively) had relatively high neonatal mortality. Thus, missing information on the Apgar score in these circumstances may have reflected caregivers who were engaged in resuscitating very ill neonates. Nevertheless, the overall observed associations were unchanged with multiple imputation of missing data. We lacked information about values of Apgar score components. Heart rate is likely to be the most important component for predicting neonatal death and of a low Apgar score in preterm infants. We adjusted for a large number of possible confounders, but residual confounding by unmeasured factors remains possible. We lacked information about blood gas analyses from the umbilical artery. Although both the relatively homogeneous population and the equal access to care in Sweden may favor internal validity, the results may not be generalizable to more heterogeneous populations.
In this nationwide study, 5-minute and 10-minute Apgar scores and changes in the score between 5 minutes and 10 minutes were associated with neonatal mortality among preterm infants across gestational ages.
