Title: Dapagliflozin in Heart Failure with Mildly Reduced or Preserved Ejection Fraction


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors reduce the risk of hospitalization for heart failure and cardiovascular death among patients with chronic heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% or less. Whether SGLT2 inhibitors are effective in patients with a higher left ventricular ejection fraction remains less certain.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We randomly assigned 6263 patients with heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction of more than 40% to receive dapagliflozin (at a dose of 10 mg once daily) or matching placebo, in addition to usual therapy. The primary outcome was a composite of worsening heart failure (which was defined as either an unplanned hospitalization for heart failure or an urgent visit for heart failure) or cardiovascular death, as assessed in a time-to-event analysis.

Abstract_Section: Results

Over a median of 2.3 years, the primary outcome occurred in 512 of 3131 patients (16.4%) in the dapagliflozin group and in 610 of 3132 patients (19.5%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.82; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.73 to 0.92; P<0.001). Worsening heart failure occurred in 368 patients (11.8%) in the dapagliflozin group and in 455 patients (14.5%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.69 to 0.91); cardiovascular death occurred in 231 patients (7.4%) and 261 patients (8.3%), respectively (hazard ratio, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.74 to 1.05). Total events and symptom burden were lower in the dapagliflozin group than in the placebo group. Results were similar among patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60% or more and those with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 60%, and results were similar in prespecified subgroups, including patients with or without diabetes. The incidence of adverse events was similar in the two groups.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

Dapagliflozin reduced the combined risk of worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death among patients with heart failure and a mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction. (Funded by AstraZeneca; DELIVER ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03619213 .)

Section: Introduction

Sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, which were originally developed as glucose-lowering agents for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus, reduce the risk of death and other adverse outcomes among patients with chronic heart failure and a reduced ejection fraction (i.e., a left ventricular ejection fraction of ≤40%) and in those with chronic kidney disease, regardless of the presence or absence of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Current clinical guidelines strongly recommend the use of SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with chronic heart failure and a reduced ejection fraction.
Few pharmacologic treatment options exist for patients with heart failure and a mildly reduced or preserved left ventricular ejection fraction. Recently, treatment with the SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin was shown to reduce the combined risk of hospitalization for heart failure or cardiovascular death among patients with heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction of more than 40%, a finding that suggests that the benefits of SGLT2 inhibition may extend to all patients with heart failure, regardless of the left ventricular ejection fraction. The benefit, which was driven by a reduction in hospitalization for heart failure, appeared to be attenuated in patients with ejection fractions in the highest part (≥65%) of the range.
Several gaps in evidence remain regarding the benefits of SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with heart failure, including whether these benefits are conserved in patients with an ejection fraction at the highest end of the ejection fraction spectrum, in patients who start the treatment during or soon after hospitalization, and in patients with a previously reduced ejection fraction that has since improved to more than 40%. We designed the Dapagliflozin Evaluation to Improve the Lives of Patients with Preserved Ejection Fraction Heart Failure (DELIVER) trial to test the hypothesis that the SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin would reduce the risk of worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death among patients with a mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction.

Section: Methods

The DELIVER trial was a phase 3, international, multicenter, parallel-group, event-driven, double-blind, randomized, controlled trial in which patients with chronic heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction of more than 40% received dapagliflozin or matching placebo, in addition to their usual therapy. The steering committee designed and oversaw the conduct of the trial and the analysis of the data in collaboration with the sponsor (AstraZeneca). The trial protocol was approved by a local or central institutional review board at each trial center. The authors who had access to the data vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data, and all the authors vouch for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. Details regarding the design of the trial are provided in the protocol and in the Supplementary Appendix , both of which are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
Patients were eligible for enrollment if they were at least 40 years of age; had stabilized heart failure, with or without type 2 diabetes mellitus; had a left ventricular ejection fraction of more than 40%; had evidence of structural heart disease; and had an elevated natriuretic peptide level. Patients who had had a previous left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% or less were eligible provided that they had an ejection fraction of more than 40% at the time of enrollment. Patients could have been enrolled either as outpatients or during hospitalization for heart failure. Detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria have been published previously and are provided in Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix .
All the patients provided written informed consent. Those who met the inclusion and exclusion criteria were randomly assigned to receive dapagliflozin at a dose of 10 mg once daily or matching placebo, in addition to their usual therapy.
The primary outcome was a composite of worsening heart failure, which was defined as either an unplanned hospitalization for heart failure or an urgent visit for heart failure, or cardiovascular death. Secondary outcomes were the total number of worsening heart failure events and cardiovascular deaths, the change from baseline in the total symptom score on the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ; scores range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating fewer symptoms and physical limitations) at month 8, cardiovascular death, and death from any cause. All potential worsening heart failure events and all deaths were adjudicated according to prespecified criteria by an independent clinical events committee whose members were unaware of the trial-group assignments. In light of the extensive data on the safety of dapagliflozin, only data on serious adverse events, adverse events that led to discontinuation of dapagliflozin or placebo, and select other adverse events were collected.
The primary outcome, the occurrence of worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death, was assessed in a time-to-event analysis with the use of a Cox proportional-hazards model, stratified according to diabetes status. This analysis was performed concurrently in the overall population and in patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 60%, with an alpha level of 0.024 used in the former analysis and an alpha level of 0.038 used in the latter analysis (see the Supplementary Methods section and Fig. S1 and Table S2). We estimated that enrollment of 6100 patients followed for at least 13.5 months (and up to 39 months) would result in the occurrence of at least 1117 events and would provide the trial with 93% power to detect a hazard ratio of 0.80 for the comparison of dapagliflozin and placebo with respect to the primary outcome in the overall population, at a two-sided alpha level of 0.024. All the analyses were performed according to the intention-to-treat principle. Secondary analyses were performed with the use of a closed-testing procedure that included a prespecified hierarchical ordering of the primary and secondary outcomes; these outcomes included (in hierarchical order) the total number of worsening heart failure events and cardiovascular deaths, a decrease in symptom burden as measured by an increase in the KCCQ total symptom score, and cardiovascular death and death from any cause (both of which were assessed in a time-to-event analysis). We analyzed the KCCQ total symptom score as a composite outcome based on the rank of the change in score from baseline to month 8, with a corresponding win ratio used to estimate the magnitude of the treatment effect. We assessed the consistency of the treatment effect on the primary outcome in prespecified subgroups. In separate sensitivity analyses, patient data were censored at the time of coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19) diagnosis, and death from noncardiovascular causes was taken into account as a competing risk.

Section: Results

Between August 27, 2018, and December 30, 2020, a total of 10,418 patients were screened at 353 centers in 20 countries; of these patients, 6263 were randomly assigned to receive dapagliflozin or matching placebo (Fig. S2). The reasons for exclusion from randomization are provided in Table S3. The demographic and clinical characteristics of the two groups were well balanced at baseline ( Table 1 and Table S4). Dapagliflozin was discontinued for reasons other than death in 444 patients (14.2%), and placebo was discontinued for reasons other than death in 442 patients (14.1%). The vital status was known at the end of the trial in all but 2 patients in the dapagliflozin group and 2 patients in the placebo group. The median duration of follow-up was 2.3 years (interquartile range, 1.7 to 2.8).
In the overall population, the primary outcome occurred in 512 patients (16.4%) in the dapagliflozin group and in 610 patients (19.5%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.82; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.73 to 0.92; P<0.001) ( Table 2 and Figure 1A ). The results of the analysis of the primary outcome in the patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 60% were similar to those of the overall population (hazard ratio, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.73 to 0.95; P=0.009) (Table S5).
The number of cardiovascular deaths and first and recurrent worsening heart failure events was lower in the dapagliflozin group than in the placebo group in the overall population (rate ratio, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.67 to 0.89; P<0.001) and among the patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 60% (rate ratio, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.65 to 0.90; P=0.002). The incidence of the components of the primary outcome favored the dapagliflozin group both in the overall population and among those with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 60%, including worsening heart failure (hazard ratio in the overall population, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.69 to 0.91) and cardiovascular death (hazard ratio, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.74 to 1.05) ( Figure 1B and 1C ), as well as death from any cause (hazard ratio, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.83 to 1.07) ( Figure 1D ). The change from baseline to month 8 in the KCCQ total symptom score indicated a benefit with dapagliflozin as compared with placebo with respect to symptoms of heart failure (win ratio, 1.11; 95% CI, 1.03 to 1.21; P=0.009; mean placebo-corrected difference between baseline and month 8 among survivors, 2.4 points; 95% CI, 1.5 to 3.4).
The effect of dapagliflozin on the primary outcome was consistent across all prespecified subgroups. These included the subgroups that were defined according to the presence or absence of type 2 diabetes mellitus; enrollment that occurred during or within 30 days after hospitalization for heart failure or enrollment that did not occur during or within 30 days after hospitalization for heart failure; and the presence or absence of a previous left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% or less that improved to more than 40% by the time of enrollment ( Figure 2 ). A prespecified Covid-19 sensitivity analysis in which patient data were censored at the time of Covid-19 diagnosis showed similar results (Table S6). Overall results were similar when death from noncardiovascular causes was taken into account as a competing risk (subdistribution hazard ratio, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.73 to 0.92). The results of the assessment of the proportional-hazards assumption are provided in the Supplementary Appendix .
Overall, serious adverse events, including death, were reported in 1361 patients (43.5%) in the dapagliflozin group and in 1423 patients (45.5%) in the placebo group ( Table 2 ). Adverse events that led to discontinuation of dapagliflozin or placebo were reported in 182 patients (5.8%) in the dapagliflozin group and in 181 patients (5.8%) in the placebo group (Table S7).

Section: Discussion

In this randomized, placebo-controlled trial involving patients with heart failure and a mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction, dapagliflozin resulted in a lower risk of the primary composite outcome, worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death, than placebo, with no appreciable difference in benefit among patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60% or more and those with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 60%, or in other subgroups. Each of the three components of this composite outcome was less common in the dapagliflozin group than in the placebo group. In addition, dapagliflozin resulted in fewer total worsening heart failure events and cardiovascular deaths and a lower symptom burden than placebo. The incidence of adverse events was similar to that in the placebo group.
In a previous trial (DAPA-HF; Dapagliflozin and Prevention of Adverse Outcomes in Heart Failure), dapagliflozin reduced the risk of worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death among patients with heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% or less. The results of the DELIVER trial extend those of the DAPA-HF trial to patients with heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction of more than 40% and are consistent with the overall results of the EMPEROR-Preserved trial (Empagliflozin Outcome Trial in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction), which assessed the effects of empagliflozin in patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of more than 40%. The rationale for the dual primary analyses in our trial (i.e., evaluation of the primary outcome in patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 60% in addition to the overall patient population) was based on concern about a potential declining benefit in patients with an ejection fraction in the normal range that had been observed in several previous trials of neurohormonal modulators. Although the EMPEROR-Preserved trial suggested some potential attenuation of benefit in the highest part of the range of ejection fraction, we observed no evidence of heterogeneity with respect to left ventricular ejection fraction in the DELIVER trial, with similar overall treatment effects among patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60% or more and those with a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 60%. This finding suggests that the benefit of SGLT2 inhibition is likely to extend throughout the full range of ejection fraction.
The DELIVER trial was designed with broader inclusion criteria than those used in previous trials involving similar populations in that we enrolled patients who were hospitalized or recently hospitalized, for whom evidence-based therapy is limited, as well as those with heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction that had improved to more than 40% at the time of enrollment. Our data suggest that these understudied groups also benefit from dapagliflozin.
The most recent guidelines of the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and Heart Failure Society of America designated SGLT2 inhibitors as class IIA, level B, for the treatment of heart failure with a mildly reduced or preserved left ventricular ejection fraction. The results of the DELIVER trial may inform future guidelines and provide further guidance for their broader use in clinical practice. Although the risk of cardiovascular death was not significantly lower with dapagliflozin than with placebo, the rate of cardiovascular death among patients who received placebo was substantially lower among patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of more than 40% than among those in the DAPA-HF trial with a reduced ejection fraction (3.8 events per 100 patient-years in DELIVER vs. 7.9 events per 100 patient-years in DAPA-HF), and DELIVER was not powered to assess the effect of dapagliflozin on cardiovascular death alone. Trials in higher-risk populations, or of longer duration, or pooled analyses of several trials would be needed for robust evaluation of benefits with respect to mortality.
This trial has some limitations. The use of specific inclusion and exclusion criteria may have limited the generalizability of our findings. Less than 5% of the patients enrolled were Black, although this percentage was proportional to the population percentage on a regional basis (Table S8). Owing to the Covid-19 pandemic, assessment of symptom burden was limited to patients for whom an 8-month assessment was planned or performed before March 11, 2020, although results were similar in all patients for whom data were available. Because all the subgroups in the DELIVER trial were underpowered, within-subgroup results should be interpreted cautiously.
Among patients with heart failure and a mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction, dapagliflozin resulted in a lower risk of the primary composite outcome (worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death), in fewer worsening heart failure events and cardiovascular deaths, and in a lower symptom burden, with no excess of adverse events. Findings were consistent across prespecified subgroups, including those defined according to left ventricular ejection fraction. These data provide further evidence to support the use of an SGLT2 inhibitor as essential therapy in patients with heart failure, regardless of the presence or absence of type 2 diabetes mellitus or left ventricular ejection fraction.
