Title: Sutimlimab in Cold Agglutinin Disease


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Cold agglutinin disease is a rare autoimmune hemolytic anemia characterized by hemolysis that is caused by activation of the classic complement pathway. Sutimlimab, a humanized monoclonal antibody, selectively targets the C1s protein, a C1 complex serine protease responsible for activating this pathway.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We conducted a 26-week multicenter, open-label, single-group study to assess the efficacy and safety of intravenous sutimlimab in patients with cold agglutinin disease and a recent history of transfusion. The composite primary end point was a normalization of the hemoglobin level to 12 g or more per deciliter or an increase in the hemoglobin level of 2 g or more per deciliter from baseline, without red-cell transfusion or medications prohibited by the protocol.

Abstract_Section: Results

A total of 24 patients were enrolled and received at least one dose of sutimlimab; 13 patients (54%) met the criteria for the composite primary end point. The least-squares mean increase in hemoglobin level was 2.6 g per deciliter at the time of treatment assessment (weeks 23, 25, and 26). A mean hemoglobin level of more than 11 g per deciliter was maintained in patients from week 3 through the end of the study period. The mean bilirubin levels normalized by week 3. A total of 17 patients (71%) did not receive a transfusion from week 5 through week 26. Clinically meaningful reductions in fatigue were observed by week 1 and were maintained throughout the study. Activity in the classic complement pathway was rapidly inhibited, as assessed by a functional assay. Increased hemoglobin levels, reduced bilirubin levels, and reduced fatigue coincided with inhibition of the classic complement pathway. At least one adverse event occurred during the treatment period in 22 patients (92%). Seven patients (29%) had at least one serious adverse event, none of which were determined by the investigators to be related to sutimlimab. No meningococcal infections occurred.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

In patients with cold agglutinin disease who received sutimlimab, selective upstream inhibition of activity in the classic complement pathway rapidly halted hemolysis, increased hemoglobin levels, and reduced fatigue. (Funded by Sanofi; CARDINAL ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03347396 .)

Section: Introduction

Patients with cold agglutinin disease, a rare autoimmune hemolytic anemia, often have chronic anemia, profound fatigue, and acute hemolytic crisis. These patients may also have agglutination-mediated acrocyanosis and a higher risk of thromboembolism and early death. Cold agglutinin disease is caused by cold agglutinins, which are IgM autoantibodies that bind to the I antigen on erythrocytes when temperatures are at or below 37°C, resulting in agglutination. The IgM-antigen complex, a potent trigger of the classic complement pathway, binds to the C1 complement complex, resulting in the activation of C1s (a C1 complex serine protease), which splits C4 and C2; this action in turn generates the C3 convertase C4bC2a. C3 convertase catalyzes C3 proteolysis into C3a and C3b, which in turn triggers opsonization and extravascular hemolysis in the liver; intravascular hemolysis mediated by C5b–C9 occurs minimally because of intact CD55- and CD59-mediated regulation (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix , available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). Cold agglutinin disease is distinguished from cold agglutinin syndrome in that cold agglutinin disease is a clonal, low-grade B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder that can be detected in blood or marrow in patients with no clinical or radiologic evidence of malignant conditions. Cold agglutinin syndrome is transient and is secondary to infections and overt malignant and autoimmune conditions.
No approved therapies exist for cold agglutinin disease. Rituximab depletes B cells and induces partial responses in approximately 50% of patients after a median delay of 1.5 months, and relapses usually occur within 1 year. The addition of bendamustine or fludarabine (both of which are cytotoxic agents) is associated with higher response rates but is accompanied by more serious toxic effects, including severe neutropenia. Eculizumab, a C5 inhibitor, reduces the need for transfusion and reduces lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels but elicits only a modest increase in hemoglobin levels in patients with cold agglutinin disease because it does not inhibit extravascular hemolysis.
Sutimlimab (formerly BIVV009) is a first-in-class, humanized monoclonal antibody designed to target C1s, which is responsible for activating the classic complement pathway. A murine precursor to sutimlimab has been shown to prevent in vitro cold agglutinin–mediated complement deposition on erythrocytes that were sensitized with plasma from patients with cold agglutinin disease. In a phase 1b study, sutimlimab rapidly suppressed activity in the classic complement pathway in healthy volunteers, and repeat administration of sutimlimab in patients with cold agglutinin disease inhibited hemolysis within 24 hours after administration, increased hemoglobin levels, and resulted in transfusion independence. Discontinuation of sutimlimab resulted in reduced levels of hemoglobin and increased bilirubin levels (a marker of hemolysis), and activity in the classic complement pathway returned to pretreatment levels. Readministration of sutimlimab in patients who had a response in the phase 1b study induced a second response. We conducted the CARDINAL study to assess the efficacy and safety of sutimlimab in patients with confirmed cold agglutinin disease and a recent history of transfusion.

Section: Methods

In this prospective, open-label, single-group study, patients with cold agglutinin disease underwent a 6-week screening period. Eligible patients entered a 26-week treatment period during which they received an intravenous infusion of sutimlimab on day 0 (the first day of treatment) and day 7, after which they received an infusion every 2 weeks (Part A of the study). Patients who weighed less than 75 kg at baseline received a 6.5-g dose, and those who weighed 75 kg or more received 7.5 g. No premedications were required, and the use of an infusion warmer was supported. Red-cell transfusions were performed if the patient either had a hemoglobin level of less than 9 g per deciliter and was symptomatic or had a hemoglobin level of less than 7 g per deciliter with or without symptoms. After the 26-week treatment period, patients were eligible to continue to the open-label extension study (Part B). Only the results of Part A of the study are reported here.
The study was conducted according to the International Council on Harmonisation guidelines for Good Clinical Practice and the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by local independent ethics committees or review boards. Patients provided written informed consent. All authors contributed to the analysis and interpretation of the data and vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol (available at NEJM.org). One author who was an employee of the sponsor (Sanofi) also contributed to the acquisition of data. All the authors made the decision to submit the manuscript for publication and contributed to its development. The study sponsor reviewed the manuscript during its development. Professional writers who were paid by the sponsor assisted in the preparation of the manuscript. The sponsor had no other role in the conduct of the trial.
Patients were at least 18 years of age and had confirmed cold agglutinin disease and a recent history (within 6 months before enrollment) of red-cell transfusion. A diagnosis of cold agglutinin disease was defined as the presence of chronic hemolysis, a positive polyspecific direct antiglobulin test result, a monospecific direct antiglobulin test result strongly positive for C3d, a cold agglutinin titer of 1:64 or higher measured at 4°C, a direct antiglobulin test result for IgG of 1+ or less, and no overt malignant disease. Two additional key inclusion criteria were a hemoglobin level of 10 g or less per deciliter and a total bilirubin level above the normal range at screening and the presence of one or more symptoms associated with cold agglutinin disease (i.e., symptomatic anemia, acrocyanosis, Raynaud’s phenomenon, hemoglobinuria, disabling circulatory symptoms, or a major adverse vascular event) within 3 months before screening.
Key exclusion criteria were cold agglutinin syndrome, a diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or other autoimmune disorder with antinuclear antibodies at screening, overt malignant disease, and treatment with rituximab monotherapy within 3 months before enrollment or treatment with rituximab combined with chemotherapy within 6 months before enrollment. Patients with a clinically relevant infection (e.g., active hepatitis C and pneumonia) within 1 month before enrollment were also excluded.
If patients had not been vaccinated in the previous 5 years for Neisseria meningitidis (including serogroup B meningococcus where available), Haemophilus influenzae , and Streptococcus pneumoniae , vaccinations were initiated during screening before enrollment and were completed by week 5 of sutimlimab treatment. These vaccines were administered according to regional guidelines for patients with persistent complement deficiency.
The primary efficacy end point was a composite of a normalization of the hemoglobin level to 12 g or more per deciliter or an increase in the hemoglobin level of 2 g or more per deciliter from baseline at the treatment assessment time point (with the value at the treatment assessment time point defined as the mean of the values at weeks 23, 25, and 26), without red-cell transfusion from week 5 through week 26 or medications for cold agglutinin disease prohibited by the protocol (see the Supplementary Appendix ). If a value was missing at the treatment assessment time point, it was calculated as the average of the available values. An increase in the hemoglobin level of 1 g or more per deciliter was considered to be clinically meaningful.
Key secondary end points were the mean change from baseline in the hemoglobin level; hemolysis, determined on the basis of the bilirubin level (except in patients with Gilbert’s syndrome) and LDH level; quality of life, as assessed with the use of the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy (FACIT) Fatigue Scale (scores range from 0 to 52, with a higher score indicating less fatigue; an increase from baseline of 3 to 7 points is considered clinically significant) at the time of treatment assessment; and the number of transfusions received in the first 5 weeks after the first dose of sutimlimab. The FACIT Fatigue Scale is a validated tool for evaluating fatigue in patients with chronic diseases and has been used for diseases that are characterized by complement-mediated hemolytic anemia.
Pharmacodynamic end points were changes in the activity in the classic complement pathway, as determined with an assay that measures activity in this pathway (Wieslab Complement System Classical Pathway assay); total CH50 level, defined as the minimal serum dilution to lyse 50% of ovine erythrocytes; total C4 level; and C1q level.
Safety end points were adverse events and serious adverse events that occurred after the first dose of the study drug, hemolytic breakthrough, and infections of grade 3 or higher, changes observed in SLE panel (antinuclear and anti–double-stranded DNA antibodies), and results of clinical laboratory evaluations. Additional end points were the incidence of thromboembolism and the change from baseline in levels of D -dimer, thrombin–antithrombin, and biomarkers of disease in serum. Adverse events were classified according to the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities , version 21.0, and were tabulated. The reported adverse events are those that occurred during the treatment period.
We determined that a sample size of 20 would give the study 90% power to detect a lower boundary of the 95% confidence interval for the percentage of patients with a response to sutimlimab of more than 30%, assuming a true percentage of 66%. The 95% confidence interval for the percentage of patients with a response was estimated with the use of the Clopper–Pearson method. Patients who discontinued the study before week 23 or had missing data for any component of the primary end point were considered to have had no response. Additional sensitivity analyses for the primary end point were conducted in different populations. All key secondary efficacy end points were analyzed with the use of a mixed model for repeated measures (see the Supplementary Appendix ). In this phase of the study, all the patients who received at least one dose of sutimlimab were included in the primary analysis.

Section: Results

Of the 42 patients who were screened, 10 were not enrolled because they did not meet the inclusion criteria, and 9 were excluded on the basis of exclusion criteria (1 patient was not enrolled for both reasons) (Fig. S2). The most common inclusion criteria that were not met were a bilirubin level above the normal reference range (5 patients) and a cold agglutinin titer of 1:64 or higher measured at 4°C (3 patients). The most common exclusion criteria were the presence of cold agglutinin syndrome associated with infection (in 3 patients), rheumatologic disease (in 2 patients), and overt malignant disease (in 2 patients).
A total of 24 patients at 16 sites in eight countries were enrolled in Part A of the study and received one or more doses of sutimlimab. Baseline characteristics were typical for a population with cold agglutinin disease (62% were women, and the median age was 72 years [range, 55 to 85]) ( Table 1 ). The mean (±SD) number of transfusions during the previous year was 4.8±6.2, with a median number of 2.0 (range, 1.0–23.0). At 6 months before enrollment, the mean number of transfusions was 3.2±4.0, with a median number of 2.0 (range, 1.0–19.0). The mean baseline hemoglobin level was 8.6±1.6 g per deciliter. Elevated levels of bilirubin (in 23 patients), reticulocytes (in 16 patients), and LDH (in 16 patients), as well as a decreased haptoglobin level (in 22 patients), were observed at baseline. Fifteen (62%) patients had received treatment for cold agglutinin disease within 5 years before enrollment in the study; of these patients, 50% had received rituximab single-agent therapy, 42% had received glucocorticoids, and 17% had received combined rituximab and bendamustine. Eight patients (33%) had a history of thromboembolism, with pulmonary embolism being the most frequent type. Twenty-two patients (92%) completed Part A of the study and continued to Part B. Two patients discontinued the study for reasons unrelated to the receipt of sutimlimab.
A total of 13 of 24 patients (54%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 33 to 74) met the prespecified criteria for the composite primary end point. The results of sensitivity analyses were similar to those of the primary analysis ( Supplementary Appendix ). Among 11 patients who did not meet the prespecified criteria for the primary end point, 6 had evidence of a treatment response: 4 patients had an increase in the hemoglobin level of 1 g or more per deciliter over the study period; 1 patient had an increase of 2 g or more per deciliter and a level of 12 g or more per deciliter at the time of treatment assessment, with no transfusion beyond week 15; and 1 patient had a change from 11.0 g per deciliter to 11.8 g per deciliter at the time of treatment assessment in the absence of transfusion. The bilirubin level had normalized in 4 of these 6 patients during the treatment period.
Evidence of a hematologic response was not observed in 3 patients. Baseline characteristics are provided in Table S1. The clinical characteristics of these 3 patients were consistent with those of the other 21 patients. Protocol-prohibited medication for cold agglutinin disease was not administered to 22 patients (92%) from week 5 through week 26. Seventeen patients (71%) remained transfusion-free from week 5 through week 26 of treatment, with a median of 0 transfusions (range, 0 to 13) during this period.
Overall, the least-squares mean increase in hemoglobin, calculated with the use of a mixed model for repeated measures, was 2.6 g per deciliter (95% CI, 0.7 to 4.5) at the time of treatment assessment. The mean hemoglobin level increased by 1.2±1.3 g per deciliter within the first week of treatment and by 2.3±1.5 g per deciliter by the third week. The mean hemoglobin level was maintained at more than 11 g per deciliter from week 3 until the end of the study ( Figure 1A ). A total of 20 patients (83%) had a mean hemoglobin change of 1 g or more per deciliter from baseline over the treatment period. At the time of treatment assessment, 15 patients (62%) had a mean hemoglobin increase from baseline of 2 g or more per deciliter, and 8 (33%) had an increase of 3 g or more per deciliter.
The initial mean bilirubin level was 51±23 μmol per liter (3.0±1.3 mg per deciliter) and had normalized within 3 weeks. The least-squares mean decrease in bilirubin level was 38.2 μmol per liter (2.2 mg per deciliter) (95% CI, 33.8 to 42.5 μmol per liter [2.0 to 2.5 mg per deciliter]) at the time of treatment assessment. The mean bilirubin level was maintained below the upper limit of the normal range for the duration of sutimlimab treatment and coincided with an increased hemoglobin level ( Figure 1B ).
The LDH level decreased by at least 1.5 times the upper limit of the normal range at the time of treatment assessment in 14 patients (58%). A decrease in reticulocyte count coincided with an increased hemoglobin level. An increase in the haptoglobin level corresponded to a decrease in the bilirubin level (Fig. S3).
Patient-reported fatigue was reduced during sutimlimab treatment (mean score on the FACIT Fatigue Scale at baseline, 32.5; mean score at the time of treatment assessment, 44.3 [with a higher score indicating less fatigue]). The reduction in fatigue was seen by the first week, with a mean difference of 7.2 points from baseline, a change in fatigue that was maintained throughout the study ( Figure 2 ). The estimated mean increase in the score on the FACIT Fatigue Scale in all patients (according to a mixed model for repeated measures) was 10.9 points (95% CI, 8.0 to 13.7) by the time of treatment assessment.
Within 1 week after the initiation of sutimlimab treatment, activity in the classic complement pathway was almost completely inhibited, with concomitant normalization of C4 levels ( Figure 3 ). Decreased CH50 levels were also observed (Fig. S4A). The mean C4 level was low at baseline, which is consistent with consumption of complement in the classic complement pathway. The mean level of C1q protein, which has additional autoimmune functions aside from its role in the C1 complex, was unchanged and was consistent with the action of sutimlimab in specifically targeting the C1s protein (Fig. S4B). Reduced activity of the classic complement pathway coincided with reduction in hemolysis, fatigue, and anemia.
Levels of D -dimer and thrombin–antithrombin were reduced with sutimlimab treatment (Table S2). Treatment adherence (the number of doses received divided by the number of prespecified doses) was nearly complete (99.7%).
A total of 124 adverse events occurred in 22 of 24 patients (92%). A total of 16 serious adverse events occurred in 7 patients (29%) ( Table 2 ). No adverse events were reported in more than 2 patients each, and the type and frequency of adverse events were generally consistent with the demographic characteristics of the patients, their coexisting conditions, and previous or concomitant medication use in this older, medically complex population. The most frequent adverse events were infections and infestations (54%), gastrointestinal disorders (33%), and general disorders or administration-site conditions (29%). No patients discontinued the study drug or withdrew early from the study because of an adverse event assessed as being related to sutimlimab, and the majority of adverse events were grade 1 or 2 in severity. There were 13 adverse events among 9 patients (38%) that were assessed by the investigator as being related to sutimlimab (Table S3). No serious adverse events were determined by the investigator to be related to sutimlimab. A full list of adverse events is provided in Table S4.
Among the 23 infections that were reported in 13 patients, the most frequently reported were gastroenteritis, nasopharyngitis, and upper respiratory tract infections, which were reported in 2 patients each. Causative organisms for serious infections with encapsulated bacteria included Staphylococcus aureus , S. epidermidis , and Streptococcus pyogenes . No meningococcal infections occurred. Although serious infections were reported in 2 patients (8%), no serious infections were determined to be related to sutimlimab, and no patients permanently discontinued the study drug or withdrew from the study because of an infection. Patients with serious infections had other confounding risk factors such as advanced age, coexisting conditions, and concomitant medication use that most likely contributed to their risk of infection.
No clinical evidence of SLE or autoimmune disease was observed in patients after administration of sutimlimab. At the investigator’s discretion, 14 patients (58%) received antithrombotic drugs, which were mostly ongoing medications that the patients had been receiving before enrollment. No patient had thromboembolism during the study. Three patients had adverse events suggestive of possible hypersensitivity reactions associated with sutimlimab, including 2 patients with reported infusion reactions and 1 with erythema; the events were grade 1 to 2 in severity. The infusion reactions resolved within a day, and erythema was ongoing at data cutoff. None of these events led to permanent discontinuation of sutimlimab or withdrawal from the study. No adverse events suggestive of serious hypersensitivity reactions to sutimlimab treatment were reported.
Two patients discontinued the study for reasons unrelated to sutimlimab. One death occurred, which was assessed by the investigator as being unrelated to sutimlimab and was attributed to newly diagnosed hepatic cancer in the first month of the study. One discontinuation was due to a serious adverse event of polymyalgia rheumatica (with onset before the first dose of sutimlimab) that resulted in hospitalization and administration of protocol-prohibited medication. Apart from those who discontinued the study, all the patients, including the three without objective evidence of a response, continued to Part B of the study.

Section: Discussion

During the first phase of our study, we found that sutimlimab was an effective therapy for patients with cold agglutinin disease and was associated with mainly mild-to-moderate adverse events. Sutimlimab treatment normalized bilirubin levels and increased mean hemoglobin levels, and most patients did not receive a transfusion from week 5 through week 26. Decreased bilirubin levels coincided with inhibition of the classic complement pathway during sutimlimab treatment and confirmed that the bilirubin level is a reliable biomarker for extravascular hemolysis, the predominant form of hemolytic activity in cold agglutinin disease.
Patients had a mean baseline score on the FACIT Fatigue Scale of 32.5, a value similar to that reported in patients with advanced cancer or rheumatoid arthritis. After sutimlimab treatment, a clinically meaningful reduction in fatigue (an increase in the score on the FACIT Fatigue Scale of ≥3 points ) occurred within 1 week and coincided with reduced activity in the classic complement pathway and improvement in hemoglobin levels. Thus, in addition to anemia, activation of the classic complement pathway or hemolytic activity or both may be key drivers of fatigue in patients with cold agglutinin disease. This relationship is supported by data that show an association between complement activation and severity of fatigue in chronic fatigue syndrome as well as a reduction in the associated symptoms when complement inhibition occurs in patients with other conditions. Previous studies suggest that complement activation enhances the expression of inflammatory cytokines (e.g., interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor α), which may contribute to fatigue. Patients with other hemolytic conditions mediated by increased complement activity (e.g., atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria) have a proinflammatory state related to persistent complement activation, and complement inhibition in these patients has resulted in reduced inflammation. The fact that this was an open-label study, however, makes the interpretation of a subjective reduction in fatigue with sutimlimab treatment difficult.
Patients with cold agglutinin disease have an increased risk of thromboembolism. At baseline, 8 patients (33%) had a history of thromboembolism, but no patient had onset of new thromboembolism through week 26. Levels of biomarkers associated with thrombotic activity ( D -dimers and thrombin–antithrombin complex) decreased after sutimlimab treatment. Additional long-term data are needed to assess the effect of sutimlimab on the risk of thrombosis.
By selectively inhibiting the classic complement pathway at the C1s level, sutimlimab leaves the immune functions of the lectin and alternative complement pathways intact. C3 or C5 inhibitors, in contrast, inhibit the common and terminal complement pathway. Moreover, since sutimlimab did not alter the levels of C1q protein, it is likely that the prophagocytic function of C1q was also maintained with sutimlimab treatment. Given that sutimlimab leaves the lectin and alternative pathways intact for immune surveillance, the risk of infection with encapsulated bacteria may be lower than that with other complement inhibitors. In patients treated with a C5 inhibitor, meningococcal infections have been observed at an overall rate of 0.25 per 100 patient-years. No such infections were reported in this study; however, additional long-term follow-up data are needed to further understand potential infection risks associated with sutimlimab treatment. Of note, vaccinations against encapsulated organisms, including meningococcus, were required in this study to mitigate this potential risk. Overall, the type and frequency of adverse events that were reported in patients with cold agglutinin disease were consistent with those in an elderly population, the underlying disease process, and coexisting conditions. Long-term follow-up is planned to further evaluate the safety profile of sutimlimab.
The results of the CARDINAL study showed that sutimlimab had a rapid and sustained treatment effect in most patients with cold agglutinin disease by preventing chronic hemolysis, markedly increasing hemoglobin levels, and improving quality of life (according to the score on the FACIT Fatigue Scale) with only mild-to-moderate adverse events assessed by the investigator as being related to sutimlimab. Although a caveat of any single-group design is that responses and adverse events may reflect, in part, the natural history of the disease, our data show that targeting the classic complement pathway represents a new, effective therapeutic approach for the management of cold agglutinin disease.
