We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
This review focuses on the evolution of plant hormone signaling pathways. Like the chemical nature of the hormones themselves, the signaling pathways are diverse. Therefore, we focus on a group of hormones whose primary perception mechanism involves an Skp1/Cullin/F-box-type ubiquitin ligase: auxin, jasmonic acid, gibberellic acid, and strigolactone. We begin with a comparison of the core signaling pathways of these four hormones, which have been established through studies conducted in model organisms in the Angiosperms. With the advent of next-generation sequencing and advanced tools for genetic manipulation, the door to understanding the origins of hormone signaling mechanisms in plants beyond these few model systems has opened. For example, in-depth phylogenetic analyses of hormone signaling components are now being complemented by genetic studies in early diverging land plants. Here we discuss recent investigations of how basal land plants make and sense hormones. Finally, we propose connections between the emergence of hormone signaling complexity and major developmental transitions in plant evolution.
Article metrics loading...
This review focuses on the evolution of plant hormone signaling pathways. Like the chemical nature of the hormones themselves, the signaling pathways are diverse. Therefore, we focus on a group of hormones whose primary perception mechanism involves an Skp1/Cullin/F-box-type ubiquitin ligase: auxin, jasmonic acid, gibberellic acid, and strigolactone. We begin with a comparison of the core signaling pathways of these four hormones, which have been established through studies conducted in model organisms in the Angiosperms. With the advent of next-generation sequencing and advanced tools for genetic manipulation, the door to understanding the origins of hormone signaling mechanisms in plants beyond these few model systems has opened. For example, in-depth phylogenetic analyses of hormone signaling components are now being complemented by genetic studies in early diverging land plants. Here we discuss recent investigations of how basal land plants make and sense hormones. Finally, we propose connections between the emergence of hormone signaling complexity and major developmental transitions in plant evolution.
Auxin, jasmonic acid (JA), gibberellic acid (GA), and strigolactone (SL) signaling mechanisms all involve hormone-activated targeting of transcriptional regulators for degradation. How the targeting is activated and the nature of the targets themselves vary across these pathways and are detailed below (Figure 1). However, a few common features emerge. First, proteolytic targeting is mediated by Skp1/Cullin/F-box (SCF)-type E3ubiquitinligase complexes, which consist of an Skp1 adaptor protein, a Cullin scaffold protein, anF-boxprotein, and a Ring-box (RBX) protein that binds the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (126). The F-box protein confers substrate specificity to the complex. Upon association with a substrate protein, or target, by the F-box subunit, the SCF complex attaches monoubiquitin or polyubiquitin chains to the substrate. The latter modification marks the target for rapid degradation by the 26S proteasome. A second common feature is that the proteolyzed targets of these hormone response pathways are transcriptional regulators that do not directly bind DNA. Instead, the targets function through association with DNA-bindingtranscription factors. A third common property is that the targets of the auxin, JA, and SL pathways either have an ethylene-responsive element binding factor-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif or associate directly with a protein that has an EAR motif. The EAR motif enables binding to proteins with C-terminal LisH domains, most prominently the TOPLESS (TPL) and TOPLESS-RELATED (TPR) transcriptional corepressors (22). Thus, activation of transcriptional programs in response to these three hormones is due to relief of inhibition.

Figure 1Click to view


Auxins regulate a very broad range of plant growth and developmental processes. These processes, which include cell division, cell growth, and cell differentiation, underlie many kinds of organogenesis and growth responses (77). The naturally occurring auxin family is composed of several small aromatic molecules with carboxylic acid moieties: indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), indole-3-butyric acid (IBA), 4-chloroindole-3-acetic acid, and phenylacetic acid (81). IAA, the most abundant and biologically significant auxin found in plants, is derived primarily from metabolism of tryptophan (86). There are sugar or amino acid conjugates to IAA, and several storage forms of IAA, including IBA, but among these metabolites IAA itself is the only endogenous molecule that directly activates auxin signaling (131,132). The perception of auxin occurs through the association of an F-box protein in the TIR1/AFB family with proteins in the AUXIN/INDOLE ACETIC ACID (Aux/IAA) family (36,70,136). This leads to polyubiquitination and proteolysis of the bound Aux/IAA (49). The functional role of Aux/IAA is to inhibit the activity of B3-type DNA-binding domain transcription factors in the AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF) family (139). Aux/IAAs form heterodimers with ARFs (71,139) and also recruit TPL/TPR corepressors through an EAR motif (135), leading to stable gene repression in the absence of auxin.
Notably, TIR1 does not undergo a conformational change after binding auxin. Rather, TIR1/AFB and Aux/IAAs function ascoreceptorswhose physical interaction is stabilized by IAA binding (136). This signaling mechanism, in which auxin acts as a molecular glue, is in contrast to allosteric signaling mechanisms, in which a receptor undergoes a conformational change in response to ligand binding that activates downstream signaling events. The strength of auxin binding is determined not only by the auxin ligand but also by different affinities of TIR1/AFB proteins for auxin and by divergence in the Aux/IAA domain that mediates interaction with TIR1/AFB proteins and auxin (20). InArabidopsis, six TIR1/AFB proteins and 29 Aux/IAAs (109) allow many possible coreceptor complexes that have different auxin affinities.
ARFs are phylogenetically classified into A, B, and C groups (158). All ARFs share a B3-type DNA-binding domain, followed by a variable middle region and a C-terminal PB1 interaction domain (111). ARF classes differ most strongly in their middle region, which is thought to direct gene activation or repression. By releasing ARF transcription factors from inhibition by Aux/IAAs, auxin controls the activation or repression of their target genes.
Jasmonates are a class of hormones synthesized from C18fatty acids that have roles in wounding responses, defense againstnecrotrophicpathogens, and development (154). These hormones include JA, methyl jasmonate, and 12-oxophytodienoate (OPDA), but the bioactive hormone inArabidopsis thalianais an isoleucine conjugate of JA, jasmonyl-Ile (JA-Ile) (154). In terms of having a very limited complement of bioactive signals, JA and auxin signaling are quite similar. The perception of JA-Ile is also strikingly similar to that of auxin, as it involves a coreceptor complex with an F-box protein in which JA-Ile functions as a molecular glue. JA-Ile is bound by a single F-box protein, CORONATINE INSENSITIVE1 (COI1), creating a high-affinity binding site for transcriptional regulators in the Jasmonate ZIM domain (JAZ) family (24,121,138). Formation of the COI1-JA-Ile-JAZ complex triggers rapid polyubiquitination and degradation of JAZ proteins. In the absence of JA-Ile, JAZ interacts with MYC1 to MYC4, a subfamily of the largebasic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)transcription factor family (40), and also with the EAR-motif-containing protein Novel Interactor of JAZ (NINJA) (104). Thus JAZ proteins indirectly recruit TPL/TPR via NINJA to repress transcriptional activation by MYC. Upon JAZ degradation, transcriptional responses to JA can occur.
Gibberellins are diterpenoid compounds produced not only in plants, but also in fungi and bacteria (84). In most plants, GAs have been shown to promote cell expansion and division, which results in an overall control of plant size (3). Their roles in development include the differentiation of pollen in angiosperms, male organ formation in ferns (125,137), and the promotion of developmental phase transitions, such as seed germination, the acquisition of maturity traits during vegetative growth, the entrance into the reproductive phase, and early fruit development (13,37,39,147). GAs have also been implicated in the modulation of responses triggered by biotic and abiotic cues, such as pathogen infection (97) or cold, salt, and osmotic stress (26).
There is strong evidence that GAs perform their roles mostly through transcriptional regulation, which involves the degradation of DELLA proteins. DELLA proteins belong to the larger GAI/RGA/SCR (GRAS) family and are nuclear proteins that interact with and modify the activity of a diverse group of transcription factors and other transcriptional regulators (29,85). DELLA proteins harbor two distinct regions: the N-terminal DELLA domain and the C-terminal GRAS domain. While all the interactions with transcription factors occur through the GRAS domain, the DELLA domain is responsible for interaction with GIBBERELLIN INSENSITIVE DWARF1 (GID1), the GA nuclear receptor. Upon binding to GAs, GID1 undergoes a conformational change that exposes a movable lid with a surface able to interact with the DELLA proteins. This GID1-DELLA interaction triggers recruitment of the F-box protein GIBBERELLIN INSENSITIVE DWARF2/SLEEPY1 (GID2/SLY1), followed by polyubiquitination and degradation of DELLA proteins.
The current model for GA signaling implies that DELLA proteins optimize the balance of growth and defense responses by coordinately modulating multiple genetic circuits that can each function independently of DELLA (25). For instance, upon biotic or abiotic stress, DELLA proteins redirect plant resources towards an adaptive response that impairs growth. This mechanism would relay environmental information based on the sensitivity of GA metabolism to cues like light quality, light intensity, and ambient temperature, which in turn would alter DELLA stability.
SLs are a class of carotenoid-derived plant hormones that regulate axillary shoot growth, leaf senescence, secondary (cambial) growth, and root architecture (4,48,66,112,143,146,166). SLs are also exuded by roots into the soil, where they promote beneficial symbiotic interactions with arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi (5,115). Obligate root parasitic plants in the Orobanchaceae, includingStrigaspp., have evolved the ability to germinate after sensing SLs in soil, which indicate the nearby presence of a host (155,163).
The core mechanism of SL perception and signal transduction that has emerged over the past decade is familiar and yet unusual (155). SLs are perceived by DWARF14 (D14)/DECREASED APICAL DOMINANCE2 (DAD2), an α/β-hydrolase protein with a strictly conserved Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad. Unlike the GA receptors, which are also members of the α/β-hydrolase superfamily, D14/DAD2 has slow hydrolytic activity on SLs that is important for SL signal transduction (52). Nucleophilic attack by the catalytic Ser residue cleaves a butenolide ring from SL that is passed to and covalently bound by the catalytic His residue (32,168). What exactly constitutes activation of D14 is currently under debate. Although modification of the His residue is well supported, the evidence for a proposed covalently linked intermediate molecule bridging the catalytic Ser and His has been challenged (21). Furthermore, the imperfect correlation of the biological activity and hydrolyzability of SL analogs as well as a SL-hypersensitive, catalytically inactived14mutant has been pointed to as evidence that hydrolysis is not essential for signaling (119). Regardless, SL induces a conformational change in D14 that promotes its interaction with theF-boxprotein MORE AXILLARY GROWTH2 (MAX2)/DWARF3 (D3) (168). Recent work indicates that the C terminus of MAX2 can switch between two conformations that associate with different interfaces of D14 in the receptor's SL-bound and SL-hydrolyzed states, regulating the enzymatic activity and protein interactions of D14 (120). SL also promotes interactions between D14 and a subset of proteins in the SUPPRESSOR OF MAX2 1-like (SMXL) family known as DWARF53 (D53) in rice or SMXL6, SMXL7, and SMXL8 inArabidopsis(64,128,152,178). This triggers polyubiquitination and rapid degradation of D53/SMXL6/7/8. Direct interactions between MAX2 and SMXL7 are comparably weak or do not occur (78), implying that D14 functions as an SL-activated bridge that brings together SCFMAX2and its targets. However, a C-terminal helix of D3 enhances D14–D53 interactions (120), perhaps by stabilizing the active conformation of D14.
It is still unclear how SMXL proteins regulate plant growth. SMXL proteins have at least one EAR motif that enables interactions with TPL/TPR proteins (64,128,152). Therefore, the prevailing hypothesis has been that SMXL proteins function as transcriptional corepressors, similar to the targets of auxin and jasmonate signaling. IDEAL PLANT ARCHITECTURE (IPA1) in rice and several other SQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE (SPL) proteins in wheat are reported to interact directly with the SMXL protein D53, enabling transcriptional control of downstream genes (80,127). However, genetic analysis of theorthologsSPL9 and SPL15 suggests that SPL transcription factors might not function as SMXL partners in control of branching, at least inArabidopsis(12). SMXL proteins also appear to impose transcription-independent control of growth because not all developmental processes regulated by SMXL7 require conservation of the EAR motif (78). Furthermore, plasma membrane localization of the auxin efflux carrier PIN-FORMED1 (PIN1) is rapidly inhibited by SL, even in the presence of cycloheximide (123).
The core SL signaling pathway is highly similar to that of karrikins (KARs), a class of small butenolide molecules found in smoke that can promote seed germination and influence seedling growth (99). KAR signaling is also MAX2-dependent and involves a receptor and putative proteolytic targets that are ancientparalogsof D14 and SMXL6/7/8. InArabidopsis, KAR responses require the α/β-hydrolase protein KARRIKIN INSENSITIVE2 (KAI2)/HYPOSENSITIVE TO LIGHT (HTL) (156). KAI2 can bind KARs in vitro, and two crystal structures of KAI2-KAR1complexes have been resolved, albeit with different orientations of the ligand (50,165). Intriguingly,kai2andmax2mutants share high seed dormancy and reduced light sensitivity phenotypes that are not found in SL biosynthesis mutants and are opposite to the effects of KAR treatment (100,156). This and other observations have led to the hypothesis that KAI2 may perceive an unknown endogenous signal, known as KAI2 ligand (KL), that is not derived from the SL biosynthetic pathway (28). It may be that KARs, which have not been reported in plants and therefore should not be considered hormones, can act as chemical analogs of KL for some species. Indeed, KAI2 demonstrates some flexibility in its ligand range, as it can hydrolyze and confer responses to SL analogs that have an unnatural stereochemical configuration (41,117). Based on genetic suppressor data and homology to the SL pathway, the likely targets of SCFMAX2-KAI2 are SMAX1, the founding member of theSMXLgene family, and SMXL2 (129,130). There is some evidence of ligand-activated KAI2–MAX2 and KAI2–SMAX1 interactions from yeast two-hybrid or in vitro pulldowns, but in-depth biochemical characterization of SMAX1 degradation and the KAR signaling mechanism is still lacking (141,169).
There are interesting parallels in the SCF-based hormone signaling pathways outlined above that have been derived from studies of angiosperm model species. First, TIR1/AFB proteins, COI1, and MAX2 are all members of a subfamily of F-box proteins with C-terminal leucine-rich repeats (LRRs). Out of approximately 700 F-box protein-encoding genes inArabidopsis, only 23 are members of this subfamily (164). Remarkably, EBF1/2 proteins, which are involved in ethylene responses, are also within this group. It is unclear why this particular subfamily of F-box proteins features so prominently in plant hormone response pathways, but it is unlikely to be only because LRRs can form small molecule-docking sites, as neither MAX2 nor EBF1/2 directly bind the hormone. Second, the logic of some pathways is conserved despite the involvement of different molecular components. In the case of auxin and JA, coreceptors recognize a very limited repertoire of ligands. Closely related F-box proteins bind different substrates (Aux/IAAs and JAZ proteins) that do not share motifs or domains. These substrates each inhibit different classes of transcription factors through recruiting the same corepressor. In the case of GA and SL, the families of bioactive molecules are large and diverse. Both receptors are members of the α/β-hydrolase superfamily. Although only the SL receptor has retained catalytic activity, both use allosteric signaling mechanisms. Like auxin and JA, the targets of SL and KAR signaling are likely to function at least partially through a corepressor mechanism. Third, some of these signaling components have shared origins and evolved to serve different hormone pathways. As we discuss below, TIR1/AFB proteins and COI1 are ancient paralogs, as are D14 and KAI2, and SMXL proteins. Finally, all mechanisms feature fast responses, in which target protein degradation occurs within minutes of hormone treatment (73,175,178).
SCF-based plant hormone pathways control many developmental and physiological responses. Comparative analysis of hormone signaling pathways in many species beyond model plants points to important differences in the functions played by these hormones. A key question is to what degree the emergence of these signaling pathways has contributed tolife history traitevolution. In this section, we briefly review the major transitions in land plant evolution and then discuss the origin of these signaling systems within this context.
The evolution of the plant lineage involved several major transitions in life history and habitat. The first of these can definitely be considered the most dramatic of transitions: Algae occupying shallow, freshwater habitats developed the capacity to settle on land. This change in environment required a large number of adaptations, presumably in a stepwise manner. As no fossils are available that help reconstruct the anatomical adaptations and their relative order, and because noextantspecies appear to represent the evolutionary intermediates along this transition, one can only form deductions from extant early-diverging land plants and latesister groupswithin the Charophycean algal lineage. The change from aquatic to terrestrial habitats went along with a switch from filamentous, or two-dimensional, growth to three-dimensional morphologies. Also, while many algae have a floating or suspended habit, land plants are anchored to the ground surface throughrhizoidsor roots. As the exposure to atmosphere is very different from being suspended in water, another key adaptation must have been the development of a protective surface (cuticle) and selective gas-exchange pores. Furthermore, moving to the terrestrial surface, early land plants would likely have been exposed to a new range of microbes that were beneficial, pathogenic, or even symbiotic.
Following the conquest of land, a next major transition in plant life history involved the appearance of active vascular transport systems (69). Not only did these systems mechanically support plant structures and allow increases in height, the vascular system also allowed long-distance transport. In turn, increased size and long-distance transport have been major elements of functional partitioning between energy storage, light-, water-, and nutrient-harvesting tissues. Long-distance transport and functional partitioning, however, also necessitated the use of proxies for light conditions and other environmental factors, such as soil nutrient availability, to be communicated towards distant tissues.
A next, defining modification to plant life history was the development of seeds. All land plants (by definition) form embryos following fertilization. In Bryophytes, the embryonic/sporophytic stage forms a minimal part of the life cycle and culminates in the production of spores after meiosis insporophyticcells. In Lycophytes and ferns, there is an extended sporophytic stage, but there is no interruption between embryogenesis and following sporophyte development. The interruption of development at the end of embryogenesis evolved in the ancestor of seed plants (gymnosperms and angiosperms). This interruption naturally allowed control over the timing of development—germination of seeds—and in many cases the integration of environmental signals in this decision.
Lastly, an important transition in plant life history evolution was the establishment of flowers (94). These reproductive structures have helped attract pollinators to aid in pollination, while encapsulation of seeds in fruits has helped establish new strategies for dispersal. Clearly, all the developmental and physiological aspects of flower and fruit development require tight molecular control.
Recent evidence has established that the different SCF-mediated hormone signaling pathways emerged at different points along the evolution of the plant lineage, and in some cases a fairly precise description of theancestral stateshas been achieved. While the origin of auxin and JA signaling coincides with the emergence of land plants, GA-dependent degradation of DELLA proteins is linked to the appearance of vasculature, and canonical SL signaling has only been confirmed in seed plants (Figure 2).

Figure 2Click to view


Various studies have used genome-basedphylogeneticapproaches to reconstruct evolutionary histories of the three dedicated components in auxin response: TIR1/AFB, Aux/IAA, and ARF proteins (33,74,96). These studies showed that the complexity of auxin signaling observed in model Angiosperms is found across flowering plants and can be traced to the common ancestor of all seed plants, including Gymnosperms (33,74,96). Sampling of species for genome analysis in earlier diverging species is sparse and until recently only included the LycophyteSelaginella moellendorffii, the mossPhyscomitrella patens, and some Chlorophycean green algae. The results of comparisons between these species did not make clear what the ancestral state of the auxin response system was: No components were found in Chlorophytes (33), whilePhyscomitrellahad several copies of each component (107,110), andSelaginellaappeared to have fewer copies (9). Given that no species is representative of the ancestral state at which the lineage diverged, the only solution to establishing a more accurate reconstruction is to include more species, particularly in Charophycean algae and early land plants. Indeed, the genome of the liverwortMarchantia polymorpha(15) has helped establish that the early liverwort lineage has a minimal auxin response system with a single TIR1/AFB ortholog, a single Aux/IAA protein, and three ARF proteins. These ARF proteins represent orthologs of each of the three subtypes found across land plants: A, B, and C class (42,67). Again, however, it is unclear ifMarchantiarepresents the ancestral state or whether it has a contracted auxin response system.
Although genome resources are still limiting, there is a wealth of transcriptome information that can be leveraged to derive ancestral states. The 1KP (1,000 Plants; see the sidebar titled The OneKP Initiative) initiative has generatedRNA sequencing(RNA-seq)-basedtranscriptome assembliesof many plant species, including at least ten species in each of the Charophyte, liverwort, hornwort, moss, Lycophyte, and fern range of early diverging species (76,89). Mining this resource revealed the number of auxin response components at each node in plant evolution (96). An important finding was that auxin response appears to have evolved to regulate a pre-existing proto-ARFtranscription factorthat is present in Charophycean algae. Furthermore, the simplicity of the auxin response system represents the ancestral state, andMarchantiais representative of the system complexity in Bryophytes and Lycophytes. The increased number of ARF and Aux/IAA copies inPhyscomitrellais specific to this species and is potentially associated with the relatively fast genome evolution found in mosses (72). Increases in auxin signaling system complexity are not found until the first ferns, and there are several further increases in complexity at the base of the flowering plants (96).
THE ONEKP INITIATIVE
Inferring evolutionary histories, conservation, and diversification patterns of genes requires sequence information from species sampled across the plant phylogeny. Given that no single species’ genome is representative of the time it departed from the common ancestor of later-evolving lineages, studies on individual model species can be deceiving. Clade-specific gene losses and gains will have shaped that species’ genome but may be different from even closely related species. To overcome this problem, the international 1,000 Plants (OneKP) consortium (http://onekp.com) has generated RNA-seq-based transcriptomes for more than 1,000 species broadly sampled from the plant phylogeny (76). While the quality of individual transcriptomes is perhaps limited, and despite the fact that not all genes will be expressed, the sampling of multiple species per group (e.g., 21 lycophytes, 421 mosses, 10 hornworts, and 27 liverworts) allows one to infer the archetype of a gene family at the time of divergence. The RNA-seq data have been publicly released (http://www.onekp.com/public_read_data.html) and have been used to analyze plant phylogeny placement models (160), as well as specific gene families such as LEAFY (116), PIN (11), auxin response (96), and SL and KAR response (19,150) components.

Several of the morphological adaptations to the terrestrial habitat, particularly rhizoid development (62,113) and organized three-dimensional growth (42,67,107), prominently involve auxin responses in land plants. Auxin treatment dramatically promotes rhizoid formation inMarchantia(42,67), much as it influences homologous root hair development in flowering plants (88). Likewise, inhibition of auxin response leads to defects in cell division orientation in flowering plants such asArabidopsis(174), and loss of auxin response causes severe distortion of organized three-dimensional growth inMarchantia(67). Thus, the emergence of the auxin response system aligns well with the emergence of morphological processes controlled by auxin. It is quite possible that other adaptations to land correlate with auxin response: Auxin-insensitivePhyscomitrellamutants displayed strong growth defects, accompanied by misexpression of many genes involved in photosynthesis and light response (75).
The origin and evolution of components in the JA signaling system have not been studied in as much detail as auxin has. The most striking observation is that the coreceptors for auxin and JA, TIR1/AFB and COI1, share a single ancestral copy in Charophytes (96). This proto-TIR1/AFB/COI1 protein shows properties of both TIR1/AFB and COI1 yet lacks hormone-binding residues and is not expected to bind either auxin or JA. Thus, a duplication in this gene in the ancestor of all land plants likely gave rise to both auxin and JA coreceptors, a process that must have included modifications in the hormone-interacting protein surface in both duplicated copies. What selection pressures shaped such modifications are unknown. Since no clear algal JAZ orthologs have been identified (101), it is unclear to what degree the JA response system was preadapted. As in the case of auxin, the JA response system appears first in the land plant lineage, withMarchantiahaving single copies of COI1, JAZ, MYC, and NINJA (15). BecauseMarchantiais representative of the bryophytes and thus of the earliest land plants in regard to auxin signaling, it is likely that this degree of simplicity is also an intrinsic property of the earliest JA signaling pathway. Genetic analysis of the JA response pathway inMarchantiahas shown that the system operates similarly to the flowering plant system but with an interesting twist: The active compound facilitating MpCOI1–MpJAZ interaction is not JA-Ile—like in flowering plants—but instead is dinor-OPDA, a derivative of a metabolic precursor of JA (92). Thus, while the system despite its simplicity operates in a manner identical to the complex flowering plant JA response system, evolution has acted on the chemical nature of the hormone itself, likely involving coevolution with MpCOI1 and MpJAZ. An important question is whether dinor-OPDA represents the ancestral hormone or if this is a specific modification inMarchantia.
JA in flowering plants is associated with wound-, ultraviolet (UV)-, and drought responses, and defense against pathogens, primarilynecrotrophicmicrobes and herbivorous insects (59). It is very unlikely that this latter function—defense against insects—is part of the ancestral function of JA, given that the first airborne insects did not evolve until tens of millions of years after the emergence of the first land plants (38). However, with the transition to land, plants were likely exposed to a different suite of microbial pathogens, and the changes in organismal complexity and morphology may have encouraged novel strategies to deal with pathogen attacks. Some JA metabolites are volatile, and their use as a plant-to-plant communication signal is limited to terrestrial plants. Other JA metabolites, including the most active JA-Ile as well as the dinor-OPDA that acts as the COI1 ligand inMarchantia, are water-soluble (154) and would thus be compatible with being signaling molecules in both aquatic and terrestrial species. The roles of JA response in adapting to high UV (35), drought (68), and wounding (10) in land plants are very clearly connected to the terrestrial lifestyle: UV light intensity in air is higher than in water, and clearly the exposure to air causes desiccation if plants are not protected. Finally, on land in the absence of the dampening effect of water, the impact of colliding particles and the chance of wounding are also larger. Thus, one can rationalize how the roles of JA signaling may have contributed to early land adaptation.
From an evolutionary point of view, there is increasing evidence that DELLA proteins predate the emergence of GA metabolism and perception. First, active GA metabolism seems to be missing in nonvascular land plants, beyond the production of the precursors ent-kaurene and kaurenoic acid (KA) (90). Second, there is no evidence so far for GID1 receptors in the genomes of nonvascular land plants (173). The structural similarity between GID1 and carboxylesterases (CXEs) that hydrolyze short-chain fatty acid esters suggests a common origin, and key changes in the CXE active site would have abolished catalytic activity and modified the movable lid to allow binding of GA molecules (144,173). Third,DELLAgenes are present in all the land plant genomes sequenced so far, includingM. polymorpha(15), but in spite of the sequence features necessary for the interaction with GID1 being conserved in most nonvascular plants, they do not allow the interaction with GID1 (54,55,170). Although there is no information on their functions in nonvascular land plants,pre-adaptationof the N-terminal domain toward interaction with the GA receptor is intimately linked to its activity as a transcriptional coactivator, a function which is conserved in mosses and liverworts at least (54). Expression ofP. patensDELLA proteins rescues to some extent the loss of two of the fiveDELLAgenes inArabidopsis(170) but does not promote dwarfism in rice plants (55), indicating that there may be at least a partial degree of conservation in the capacity to interact with partner transcription factors in early-diverging land plants. Therefore, it is likely that DELLA proteins would be transcriptional regulators in the common ancestor of Embryophyta, and the GA synthesis and perception module recruited DELLA proteins through the conserved N-terminal domain to exert GA-dependent control over transcriptional programs during the establishment of the vascular plant lineage (54).
It is striking that the GA response system emerged first in vascular plants. GA has many activities in vascular plants, many of which are related to controlling the extent and rate of growth. Intrinsic to GA activity seems to be its tight integration with other signaling pathways, for example, auxin or light signaling (6). The DELLA proteins, effectors of GA action, appear to constitute hubs in transcriptional regulation, interacting with components of many signaling pathways (30,85). Examples of these are interactions with PIF, ARF, and brassinosteroid response proteins to control growth-regulating genes (31,45,102). Thus, GA may have emerged as a facile long-distance signal to coordinate local growth with information from distant organs about environmental inputs. Notably, both the DELLA proteins and many of their interaction partners predate the emergence of the GA signaling pathways, and it is thus possible that DELLA proteins represent an ancient transcription hub that was subverted to GA regulation with the establishment of vascular plants.
Phylogenetic analyses have suggested that the SL signaling mechanism found in angiosperms is derived from the KAR/KL pathway.KAI2is present in Bryophytes, butD14emerges only in seed plants (19). Similarly,SMXLgenes are present in Bryophytes, but diversification intoSMAX1is not apparent until the Gymnosperms, and D53-typeSMXLgenes (e.g.,SMXL6/7/8) are an even more recent innovation of Angiosperms (93,150). In contrast,MAX2is present throughout land plants and is typically maintained in genomes as a single-copy gene (23).
Despite the lack of clearly recognizable SL receptors and targets prior to the Angiosperm lineage, several lines of evidence suggest that SL perception evolved much earlier. First, canonical and noncanonical SLs have been detected in Bryophytes and putatively in green algae in the Charales (34,172). The core enzymes involved in SL biosynthesis from carotenoids are found in most Bryophytes, althoughP. patensandM. polymorphaappear to lack at least one of these (150). Second, loss of CAROTENOID CLEAVAGE DIOXYGENASE 8 (CCD8), which carries out a key step of SL biosynthesis in angiosperms, causes a dramatic effect on protonemal growth inP. patens(108). This phenotype can be recovered by application ofrac-GR24, a racemate of synthetic molecules that mimic SL and potentially KL. Low concentrations ofrac-GR24 also influence the growth ofChara corallina(Charales) andMarchantiaspp. (34). Third, there is a precedent for KAI2 proteins having the ability to function as SL receptors. In root parasitic plants in the Orobanchaceae, KAI2 has undergone an atypical degree of gene duplication. A subset of the KAI2paralogsfound in these parasites evolved into SL receptors, enabling SL-activated germination responses (27,140,142). Similar, but independent, diversification of KAI2 is evident in Bryophytes, leading to the hypothesis that some of the KAI2 paralogs might recognize SLs (19,82). If so, most of the sequence divergence that distinguishes D14 from KAI2 may be due to coevolution with D53-typeSMXLgenes rather than acquisition of SL perception (19).
Countering this hypothesis, the threeP. patensKAI2-like proteins in the clade most closely related to angiosperm KAI2 bind, hydrolyze, and are structurally destabilized by (-)-5-deoxystrigol, which has a stereochemical configuration not found in any known SLs (18). Three other PpKAI2-like proteins bind KAR1in vitro, and a fourth does not bind either class of chemicals (18). Because responses to natural SLs or the SL precursor carlactone (CL) were not found among these proteins, questions arise about whether one of the remaining four PpKAI2-like proteins, which were not amenable to purification, functions as an SL receptor; whether PpCCD8 produces an atypical CL stereoisomer; or whether there is an alternative mechanism for SL perception in moss. To resolve this it would be useful to determine whether the phenotype ofPpccd8mutants is restored by enantiomerically pure SLs with natural or unnatural configurations and whether knockout of anyPpKAI2-like genes reproduces aPpccd8phenotype.
Another challenge to an angiosperm-like SL signaling model in moss is thatmax2mutants inP. patenshave phenotypes that are very different or potentially opposite to SL-deficientccd8mutants. While this difference might be explained as a complex phenotype resulting from the loss of both KL and SL signaling, as found inArabidopsis max2plants, it is striking that thePpmax2mutant retains responses torac-GR24 (83). This may indicate that MAX2 does not carry out SL-induced turnover of SMXL proteins or that its role in this process is only auxiliary.
The contribution of KARs to land adaptation is less intuitive. The capacity to respond to smoke, which encompasses KARs as well as other chemical stimulants, is widespread among the Angiosperms (99). However, for many species this may reflect the ability of KARs to substitute for an endogenous KL more than it implies an adaptation for postfire regrowth, as KAR responses are found among plants that are not considered fire followers. KAR perception is not apparent in the Bryophytes, suggesting that their KAI2 are more KL-specific. This is seen inP. patens, which has not shown any obvious responses to KAR1treatments, despite having KAI2-like proteins that bind KAR1in vitro (18,56). Also, aKAI2gene fromS. moellendorffiiis able to partially or fully rescue some phenotypes of anArabidopsis kai2mutant and yet is not responsive to KARs or GR24 (157). Therefore, a better question may be how KL (or at least KAI2 activity) contributed to land adaptation. KAI2 has functions in seed germination, seedling photomorphogenesis, root and root hair growth and development, leaf shape, drought resistance, and abiotic stress tolerance inArabidopsis(79,128,134,149,153,156). As thePhyscomitrella max2mutant has photomorphogenesis defects, it is possible that KAI2 has a conserved role in light-regulated growth throughout land plants (83). Another interesting possibility is that an ancestral function of KAI2 was to enable interactions with AM fungi, as KAI2 is required for AM symbiosis in rice (51). This symbiosis is used by more than 80% of land plants, including Bryophytes, and it is conceivable that KAI2-dependent processes have contributed to its adoption and establishment.
The origin of the different SCF-based hormone response pathways can be intuitively linked to transitions in plant life history, although causality is unclear. Prominent properties of each of the hormone pathways discussed here are the diverse functions that are controlled by each hormone in flowering plants. A key question is how this divergence came to be. Here, we focus on the steps in pathway evolution that led to increases in response diversity.
In the auxin response system, all diversity seems to be contained within the TIR1/AFB, Aux/IAA, and ARF protein families. An important question is whether the complexity of the auxin response system, as derived from genome/transcriptome information, is predictive of a species’ response properties. Many species, even beyond the green lineage, were shown to physiologically respond to auxin (7,14,33,74). Surprisingly, two studies showed that, despite the absence of a full nuclear auxin response system, two Charophycean algal species readily responded to auxin (96,103), both activating and repressing hundreds of genes within an hour (96). Thus, while the specificity of such responses to the chemical structure is not clear and may represent a general response to amino acid derivatives, there are unexplained aspects of auxin response that are revealed by studies in early plant lineages. In a landmark study, all three Aux/IAA genes inPhyscomitrella(107) were deleted, and transcriptome analysis demonstrated that no transcriptional auxin response could be detected in such mutants (75). Thus, the widespread Aux/IAA-independent auxin-regulated transcription in Charophytes was clearly lost in land plants as a specific response system was gained.
Among land plant species that have a nuclear auxin response system, there are clear differences in system complexity. Duplications within each response component family increased the complement of response components during land plant evolution. Significant expansion occurred in both the ancestor of vascular plants and the ancestor of flowering plants. It is reasonable to predict that the complexity of the auxin response system determines the output, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Comparing each species’ genomic auxin response component complement with their auxin response output (the number of genes, the amount of activation versus repression, and the amplitude of regulation) across four land plant species revealed that indeed ARF number positively correlates with the number of auxin-regulated genes. Furthermore, a switch from dominant gene repression to gene activation is correlated with a gene duplication in the A-class ARF subfamily (96). Finally, the high amplitude of gene regulation that is typical for many auxin-regulated genes in flowering plants (2,145) seems to be associated with more efficient repression in the absence of auxin, rather than more activation in the presence of auxin, and correlated with duplications of Aux/IAA and TIR1/AFB genes (96). Thus, comparisons among species reveal the design principles of the auxin response system.
Given the deep origin of the auxin response system in the ancestor of all land plants and the regulation of similar cellular processes, a key question is whether the same genes are regulated by the system across land plants. The amount of transcriptome data is limited, even within the flowering plants. A comparative transcriptomic experiment including three Bryophyte species and a fern, however, revealed that all of these species share a small set of auxin-regulated genes that appear to have acted in a module since the origin of land plants. These genes include both activated and repressed ones, and both encompass developmental regulators (WIP-domain protein and homeodomain leucine zipper transcription factors, expansin) and feedback regulation of auxin levels (YUC enzyme) (96).
An interesting aspect of deep evolutionary analysis is that progressive steps towards later diverging plants such as angiosperms have led not only to increases in complexity but also to losses of ancestral components. Indeed, there are several clades in the ARF and TIR1/AFB families that were lost in Brassicaceae, and are thus not present in theArabidopsisgenome (96). In addition, however, there is a noncanonical member of the ARF family (ncARF) that lacks a DNA-binding domain that arose in the Bryophyte ancestor and was lost in the common ancestor of ferns. This ncARF has a positive role in auxin response and auxin-dependent gene regulation inMarchantia(43,96) and thus represents a relevant component in these species that would not have been predicted from the angiosperm-based knowledge.
The overall trajectory of JA response system evolution may have closely followed the one described for auxin. The DNA-binding transcription factor controlled by JAZ, MYC, belongs to the bHLH family, which itself is ancient and not limited to plants (87). Genes with close homology to MYC are found in algal genomes, although it remains to be seen if the JAZ-interacting domain is likely to allow JA regulation (57,101). Nonetheless, in this case, it seems that JA signaling evolved to regulate a pre-existing transcription factor. In this pathway, expansion mostly occurred in the JAZ family, while COI1 seems to be present as a single-copy gene in all genomes surveyed. The MYC transcription factor has undergone limited duplications (40), and thus the diversity of JA responses is likely driven by diversification of JAZ proteins. There has not yet been a systematic analysis of JAZ gene function and functional diversification, but the presence of substantial primary sequence differences within the angiosperm JAZ family (8) suggests a role in mediating specific JA responses.
How has the evolution of the different GA signaling elements shaped the pervasive functions of this hormone in plant development and defense? Although a full answer is still missing, comparative analysis of GID1 and DELLA activity in different plants has provided a few clues. While functional diversity of auxin and JA has been associated with the presence of multipleparalogsof signaling elements performing different roles, this does not seem to be the case with DELLA proteins because the actual number ofDELLAgenes per genome is not associated with different levels of functional diversification. For instance, theSolanum lycopersicumandOryza sativagenomes harbor only one copy of aDELLAgene (PROCERAandSLENDER RICE, respectively) (60,63), while Brassicaceae tend to have five members (GAI,RGA,RGL1,RGL2, andRGL3inArabidopsis) to perform the same functions as in tomato and rice (105,124). Multiplication ofDELLAgenes inArabidopsishas resulted in subfunctionalization linked to the expression patterns of the particular genes and not to differential ability of corresponding DELLA proteins to recognize partner TFs (46). A similar logic can be applied to GID1, with only one copy in monocot genomes and three inArabidopsis(61,144,161). In this case, the different DELLA proteins inArabidopsisdisplay differential affinities for the three GID1 receptors (133), providing a mechanism by which certain changes in GA levels might preferentially affect the stability of only a subset of DELLA proteins. Given that this regulation would not explain the multiplicity of processes regulated by GAs, functional diversification must rely on the promiscuous capacity of DELLA proteins to interact with large sets of TFs that serve different functions. In other words, GAs would regulate as many processes as those under the control of DELLA partners. This is, for instance, supported by the interaction of DELLA proteins with CYCLOPS, a central TF in the regulation of root symbiosis development, described in legumes (44,65,106). On the other hand, although there is no experimental evidence that confirms that the conservation of DELLA promiscuity is a beneficial trait selected for during plant evolution, comparative in silico network analysis of putative DELLA targets in species with GA-regulated (ArabidopsisandS. lycopersicum), with GA-independent (P. patens), and without DELLA proteins (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) suggests that DELLA proteins and GAs have gradually increased the coordination of expression between transcriptional circuits (17).
Diversification of MAX2-associated signaling has occurred through its receptor partners and proteolytic targets, asMAX2itself is typically present as a single copy in land plants.KAI2is prone to gene duplication, unlikeD14, which is usually maintained as a single copy in seed plant genomes. AlthoughArabidopsisonly has oneKAI2, it is common to observe two or more copies ofKAI2in angiosperm genomes, with lineage-specific amplifications often occurring (19,27). Whether variousKAI2paralogs have functional differences largely remains to be determined, but, as noted in the section titled Origins of SCF-Mediated Hormone Signaling in Plants, a dramatic expansion of theKAI2family in the parasitic Orobanchaceae has given rise to changes in ligand specificities for these receptors (27). Other homologs ofKAI2andD14, such asD14-LIKE2(DLK2), are found in seed plants, but their roles are unclear.DLK2has a very weak ability to hydrolyze an unnatural stereoisomer of the SL analog GR24 and does not have a conserved MAX2 interface (148). A phenotype fordlk2loss-of-function mutants has remained elusive, although overexpression ofDLK2can influence seedling growth (148,156).
The seed plant lineage began with twoSMXLtypes,SMAX1andSMXL4. Expansion at the base of the angiosperms gave rise to theSMXL7/8andSMXL3/9subclades, which are derived fromSMAX1andSMXL4, respectively. These four groups are found in all angiosperms, and further divergence at the base of the eudicot lineage led to theSMXL7andSMXL8subclades andSMXL3andSMXL9subclades. Duplications ofSMAX1,SMXL7, andSMXL4and loss ofSMXL9within the Brassicaceae have produced the complement of eightSMXLgenes found inA. thaliana(150).SMAX1andSMXL2are partially redundant regulators of KAR/KL responses, withSMAX1playing a more substantial role in germination and seedling growth (129,130,134,149).SMXL6,SMXL7, andSMXL8all contribute to branching regulation, butSMXL7andSMXL6account for most of this activity (128,152). There is no evidence that SMXL3, SMXL4, or SMXL5 are regulated by either KAR/KL or SL pathways, and indeed these proteins lack a motif that has been associated with MAX2-dependent proteolysis. These three genes have partially redundant functions in phloem formation, and the triple mutant is lethal after the seedling stage (151). Beyond this, it is unclear how diversified SMXL functions may be within each of these major groups.
F-BOX PROTEINS IN HORMONE SIGNALING EVOLUTION
The prominent role of F-box proteins in several hormone signaling mechanisms raises questions about why proteolysis-based signaling mechanisms were favored during plant evolution. One possibility may be that extensive duplications of F-box genes have provided opportunities for neofunctionalization. The F-box protein superfamily varies dramatically in size across land plants: Whereas 241 F-box proteins are found inPhyscomitrella patensand the grape genome only has 156,Arabidopsis, rice, and Medicago genomes contain from ∼700 to ∼900 (58,164,167). The high degree of variability is one sign of the lineage-specific expansions that have occurred for many F-box protein clades. The F-box protein superfamily can be divided into different groups based on the C-terminal domain. Among the most prominent families are those with C-terminal Kelch repeats or F-box associated domains that appear to have been derived from Kelch repeats. Signatures of purifying selection in F-box domains and adaptive selection in portions of the C-terminal domain of these families suggest a means by which new protein targets may be acquired (98,118). TIR1 and the five AFB proteins, COI1, MAX2, and the ethylene regulators EBF1 and EBF2 are all members of a 23-gene (inArabidopsis) subfamily of proteins with C-terminal leucine-rich repeats (LRR_7) that is well-conserved throughout land plants (164).

Studies in plants and animals have provided evidence for the coevolution of hormone metabolism and signaling networks and have hinted to its biological relevance (159). In the case of SCF-based hormone signaling (see the sidebar titled F-Box Proteins in Hormone Signaling Evolution), the hormones involved display striking differences in the degree of complexity of the biologically active molecules. For instance, while chemical diversity among auxins is limited to four relatively similar compounds whose synthesis involves only a few steps, around 100 GA molecules and at least 23 canonical SLs are found in plants. Therefore, several questions deserve some attention from an evolutionary perspective.
Is chemical diversity associated with the number or type of functions exerted by the different hormones? This does not seem to be the case, given that auxin is involved in as many developmental stages as GAs. As in auxin, functional diversification in GA action relies on the molecular features of the signaling pathway rather than each GA molecule triggering differential responses. First, only a small fraction of the known GA molecules are biologically active, and second, there is no clear evidence that any given response to GAs cannot be induced by either one of the known active molecules. A similar situation is found for SLs; chemical modifications of the core SL structure, for example, hydroxylation or acetoxylation, can impact their activity on parasitic weed germination and branching of AM fungi, but specific SLs have not been associated with different roles in plant development.
Is chemical diversity associated with specific features of the hormone perception modules? It is likely that the higher degree of chemical diversity in GA and SL reflects evolutionary constraints in auxin and JA metabolism imposed by the mechanistic nature of the perception module—a coreceptor in the case of auxin and JA—while GA and SL perception depends on single receptor proteins. The observation that the complexity in GA and SL metabolism has only increased during evolution also supports this idea. GAs are divided into two classes based on the number of carbon atoms: C20-GAs and C19-GAs, in which C20has been replaced by a gamma-lactone ring. GA biosynthesis occurs in three steps: (a) the formation of ent-kaurene and KA in the proplastids, (b) formation of GA12in the endoplasmic reticulum by KA oxidase, and (c) formation of active GA in the cytosol by successive oxidation steps. Nonvascular land plants lack bioactive GAs, and there are no homologs of KA oxidase inP. patens(53,91). Although ent-kaurene-deficientP. patensmutants (Ppcps/ks) showed limited protonemal cell differentiation of chloronemata to caulonemata, which are fast-growing cells that produce gametophores, the application of KA but not of GA rescued the phenotype. Subsequent work has identified the nature of the actual KA-derived bioactive molecule in moss as 3β-hydroxy-kaurenoic acid (90). However, the lack of GID1 receptor homologs in moss makes it unlikely that this compound acts through the canonical GID1-DELLA pathway operating in vascular plants.
The emergence of GID1 GA receptors required the recruitment of a specific Y residue in the active center of ancestral CXE to establish the interaction with hydroxylated C3in bioactive GAs (95,122), and the discrimination between active and inactive GAs gradually increased during evolution, as indicated by the observation that the Lycophyte GID1 receptor binds both the active GA4and the inactive GA34or GA with similar efficiencies (173). Therefore, evolution has operated towards more specific discrimination between active and inactive GAs, but additional GA-evolution mechanisms have developed in specific taxa, such as the lack of C13-OH-related GA molecules in Lycophytes (55) or the spatially separated synthesis of the GA precursor antheridiogen (methyl-GA9) and the bioactive GA4 moiety (137).
A similar case is postulated for SLs. Canonical SLs share a tricyclic ABC-ring structure connected by an enol–ether bond to a butenolide D-ring in a 2'Rconfiguration. More than 23 canonical SLs have been discovered. These molecules vary in the side chain configurations of the ABC-ring and are divided into strigol- and orobanchol-type classes based on the stereochemical configuration of the BC-ring (171). In addition, several noncanonical SLs have been identified that lack the conventional ABC-ring structure but retain the D-ring and SL-like activity. These include the biosynthetic precursor of SLs, CL, and its derivatives, carlactonoic acid (CLA) and methyl carlactonoic acid (1,16).
Plants vary in the types and amounts of SLs they synthesize. Tobacco, for example, produces 11 canonical SLs of both stereochemical types (162). Some species, such asP. patensandA. thaliana, neither of which are mycotrophic, probably produce only noncanonical SLs (171). Remarkably, the composition of even major SL types can vary within a single family. Among the Poaceae, for example, sorghum normally produces strigol-type SLs, rice makes only orobanchol-type SLs, and maize produces noncanonical SLs.
The evolutionary history of SL diversification remains murky, in part because the biosynthetic pathways have not been fully defined.S. moellendorffiimakes orobanchol-type SLs, as do many of the Angiosperms tested so far, but it is not clear that orobanchol-type SLs are an ancestral molecule from which strigol-type SLs evolved (171). A cytochrome P450, MAX1, plays an important role in SL biosynthesis steps after CL. Typically, MAX1 converts CL to CLA. In some species, such as rice andS. moellendorffii, MAX1 paralogs are also able to catalyze reactions that produce the canonical SLs 4-deoxyorobanchol or orobanchol, while in others, such as tomato, unknown enzymes must carry out these final steps (171,176,177). A sulfotransferase, LOW GERMINATION STIMULANT 1 (LGS1), has recently been implicated in strigol production in sorghum, but it remains to be determined how it does so and whether this function is evolutionarily conserved (47).
The biological significance of the diversified SL family is also unclear. In angiosperms, the SL receptor D14 is typically maintained as a single-copy gene under strong purifying selection (27). While it is possible that many SLs with different affinities for D14 have emerged as a way to fine-tune SL signaling activity, much simpler evolutionary paths to achieve the same regulatory effect can be imagined. Instead, SL diversification may have been driven by selective pressures imposed by AM fungi and parasitic plants. Most canonical SLs have been identified in exudates from phosphate-starved roots, usually through parasite germination bioassays, and it is not known which of these molecules have significant roles as internal hormones. It is possible that noncanonical SLs such as CLA, which appears to be found broadly in land plants, serve the hormonal role (172). Canonical SLs, which have higher stability and lower diffusibility in soil, might act primarily as rhizosphere signals to AM fungi (172). The very low abundance of SLs in plant tissues makes evaluation of this hypothesis difficult to achieve. However, a highly sensitive in vivo assay for SL activity has demonstrated that D14 inArabidopsishas selective responses to applied canonical SLs (114). It would be very interesting to use this assay to compare how D14 responds to the noncanonical SLs thatArabidopsisactually makes, or to examine the ligand preferences of D14 in species that make both canonical and noncanonical SLs.
The diverse SL profiles of host plants seem likely to have driven expansion of the clade of KAI2 receptors for SL (KAI2d) that evolved in parasitic plants. Limited sampling of the Orobanchaceae has so far shown that specialist parasites tend to have fewer KAI2d paralogs, while generalists such asStrigaspp. have many (27). This correlation may indicate a link between KAI2d diversity and the ability to detect different SLs. Supporting this idea, a range of affinities for different SLs has been demonstrated for several KAI2d paralogs fromStriga hermonthica(140,142).




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
Research in the authors’ laboratories on hormone response and evolution is funded by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) (VICI 865.14.001, GSGT.GSGT.2018.013, and OCENW.KLEIN.027 to D.W.), the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (BFU2016-80621-P to M.A.B.), and the National Science Foundation (IOS-1737153, IOS-1740560, and IOS-1856741 to D.C.N.).
1Dobzhansky T. 1973. Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.Am. Biol. Teach.35(3):125–29.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


