We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Apomixis is a form of reproduction leading to clonal seeds and offspring that are genetically identical to the maternal plant. While apomixis naturally occurs in hundreds of plant species distributed across diverse plant families, it is absent in major crop species. Apomixis has a revolutionary potential in plant breeding, as it could allow the instant fixation and propagation though seeds of any plant genotype, most notably F1hybrids. Mastering and implementing apomixis would reduce the cost of hybrid seed production, facilitate new types of hybrid breeding, and make it possible to harness hybrid vigor in crops that are not presently cultivated as hybrids. Synthetic apomixis can be engineered by combining modifications of meiosis and fertilization. Here, we review the current knowledge and recent major achievements toward the development of efficient apomictic systems usable in agriculture.
Article metrics loading...
Apomixis is a form of reproduction leading to clonal seeds and offspring that are genetically identical to the maternal plant. While apomixis naturally occurs in hundreds of plant species distributed across diverse plant families, it is absent in major crop species. Apomixis has a revolutionary potential in plant breeding, as it could allow the instant fixation and propagation though seeds of any plant genotype, most notably F1hybrids. Mastering and implementing apomixis would reduce the cost of hybrid seed production, facilitate new types of hybrid breeding, and make it possible to harness hybrid vigor in crops that are not presently cultivated as hybrids. Synthetic apomixis can be engineered by combining modifications of meiosis and fertilization. Here, we review the current knowledge and recent major achievements toward the development of efficient apomictic systems usable in agriculture.
Hybrid plants can have increased vigor compared to their inbred parents. This phenomenon, known as heterosis, has been described in many plant species and has been exploited in the last 100 years in the hybrid seed industry (24,58,76,123). Hybrid crop varieties lead to the highest yields in many important crop categories including grains (maize and rice), oils (rapeseed and sunflower), sugars (sugar beet), fibers (cotton), and vegetables (tomato and numerous others) (8,58). However, hybrid plants reproduce sexually, and their offspring are genetically and phenotypically variable (Figure 1). Therefore, new hybrid seeds need to be produced annually, which is laborious, expensive and not feasible in a number of important crop species, including wheat and soybean (82,145).

Figure 1Click to view


Apomictic plant species produce seeds that contain the same genetic information as their mothers and can fix hybrid, usually polyploid, genotypes through subsequent generations (110,111,119). In nature,apomixisgenes can be passed through the pollen from apomictic plants to sexually reproducing plants, leading to the generation of new clones. New apomictic clones can permanently fix ideal genotypes that lead to vigorous phenotypes in subsequent generations. Therefore, the application of apomixis in sexual crop species could fix heterozygous genotypes through seeds (Figure 1) and fundamentally alter breeding and agricultural practices (55,65,125,135).
The application of apomixis in crop species has several potential advantages. First, hybrids would only need to be produced once and then could be propagated through seeds for multiple generations. This would reduce the cost of hybrid seed production and make it possible for farmers to generate their own hybrid seed. Second, some important crop species are currently not cultivated as hybrids (e.g., wheat and soybean) due to the technical challenges of generating hybrids on a large scale (82,145). Implementation of apomixis in such species would facilitate the cultivation of hybrid plants, which could lead to major gains in yield. Third, synthetic apomictic systems could lead to the development of new breeding schemes (132). Notably, in classical F1hybrid breeding, both parental lines need to be fully homozygous before crossing, while apomixis would allow the propagation of a heterozygous plant even if its parents are unknown. This would allow the development of novel and faster breeding schemes. Finally, several polyploid crops (including potato, banana, and cassava) are propagated vegetatively to prevent loss of the hybrid state and due to reproductive incompatibilities, which means they are prone to spreading diseases (30,40,131). Most plant pathogens cannot be passed through seed, and, therefore, propagation of hybrid polyploid crop varieties through apomictic seed could have a major benefit for the control of devastating plant pathogens.
The application of apomixis in crop species could be carried out via the introgression of apomixis genes from natural apomicts (e.g., introgression of apomixis fromTripsacumto maize) (51). However, this approach relies on the existence of a closely related apomictic species and has to date not been successful. Engineering apomixis from components of our understanding ofmeiosis, fertilization, andendospermbiology has emerged as a promising approach to make apomixis in any crop a reality.
Sexual reproduction relies on two crucial events: meiosis and fertilization. Meiosis reduces ploidy and shuffles the genetic information inherited from the previous generation. Meiosis thus leads to the production of haploid and recombinedspores. As each resultinggameteis unique, the process of sexual reproduction generates infinite genetic variation among siblings. In mammals, the spores differentiate directly into gametes, but in flowering plants, the haploid spores must enter and complete gametogenesis before fertilization can take place (70). InArabidopsisand most other flowering plant species, a single female spore passes through three rounds of haploid mitotic division, and two female gametes—the haploid egg cell and the diploid central cell—differentiate (Figure 1). During male gametogenesis, male spores divide twice mitotically, and two haploid cells differentiate into gametes (sperm). The two haploid male gametes delivered by the pollen tube participate in so-called double fertilization: One male gamete fuses with the haploid female gamete (egg cell) and the other with the diploid female gamete (central cell), giving rise to the diploidembryoand the triploid endosperm, respectively. The endosperm will support the development of the embryo, like the placenta supports the embryo in mammals.
Engineering clonal reproduction through seeds requires bypassing both meiosis and fertilization (Figure 2). In natural apomicts, this happens in two broad manners (110,111). In sporophytic apomixis, a somatic cell initiates embryogenesis without either meiosis or fertilization, as is the case inCitruswhere a candidate gene (CitRWP) for nucellar polyembryony has been identified (143). In gametophytic apomixis, a cell develops into a femalegametophytewithout prior meiosis. The resulting clonal gametophyte, which contains a clonal egg cell, will initiate embryogenesis without fertilization. Gametophytic apomixis comes in two flavors, depending on if the meiocyte skips meiosis (diplospory) or a somatic cell (apospory) develops into a gametophyte. Note that in diplospory, typically only one embryo is present per seed as there is a single meiocyte per ovule. By contrast, in both sporophytic apomixis and apospory, clonal and sexual embryos can cohabit and compete in a single forming seed (77,143), making diplospory-like strategies more attractive to engineer fully penetrant clonal reproduction.

Figure 2Click to view


Successful implementation of synthetic apomixis to date has mimicked diplospory (Figure 2), with the meiosis modified into a mitotic-like division (apomeiosis) and the resultant clonal gamete developing into an embryo without the contribution of a male gamete (69,95,139). Turning meiosis into mitosis has been achieved with high efficiency in two plant species (see Section 3). However, bypassing meiosis is not enough, as the clonal diploid female gametes are fertilized, leading to the doubling of ploidy at each generation (29,115). To bypass fertilization (see Section 4), two strategies are at hand: (a)parthenogenesis, which is the formation of an embryo from an egg cell independently of a male gamete (19,69), and (b) the use of haploid inducers where a pollen grain is required to trigger embryonic development, yet the male gamete genome does not contribute to the embryo genome (66,114). Bypassing fertilization alone leads to the production of haploid and recombined progeny, but combining parthenogenesis or male genome elimination with apomeiosis leads to the production of a clonal embryo and clonal seeds (Figure 2), as demonstrated inArabidopsisand rice (69,95,139).
In contrast to mitosis, which produces clonal cells, meiosis produces recombined haploid cells that will develop into genetically unique gametes (Figure 3). Mechanistically, meiosis fundamentally differs from mitosis in three aspects (97,99): (a) Homologous recombination occurs at high levels, with at least one crossover per chromosome pair; (b) during the first division,homologous chromosomesmove to opposite poles, meaning thatsister chromatidsare distributed to the same pole; and (c) two divisions follow a single replication, leading to ploidy halving. This contrasts with mitosis, during which a single round of replication is followed by a single round of segregation where the pairs of freshly replicated sister chromatids are distributed to opposite poles of the cell. TheMitosis instead of Meiosis(MiMe)concept consists of combining three mutations that each affect one of the key features that distinguish meiosis from mitosis (29) (Figure 3).MiMewas first established inArabidopsis thaliana(29) and then successfully applied in rice (102).

Figure 3Click to view


The first building block ofMiMeis the abolition of meiotic recombination. This can be done by mutating genes essential for forming DNA double-strand breaks that initiate homologous recombination, as identified inArabidopsis. The originalMiMeused aspo11-1mutation. Other mutations that abolish recombination—prd1,prd2, andprd3/pair1—were also successfully tested to generate theMiMephenotype (102). A knockout of any other conserved known factor required for double-strand break formation, such asSPO11-2ormTOPVIB, would likely be equally suitable to buildMiMe. All six of these genes are well conserved at the sequence level and were also shown to be essential for recombination in rice and/or more distant eukaryotes (99,138) (Table 1), making their identification easy and strongly suggesting that their function would be conserved in any crop species. An additional candidate,DFO, is essential to initiate recombination inArabidopsis(157), but its homologs have not yet been functionally analyzed in other plant species, and it does not seem to be conserved in other eukaryotes, raising doubts about its universality to initiate recombination in plants. Additional genes that were shown to be essential for the initiation of recombination in rice includeSDS(148),PCH2/OsCRC1(101), andP31comet(62), but their function is not completely conserved in plants. InArabidopsis, PCH2 and P31cometare involved in later steps of meiotic recombination, and their mutation reduces but does not abolish recombination (5,81). SDS also has a divergent role inArabidopsis, where it is not essential for double-strand break formation but directs recombination to the homologous chromosome (25,146). Many other genes are important for recombination in plants, but only those required for double-strand break formation are associated with complete abolition of crossover formation (99,144). As clonal reproduction necessitates the complete absence of recombination, these genes appear less suited to engineerMiMe.
Mutation of genes involved in meiosis that can be used to generate diploid/clonal gametes
1Abbreviations:At,Arabidopsis thaliana; npe: nonplant eukaryotes (e.g., yeast, mice);Os,Oryza sativa(rice);Ta,Triticum aestivum(bread wheat);Zm,Zea mays(maize).
The text colors are associated with the building blocks ofMiMe[abolition of recombination (red), separation of sister chromatids (green), and skipping of second division (blue)] (see alsoFigure 3).

The second building block ofMiMeis the alteration of chromosome distribution at meiosis I. While at mitosis the kinetochores of the two freshly replicated sister chromatids are oriented to opposite poles of the cell, atmeiosisthey adopt a monopolar orientation, facing the same side of the cell. Consequently, sister chromatids are separated at mitosis, while at meiosis they migrate to the same pole of the cell, and the pairs of homologous chromosomes (each composed of two chromatids) are separated (Figure 3). This monopolar orientation is maintained at meiosis even when recombination is abolished (50). Consequently, in aspo11-1mutant, chromosome segregation is unbalanced at meiosis I, leading to aneuploid gametes and sterility (29,102). The monopolar orientation of sister chromatid kinetochores in plants is dependent on the cohesin complex, the molecular glue that keeps sister chromatids together after replication (12). Mutating the meiosis-specific cohesin subunitREC8inspo11-1modifies the mode of distribution of chromosomes at meiosis I, with pairs of chromatids aligning on the metaphase plate and being separated at anaphase I, just like at mitosis. However, in thisspo11-1 rec8double mutant, the second division still occurs, during which the free chromatids segregate erratically, leading to aneuploidsporesand sterility (12,29).
The last building block of theMiMeconcept is the skipping of the second meiotic division, preventing ploidy halving. This was made possible by the identification of theArabidopsis OMISSION OF SECOND DIVISION1(OSD1) gene (11), which was later shown to be a regulator of the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) (23). In the absence ofOSD1, meiosis is terminated at the end of the first division, probably because of a hyperactive APC/C. This premature meiotic exit results in diploid spores, diploidgametesat very high frequencies (∼100% in male, ∼85% in female), and polyploid progeny. Theosd1meiosis produces diploid spores, but this is fundamentally different from mitosis since during the single meiotic division ofosd1recombination occurs and homologous chromosomes segregate, resulting in recombined diploid gametes (29).
Combining the three mutations together—wherespo11-1(or another recombination-initiation-complex mutant) abolishes meiotic recombination,rec8leads to separation of sister chromatids at meiosis I, andosd1provokes the exit from meiosis after the first division—turns meiosis into a mitotic-like division that produces clonal cells (Figure 2). The obtained diploid cells keep the identity of spores and enter gametogenesis, leading to the production of clonal gametes, as shown inArabidopsisand rice (29,102).
MiMewas demonstrated in two distant species, a monocot and a dicot, but is it applicable to any crop? For two of the three components, no difficulty is expected. Six of the genes required for initiation of recombination are very conserved (Table 1), including in mammals, and are typically single copy (90), and single-null mutants are sufficient to abolish recombination. For the monopolar orientation ofsister chromatids,REC8is the only known option to date, but this gene is also conserved in eukaryotes both at the sequence and functional levels (4,32,49,121), suggesting that a mutation in this gene can be used to buildMiMein any plant species of interest. REC8 is the only cohesin subunit that is meiosis specific in plants. Mutating other cohesin subunits could, in principle, be used instead of REC8, but it would require a meiosis-specific extinction to avoid lethality or growth defects (12,88). Similarly, the kinetochore protein MIS12 was shown to be involved in monopolar orientation (85), but this protein is also essential for mitotic cell divisions. Intriguingly, meiotic-specific factors that impose monopolar orientation, similar to Mam1 inSaccharomyces cerevisiae, Moa1 inSchizosaccharomyces pombe, or Meikin in mammals (71,129,154), have yet to be identified in plants.
For the third component ofMiMe, the case of OSD1 is somewhat more complex. TheArabidopsis OSD1and its paralogUV-B-insensitive 4(UVI4) were shown to be APC/C inhibitors with partially overlapping functions (23,29,57,60,134). In auvi4mutant, meiosis is normal, but endoreplication of somatic cells is stimulated and tolerance to ultraviolet light conferred. Mutation ofOSD1provokes an early exit from meiosis associated with the production of diploid male and female gametes (29). Ectopic endomitosis of some somatic cells is also observed inosd1but not associated with macroscopic phenotypes (60). Importantly, the double mutation is lethal, suggesting thatUVI4andOSD1play a redundant essential function in controlling somatic cell division (27,60). These two genes originated from a whole-genome duplication that is shared by Brassicaceae species (90,102), making it easy to identify theOSD1andUVI4respective orthologs in this clade. Outside Brassicaceae, thisOSD1/UVI4family is typically represented by a single gene, except recent polyploids and the clade of Poaceae, in which an ancient duplication, independent of one of the Brassicaceae, gave rise to two gene families (102). Thus, two gene families are present in rice, barley, and sorghum. One of the two genes was characterized in rice, and its mutation recapitulated theArabidopsis osd1phenotype with premature exit of meiosis after the first division and production of very high levels of diploid gametes (100% in male, 90% in female). This gene was accordingly namedOsOSD1(102), despite being equally distant phylogenetically fromArabidopsis UVI4andOSD1. The second gene of the OSD1/UVI4 family in rice has not yet been characterized. It thus appears that AtOSD1 and OsOSD1 acquired independently their meiotic function through convergent evolution.
From theArabidopsisand rice data, one can select the probable OSD1 gene(s) in any species of Brassicaceae and Poaceae. However, in species from other clades that typically contain a single gene (e.g., tomato or melon), it is quite possible that a knockout mutation could be lethal, mimicking theArabidopsis uvi4 osd1double mutation. However, this remains to be tested. A few other mutations that confer diploid female gamete production likeosd1does were identified inArabidopsisand can serve as alternatives.TARDY ASYNCHRONOUS MEIOSIS(TAM)/Cyclin CYCA1;2 is also required for entry into meiosis II (27). However, its mutation is slightly less penetrant thanosd1, with ∼95% of male and ∼40% of female diploid gametes. The combination oftamwithspo11-1andrec8successfully produced theMiMephenotype (MiMe-2), but while the originalMiMeproduced virtually 100% of diploid clonal gametes, 10–15% of the female gametes ofMiMe-2 were aneuploid, as an expected consequence of the leakiness oftam. Compared toosd1,tamthus appears to be a second choice to constructMiMe, but it is possible that the penetrance of the phenotypes can vary in different species. Interestingly, combiningosd1andtamincreased the frequency of female diploid gametes from 85% to 99%, suggesting thattamcan be used to further improveMiMe(27). However, theArabidopsis tam osd1double mutant is male quasi-sterile due to arrest at the end of meiotic prophase, which may pose a problem to engineerapomixis(see Section 5). To our knowledge, TAM/CyclinA1s have not yet been functionally analyzed in species other thanArabidopsis, even if the CyclinA1 gene family is well conserved at the sequence level.
THREE DIVISION MUTANT1 (TDM1) has an opposite function to TAM or OSD1: It is required to impose exit from meiosis after the second division. TDM1 is proposed to be part of the APC/C that triggers meiotic exit (15). Accordingly, in thetdm1knockout mutant, meiocytes complete the two meiotic divisions but then enter an aberrant third division with a spectacular four-spindle stage (23,47,118). TDM1 is negatively regulated by phosphorylation (15) mediated by the CDKA;1-TAM complex. Thus, expressing a version of TDM1 that has been mutated or deleted for the phosphorylation site (threonine 16 inArabidopsis) dominantly mimics thetamloss-of-function mutants, provoking exit from meiosis at the end of meiosis I with high penetrance. Thus, similar toosd1andtam, these dominant mutations inTDM1can be used to generate theMiMephenotype when combined withspo11-1andrec8(15). The TDM1 protein and its phosphor-ylation consensus site are conserved in flowering plants (15) but have not yet been characterized in species other thanArabidopsis.
Mutations of two other genes,AtPS1andJASON, lead to diploid gamete formation through the fusion of meiosis II spindles (28,36). These mutations could be used to generate clonal gametes in combination with abolition of recombination (22,28), but they affect only male meiosis, making them unusable to engineer apomixis.
An alternative toMiMefor implementingapomeiosisis theArabidopsis dyad/swi1mutation. DYAD/SWI1 is a key regulator ofmeiosisthat protects cohesin complexes during prophase (1,98,100,152). Thedyadsingle mutation is sufficient to trigger female apomeiosis, and the resulting clonalgametescan be used to engineer apomixis (95,115). However, the penetrance is incomplete (∼50%) and the fertility extremely reduced, which impairs applied perspectives. Likewise, the mutation ofAMEIOTICin maize, the homolog ofDYAD/SWI1, provokes the replacement of meiosis by a mitotic-like division but is associated with almost complete sterility (48,112).
Another potential alternative toMiMeis thenonreduction in female4(nrf4) mutant of maize. This single mutation provokes the production of diploid female gametes at high frequency, but less than 5% of diploid gametes are clonal (WO Patent Appl. 2016/179522). Further characterization ofnrf4and its combination withMiMecomponents is an interesting line of research. Similarly, theago4/dnr4mutant of maize produces diploid female gametes, resulting from complex meiotic defects, that are probably not clonal (124). Another potential source of unreduced gametes in maize is specific DNA methylation mutants (43).
A promising source of genes to generate clonal gametes is the natural apomicts. Indeed, apomeiosis segregates as dominant, single-locus genetic traits in several species (110). For example, genetic mapping efforts are in progress in theDIPLOSPORY(DIP) locus in the common dandelion,Taraxacum officinale(136) (WO Patent Appl. 2017/039452), and theLOSS OF APOSPORY(LOA) locus in the hawkweed,Hieracium praealtum(78). Identification of these genes may lead to novel solutions to engineer apomeiosis in crop species, but the genetic complexity of natural apomixis systems makes it challenging (133).
Embryodevelopment, in the absence of a male genetic contribution, is an essential feature of producing clonal seeds. In sexual plants, fertilization and the subsequent fusion of the sperm nucleus and egg cell nucleus are necessary steps for zygote and embryo formation (33,113). There are two options for triggering embryo development without a male genetic contribution:parthenogenesisandmaternal haploid inducers(Table 2). Parthenogenesis initiates embryo development in egg cells in the absence of pollination and fertilization (70,137). Maternal haploid inducers are genetic backgrounds that, when used as male parents in crosses, can induce the formation of embryos with a genetic contribution from the female parent alone (61,63). If pollination-independent seed production represents the ultimate goal of synthetic apomixis, then initiation of embryogenesis by parthenogenesis is absolutely required. Here, we include a discussion of known parthenogenesis and haploid inducer genes that can contribute to clonal seed production.
Genes that can be modulated for parthenogenesis and haploid induction

Parthenogenesis, coming from the ancient Greek words parthénos (virgin) and génesis (origin or generation), is the initiation of embryo development in an egg cell in the absence of fertilization. Most studies in natural apomictic species (e.g.,Pennisetum,Taraxacum,Hieracium) have shown parthenogenesis to be genetically controlled by a single dominant locus (110).
The first parthenogenesis gene isolated from an apomictic plant species was thePennisetum squamulatum APOSPORYSPECIFIC GENOMIC REGION–BABY BOOM–LIKE(PsASGR-BBML) gene (19). ThreePsASGR-BBMLgenes were identified in the locus linked to apomixis (18,19). Since apomicticPennisetumis recalcitrant for transformation, aPsASGR-BBMLRNA interference (RNAi) construct was transformed into sexual tetraploid pearl millet and then pollinated withP. squamulatumto generate hybrid plants that contained the apomixis locus, with and without the RNAi construct. Hybrid plants containing the RNAi construct that had substantially reduced expression ofPsASGR-BBMLcould still undergo apospory but had substantially reduced parthenogenetic embryos (8.5–25%) compared to hybrids without the RNAi construct (64%) (19). APsASGR-BBMLpromoter–GUS construct transformed into sexual tetraploid pearl millet demonstrated that the promoter is active in unfertilized egg cells, and in embryos up to three days after pollination, but is not active in central cells, antipodal cells, or earlyendosperm(19). Three of nine sexual tetraploid pearl millet transgenic lines that contained aPsASGR-BBMLgenomic clone, with native 5′ and 3′ regulatory regions, could produce embryo-like structures in the absence of fertilization. One of these lines gave rise to diploid/dihaploid offspring (6 out of 170 offspring tested), which must have been the result of parthenogenesis, given that the parent was tetraploid (19). Introduction of thePsASGR-BBMLgene in rice and maize led to haploid embryos and offspring in several independent lines in both species (20). ThePsASGR-BBMLgene is not able to trigger parthenogenesis inArabidopsisbut can do so in allotetraploid tobacco, where dihaploids are induced at a frequency of 1% (20,158). An insertion in the first intron ofPsASGR-BBMLhas been proposed as a possible regulatory element, but a causal role of this element in parthenogenesis has yet to be demonstrated (20).
The original discovery of theBABY BOOM(BBM) gene class was made inBrassica napus, whereBBMwas found to be highly upregulated during in vitro induction of embryogenesis from immature pollen (10). Ectopic, ubiquitous expression ofBBMinBrassicaandArabidopsisleads to the formation of somatic embryos on cotyledons and leaves, among other tissue types (10). TheArabidopsis BBMgene is part of theAINTEGUMENTA‐LIKE(AIL) family of AP2/ERF transcription factors that contains seven other genes (59).BBMand other family members are expressed inArabidopsisembryos, and mutant studies have demonstrated that they play redundant functions in shoot and root meristem maintenance (2,42,104).AT-HOOK MOTIF CONTAINING NUCLEAR LOCALIZED(AHL) genes are important downstream actors ofBBMand are required forBBM-induced somatic embryogenesis inArabidopsis(64). In maize, overexpression of the maize geneBbmcan stimulate callus proliferation and increase transformation efficiency (91). Coexpression of maizeBbmand the unrelatedWuschel2gene can further increase transformation efficiency in maize and other monocot species, including rice, sorghum, and sugarcane (91). Overall,BBMgenes have been shown to stimulate the proliferation of cells and a pluripotent cell state, and their expression, potentially alongside other genes, has emerged as a promising route to induce embryogenesis.
In wild-type rice,OsBBM1is not expressed in egg cells, but transcripts from the paternally inherited allele are detected in the zygote 2.5 hours after fertilization, while the maternally inherited allele is surprisingly not expressed (3,69). This expression pattern, together with the fact thatOsBBM1is the most closely related rice gene toPsASGR-BBML, suggested that paternal expression ofOsBBM1after fertilization may contribute to the initiation of embryogenesis in rice (3). Ectopic expression of OsBBM1in rice egg cells under the pDD45 promoter (anArabidopsispromoter that is egg cell specific) leads to the formation of embryonic structures in 12% of ovules on emasculated flowers, indicating that the construct can trigger parthenogenesis (69). However, emasculated flowers only led to aborted seeds, which can be explained by the absence of central cell fertilization and subsequent lack of endosperm development (69). Consistently, when the transgenic rice plants were allowed to self-fertilize, seed abortion did not occur, and haploid offspring were found at frequencies as high as 29% (69).
The combination ofMiMewithOsBBM1-mediated parthenogenesis in rice led to the development of a novel syntheticapomixissystem. Previously, researchers found that haploid plants are sterile inArabidopsisdue to the lack ofhomologous chromosomesduringmeiosis, while haploidMiMeplants are not sterile since no meiosis occurs (16). Similar toArabidopsis, rice haploid plants produced by parthenogenesis are sterile (69). Haploid and diploid offspring with thepDD45::OsBBM1cassette were subjected to genome editing of threeMiMegenes (PAIR1,REC8, andOSD1). Haploid plants that retained thepDD45::OsBBM1cassette but were mutant in theMiMegenes became fertile, as a mitotic-like division occurred instead of meiosis and allowed for the propagation of haploid genotypes through seeds. In diploids, when the threeMiMemutations were combined with the egg-cell-specific expression ofOsBBM1, plants produced clonal diploid offspring at a frequency as high as 29%, maintaining heterozygosity in subsequent generations. This represents the most penetrant synthetic apomixis system reported to date (69). Even higher frequencies, compatible with an application in agriculture, are achievable using theMiMe+BBM1approach (E. Guiderdoni, personal communication).
A natural parthenogenesis gene has recently been identified from dicot apomictic common dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) (130). TheTaraxacum officinale PARTHENOGENSIS(PAR) gene encodes a K2-2 zinc finger–EAR domain protein, with predicted DNA-binding and transcriptional repressor activity. The dominantPARgene was isolated from triploid apomictic dandelion by means of deletion mapping to identify the causal locus, which was subsequently sequenced and assembled. CRISPR-Cas9-mediated mutagenesis of candidate genes within the locus led to the identification ofLOSS OF PARTHENOGENESIS(LOP) mutants that only produce viable seed when pollinated, demonstrating that the plants can produce viable femalegametesbut can no longer undergo parthenogenesis. The dominantPARallele is specifically expressed in egg cells, in contrast to the recessive alleles that were not expressed in egg cells. Heterologous expression of dandelionPARusing theArabidopsisegg-cell-specific EC1.1 promoter was carried out in lettuce, a related diploid, sexual crop species. Emasculated transgenic lettuce plants with theEC1.1::PARconstruct could induce embryo-like structures in the absence of fertilization at a maximal induction rate of 25%, while no embryos were found in emasculated wild-type lettuce. In rare cases, polyembryony was also observed in the transgenic line. The dandelionPARgene is homologous to theArabidopsisgenesDAZ3andDAZ3L/TREE1, which are both among the most highly expressed genes inArabidopsissperm cells but are not expressed in egg cells (9,159). Therefore, it appears that dandelion, likePennisetum, has hijacked a factor that is usually delivered by the male gamete upon fertilization. However,PARor related genes were not previously linked with embryogenesis, as is the case forBBM, opening a new avenue for engineeringparthenogenesis.
Substantial progress has been made in the discovery of natural apomixis genes inPennisetumandTaraxacumand the engineering of parthenogenesis and synthetic apomixis in rice. The successful implementation of parthenogenesis in a wider array of crop species will likely depend on the availability of promoters that deliver both high and specific expression in egg cells. Insufficient expression levels may result in incomplete activation of embryogenesis and cause reduced fertility if mature embryos are not produced. Novel approaches in promoter editing and engineering will be important to invoke parthenogenesis by the ectopic expression of native genes in egg cells. Ultimately, coexpression of multiple embryogenesis and/or parthenogenesis factors may also facilitate higher penetrance of parthenogenesis.
The induction of haploid plants from gametes can be used to generate plants with an identical genotype to the gamete. In plant breeding, haploid induction is used to rapidly generate recombinant, homozygous plants from hybrid parents (35). Various methods to induce doubled haploids have been developed in different crops and are discussed in detail in recent reviews (35,61,63,142). In the context of synthetic apomixis, in planta haploid inducers are most relevant because when crossed with genotypes that produce nonrecombinant and diploid gametes, e.g.,MiMe, clonal offspring can be produced.
Plant genotypes with specific modifications to CENH3, the centromeric histone H3 variant, are known to act as maternal and paternal in planta haploid inducers (114).Arabidopsishomozygouscenh3null mutants are not viable because CENH3 defines centromere position by establishing the kinetochore (41,114). Modified CENH3 proteins that are the most efficient haploid inducers inArabidopsishave large modifications to the N-terminal sequence, which is known to be variable between species (114,116,127). When used as mothers,Arabidopsis cenh3mutants complemented with either a green fluorescent proteinGFP–CENH3orGFP–tailswaptransgene lead to paternal haploids at a maximal rate of 8% and 34%, respectively (114).GFP–tailswappaternal haploid induction rates can be enhanced in certain genetic backgrounds (128), andGFP–tailswapcan induce maternal haploids at a maximal rate of 12%, yet male fertility is highly reduced (95,114). In zygotes and earlyembryos, weak centromeres, inherited from the parent expressing modified CENH3, fail to segregate properly and are not inherited in daughter cells at variable, not fully penetrant, frequencies (96). In crop species, modulation ofCENH3has produced haploids in maize (68,140) and wheat (94), as well as reports of modulation in cucumber, melon, watermelon, tomato, and rice in patents (WO Patent Appl. 2017/081011 and 2017/200386). Native differences between CENH3 are found in the barleyvulgare×bulbosumhaploid induction system (120), suggesting that centromere instability could also play a role in uniparental chromosome elimination induced by wide hybridization.
Arabidopsisplants that generated clonal female gametes viaMiMeordyadmutants were hybridized with the CENH3-inducer lineGenome Elimination induced by a Mix of CENH3 variants(GEM) to generate clonal offspring (95). TheGEMline coexpresses GFP–CENH3 and GFP-tailswap variants in thecenh3-1mutant and has a much improved male fertility compared to GFP-tailswap (95). From theMiMecrosses, 34% of offspring were diploid, 98% of which contained only maternally derived, nonrecombinant chromosomes. From thedyadcrosses, 13% of offspring were diploid and retained parental heterozygosity. The GEM inducer could also be used to generate clonal offspring from maleMiMeparents at a rate of 42% of the viable seeds (95), which to date remains a unique feature of theCENH3system compared with other synthetic apomixis systems.
Maize stock 6 and improved derivatives are used as male parents in maize breeding to induce maternally derived haploids (17,61). Three independent studies identified the same mutation in a phospholipase gene,MATRILINEAL(MATL)/PHOSPHOLIPASE A(ZmPLA1)/NOT LIKE DAD(NLD), that underlies the major haploid induction quantitative trait locus (QTL)qhir1in maize (46,66,86). Maize haploid induction rate inmatlmutants is variable, due to other genetic modifiers of haploid induction rate, but it appears to be between 1% and 6% (46,66,86,163). MATL localizes to the pollen endo-plasma membrane (endo-PM), which surrounds the two sperm cells and is derived from the vegetative cell plasma membrane (45). Maizematlmutants appear to induce maternal haploids by genome elimination. In the maize HI-Edit system,matlmutants expressingCAS9and guide RNAs (gRNAs) against a maize gene were used as male parents and could induce maternally derived haploid plants that contain mutations in the gRNA target (67). These haploid offspring do not contain the transgene or any male genetic contribution, indicating that maternal haploid induction must include a transient zygote stage, otherwise the delivery of CAS9-gRNA complexes to maternal chromosomes could not occur (67). Thus, inmatlsystems, the male genome is likely eliminated from the transient zygote or early embryo, as has been found to occur in the CENH3 system (96,114).
In monocot species, the mutation ofMATLcan be used for haploid induction and as a component of synthetic apomixis. Rice, wheat, and foxtail milletmatlmutants arematernal haploid inducers(with respective average haploid induction rates of 6%, 19%, and 3%), demonstrating that this approach is more widely applicable in monocots (13,87,89,153). TheMiMesystem has been successfully combined with the mutation ofMATLin rice to produce clonal offspring (139). Gene editing was performed in rice CY84 hybrids to separately generateMiMe(pair1 rec8 osd1) triple mutants,matlsingle mutants, andFix(pair1 rec8 osd1 matl) quadruple mutants (139).MiMetriple mutants in the CY84 hybrid background (seed-setting rate 81.2%) were as fertile as wild-type hybrid controls (seed-setting rate 79.1%), which was much greater than the seed set previously found in the original riceMiMegenotype (27%), suggesting that genetic background may be important forMiMeplant fertility (102,139). Thematlsingle mutants had a drastically reduced seed-setting rate of 11.5%, with a haploid induction rate of 4.4% (139).Fixquadruple mutants also had a reduced seed-setting rate of 4.5% (139). Most of theFixgenotype offspring are tetraploid hybrids, but 6.2% are diploid clonal offspring (139). MultipleMATLorthologs are found in dicot genomes, suggesting that the implementation of this approach in dicots will not be straightforward (46,66).
The causal variant underlying a secondary QTL that controls maternal haploid induction rate in maize,qhir8, was found to be inZmDMP, encoding a pollen-expressed membrane protein of unknown function (163). Maizedmpmutants induce haploids at a rate of 0.3% and can boost haploid induction inmatl dmpdouble mutants compared tomatlsingle mutants, suggesting thatdmpmay act in a distinct genetic pathway (163). Unlike withMATL, the identification of functional homologs ofZmDMPinArabidopsishas already been possible (160).Arabidopsis dmp8 dmp9double mutants are capable of a maternal haploid induction rate of 2.1% and appear to be single-fertilization mutants (149,160). The mutation ofDMPgenes in other dicot species (including tomato, tobacco, rapeseed, and the legumeMedicago truncatula) has been shown to be a promising approach for establishing maternal haploid induction systems (141,161,162).
In summary, the combination ofMiMeand haploid induction can lead to the production of clonal offspring when either the CENH3 (maternal or paternal haploid inducer) ormatl(maternal haploid inducer) systems are employed. Combination ofDMP-based haploid induction withMiMehas yet to be attempted in any species, with or withoutmatl. In the context of syntheticapomixis, the frequencies of haploid induction and seed set continue to limit these approaches and should be addressed in future research if haploid induction can contribute to synthetic apomixis in commercial seed production. A potential advantage of haploid induction via mutation ofMATLorDMPis that only gene knockout mutations are required, which can be achieved without transgene introduction. However, decades of academic and applied research have yet to deliver an in planta crop haploid-inducer line that goes beyond a penetrance of 20%, suggesting that a genome-elimination strategy may be a difficult route toward a fully penetrant synthetic apomixis system.
Theendospermplays an essential role in supporting the formation of viable embryos and seeds (80). In sexual flowering plants, the endosperm is initiated upon the fertilization of the diploid central cell (the product of the fusion of two haploid polar nuclei) by a haploid sperm cell. The ratio of maternal to paternal genomic contributions in the endosperm is important for the formation of viable endosperm, and in many plant species a ratio of two maternal to one paternal genomic contributions is essential in order for a viable endosperm to form (44,54,73). The ratio of parental contributions is important because parental imprinting (DNA methylation status) of important regulators of endosperm development is different between central cells and sperm cells and represents a classic example of parental conflict (14,31,75). The majority of natural apomictic systems requires the formation of sexual endosperm (pseudogamous apomixis) via fertilization of the central cell; however, some natural apomicts formautonomous endosperm(autonomous apomixis) without fertilization of the central cell. Autonomous endosperm formation has been commonly observed in apomictic species from the Asteraceae family, including dandelion (Taraxacum), hawkweed (Hieracium), andErigeron(110).To date, the molecular details of autonomous endosperm formation in natural apomictic species remain undetermined.
All of the synthetic apomixis systems described to date form sexual endosperms, and therefore the single fertilization of the central cell is, at least, required. InMiMe, male and female diploidgametesare produced at high penetrance (29). Therefore the 2:1 maternal to paternal ratio in the endosperm can be maintained as genomic contributions from both sides have been doubled (29,102). In the case ofMiMe-CENH3, double fertilization of the egg and central cell takes place, with genome elimination happening at the zygote or early embryo stage (95,96). Double fertilization is likely also required in the riceFix(pair1 rec8 osd1 matl) system (139), assumingmatloperates via genome elimination (67). In theMiMe-OsBBM1system, only single fertilization of the 4n central cell by a 2n sperm is required, as the embryo is parthenogenetic (69). The hexaploid endosperm therefore maintains the 2:1 maternal to paternal ratio and leads to viable endosperm formation. In this system, the induction ofparthenogenesisand central cell fertilization must occur almost simultaneously in order for the embryo and endosperm to develop properly. When thePsASGR-BBMLgene was transferred to sexual tetraploid pearl millet, only one of three primary transformants that could trigger parthenogenesis gave rise to viable seeds due to endosperm collapse (19). This collapse was attributed to a lack of coordination between embryo and endosperm development, with parthenogenetic division of egg cells taking place much earlier than central cell fertilization. Therefore, ensuring that the induction of parthenogenesis and central cell fertilization are synchronized is important if a sexual endosperm is to be used in synthetic apomixis systems.
Autonomous endosperm formation is not essential for clonal embryo formation, but its implementation in crop species could present novel possibilities in synthetic apomixis systems. First, synchronizing synthetic parthenogenesis and an autonomous endosperm may lead to more reliable seed set and grain filling than the combination of parthenogenesis and sexual endosperm. If egg-cell-specific and central-cell-specific promoters that activate expression at equivalent times can be identified, their respective combination with parthenogenesis and endosperm genes may lead to a more robust synthetic apomixis system. Second, an autonomous endosperm could make seed formation independent of pollen development and pollination. Pollen development is known to be sensitive to high temperature, and its failure is potentially an emerging risk in the performance of grain crops grown under heat stress (6,117). Additionally, autonomous endosperms would alleviate the need for the formation of unreduced male gametes, which would provide flexibility in apomictic breeding schemes (132). Finally, the endosperm represents a major part of the nutrition and calories present in grain products. It remains to be seen how the biochemical properties of a hexaploid sexual endosperm (akin to that produced in aMiMe-OsBBM1plant) or a tetraploid autonomous endosperm (akin to that produced in aMiMeplant with engineered autonomous endosperm) would compare with a conventional triploid sexual endosperm.
The accumulated knowledge on the regulation of endosperm development inArabidopsissuggests it may be possible to trigger autonomous endosperm in sexual crop species. During the late 1990s, severalArabidopsis FERTILIZATION-INDEPENDENT SEED(FIS) class mutants were isolated in which the central cell divides in the absence of fertilization and an autonomous endosperm develops up to the point of cellularization, butembryodevelopment fails (11,52,72,108). It is noteworthy that single fertilization of egg cells in theFIS-class mutantmedeacan suppress seed collapse and lead to the development of smaller seeds that contain diploid embryos and uniparental diploid endosperm (107). SeveralFIS-class mutants have been cloned (includingmedea,fie,fis2, andmsi1), and the respective genes have been shown to encode proteins that form part of the FIS-POLYCOMB REPRESSIVE COMPLEX 2 (FIS-PRC2) (52,53,72,74,92,109). Polycomb genes were first found inDrosophilawhere they control normal organ patterning during development and were later shown to act as a repressor of gene expression by depositing histone H3 Lysine-27 (H3K27) methylation on target genes intrans(83,105). InArabidopsis, three PRC2 complexes with H3K27 methyltransferase activity have been identified, and FIS-PRC2 predominantly acts during female reproductive development (103). Two genes,YUCCA10(YUC10) andTRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE-RELATED 1(TAR1), that are directly repressed by the FIS-PRC2 are involved in auxin biosynthesis (38). Incredibly, ectopic expression of both genes under a central cell/early endosperm promoter was sufficient to trigger autonomous endosperm formation in unfertilized ovules (38). Likewise, the application of exogenous auxin alone is sufficient to trigger central cell division in unfertilized ovules. This suggests that FIS-PRC2 prevents central cell division prior to fertilization by silencing auxin biosynthesis genes.
In rice, PRC2 and auxin have also been to shown to play a role in endosperm development (39). Mirroring findings inArabidopsis, rice RNAi lines that knock downOsFIE2exhibit autonomous endosperm development (84), whileOsYUCCA11, the homolog ofArabidopsis YUCCA10, is also a paternally expressed gene in rice endosperm (34,93). Mutants inOsYUCCA11have reduced seed size and increased chalkiness, consistent with endosperm filling defects (150). Furthermore, an endosperm-specific transcription factor, OsNF-YB1, controlsOsYUCCA11expression, andosnf-yb1mutants also have grain-filling defects (150). In summary, there is strong evidence that PRC2 and auxin play important roles in endosperm development in both dicots and monocots.
To date, there is evidence inArabidopsisthat induction of auxin biosynthesis in central cells can trigger central cell division and endosperm development. Sexual endosperm can develop in the absence of an embryo, but embryo development relies upon the development of a normal endosperm (149). Therefore, systems that can robustly trigger autonomous formation of endosperm may enhance parthenogenetic systems by supporting embryo development. A key unresolved question is whether the combined manipulation of auxin biosynthesis in the central cell and activation of parthenogenetic division of the egg cell can trigger fully autonomous seed development.
Despite major advances in the development of syntheticapomixisin the last few years, some challenges remain to be addressed to be able to use apomixis in the field.
First, the system should be virtually fully penetrant, with close to 100% of the produced seeds being clonal. If the final product is seeds, as is the case for most field crops, the fertility of the apomictic plants must be unaffected. Further research is needed in model species, crops, and natural apomicts to tinker withmeiosis, parthenogenesis, and endosperm (see Sections 3–5) and surpass the current maximum reported result of ∼30% clonal seeds (69).
Second, apomixis should be inducible in one generation. Indeed, sexual reproduction is needed to generate elite plants (e.g., F1hybrid, or any heterozygous plant with a desirable phenotype) in which apomixis can be triggered for clonal propagation through seeds (Figure 1). One possibility is combined genome editing and/or transgenesis of F1hybrid plants in a single step, which has already been demonstrated (139). The rapid development of genome editing approaches makes it possible to generate transgene-free edited plants (56,147) even if segregation of the transgene by sexual reproduction is not an option in an apomictic lineage. Another possibility is to have the genetic components already present in the parental lines but to activate them only in the F1plants, for instance, by segregation of recessive alleles ortrans-complementarity of a binary system (e.g., a promoter present in one parent and the corresponding transcription factor from the other parent) (21). An attractive system could be a dominant cassette that confers apomixis without affecting male sexual reproduction and then could be transmitted via malegametes(132). The exact optimal design would depend on the nature of the apomictic system (based on gain/loss of function or modified gene expression), its properties (e.g., expressed only in the female or in both sexes), the biology of the considered crop, and the regulation of genome editing and transgenesis by authorities.
Third, stablehybrid vigorover generations of clonal propagations through seeds remains to be formally demonstrated in a crop species. However, the demonstration that F1hybrid traits are stable over multiple generations in the naturally apomicticHieracium pilosellastrongly suggests that apomixis can be used to maintain the quality of F1hybrids in crops (119).
Finally, the broader implications of applying apomixis must be considered, including biosafety and intellectual property issues (125). A common immediate reaction when considering the use of apomixis in agriculture is the fear of crop homogeneity and enhanced risk of disease outbreaks. However, apomictic lineages do not pose a different problem than self-propagating inbreeders (e.g., current wheat), and should be similarly managed. By contrast, the facilitation of hybrid breeding triggered by apomixis technologies may favor the development of a larger diversity of hybrid crop varieties, in a similar manner that the invention of printing by Gutenberg did not lead to the uniformization of books, but, on the contrary, to an enhanced diversity of titles (132).


The French National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and Environment (INRAE), the former employer of R.M., holds patents on theMiMesystem. C.J.U. is an inventor on a patent application, made by his former employer Keygene N.V., for the use of the dandelionPARgene.
We thank Yazhong Wang and Dipesh Kumar Singh for critically reading the manuscript and providing feedback.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


