We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Rising CO2concentrations and their effects on plant productivity present challenging issues. Effects on the photosynthesis/photorespiration balance and changes in primary metabolism are known, caused by the competitive interaction of CO2and O2at the active site of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase. However, impacts on stress resistance are less clear. Reactive oxygen species are key players in biotic and abiotic stress responses, but there is no consensus on whether elevated CO2constitutes a stress. Although high CO2increases yield in C3plants, it can also increase cellular oxidation and activate phytohormone defense pathways. Reduction-oxidation processes play key roles in acclimation to high CO2, with specific enzymes acting in compartment-specific signaling. Traditionally, acclimation to high CO2has been considered in terms of altered carbon gain, but emerging evidence suggests that CO2is a signal as well as a substrate. Some CO2effects on defense are likely mediated independently of primary metabolism. Nonetheless, primary photosynthetic metabolism is highly integrated with defense and stress signaling pathways, meaning that plants will be able to acclimate to the changing environment over the coming decades.
Article metrics loading...
Rising CO2concentrations and their effects on plant productivity present challenging issues. Effects on the photosynthesis/photorespiration balance and changes in primary metabolism are known, caused by the competitive interaction of CO2and O2at the active site of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase. However, impacts on stress resistance are less clear. Reactive oxygen species are key players in biotic and abiotic stress responses, but there is no consensus on whether elevated CO2constitutes a stress. Although high CO2increases yield in C3plants, it can also increase cellular oxidation and activate phytohormone defense pathways. Reduction-oxidation processes play key roles in acclimation to high CO2, with specific enzymes acting in compartment-specific signaling. Traditionally, acclimation to high CO2has been considered in terms of altered carbon gain, but emerging evidence suggests that CO2is a signal as well as a substrate. Some CO2effects on defense are likely mediated independently of primary metabolism. Nonetheless, primary photosynthetic metabolism is highly integrated with defense and stress signaling pathways, meaning that plants will be able to acclimate to the changing environment over the coming decades.
The population of the planet has risen almost threefold within the last 60 years, placing a huge burden on agriculture and food security. Since the early 1980s, the average atmospheric CO2concentration has increased from 340 ppm to its present average level of 415 ppm, an increase of approximately 20%. These two trends must be considered together because the demand for food is ever rising, whereas uncertainty remains over how high atmospheric CO2will rise (110), as well as over how beneficial increased CO2is likely to be for plant yield and food quality even in the absence of its ancillary effects on climate and weather.
While C4and crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) plants are not greatly affected by CO2concentration, higher CO2has a direct positive effect on C3plant growth because it promotes carbon gain by stimulating photosynthesis and depressing photorespiration in species that are limited by present CO2availability (Figure 1). Another direct effect is likely to occur through CO2signaling, which to date has been best described for stomatal closure in response to increased CO2(30). However, it is likely that CO2signaling extends to other cells and other pathways (Figure 1). Despite stomatal regulation and the counteracting effects of photosynthetic acclimation to high CO2(caused by carbohydrate accumulation and often called feedback limitation), there is an abundant literature showing that increased CO2promotes growth and yield of C3plants (75,117).

Figure 1Click to view


In addition to these direct consequences, our ability to predict the benefits of increased CO2on plant performance is compromised by the existence of numerous indirect effects, which can be divided into two types. The first involves altered C3plant metabolism linked to changes in the ratio of photosynthesis to photorespiration, which may have a wide-ranging effect on many other plant processes. A well-studied example is the effect of increased CO2on primary nitrogen assimilation and overall nitrogen status (3), but increased fluxes through carbon assimilation pathways also place demands on other nutrients such as sulfur and phosphorus. Crucially, since the whole metabolic engine of the plant relies on reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions, increased carbon assimilation can modify the balance and poise of cellular redox status, both in the short term and, perhaps, in a sustained manner (Figure 1). The second type of indirect effect relates to climate change caused by higher tropospheric CO2(Figure 1), which will increase temperatures, with the excess energy possibly leading to more extreme and unpredictable climatic conditions in some parts of the world (10). Both types of indirect effects may be crucial in determining how plants will adapt and acclimate to challenging conditions, namely stress, a key determinant of plant health and stress resistance (Figure 1).
How do plants perceive increased CO2? The classic mechanism concerns only direct effects of increased CO2substrate on the ratio of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco) carboxylation to oxygenation reactions in C3plants, leading to increased carbon gain and enriched levels of compounds such as sugars and other carbohydrates. Within this framework, any signaling is considered to arise from downstream changes in metabolites. However, significant advances in the area of stomatal signaling, particularly over the last decade, have revealed that plants can perceive CO2through other mechanisms (30,53,55,122). Thus, changes in CO2may be sensed by both photosynthesis-dependent and -independent mechanisms (Figure 1).
Although increased CO2favors C3plant growth and yield, it is still not clear whether CO2enrichment constitutes a stress. Cellular redox metabolism is a key integrator of plant responses to the environment, whereby external fluctuations impact the cellular oxidation state to elicit changes in gene expression and metabolism (36). Therefore, both direct and indirect effects of altered CO2will affect redox processes and signaling. The abruptness of changes in CO2is likely to be a key factor in plant responses. Because it is difficult to simulate slow anthropogenic increases in either laboratory or field experiments, almost all studies have reported only responses to step changes in CO2, with the aim of defining plant responses to CO2concentrations likely to occur within the next 30–100 years. While a 20% increase in CO2over the last 40 years does not seem excessive, the capacity of plants to adapt to this rate of change is still not clear.
Although the idea persists that high CO2decreases cellular oxidation states (e.g.,1), some studies of plants growing at CO2levels that are twice as high as (or higher than) present levels have reported induction of oxidative markers at the transcriptomic, proteomic, and biochemical levels (19,84,105). Moreover, specific pathways of secondary metabolism linked to defense, including phytohormone synthesis, can be upregulated simply by growing plants at higher CO2(80,84,95,143–145). While one interpretation of these studies is that higher CO2constitutes a stress, activation of such defenses should not necessarily be viewed as a negative outcome. Defense induction may be an appropriate response to an enrichment in resources that are sought by herbivores, pathogens, and other opportunists. Nevertheless, the mechanisms that link CO2levels to increased defense responses are unclear, as is the eventual impact on plant yield.
In this review, we discuss whether plant fitness will be improved or compromised in the face of the challenges to come in the near future, with a focus on stress and defense processes. Our aim is to provide an integrated view of present knowledge, considering possible links among primary metabolism, secondary metabolism, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO) metabolism, within the context of plant responses to increased CO2. We discuss links between CO2and redox metabolism, highlighting possible effects of CO2on ROS production in different subcellular compartments.
All cells are powered by energy-producing reactions that generate ROS as a result of electron and energy flow (26,33,94). In addition, specific enzymes have been selected for their beneficial ability to generateROSas a product, allowing these reactive molecules to serve as cellular signals (124,135). Reactive nitrogen species (RNS) such as NO and derived compounds such asS-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) are also crucial (4,16,31,43). While these molecules, particularly H2O2and NO, have attracted considerable attention in plant signaling, there is still debate about how ROS and RNS production and concentrations are affected by increases in CO2(8,37,90,95). Any changes are likely to be compartment specific; therefore, compartment-specific signaling pathways have to be considered.
The major ROS produced in the chloroplast are superoxide, chiefly by photosystem I acceptors, and singlet oxygen, which is generated in photosystem II (Figure 2). Under the assumption of constant irradiance, the rate of production of these reactive molecules depends on the probability of direct electron transport to O2in the first case and the probability of direct energy transfer from triplet chlorophyll to ground-state triplet O2in the second (33,36). How does increased CO2change these probabilities in C3photosynthesis? A simple prediction is that higher CO2should lower them because stromal redox pools [ferredoxin, NADP(H)] become more oxidized, decreasing the electron and excitation pressure within the photosynthetic electron transport chain. According to this rationale, for C3metabolism, higher rates of the Calvin-Benson cycle should provide an increased sink for NADPH for the 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (1,3-bPGA) reduction catalyzed by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). However, the picture is not so simple, because photorespiration also generates electron acceptors.Figure 2shows how reductant generated by the electron transport chain is distributed among pathways linked to carbon assimilation and photorespiration at typical ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) carboxylation:RuBP oxygenation (C:O) ratios in C3chloroplasts at present air levels of CO2. Although higher CO2will increase 1,3-bPGA production linked to carboxylation, it will also decrease the rate of formation of electron acceptors linked to oxygenation. The requirement for ferredoxin to support reassimilation of photorespiratory ammonia by glutamine synthetase/glutamine:2-oxoglutarate aminotransferase also decreases. The picture is further complicated by effects of altered C:O ratios on ATP:reductant ratios required by stromal metabolism. As the C:O ratio goes up, the ATP:NADPH requirement of the Calvin-Benson cycle decreases because the stoichiometry between the GAPDH and ribulose 5-phosphate kinase reactions increases, although this effect may be counterbalanced by an increased ATP demand for starch synthesis (92).

Figure 2Click to view


All these complexities mean that at present it is difficult to predict whether higher CO2will strongly influence ROS production in the chloroplast. If the chloroplast is able to maintain redox balance at different C:O ratios, and if there is considerable flexibility in the relative rates of production of ATP and NADPH (38), then there is little reason to predict a strong influence of higher CO2on chloroplast ROS production. Moreover, any changes in chloroplast ROS production are likely to be transient rather than sustained. We emphasize that this conclusion is based on present knowledge and concepts of the major pathways of chloroplast ROS production, and may hold less true if plants are suddenly exposed to conditions that may temporarily radically alter the C:O ratio.
Resolving the relationship between high CO2and chloroplast ROS will require direct measurements that are still difficult to perform (96). By contrast, effects on peroxisomal ROS production can be more readily predicted. Indeed, the most direct effect of high CO2on metabolic ROS production in the C3leaf will be a decrease in the peroxisomal H2O2rate of production as a result of decreased photorespiration. Calculations based on known photosynthetic models estimate that the peroxisomal glycolate oxidase reaction is typically responsible for more than half of the total metabolic H2O2production inside the photosynthetic cell in C3plants (35,98). Although the real-world situation is more complex, kinetic modeling found that an increase in CO2from 400 to 3,000 ppm, which is sufficient to largely abolish photorespiration, caused an approximately fourfold decrease in total cellular H2O2(125). Nevertheless, as we discuss below, other processes contribute to and may compensate for the loss of H2O2from photorespiration.
Plant mitochondria contribute to ROS production (56), although they are likely to produce fewer ROS than the chloroplast and peroxisomes in C3leaves in the light. There have been numerous attempts to define the effects of high CO2levels on respiration, which are usually measured in the dark. Most evidence suggests that plants grown at elevated CO2levels have higher rates of mitochondrial respiration, but the response can depend on other variables such as nitrogen nutrition (3 and references cited therein). Moreover, it is not easy to extrapolate respiratory rates in the light from measurements of dark respiration. The tricarboxylic acid cycle can be inhibited during photosynthesis (66,121), and to what extent the oxidation of photorespiratory glycine relies on the mitochondrial electron transport chain is uncertain (57,112).
ROS production by the respiratory chain is related not only to the rate of respiration but also to the strength of respiratory control, which favors superoxide production at complex III (56). High CO2should promote sucrose synthesis, which is a major cytosolic ATP sink in the light (66). Together with inhibition of photorespiration, this might decrease respiratory control and thereby decrease mitochondrial ROS production in the light at high CO2. Whether such effects are counteracted by an increase in overall respiration rates linked to increased respiratory substrate is, as noted above, uncertain. The activity of the alternative oxidase (AOX), which provides an outlet for electrons that could otherwise reduce O2to superoxide, might be a key factor. While this enzyme has been linked to photorespiration (57), the amount of AOX protein is substantially higher at high CO2(133). In addition, a shift in flux from the cytochrome oxidase to the AOX pathway was observed during dark respiration at high CO2(42).
While mitochondria play a minor quantitative role inROSproduction during photosynthesis, accumulating evidence suggests that they are a key site for redox sensing and retrograde signaling to the nucleus (146). Indeed, increases inAOXexpression, which is considered a marker for mitochondrial ROS production, at high CO2might indicate a trend toward enhanced ROS formation by the respiratory chain (133). Moreover, the effects of CO2may not be restricted to processes occurring in the light (3).
Initially recognized for their role in immune responses, extracellular ROS are now recognized as crucial signals in numerous growth and developmental processes, as well as in acclimation to the environment (67,87,124). While class III heme peroxidases and several other enzymes may contribute to apoplastic ROS production (99), evidence suggests that respiratory burst oxidase homolog (RBOH)-type enzymes (NADPH oxidases) are the most important sources of ROS in the apoplast and cell wall space (124,135). NADPH oxidases function in an integrated fashion with calcium signaling and receptor-like kinases to propagate and mediate cellular and cell-to-cell defense signaling, allowing systemic as well as local responses (135).
Increased ROS signals can be observed at high CO2(19,84,105), and several reports suggest that NADPH oxidases are important in CO2acclimation. Activation of biotic stress responses inArabidopsisby growth at high CO2was associated with enhanced transcripts forAtRBOHDandAtRBOHF, the major NADPH oxidases expressed in leaves (84). Tolerance to salt in tomato plants was promoted by high CO2in a manner that was dependent on ROS production by NADPH oxidases (140). Similar changes in these signals can also be caused by compartment-specific removal or relocation of antioxidants, for example, in response to phytohormone signaling (39). If the mitochondrial electron transport chain and NADPH oxidases are substrate limited, high CO2may increase ROS production as more sugars become available for production of reduced pyridine nucleotides. Such an increase would be consistent with a small but significant increase in NADPH at plants grown at high CO2(84).
The above discussion suggests that any increase in ROS at high CO2may largely reflect higher production by the mitochondria and by plasma membrane NADPH oxidases. Together with decreased peroxisomal H2O2production, this could lead the cell to respond to alterations in the relative rates of ROS production at different sites (Figure 3). Interplay between the intracellular and apoplastic redox states could be particularly important. One study showed that defense metabolite profiles triggered by catalase (CAT) deficiency were strongly dependent on leaf NADPH oxidases, particularlyAtRBOHF(18).

Figure 3Click to view


Knowledge of sources of NO in plants remains incomplete, with continuing uncertainty surrounding the existence of a dedicated NO synthase in embryophytes (4). Although a study inArabidopsisusing an inhibitor of the animal enzyme reported that high CO2increased NO levels via NO synthase (29), the significance of this NO source in plants remains unclear. Most evidence suggests that nitrate reductase is a key player, allowing NO production via reduction of nitrite, although there is good evidence for a mitochondrial pathway as well (4,16,43). Given the close interactions between primary carbon and nitrogen assimilation, high CO2could affect nitrate reductase–dependent NO availability in several ways, including effects on nitrate uptake and availability, movement of nitrite into the chloroplast, and CO2-mediated effects on NADH availability (3,37). In addition, GSNO and GSNO reductase are important players in redox signaling (31). Further research is required to establish how high CO2affects the production and concentrations of NO and GSNO (8).
While ROS and RNS are undeniably important, numerous redox processes are independent of these molecules and may also contribute to signaling in response to increased CO2. In addition to possible movement of ROS between organelles (94), exchange of pyridine nucleotide [NAD(P)(H)] equivalents among chloroplasts, mitochondria, and peroxisomes occurs during photosynthesis and photorespiration, and is enabled by systems such as malate/oxaloacetate antiporters and associated malate dehydrogenases (MDHs) (50,108). These systems also mediate redox links between energy-producing/consuming organelles and the cytosol, a key site of signal integration. The chloroplast NADP-MDH has been implicated in acclimation of plants to high CO2(6). Although strong phenotypes were not apparent, a study of knockout mutants for this enzyme pointed to some role in photorespiration (49). A recent report has drawn attention to the roles of chloroplast and mitochondrial NAD-MDH in programmed cell death linked to ROS homeostasis (147). Both compartments can influence cytosolic NADPH and NADH pools, which are drawn upon by key redox-homeostatic and signaling enzymes, including NADPH oxidases, NO-producing nitrate reductase, glutathione reductase, NADPH-thioredoxin reductase, and GSNO reductase. These enzymes are crucial in determining the accumulation of ROS and NO and in regulating the status of the thioredoxin and glutathione pools, all of which are critical factors in biotic stress responses through redox control of factors such as NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS RELATED1 (31,45,68,74,81,82,120,126).
Aside from malate/oxaloacetate exchange, the chloroplast exports triose phosphate (triose-P) for two main purposes. The first is to allow sucrose synthesis, and involves exchange of triose-P with phosphate. The second, in which triose-P is exported in exchange for 3-phosphoglycerate, allows transfer of reductant to the cytosol. Loss-of-functionArabidopsismutants for an isoform of the chloroplast inner membrane triose-P transporter showed compromised stress responses through a mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway (132). Biotic stress responses activated by growth ofArabidopsisat high CO2were found to be compromised in mutants in which specific functions of cytosolic NADP-linked dehydrogenases were lost (84). The strongest effect was observed for a knockout mutant for nonphosphorylating GAPDH, which may be a significant route for cytosolic triose-P oxidation in the light (66). Thus, functional coupling between NADPH-consuming GAPDH in the chloroplast and its irreversible NADPH-producing isoform in the cytosol could be a relatively direct way by which chloroplast redox status could influence cytosolic NADPH-dependent stress responses (Figure 4).

Figure 4Click to view


ROSand related redox components are influential in the control of plant development in response to a changing environment, through mediating effects at many levels including translation, transcription, and the cell cycle (24,27,38,41,48,62,63,78,88,102,109). Although studies have addressed intracellular movement of ROS, through diffusional waves, by passage through aquaporins, or via organellar extensions (14,52,130), redox changes in different compartments should not necessarily be considered equivalent. Even within a compartment, redox changes may have different kinetics in different redox processes. For example, oxidation in the chloroplast could occur while other organelles and the cytosol remain relatively reduced, and H2O2produced in the peroxisome and chloroplast produces different transcriptomic signatures (111). Compartment-specific changes in redox regulation and signaling have far-reaching implications for transcriptional, translational, and posttranslational regulation. For this reason, compartment-specific information can be conveyed to other compartments, such as the nucleus, to coordinate appropriate responses (94). Defining how this signaling network is affected by increased CO2is one of the major challenges for the future.
Accumulation of ROS is often equated with rates of production in the literature. However, their rates of removal by the complex and powerful plant antioxidative systems are likely to be crucial in determining compartment-specific redox signaling. Plants are notable for the complexity and power of their antioxidative systems. These include CAT, the ascorbate-glutathione pathway, and numerous antioxidant metabolites (93). Research over the last two decades has added greatly to this panoply of redox-active ROS-processing systems.Table 1summarizes antioxidant systems in plants, mainly on the basis of studies inArabidopsis(5,9,21,25,26,28,77,97,99,106). In some cases, subcellular compartmentation has not yet been fully elucidated. Several of the proteins found in the nucleus are also located in the cytosol, raising the possibility of redistribution between the two compartments to regulate redox states.Table 1emphasizes the diversity of antioxidant systems within the cell compared with the cell wall/apoplast compartment, a factor likely to be crucial in setting intracellular versus intercellular redox signaling.
Summary of principal antioxidative systems in plants
aCompartments indicate main locations of accumulation of enzymes or metabolites once synthesized on the basis of knowledge gained forArabidopsis.
bThe most common abbreviation and the number ofArabidopsisgenes are given in parentheses. Not all genes may be expressed or functional. Several genes give rise to dual-targeted proteins (e.g., GR1, GR2, MDHAR5/6). Specific proteins within some families may be membrane bound on the outside of organelles (e.g., APX3) or the inside of the plasma membrane (GPXL4, GPXL5, some GRX) and/or may be located in the Golgi body or endoplasmic reticulum (e.g., GPXL3). Some proteins are composed of specific subfamilies with specific regenerating reductants (e.g., PRX, TRX) or noncanonical functions (e.g., ROXY-type GRX), while others may catalyze other reactions such as conjugation (GST) or even ROS production (POX/POD) as well as, or instead of, ROS removal.
cOnly the localization of the reducing forms of antioxidative metabolites is presented.
Abbreviations: Chl, chloroplast; CW/A, cell wall/apoplast; Cyt, cytosol; Mit, mitochondria; Nuc, nucleus; Per, peroxisome; ROS, reactive oxygen species; Vac, vacuole.

Note that many members of certain protein families, such as glutathioneS-transferases, thioredoxins, and class III heme peroxidases, may have other biochemical functions that may be more important than any antioxidant role. Moreover, even enzymes of the ascorbate-glutathione pathway, whose roles have been traditionally associated with ensuring ROS removal, may have pro-oxidant biochemical or signaling functions (44,58,106,128). Superoxide dismutase andCATcan play moonlighting roles in signaling (39), as discussed below for CAT.
Most of the available literature suggests that extractable activities of the majority of the highest-capacity antioxidative enzymes are not extensively changed by high CO2alone (1). Given that antioxidative enzyme activities are considered a marker for ROS (96), this notion argues against a generalized increase in oxidative stress during growth at high CO2. It is further supported by measurements inArabidopsis, where the redox states of the key antioxidants, ascorbate and glutathione, were similar in air and at 3,000 ppm CO2(84).
Note that extractable activity assays offer an indication of capacity, but do not necessarily report on activities in planta, where substrate concentrations may be different or posttranslational modifications (PTMs) may occur that are not captured during in vitro assays. Papers reportingPTMson antioxidant enzymes continue to appear, but their in vivo relevance remains to be established in many cases.
Because of its high capacity and potential relevance for altered atmospheric CO2, in the next section we focus our discussion on CAT. The importance of this enzyme has been established by its responsiveness to CO2levels and by a clear photorespiratory phenotype in knockdown and knockout lines that have been produced for specific isoforms in several C3species.
One of the most evident effects of high CO2on antioxidant systems in C3plants, in addition to induction of the mitochondrialAOX, noted above, is a decrease in extractable CAT activity (46,103). Interestingly, extractable CAT activity inNicotiana sylvestriswas reported to be much more sensitive to high CO2than that of other peroxisomal photorespiratory enzymes and to be insensitive to low O2, suggesting that the mechanisms that downregulate CAT at high CO2may be independent of decreased photorespiratory metabolism (46).
CAT is considered to be primarily a peroxisomal enzyme whose main function is to decompose H2O2into water and oxygen (85). Of the three CAT genes inArabidopsis(CAT1,CAT2, andCAT3),CAT2encodes the predominant form that protects plant cells against accumulation of H2O2produced by photorespiration (103,139). Studies withArabidopsisknockout mutants suggest that CO2-dependent differences in CAT capacity are due to the photorespiratory isoform (103). Therefore, the clearest responses of ROS-regulating systems to high CO2are, first, an increase in mitochondrial AOX capacity (133) and, second, a decrease in the capacity of the photorespiratory CAT. These effects are perhaps consistent with a shift inROSproduction from the peroxisomes to the mitochondria when CO2is increased, although we note that this shift might be marked only if CO2levels are high enough to strongly suppress photorespiration.
Extensive analysis ofcat2mutants has underscored the potential role of this enzyme in plant-pathogen responses (17,141). Indeed, strong decreases in CAT activity lead to induction of numerous defense mechanisms associated with phytohormone signaling, including salicylic acid (SA), jasmonic acid (JA), and auxins (17,18,40,86,123). Many of the effects incat2mutants grown in air are not observed when plants are grown at low light or at high CO2. In these conditions,cat2has a similar phenotype to the wild type (103). Thus,cat2has been characterized as a classical photorespiratory mutant whose stress phenotype is dependent onRuBPoxygenation that produces H2O2in the peroxisomes (Figure 3) at a sufficient rate to perturb cell redox homeostasis.
TheArabidopsis cat2mutant has been used to analyze responses driven by metabolic redox signaling, with the expression of several hundred genes being altered by increased photorespiratory H2O2(104,127,128). The similar phenotypes, growth, and transcriptomes ofcat2and the wild type at high CO2suggest that the CAT2 protein plays only a minor role under these conditions, where photorespiratory rates are low. However, a reanalysis of published transcriptomic data (104) shows that this may be a simplification. A small number of transcripts show altered abundance in bothcat2andArabidopsiswild type (Col-0) when the plants are grown at high CO2compared to growth in air (Table 2). These include 16 transcripts that are less abundant incat2and 3 that have higher levels. Interestingly, 13 of the 16 repressed genes are associated with responses to biotic stress. Most of these genes are not among those that show significantcat2/Col-0 differences after transfer from high CO2to air in the same conditions (Table 2). Given that the high-CO2condition used in this study should be sufficient to greatly decrease photorespiratory rates, these transcriptomic changes might reflect signaling roles for CAT over and above its metabolic function in removing H2O2. These possible additional roles should be considered when interpreting CAT functions in response to high CO2. As discussed below, several recent papers have reported a wide range of CAT-interacting proteins, including pathogen effectors.
Arabidopsisgenes that show altered expression levels at high CO2when the major leaf catalase is knocked outa
aData are from the microarray analysis reported by Queval et al. (104). Plants were grown in short-day conditions for 5 weeks at 3,000 ppm CO2to decrease photorespiration to very low levels. The 19 genes were more than twofold higher or lower incat2compared with Col-0, and values were significantly different atp< 0.05 (t-test, three biological replicates).
bThe effect of thecat2mutation relative to Col-0 after transfer to air to engage photorespiratory H2O2production in short days is indicated by letters in parentheses: s, similar effect in air to that in high CO2; n, no significant effect in air; o, opposing effect in air to that in high CO2.
Abbreviations: FC, fold change; PR, pathogenesis-related. An asterisk indicates that the gene is implicated in fungal or pathogen responses.

Several proteins have been reported to interact physically with CAT. The import of peroxisomal enzymes is dependent on cytosolic interaction with the peroxisomal targeting sequence import receptor PEX5 (69,100). Docking of PEX5 with anchor proteins on the membrane allows deposition of proteins in the peroxisomal matrix. Emerging evidence suggests that the intracellular localization ofCATand its interacting proteins can be influenced by the redox state of the cell through regulation of PEX5 function. PEX5 undergoes oxidation-induced monoubiquitination at a cysteine residue in the N terminus, favoring its retention in the peroxisomes (2). Consequently, PEX recycling is blocked when the cytosol becomes oxidized, resulting in decreased peroxisomal import of PEX5 interactors, including CAT (69). The location of cytosolically synthesized CAT is determined by competition among potential binding partners, as a consequence of oxidant-induced decreases in import into peroxisomes and/or increased retention of CAT in the cytosol.
PTMs also play a role in CAT regulation. The plant enzymes are subject to inhibitory oxidative modifications (65). The oxidation-induced exclusion of CAT from the peroxisomes may be part of the wider regulatory network that enables these critical detoxifying enzymes to become substrates of nuclear nucleoredoxin 1 (65). Nucleoredoxin 1 protects CAT from ROS-induced oxidation, presumably by restoring the reduction state of critical cysteine residues (65). Moreover, the activity of the rice CATA was shown to be regulated by lysine succinylation (148). Succinylation of CATA was markedly decreased in response to H2O2. The desuccinylation of recombinant CATA altered enzyme activity, showing that this PTM may have effects on metabolic regulation.
CATs in the cytosol interact with a variety of proteins, including calmodulin (138), calcium-dependent protein kinase 8 (151), lesion simulating disease 1 (70), the receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase STRK1 (16), no catalase activity 1 (44,72) and salt overly sensitive 2 (7,129). All these CAT-interacting proteins are components of integral stress signaling networks, and disruption of such networks when CAT is absent may explaincat2-dependent changes in gene expression even at very low rates of photorespiratory H2O2production (Table 2).
Several lines of evidence implicate CAT in biotic stress responses. When photorespiration is active, thecat2mutant activates a wide range ofSA- and JA-dependent responses and displays day length–dependent localized programmed cell death (PCD) and resistance to pathogens (17,18,82,86). This constitutive activation of biotic defense responses in response to CAT deficiency has been documented in several species (86). The relevance of observations ofcat2to pathogenesis-related (PR) processes that occur in wild-type plants is becoming clearer. Until recently, such observations were considered mainly in terms of changes in H2O2concentrations. In light of recent findings, the influence of CAT may involve a wider signaling network that includes interactions with target proteins. There have been several recent reports that CAT is a target for pathogen-encoded effector proteins (79,89,119,144). The fungal effectors PsCRN115 and PsCRN63 traffic CAT to the nucleus but have opposite effects. PsCRN115 stabilizes CAT, decreasing H2O2and PCD, whereas PsCRN63 destabilizes the enzyme, increasing H2O2and PCD (144).
The above evidence suggests that CAT is an important component of the plant disease resistance network, both in terms of its role in H2O2removal and as an interactor with signaling proteins. These roles are likely to be closely intertwined and responsive to changes in atmospheric CO2. Interestingly, both CAT and a chloroplast isoform of carbonic anhydrase (CA), which is implicated in CO2signaling inArabidopsis(54,55), have been identified as SA-binding proteins in tobacco (115,131). Following from this concept of CAT as an SA-binding protein, recent research suggests that the photorespiratory isoform is required for SA-mediated repression of auxin synthesis during Pst DC3000 infection, leading to decreased susceptibility (141). In addition, CAT2 promotes JA synthesis by facilitating direct protein-protein interactions of JA synthesis enzymes such as acyl CoA oxidases 2 and 3 in the peroxisomes (141). This is an example of how CAT proteins might, independently of their catalytic activity, act as signal transmitters to determine plant responses to stress through modulation of phytohormone synthesis. It is noteworthy that, in addition to JA, the peroxisome houses enzymes that convert indole-butyric acid to indole-acetic acid (IAA) through H2O2-generating β-oxidation (118). It would therefore be timely to explore the CAT interactome in different compartments under conditions in which H2O2is produced at different rates.
The above observations are relevant to understanding how higher CO2may affect antioxidative systems and associated signaling. Lower rates of H2O2production linked to decreased photorespiration may alter CAT compartmentation or its affinity for its protein interactors. The first possibility could allow the enzyme to make a greater contribution to controlling cytosolic or nuclear H2O2. The second could alter signaling networks independently of the catalytic function of CAT. Yet another effect might be through a shift in biochemical CAT functions. Eukaryotic CATs are thought to catalyze mainly H2O2dismutation and to have evolved from CAT-peroxidases that can also remove H2O2by peroxidation of reducing substrates (85,142). The dismutation reaction involves a two-electron oxidation of the heme prosthetic group to a ferryl-O intermediate (compound I), which is reduced back to the initial state by a second H2O2(Figure 5a). In the peroxidase reaction, compound I is rereduced by one- or two-electron donors other than H2O2. In the case of one-electron reductants, radical products may be formed (Figure 5b).

Figure 5Click to view


While plant CAT is thought mainly to catalyze H2O2dismutation, CAT-associated peroxidase activity has been detected in plants through the use of ethanol as a reducing substrate (47). Other reductants, such as methanol, formate, or NAD(P)H, can also be used by eukaryotic CAT, and several other physiologically relevant compounds, such as ascorbate and SA, can donate an electron to reduce compound I to compound II (23). In tobacco (Nicotiana tabacumandN. sylvestris) and inArabidopsis, decreased extractable CAT activities during growth at high CO2are due mainly to changes in the photorespiratory isoforms (46,103). In tobacco, another isoform of CAT, which has enhanced peroxidatic activity (47), was reported to increase in seedlings grown at high CO2(46). Decreased sensitivity to 3-aminotriazole, an inhibitor of the classical CAT reaction, suggests that the root isoforms may have greater bifunctional peroxidase activities (20).
The above observations are perhaps consistent with the notion that CAT-dependent peroxidation reactions become more important as H2O2falls to levels that might strongly limit the dismutation reaction. A key feature of the peroxidatic reaction may be the generation of radical oxidized forms of reducing substrates (Figure 5). Production of radicals by antioxidant enzymes can be important in activating toxins or endogenous signaling compounds in some conditions. Two examples identified in genetic screens for herbicide resistance inArabidopsisare decreased sensitivity to (a) hydroxyurea in CAT-deficient mutants (59) and (b) 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene in plants lacking mitochondrial monodehydroascorbate reductase (58). Such observations underscore the complexity of antioxidant systems and their possible prooxidant or protoxin roles in specific conditions (91). Here, we have focused our discussion onCATbecause of its close association with photorespiration and its sensitivity to CO2levels, but we note that other antioxidative enzymes may be involved in redox-mediated intercompartmental shuttling and signaling in a way that could contribute to the CO2response.
Photosynthesis has classically been considered to be the key process by which high CO2impacts plants (Figure 1). However, photosynthesis-independent signaling systems have emerged in recent years. Of these, CO2-dependent regulation of stomatal closure has been the best studied and documented (30). In these pathways, components of CO2perception include resistance to high CO21 (RHC1), a multidrug and toxin extrusion (MATE)-type transporter, and two CAs (55,122). The integration of these pathways with photosynthesis-dependent CO2signaling pathways is largely unexplored. As for other factors that cause stomata closure, increased CO2triggersROSproduction in the guard cells via activation ofRBOH-type NADPH oxidases (67). Key questions are to what extent cells other than stomatal guard cells independently sense CO2and whether such sensing occurs through similar pathways. NADPH oxidases, which are thought to be located mostly on the plasmalemma, are key players in systemic cell-to-cell signaling in response to various stresses and other stimuli (87,135).
As discussed above, growth under high CO2exerts many local and systemic effects on plant biology, including changes in redox homeostasis, hormone signaling, root development, and defense responses (84,90,113). Such observations suggest the existence of largely carbohydrate-independent systemic signaling pathways that underpin plant responses to CO2. The presence of a redox-auxin-strigolactone systemic signaling cascade that facilitates mycorrhizal symbiosis and subsequent phosphate uptake from the soil was recently demonstrated in tomato (149). This pathway involves perception of high CO2in the shoots, leading to an RBOH1-dependent increase in IAA accumulation. Plants with impaired polar auxin transport showed a compromised response to high CO2in terms of root arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis and phosphate uptake. Crucially, suppression of RBOH1 prevents CO2-induced accumulation of IAA in the shoot and subsequent systemic signaling (150). These results provide evidence for systemic ROS-dependent high-CO2signaling, and add to reports that the redox state is a key player linking defense responses to high CO2in leaves (84).
Although ROS-dependent signaling is important in most stress responses, the role of H2O2has been intensively studied in plant responses to biotic stress. It is well established that increased H2O2concentrations are sufficient to mimic responses to pathogens, and analyses of CAT and other mutants show that photorespiratory and, perhaps, other pathway reactions can contribute to PR responses (17,61,107,116,136). Nevertheless, theSApathway can be significantly induced in several plants simply by growing plants at high CO2in the absence of biotic challenge (15,80,84,95,136,143,145). Although induction of the SA pathway appears to be a general response to growth at high CO2, the extent of induction varies among and even within species. This likely reflects the wide range of high CO2concentrations used in the studies cited above (from 550 to 3,000 ppm), but the response may also be modulated by additional factors such as light conditions (irradiance or photoperiod), temperature, or nutrition. The influence of age-related resistance in the induction of immune responses by high CO2inArabidopsishas attracted attention (136). This is a point worth taking into account. Nevertheless, our recent observations suggest that the SA response to high CO2inArabidopsisis substantially above basal levels that are observed throughout development in air. Furthermore, the effect of high CO2on SA accumulation is at least partly inducible during air-to-high CO2transitions and reversible following high CO2-to-air transitions (84).
A key question concerns whether the observed activation of plant immune responses at high CO2reflects metabolic signaling driven by modified redox status, the action of CO2-sensing pathways that include components involved in guard cell regulation, and/or effects of enhanced photoassimilated carbon on metabolite levels. Recent evidence suggests that all three pathways are possible, and there may be close interaction among them with multiple points of reciprocal control. The potential effect of redox signaling at high CO2is discussed above. Stomatal closure is a key leaf response to pathogens. While it is not yet clear whether all components identified in studies of high CO2-induced stomatal signaling are involved in the biotic defense response, there is an intriguing possible convergence at the level of the CO2-sensing chloroplastCA(55). A chloroplast CA was previously identified as an SA-binding protein in tobacco (SABP3) (115). Moreover, it was shown inArabidopsisthat nitrosylation of AtSABP3 causes loss of both CA activity and SA-binding capacity (134). Together, these observations suggest that plant CO2-sensing proteins include some that play roles in biotic stress signaling. This notion is reinforced by the role of certain mitogen-activated protein kinases in both immune responses and CO2-induced stomatal closure (12,53,101).
Organic acids such as citrate can trigger transcriptomic changes, including in genes involved inPRresponses (32). Cytosolic NADP–isocitrate dehydrogenase, in which citrate is increased, seems to play some role in SA responses (83), and citrate contents were increased alongside the SA pathway inArabidopsisgrown at high CO2(84). Sugar signaling may also be involved, given that sugar status and metabolism can influence biotic stress responses (114). While sugars can act as sacrificial antioxidants, higher sugar content can also increase ROS signals (10,22). Specific connections between ROS and sugar metabolism are also possible at the level of ascorbate synthesis and mitochondrial hexokinase activity (13,137).
High CO2–induced changes in nitrogen and sulfur status may also be involved in the upregulation of basal defenses. Several amino acids can induce biotic stress responses in rice (60), and glutamate receptors play a role in immune response signaling through calcium signaling (71,76). The glutamate receptor atGLR3.3 is required for full resistance againstHyaloperonospora arabidopsidis(76), and GLR3.3-dependent calcium fluxes could be induced by several amino acids (glutamate, glycine, alanine, asparagine, serine, cysteine) as well as glutathione, although only cysteine and glutathione were competent to induce defense reactions (71). Interestingly,Arabidopsisplants showed slightly but significantly increased glutathione levels when grown at high CO2, and SA-dependent gene induction by high CO2was partly annulled in glutathione-deficient mutants (84). Finally, in terms of links between primary carbon/nitrogen status and secondary pathways, phenylpropanoid metabolism can be affected by the capacity of Calvin-Benson cycle enzymes (51), and flavonoids such as kaempferols accumulate in response to depletion of nitrogen and other nutrients inArabidopsisand other plants (73).
Increasing global CO2levels will have profound consequences for C3plant growth and productivity, not least because of direct influences on carbon gain. The beneficial effects of CO2fertilization are likely to result in significant yield gains for major C3crops. However, climate change models forecast increased global warming, with associated increases in the frequency of heat waves and changes in rainfall patterns. These factors alone are predicted to have a negative impact on the yields of most major crops. In many cases, these negative effects may be exacerbated by changes in the behavior of pathogens and insect pests that already consume between 5% and 20% of major grain crops (11). For example, global warming, in itself, is likely to have a positive effect on insect population growth and metabolic rates and will perhaps make it even more important to avoid yield losses due to insects. However, recent data suggest that higher atmospheric CO2concentrations activate plant innate immune responses, in part by modifying the redox status of the different cellular compartments. We are only now beginning to understand how high CO2can influence the ROS/phytohormone interface to increase resistance to pathogens and insects. Emerging evidence suggests that high CO2acts as a signal as well as a substrate, and that resultant effects on plant defenses may be mediated independently of primary metabolism.
Stomatal closure is a key feature of plant immune responses. Within the context of high CO2perception and signaling, these processes may be linked by common mechanisms. Recent advances in our understanding of the mechanisms that lead to high CO2, which then leads to stomatal closure (30), might provide insights into more general mechanisms of CO2signaling, particularly the role ofCAsin this process. The emerging concepts that different CA forms function in plant responses to pathogens and that the perception of high CO2strengthens innate immune responses merit further exploration. The mechanisms of high CO2-enhanced immunity that operate in different species may be crucial in providing a preemptive advantage to plants in terms of the projected climate-change-induced proliferation of pathogens and herbivores (11).
We have discussed the question of whether elevated CO2is perceived by the plant as a stress. While this question cannot be fully addressed on the basis of the present literature, we have provided a personal perspective concerning how the activation of the plant innate immune system might be achieved at elevated CO2through compartment-specific modifications in redox processes, particularly the balance between (a) metabolicROSproduction and processing and (b) NADPH-mediated ROS production and signaling.
One possible effect of increased awareness of the effects of CO2involves attempts to engineer increased carbon gain by decreasing photorespiration. Recent reports that increased carbon gain and growth can be achieved in plants in the field by introducing alternative pathways of glycolate metabolism are encouraging (117). Such approaches may be less disruptive to plant stress signaling than strategies that aim to achieve marked increases in intracellular CO2by introducing mechanisms that have evolved, more gradually, in C4plants. We also note that there may be unforeseen consequences of producing plants with intrinsically decreased photorespiration, in terms of either effects on redox states or the dampening of metabolic regulatory mechanisms (34).




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


