We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Crop loss due to soil salinization is an increasing threat to agriculture worldwide. This review provides an overview of cellular and physiological mechanisms in plant responses to salt. We place cellular responses in a time- and tissue-dependent context in order to link them to observed phases in growth rate that occur in response to stress. Recent advances in phenotyping can now functionally or genetically link cellular signaling responses, ion transport, water management, and gene expression to growth, development, and survival. Halophytes, which are naturally salt-tolerant plants, are highlighted as success stories to learn from. We emphasize that (a) filling the major knowledge gaps in salt-induced signaling pathways, (b) increasing the spatial and temporal resolution of our knowledge of salt stress responses, (c) discovering and considering crop-specific responses, and (d) including halophytes in our comparative studies are all essential in order to take our approaches to increasing crop yields in saline soils to the next level.
Article metrics loading...
afn1*These authors contributed equally to this article
Crop loss due to soil salinization is an increasing threat to agriculture worldwide. This review provides an overview of cellular and physiological mechanisms in plant responses to salt. We place cellular responses in a time- and tissue-dependent context in order to link them to observed phases in growth rate that occur in response to stress. Recent advances in phenotyping can now functionally or genetically link cellular signaling responses, ion transport, water management, and gene expression to growth, development, and survival. Halophytes, which are naturally salt-tolerant plants, are highlighted as success stories to learn from. We emphasize that (a) filling the major knowledge gaps in salt-induced signaling pathways, (b) increasing the spatial and temporal resolution of our knowledge of salt stress responses, (c) discovering and considering crop-specific responses, and (d) including halophytes in our comparative studies are all essential in order to take our approaches to increasing crop yields in saline soils to the next level.
Soil salinity is an increasingly severe global problem, as salt hampers plant growth and development and reduces crop yield. In addition to naturally occurring soil salinity, the amount of salinization increases as a result of irrigation practices and climate change; the latter acts through either a rise in sea levels or increased evaporation in periods of drought (reviewed in144). Crop loss due to increased soil salinity is now affecting migration patterns of farmers in coastal agricultural regions such as Bangladesh (22), stressing the impact and urgency of the problem. The detrimental effect of NaCl on plants is caused by both the reduction of water availability as sodium accumulates in the soil (124) and the toxic effect of sodium and chlorine ions on plants.Halophytesare plants that are adapted to salinized environments. They employ specialized strategies to deal with salinity (47). However, most crop species are salt sensitive—glycophytes—and optimizing them to produce more salt-tolerant plants is a strategy to increase crop yield on salinized agricultural land.
Soil salinity induces both osmotic and toxicity stress in plants, resulting in growth inhibition, developmental changes, metabolic adaptations, and ion sequestration or exclusion (124). Osmotic and ion toxicity effects were thought to be temporally and spatially separated, with sodium ions in the soil rapidly reducing water availability and a slow accumulation of sodium in the shoot inhibiting photosynthesis. This spatial and temporal separation suggested that early salt stress responses are due to general osmotic or drought stress and that sodium-specific responses are induced later. While there is indeed a significant overlap between osmotic and salt stresses in early and downstream signaling (Figure 1), this theory could be challenged by recent findings of both rapid salt-specific signal transduction and fast sodium-induced growth responses in roots (23,51).

Figure 1Click to view


In this review, we link new findings in cellular responses to salt-induced changes in growth rate. At the cellular level, advances in the past decade have focused on salt-induced early signaling, demonstrating a major role for both calcium waves and reactive oxygen species (ROS) and their downstream targets, while the cell wall is often implicated as a modulator of cell expansion during salt stress. Furthermore, gene expression, mRNA stability, and translational regulation are altered to change protein abundance during salt stress. We discuss how different ion channels and transporters affect sodium/potassium homeostasis at the cellular level, with consequences for their in planta function.The plant hormonesauxinand abscisic acid (ABA) have a major role in growth and architectural adaptations. We place local hormone signaling, gene expression, and ion transport in a tissue context to discuss their effect on organ-specific growth and whole plant survival.
The knowledge on signaling pathways and growth adaptations mostly comes from work on the model speciesArabidopsis thalianaand has not yet been transferred to crops. To be able to increase salt tolerance in crop species we need to understand which growth adaptations to salt are beneficial for specific species. Plant salt tolerance is a complex trait that can be scored in different ways, including by ion accumulation, tissue-specific growth rates, biomass production, survival, and seed production. Depending on the crop, it will be desirable to optimize different salt responses in order to increase yield.
The earliest cellular responses to salt, sodium import and sodium sensing, are arguably the least understood, and they remain a black box in salt-induced signaling pathways (Figure 1). Salt can enter the root through nonselective cation channels (NSCCs), which transport sodium across the plasma membrane (27,28) (Figure 2a). NSCCs are regulated by different salt-induced signals, such as calcium, 3′,5′-cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), and ROS. Other channels and transporters may also contribute, but their actual role in sodium import in planta is debated.The hypothesized action and regulation of sodium import have recently been critically assessed (94).

Figure 2Click to view


Despite recent advances, the mechanisms by which plants perceive salt is another open question (Figure 1). It has been proposed that plants sense osmotic changes rather than sodium ions, while sodium-specific responses occur much later through the toxic effects of sodium (or chloride) on the leaves (124). However, rapid salt-specific responses, such as salt-specific calcium waves, were recently identified in roots (23). Furthermore, the rapid and sodium-specific effect of salt on root growth direction (halotropism) predicts the presence of a root-based sodium sensor (51). Sodium may be sensed intercellularly, extracellularly, or by ion transporters at the plasma membrane (97a). Recently, significant progress has been made with the identification of MONOCATION-INDUCED [Ca2+]iINCREASES 1 (MOCA1) likely functioning in extracellular salt sensing, including but not restricted to Na+ions (71). Themoca1mutant lacks the early response calcium waves that occur in response to Na+, K+, or Li+ions. Functioning as a glucuronosyltransferase, MOCA1 produces glycosyl inositol phosphorylceramide (GIPC) sphingolipids at the plasma membrane. These GIPCs can bind monovalent cations and, upon binding, are hypothesized to bind and open a Ca2+channel to induce downstream responses to salinity (Figure 2a). In addition, salt-induced changes in the cell wall are perceived via FERONIA (FER), areceptor-like kinase (RLK)(Figure 2e) (45). However, downstream signaling of this receptor happens several hours after salt application, and not during early salt-induced signaling responses (Figure 2). It is likely that no single sodium sensor exists, but rather that different aspects of salt stress are sensed and integrated through different signaling routes.
Increases in cytosolic Ca2+concentration, ROS production, and cGMP are some of the earliest-described salt stress responses (32,85,117) (Figure 2b). Three different types of calcium fluxes in response to sodium have been described: cellular calcium spikes and fast- and late-response calcium waves (23,45,85). The use of fluorescent and luminescent calcium biosensors has made it possible to track calcium fluxes throughout tissues. Although various stresses showed a cellular increase in calcium, tissue-specific subtle differences were found in the amplitude and oscillation of calcium peaks induced by osmotic and salt stress (85). Subsequently, local salt application showed that the propagation of long-range calcium waves was induced by high salt, but not by osmotic stress treatment. These waves are almost instant, initiate 10 s after salt application, and can propagate throughout the root and even reach the leaves within 30 s (23). As described earlier, GIPC produced by MOCA1 can be bound by monovalent cations and initiate a Ca2+influx; however, the involved Ca2+channel remains to be identified (71) (Figure 2a). The propagation of Ca2+waves is facilitated by TWO-PORE CHANNEL1 (TPC1), which mediates Ca2+release from the vacuole; consequently, the speed of the long-range calcium signals intpc1mutants was drastically reduced (23) (Figure 2c). In general, calcium waves and spikes are not a sodium-specific phenomenon, as various other stimuli such as touch, cold, and osmotic stress are also known to induce changes in cellular calcium concentrations; however, the peak amplitude, peak oscillation pattern, and wave propagation do show salt specificity.
To mediate the output of calcium fluxes, calcineurin B–like proteins (CBLs) bind calcium and cause protein phosphorylation through their interaction with CBL-interacting protein kinases (CIPKs). Over the years, different CBL-CIPKs have been found to coordinate a set of cellular responses to sodium by decoding the Ca2+signals produced (reviewed in111). The salt overly sensitive (SOS) pathway is the best-characterized CBL-CIPK pathway (Figure 2b). Calcium is sensed by SOS3/CBL4 (104), which binds to SOS2/CIPK24 (57,103). The SOS2-SOS3 complex phosphorylates the H+/cation antiporter SOS1/NHX7 (57), which can transport sodium out of the cell. Mutation of any of the components of the SOS pathway results in severely reduced salt tolerance inArabidopsis, crop species, and halophytic species (reviewed in68,111). This pathway was extended with CBL10, which is more abundant in shoots (86,140). CBL10 can also form a complex with SOS2, and this complex plays a role in sodium sequestration in the vacuole. However, it remains unknown which transporter is activated by the CBL-CIPK complex in this case. An additional pathway activating SOS2 is mediated by SOS2-LIKE PROTEIN KINASE5 (PKS5) and14–3–3 proteins(178). PKS5 can phosphorylate SOS2 in control conditions, repressing SOS2 by inducing binding with 14–3–3 proteins. During salt stress, calcium binds the 14–3–3 proteins and PKS5 activity is repressed, showing an alternative pathway through which calcium can modulate SOS2 activity. The annexin AtANN4 mediates salt stress–induced Ca2+increase, while its subsequent phosphorylation by SOS2 attenuates the Ca2+wave to generate a salt-specific calcium signal (106). Other CBL-CIPKs are involved in regulating energy status and proton and potassium transport (reviewed in111). One example is CPK3, which phosphorylates the vacuolar TWO-PORE K+ CHANNEL 1 (TPK1), andcpk3andtpk1mutants both show increased salt sensitivity (98) (Table 1). Together, these recent advances in understanding CBL-CIPK pathways have begun to reveal how calcium fluxes induce different cellular salt stress responses.
Selection ofArabidopsisK+channels and transporters with a function in Na+transport or K+homeostasis during salt stress
This table shows the channel/transporter families ofArabidopsis(as described in113), abbreviation of family name, total number of members in the family (as described in113), family member, ion selectivity [antiports (↔), might transport both ions (/)], cellular localization [trans-Golgi network (TGN), prevacuolar compartment (PVC)] and function during salt stress for channels and transporters mentioned in this review.

Salt stress rapidly generates elevated levels of apoplasticROSmolecules (Figure 2b), such as hydrogen peroxide, singlet oxygen, superoxide, and hydroxyl radicals, which disrupt redox homeostasis and cause oxidative damage to plant cells (117). The RESPIRATORY BURST OXIDASE HOMOLOGs (RBOHs) are plant ROS-producing NADPH oxidases. InArabidopsis, the expression patterns of 10 RBOH genes (RBOHA–RBOHJ) are changing dynamically, and they generate ROS waves upon salt stress over a 24-h period (176), indicating that the complex ROS production network is constantly active and plays a central role during early salt response.
ROS initially interact with polyamines to increase cytosolic free Ca2+, which by binding N-terminal EF-hand motifs of Rbohs causes the activation and phosphorylation of Rboh proteins (130,182). Mathematical modeling showed that under salt stress, crosstalk between ROS and Ca2+signaling is necessary to spread the Ca2+signal between cells (43). Accordingly, theatrbohd atrbohfdouble mutant, which is hypersensitive to salt stress, exhibited a reduction in cytosolic free Ca2+and plasma membrane Ca2+influx (107). Moreover, the calcium signaling complex CBL1/9-CIPK26 interacts with and phosphorylates AtRbohF (35). Thus, in the early stages of salt stress, ROS and Ca2+signals work together to affect cellular pH and ion homeostasis (Figure 2).
Modifications in membranephospholipidsact as signaling components during salt stress. Within 5 min of exposure to both salt and osmotic stress, several phospholipid signals are produced, including polyphosphoinositides and phosphatidic acid (PA). The latter is produced by phospholipase C or phospholipase D (PLD) activity inChlamydomonasand several plant species, includingArabidopsisand rice (164,165). Severalpldmutants are more salt sensitive (8). As some C2 domain–containing PLDs use calcium as a cofactor (139), PA formation is yet another putative downstream response of calcium signaling during salt stress. Furthermore, Ca2+-independent ζ-type PLDs influence the direction of root growth during salt stress (51,93). PA itself can bind and influence various downstream proteins inABAsignaling andauxintransport (116), two hormone signaling pathways with a major role in salt stress signaling. PA also influences sodium transport through MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE6, which has SOS1/NHX7 as a downstream target (180). In rice, MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE6 is a downstream effector of the lectinRLKSALT INTOLERANCE I, which is dephosphorylated by Protein Phosphatase 2A under salt and mediates plant salt sensitivity by regulating ethylene homeostasis (101,187). In summary, PA influences protein localization and activation during salt and osmotic stress, thereby influencing hormone signaling and sodium transport (Figure 2d).
Other PA-binding proteins are the protein kinase family SUCROSE NONFERMENTING1-RELATED PROTEIN KINASE2 (SnRK2) subclass 1 proteins (76,163) (Figure 2d). These protein kinases are activated by osmotic and salt stress in an ABA-independent manner, in contrast to subclasses 2 and 3, which are required for ABA responses (95). During osmotic stress, ABA-independent SnRKs localize to intercellular foci within 5 min of salt application (115,157). Recently, these foci were found to be mRNA-processing bodies, in which SnRK2s bind to and phosphorylate VARICOSE (VCS), an mRNA-decapping protein involved in RNA stability (157). VCS and other members of the decapping protein complex, including DECAPPING and SM-like proteins, as well as 5′-to-3′ exoribonucleases, are required for 5′-to-3′ mRNA degradation. The ABA-independent SnRKs influence mRNA levels of aquaporins and the enzyme CYP97B2, involved in auxin biosynthesis (80) (see the section titled Auxin Transport and Local Auxin Response). Finally, the isoforms SnRK2.4 and 2.10 influence root growth and branching during salt stress (80,115). In general, the stability of coding mRNAs was previously shown to be affected by osmotic stress (127), and coordinated degradation of mRNA through regulation of several 5′-to-3′ degradation components is an emerging response to salt stress (reviewed in81).
Proton pumps play an essential role in cellular ion transport and sodium sequestration. P-type ATPases (P-ATPases) localize at the plasma membrane and maintain a negative membrane potential (Figure 2a). During salt stress, the positive charge of sodium ions depolarizes the membrane potential. Consequently, the P-ATPases become more active to counteract this depolarization, decreasing sodium import and potassium export in poplar (159). Moreover, P-ATPases fuel the exclusion of sodium from the root, a process mediated by the sodium/proton antiporter SOS1/NHX7 (52). Similarly, the tonoplast-localized H+-ATPases build up the proton-motive force necessary for sodium sequestration in the vacuole (11) (Figure 2c). These functions of H+-ATPases show how H+-ATPases influence the transport of other ions through their effect on membrane polarity and pH of intercellular compartments.
The cellular balance between sodium and potassium is important for plant survival in saline soils. The molecular similarity between the two causes potassium replacement by sodium, although it cannot take over the function of potassium in cellular processes (14). A multitude of channels, transporters, and antiporters play a role in maintaining sodium/potassium homeostasis during salt stress (4), one of which is the family of NA+/H+EXCHANGERS (NHXs) (Table 1). The plasma membrane–localized NHX7/SOS1 predominantly transports sodium and is important for the exclusion of sodium from the root (Figure 2b) (68). Apart from the plasma membrane–localized NHX7 and NHX8, the other members of the NHX family localize to intercellular compartments and can transport both potassium and sodium, which has demonstrated relevance for salt tolerance of crop plants (4). InArabidopsis,overexpression ofNHX1increases salt tolerance and sodium accumulation in the shoot during salt stress (6). Because of this accumulation and the tonoplast localization of NHX1 and NHX2, these NHXs are hypothesized to influence sodium sequestration in the vacuole. However, in planta they are likely involved mainly in vacuolar potassium homeostasis (Figure 2c) because of their equal affinity for potassium (70,110). This hypothesis was confirmed by a decrease in vacuolar potassium content innhx1 nhx2double mutants accompanied by an increase in sodium content innhx1 nhx2leaf tissue during salt stress (9). The impaired potassium homeostasis resulted in decreased growth and delayed stomatal closure. In addition,nhx5 nhx6mutants exhibit increased salt sensitivity. Endosome-localized NHX5 and NHX6 increase the pH of endomembrane compartments and thereby influence the sorting of transmembrane proteins (Figure 2c) (12,142). Taken together, these data show that NHX7/SOS1 has an important role in sodium export, while the endomembrane- and tonoplast-localized NHXs seem to be important for protein sorting, intercellular potassium transport, and endomembrane pH maintenance during salt stress.
Compared with NHXs, considerably less is known about the role of other potassium transporters and antiporters. However, the role of HIGH-AFFINITY POTASSIUM TRANSPORTER 5 (HAK5) has been shown to facilitate potassium transport under conditions of low extracellular potassium or high salt (128) (Figure 2a;Table 1). A single amino acid mutation increases HAK5’s potassium affinity and decreases its affinity for sodium in a heterologous system (2). HAK5 expression is upregulated in the loss-of-function mutant of the ethylene production regulatorETO1, which was associated with higher K+levels ineto1mutants during salt stress (69). Furthermore, different shaker-type potassium channels are important for maintaining sodium/potassium homeostasis (reviewed in151) (Figure 2a). GATED OUTWARDLY-RECTIFYING K+CHANNEL (GORK) and ARABIDOPSIS K+TRANSPORTER 1 (AKT1) are responsible for potassium efflux during salt stress and influx during osmotic stress, respectively. Furthermore, K+CHANNEL IN ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA 1 (KAT1) and GORK have a role in stomatal closure in response to ABA (Table 1). Finally, CATION/H+EXCHANGER 13 (CHX13) has a role in root growth direction on a salt gradient, while CHX17 influences K+accumulation in the root and CHX21 influences Na+accumulation in the shoot (Table 1).
Although the expression of many other cation transporters changes during salt stress (108), the biological role of these transporters has not been determined in many cases. Moreover, most of our knowledge of transporters that have a role in sodium/potassium homeostasis is at either the cellular or whole-organ level, but rarely integrated between these levels. Recent advances in our understanding of calcium transport are partly due to the generation of high-resolution reporters. Similar reporters for sodium and potassium could yield insights into the functions of transporters and the relevance of tissue-specific sodium/potassium balance, as well as the transporters’ subcellular and tissue-specific function.
After early signaling, the growth rate changes, going through four different growth phases. In the main root, salt rapidly decreases the rate of growth and induces a temporary pause in growth referred to as thequiescent phase(53); thereafter, the growth rate partially recovers, approximately 9 to 13 h after salt application (Figure 2). A similar growth curve has been described in lateral roots; however, here the quiescent phase could last more than 2 days (36). In lateral roots of Col-0 seedlings, the growth rate was reduced by 90%, whereas the primary root growth rate was reduced by only 50%. Less is known about salt-induced changes in the shoot growth rate. Leaf elongation rates in barley show a similar pattern after salt application to that of roots (48). Here the quiescent phase is shorter; growth recovery starts between 30 and 50 min after stress application, and the growth rate eventually is reduced by 60%.
The severity and length of salt-induced quiescence are regulated by hormone levels (53). The ABA levels and ABA signaling transcripts were found to correlate with the quiescent phase. ABA concentrations were reduced during the recovery phase, whereas jasmonic acid (JA), brassino-steroids (BR), and gibberellic acid (GA) levels rise, and downstream transcriptional programs are induced (Figure 2g). GA induction was observed from 5 to 8 h after salt treatment, when it could function in growth recovery, followed by a reduction at 24 h (53), consistent with earlier reports of reduction of bioactive GAs after several days of salt treatment (1). JA biosynthesis and signaling are activated by salt stress and consequently inhibit plant cell elongation and primary root growth (169). Accordingly, a JA insensitive mutantjai3-1recovers sooner after salt treatment and grows faster at the homeostasis stage compared with wild type, indicating that JA inhibits root growth during and just after the growth recovery phase (53). Modulation of growth rate coincides with changes in cellular water and solute management, photosynthesis, cell elongation, and cell division.
Cell expansion and division are both crucial for maintaining growth. Salt application reduces cell division (174) and induces cell swelling close to the root tip (45). Cell swelling is influenced by the structure of the cell wall, and the production of the cell wall's load-bearing component, cellulose, and cellulose crosslinking by pectins are modified upon exogenous salt application (reviewed in46). Calcium ions, normally required for pectin crosslinks, can be replaced by sodium ions, likely compromising pectin structure (120). Within 1.5 h of salt application, the microtubule network starts to be broken down and repolymerized, a process that completes after 4–8 h (40). Because the tips of microtubules are bound by cellulose synthesis complexes (CSCs), CSCs are internalized and delivered back to the plasma membrane during the microtubule repolymerization phase (40). Companion of cellulose synthesis (CC) proteins are a part of the CSCs and facilitate both the bundling of microtubules and the association of CSCs to microtubules (83). Incc1mutants, CSCs dissociate from the microtubules, resulting in decreased growth and cellulose synthesis during salt stress. Interestingly, the timing of these cell wall modifications precede the above-described changes in growth rate; CSC internalization and microtubule depolymerization coincide with the quiescent phase and microtubule bundling preceding the recovery phase (Figure 2f).
Recently, new regulators of salt-induced microtubule dynamics have been identified. Microtubule depolymerization requires changes in the activity of the kinase PROPYZAMIDE HYPERSENSITIVE1 (PHS1) and SPIRAL1 (SPR1). PHS can phosphorylate and inhibit polymerization of α-tubulin. Normally, this function is inhibited through the phosphatase function of PHS1 itself; however, osmotic stress blocks this phosphatase activity, causing phosphorylation and depolymerization of α-tubulin (49). SPR1 binds to the plus ends of microtubules, where it inhibits the depolymerization of microtubules. Salt induces 26S proteasome–mediated degradation of SPR1 and thereby causes depolymerization of microtubules (173). In contrast, microtubule repolymerization and bundling require ethylene signaling (34) and PA recruitment of microtubule-associated protein 65 (183). Taken together, both microtubule depolymerization and repolymerization as well as increased bundling are necessary to maintain long-term growth rates and tolerance.
A class of receptors, theRLKs, can perceive salt-induced changes in cell wall properties. One RLK with a clear role in salt stress signaling is FERONIA (FER) (45) (Figure 2e). As a response to high salt stress, FER mediates late-response calcium waves, which are necessary to prevent cell bursting. Consequently,fermutants show increased salt-induced cell swelling and eventually bursting close to the root tip. FER is thought to directly perceive decreased crosslinking of pectin, because it binds pectin in vitro and addition of exogenous calcium or borate can complement theferphenotype, likely by promoting pectin crosslinking. Alternatively, FER might indirectly perceive changes in the cell wall structure through LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT EXTENSINS and the peptides RAPID ALKALINIZATION FACTOR (RALF) 22/23 (185). Another RLK with a possible role in salt stress, MIK2/LRR-KISS, was identified in agenome-wide association study (GWAS)for natural variation in biomass during salt stress (74). MIK2/LRR-KISS expression levels can be linked to salt tolerance (42,74), and the receptor might perceive changes in cell wall composition, since anmik2/lrr-kissmutant shows a decreased response to cellulose synthesis inhibition (171). Beside the peptides RALF22/23, salt induces the expression of the plant elicitor peptide 3 (PEP3), which can be perceived by PEP receptor 1 (PEPR1) and eventually increase salt tolerance (125). This could be another perception mechanism of cell wall modifications, because PEP3 expression is induced by cell wall damage (42). In summary, components of the cell wall are affected by salt stress and can modulate cell expansion. FER, MIK2/LRR-KISS and PEPR1 are three examples of receptors that could perceive these changes in the cell wall either directly or through the exclusion of small signaling peptides such as RALFs or PEPs. This perception is in turn required to induce important responses to salt stress, likely leading to salt adaptation and tolerance.
Loss of water, due to decreased osmotic pressure, is one of the problems plants face when growing in salinized soils. To maintain cell volume and turgor in this situation, plants can compensate for changes in osmotic pressure with organic solutes. Accumulation of osmolytes in the cytoplasm for osmotic adjustment is one of the major salt tolerance mechanisms ofhalophytes(47). These osmolytes are low-molecular-weight compounds including proline, sugar alcohols, sorbitol, quaternary ammonium compounds, and α-amino nitrogen. Metabolomic profiling analysis ofArabidopsis, rice, and lotus reveals that the balance between amino acids and organic acid is a conserved metabolomic response upon salt treatment (148). The osmolyte profiles may vary from species to species upon salt stress. For instance, some halophytic species accumulate sucrose as compatible solute, while others synthesize proline (reviewed in156).
Osmotic adjustment in response to salt stress decreases the growth rate by redirecting energy sources to the production of organic solutes (121). This major allocation of resources is estimated to be impossible without uptake of NaCl, because it would take away too many of the resources produced by photosynthesis, reducing those available to maintain growth. This calculation showed that plants need to take up sodium to maintain turgor; however, in this case they need to be able to deal with the toxic effects of sodium (122), described as tissue tolerance.
In addition to reallocating resources for osmotic adjustment, a decrease in photosynthesis reduces available resources and therefore growth in response to salt. The closure of stomata reduces the amount of CO2available for fixation, although increasing the CO2concentration can only partially recover the photosynthetic rate (21). This finding suggests that there is also an ionic effect, or at least a stomatal closure–independent effect, of sodium on photosynthesis. The activity of CO2-fixing enzymes decreases during salt stress, and interestingly the tolerance of these enzymes for Na+in vitro differs among species (17), although the relevance of this observation for in planta photosynthetic capacity has not been addressed. The proton-motive force necessary for energy production in chloroplasts depends on close coordination between pH and electro potential changes over thylakoid membranes (17). Sodium ions can disturb this balance because of their positive charge and effect on pH. Ion channels and transporters with a potential role in maintaining chloroplast function during salt stress have recently been reviewed (17). For example, a mutant that lacks chloroplast-localized K+Efflux Antiporter 1 (KEA1) and KEA2 shows decreased photosynthetic capacity, and applying sodium can rescue this phenotype (Table 1). In addition, chloroplasts produce retrograde signals to communicate chloroplast status, affecting signaling pathways relevant to salt stress responses (25). Overall, Na+influences photosynthesis by disrupting the proton-motive force and chloroplast function and by interfering with CO2-fixing enzymes (Figure 3a).

Figure 3Click to view


The above-described cellular processes take place within the context of a tissue. Thus, tissue-specific responses and transport mechanisms eventually determine organ growth and development during salt stress, starting with ion and water transport throughout the plant. There are three transport routes of water and solutes between the soil and the root vasculature: apoplastic transport through the extracellular space, symplastic transport through neighboring cells connected by plasmodesmata, and transcellular transport through cells via channels and transporters. All three transport routes can contribute to the import of salt into the root. The endodermal tissue surrounding the stele is important in regulating apoplastic and transcellular transport due to the deposition of lignin andsuberin(reviewed in30). Lignin is deposited in bands around endodermal cells; together these bands form theCasparian stripand regulate the apoplastic transport of solutes to the stele. Suberin is a waxy substance that is deposited between the cell wall and the plasma membrane and thereby regulates influx and efflux of both water and solutes during transcellular transport through the endodermis.
The integrity of the Casparian strip affects the deposition of suberin, making it difficult to determine the independent effects of these two barriers in ion transport (30). The recent identification of the RLK SHENGEN3 (SGN3) has resolved this problem, because SGN3 is required not only for Casparian strip integrity but also for increased suberin deposition upon sensing Casparian strip defects (31).sgn3mutants demonstrate the function of the Casparian strip without increased suberin deposition. Interestingly, the Casparian strip alone does not influence the accumulation of most ions, including sodium, in control conditions, while potassium content is decreased (136). This finding suggests that the Casparian strip plays a role in blocking potassium leakage from the stele. In contrast, suberin deposition mutants show a higher permeability to sodium in particular (reviewed in30). Thus, the endodermis could play a dual role in maintaining a low sodium/potassium ratio by both minimizing potassium leakage from the stele and limiting sodium import into the xylem (Figure 3c). Suberization deposition dynamically changes during salt stress, resulting in continuous suberization alongside major parts of the root (7). This increase in suberin deposition is dependent on endodermalABAsignaling, wherein ethylene signaling plays an antagonistic role by decreasing suberization in metal-deficient conditions. Suberin-deficient genotypes show higher sodium accumulation after salt treatment, and both root growth and seed production are reduced, suggesting that salt stress–induced suberization could contribute to salt tolerance (7).
At a concentration of 100 mM NaCl outside the root, the hydraulic conductivity (i.e., water uptake capacity) of the root decreases by 70% (18). Interestingly, inArabidopsis, there is natural variation in this hydraulic conductivity (161), suggesting that plants employ different water management strategies during salt stress. Suberin decreases water flow (158); therefore, increased suberization may reduce hydraulic conductivity. Hydraulic conductivity is facilitated to a large extent by aquaporins, which are pores that facilitate water transport over membranes (67,137). Both their localization and their activity are altered by salt stress and downstream sodium signals (reviewed in102) (Figure 2d). Finally, the closure of stomata largely influences transpiration and therefore water transport throughout the plant. ABA is a major regulator of stomata closure, mediated by the above-described signaling components such as calcium,ROS, andPA(89) (Figure 3a). In summary, stomatal closure decreases transpiration while, in parallel, aquaporin regulation and suberin deposition reduce hydraulic conductivity of the root. While the relevance of reduced transpiration to minimization of water loss is obvious, the relevance of reduced root hydraulic conductivity in response to salt is still debated. Water import might facilitate the passive import of sodium ions, or reduced hydraulic conductivity could prevent backflow of water into the saline soil.
Sodium concentration in shoots is affected by the regulation of sodium transport from root to shoot by the family of HIGH-AFFINITY POTASSIUM TRANSPORTERS (HKTs) (Figure 3a,b). The members of this family can be divided into two classes according to their affinity for either sodium or potassium, caused by a single amino acid substitution in the pore region of the transporter (112). The HKT1 subclass transports sodium, while the HKT2 subclass transports potassium. InArabidopsis, AtHKT1;1 is the only member of the HKT family. AtHKT1;1 both inhibits root-to-shoot transport and facilitates shoot-to-root transport of sodium by loading sodium into the phloem stream (15) and unloading sodium from the xylem flow into xylem parenchymal cells, respectively (Figure 3a,b;Table 1) (160). In other species, the role of HKTs in sodium transport is more complex because of the differing localization and affinity among members of the HKT1 families, as we discuss in the section titled Halophytes and the section titled Transgenic Approaches in Model Plants and Crops.
Overexpression of AtHKT1;1 in the stele increases salt tolerance in adult plants grown in hydroponics (118); however, high expression of AtHKT1;1 can also have a detrimental effect, possibly due to its role in root development, as shown by investigations of natural variation in AtHKT1;1 expression (13,75). On average, accessions from coastal regions were shown to contain a higher sodium leaf content, accompanied by enrichment of a weak allele of AtHKT1;1 (13). Subsequently, AtHKT1;1 was identified in aGWASfor root system architecture changes in response to salt, demonstrating that the higher expression of AtHKT1;1 resulted in fewer and shorter lateral roots, a phenotype that could be partially rescued by addition of potassium to the medium (75). Furthermore, the beneficial effect of AtHKT1;1 overexpression was shown to be dependent on the plant developmental stage during salt application. Even earlier in development, salt stress inhibits seed germination, which coincides with upregulation of AtHKT1;1. Thecalmodulin-binding transcription activator6(camta6) mutant is salt tolerant during germination and shows no upregulation of AtHKT1;1 (155). However, anathkt1;1 camta6double mutant regains salt sensitivity during germination. Thus, depending on the expression levels, AtHKT1;1 can be either beneficial or harmful in seed germination under saline conditions. Lastly, AtHKT1;1 is known to be repressed by the hormone cytokinin (CK), causing an increase in leaf sodium content (114). Salt stress reduces CK levels, and the accumulation of CK negatively regulates plant salt tolerance. In summary, when the root system is already established, overexpression of AtHKT1;1 can be beneficial by reducing shoot sodium concentration. However, in earlier developmental stages the high sodium/potassium ratio in the root inhibits lateral root formation, and upregulation of AtHKT1;1 is associated with salt sensitivity during germination.
Phytohormones are crucial endogenous chemical signals coordinating plant growth and development both under optimal conditions and during environmental challenges. ABA has key roles in stomatal closure and regulation of root growth under abiotic stress, and guard cells and various root tissues are the hot spots for their functions (Figure 3) (53,89). Abiotic stresses, including salinity and water deficit, induce the expression of ABA biosynthetic genes (e.g.,NINE-CIS-EPOXYCAROTENOID DIOXYGENASEs(NCEDs),ABA DEFICIENTs(ABAs), andALDEHYDE OXIDASE 3) in specific vascular tissues (10,41,146). In the root, expression ofABA1–ABA3andNCED3is triggered in epidermis, cortex, endodermis, and root stele layers within 3 h of salt treatment (53). ABA has been proposed to be transported from root to guard cells to promote stomatal closure; however, grafting experiments in tomato show that stomatal closure does not rely on ABA production in the root (64).The expression pattern of the rate-limiting ABA biosynthesis geneNCED3suggests that ABA can be synthesized in leaf vascular parenchymal cells and transported to guard cells (41,77). The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) B-type transporters ABCG25 and ABCG40 transport ABA from leaf vascular cells to guard cells to mediate stomatal closure during drought stress (77,97). The combination of tissue-specific ABA production and high-resolution ABA reporters could elucidate how ABA moves throughout the plant and may offer opportunities to determine ABA origin and spatial regulation in response to salt. Förster resonance energy transfer sensors have been developed for ABA, although they are not yet being used widely due to their interference with ABA signaling (72,172). A newly developed ABA-responsive element (ABRE)-based promoter reporter could be an alternative tool to resolve spatial ABA signaling (175).
The perception of ABA by PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE/PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE-LIKE (PYR/PYL) leads to inactivation of PP2C/ABI1, which induces the phosphorylation activity of subclass III SnRKs (SnRK2.2, SnRK2.3 and SnRK2.6). Various downstream phosphorylation targets of SnRK2 kinases mediate processes including ion transport,ROSproduction, gene transcription, and closing of stomata. OST1/SnRK2.6 interacts with and phosphorylates specific ion channels [KAT1, K+UPTAKE PERMEASE 6 (KUP6), and SLOW ANION CHANNEL-ASSOCIATED 1 (SLAC1)] to mediate K+efflux and anion currents in guard cells, promoting stomatal closure during salt and osmotic stress (135,149,168). In addition, ABA-mediated gene expression is dependent on transcription factors acting downstream as substrate of SnRK2s, as well as target genes that containABREs in their promoters (50). Additional transcription factor families containing other stress-responsivecis-regulatory elements in their promoters may mediate ABA-responsive gene expression; these include NAC-, MYB-, HD-Zip-, AP2/ERF-, and WRKY-type transcription factors, which are induced in various plant species in response to salt (reviewed in63).
Aside from ABA-dependent transcriptional regulation, the dehydration-responsive element (DRE) is the majorcis-regulatory element regulating gene expression response to salt stress (126).Rd29Aand the AP2/ERF family transcription factorDEHYDRATION-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING PROTEIN2A(DREB2A), both of which contain DRE in their promoters, are rapidly upregulated by salt treatment (179). GROWTH-REGULATING FACTOR7 (GRF7) binds to theDREB2Apromoter and interacts with the DREB2A protein. Knockout mutants ofgrf7exhibited a greater survival rate under high salt, and a transcriptomic analysis revealed significant increases in osmotic stress– and ABA-responsive gene expression in this mutant, including expression ofDREB2A(87). Interestingly, the same study also supports crosstalk between ABA-dependent and -independent pathways in regulation of gene expression under salt stress, sinceGRF7also suppresses ABA-responsive gene expression. An ABRE element is consistently present in the promoter ofDREB2A, and expression ofDREB2Ais regulated by the ABA signaling cascade, implying crosslinking between ABA-dependent and -independent gene regulation pathways (88). Taken together, major advances have been made in deciphering the ABA signaling cascade and downstream responses, while the relative contribution of tissue-specific ABA production and transport remains a debated topic.
A hallmark of a plant's response to abiotic stress is root developmental plasticity (91). Long-distance shoot–root downwardauxintransport and local cellular movements to maintain auxin maxima are indispensable for plant root growth and adaptation to environmental cues. Both global auxin transport and intracellular auxin movements contribute to maintenance of local auxin maxima (reviewed in92). Salt and osmotic treatments induce PIN-FORMED2 (PIN2) efflux facilitator internalization (189). When exposed to a salt gradient, plant roots exhibit a salt avoidance (halotropism) response due to rapid (within 1 h) asymmetric auxin distribution mediated by PIN2 internalization (51). The response is enhanced by elevation of the auxin influx carrier AUX1 at the non-salt-exposed side of the roots, as well as a transient accumulation of PIN1 (51,170). This internalization of PIN2, but not AUX1, is facilitated by thePA-producing phospholipases PLDζ1 and PLDζ2 (51,93) (Figure 2d). Apart from PIN and AUX auxin polar transporters, ABCB transporters exhibit spatiotemporal expression patterns in response to salinity (20,181), which might also contribute to the dynamic auxin distribution to mediate plant growth response.
Auxin biosynthesis pathways are temporally and spatially regulated in response to a range of salt stresses in multiple plant species (38,61,92,138,177). Short-term (3-h) high salinity stress (≥100 mM NaCl) of cucumber seedlings induces expression of YUCCA genes, which are part of the major Trp-dependent auxin biosynthesis pathway, leading to increased IAA levels (177). In addition, theBrassica-specific indole-3-acetaldoxime (IAOx) auxin biosynthesis pathway genesCYP79B2andCYP79B3show induction in both roots and shoots ofArabidopsisafter 24 h of mild salt stress, while the double mutant shows reduced root branching on salt, suggesting a role for the IAOx pathway in regulating salt stress responses (75). Auxin is perceived through binding to the F-box protein complex TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE1/AUXIN SIGNALING F-BOX (TIR1/AFB); auxin binding promotes interaction with the AUXIN/INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (AUX/IAA) family of transcription repressors, leading to the ubiquitination and degradation of AUX/IAAs and expression of AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF) genes (100). Salinity suppresses auxin response by downregulating expression of the auxin receptor complex TIR1/AFB2 (65). InArabidopsis, there are 29AUX/IAAgenes with functional specialization and differentiation in various aspects of plant development. Among them, AXR3/IAA17 is stabilized by the accumulation of nitric oxide under salt stress (105). Although the role of most AUX/IAA genes in salt stress response is largely unknown, an in vitro yeast one-hybrid screening assay (152) showed that stress-responsive DREB/CBF-type transcription factors bind to the promoters of a number ofArabidopsisAUX/IAA genes (IAA5, IAA6, and IAA19). Together, changes in auxin transport along with local tuning of auxin synthesis and responses coordinate roots’ tissue-specific growth responses to salt.
As mentioned above, plants have evolved strategies to coordinate hormone signals to dynamically modulate their spatial growth and reshape their architecture in response to environmental changes. Roots are the frontline organs in contact with salt in the soil, and they need to adapt in order to maintain growth and uptake of nutrients and water. Salt stress in general reduces root mass and modifies the distribution of different root system architecture components, differentially affecting the growth rate of the main root and lateral roots and inhibiting lateral root formation. Automated phenotyping platforms have been developed for two- and three-dimensional imaging systems, allowing the capture of root dynamic growth in response to environmental factors (73,119,143).
Salt inhibition of both main and lateral roots was observed when measured after 4–8 days (36,73). Salt reduces lateral root elongation inArabidopsisCol-0, but seems not to affect lateral root density when observed macroscopically, by counting emerged lateral roots (73). Yet, lateral root development is partially blocked by salt stress in developmental stages V–VI just prior to emergence (37,115). Lateral root growth is modulated primarily via auxin (99) (Figure 3b). ARFs are crucial mediators for lateral root development in response to abiotic stress factors including salt. As an example, ARF4 posttranscriptionally targeted by microRNA390 is involved in lateral root development under salt in poplar, while ARF7 is posttranslationallySUMOylatedon the dry side ofArabidopsisroots (60,133).SUMOylationnegatively affects the DNA-binding activity of ARF7 to the promoter ofLBD16, affectinglateral root initiationduring hydropatterning (133). While SUMOylation has been reported to affect salt responses as well (24), its role in salt-affected root architecture is unknown (Figure 3c). Other than auxin, endodermalABAsignaling is required for salt-induced lateral root growth quiescence (37). One study showed that the ABA-SnRK2.2/SnRK2.3/SnRK2.6 core signaling pathway promotes lateral root growth quiescence induced by ABA treatment (184). Interestingly, the same study showed thatPYL8promotes lateral root growth recovery by interacting with MYB77 to enhance auxin signaling and that auxin is able to restore the lateral root phenotype ofpyl8knockout mutants. On the other hand, the ABA-independent SnRK2.10 affects lateral root emergence under salt, likely via the PA signaling pathway (115). Although the influence of salt on different developmental stages of lateral root primordia is still largely unknown, these data suggest interplay between ABA and auxin in mediating lateral root growth modulation by salt (Figure 3b).
Root system architecture phenotyping of 31 differentArabidopsisaccessions under salt revealed natural variation in balancing growth between primary and lateral roots. For example, some accessions exhibit greater reduction in primary root elongation than in lateral root elongation as well as changes in lateral root numbers, while others respond similarly in terms of reduction of primary root length, lateral root length, and alteration of lateral root numbers. These different root system architecture strategies in response to salt are associated in part with differences in ABA sensitivity and shoot Na+/K+ratio (73). Furthermore,GWAShave exploited the natural variation in both root architecture remodeling under salt and halotropic responses to salinity to uncover the genetic controls underlying root responses (29,75,79). To date, few studies have focused on crops, and much still can be learned from the interspecific variation among architectural responses to salt and other abiotic stresses (91).
Salt stress limits the growth and development of aboveground tissues, although the molecular mechanisms are not as intensively studied as those for roots. So far, it is not clear how the shoot apical meristem and shoot architecture are regulated by salt. A recent study showed that low soil NaCl levels reduced far red (shade)-induced hypocotyl elongation through BR and ABA signaling pathways (59). Inhibition of the shade avoidance response by salt involves repression of PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR 4 and 5, which are important transcription factors that link shoot responses to light via auxin signaling. In addition, salt delayed flowering time inArabidopsiswild-type plants, while it had the opposite effect on quadruple DELLA mutants (1), implying that GA signaling modulates salt-affected flowering time via DELLA proteins (Figure 3a). Moreover, BROTHER OF FT AND TFL1, which belongs to the FT/TERMINAL FLOWER 1 gene family, is induced by salt and delays flowering time under salt, likely via the ABA pathway (147). A recent study showed that the flowering time regulator GIGANTEA (GI) interacts with and inhibits SOS2-mediated SOS1 phosphorylation in the absence of salt, whereas salt induces degradation of GI, thereby releasing SOS2 to activate theSOS pathway, involved in regulating ion homeostasis (90). In summary, salt likely affects flowering time through multiple signaling pathways, the molecular mechanisms of which remain elusive.
To sustain local tissue growth and cope with salt stress, plants are responsive in the distribution of their photosynthesis-fixed carbon, which is the major source of starch and soluble sugars. An emerging role of starch metabolism in determining plant fitness under abiotic stresses has been reviewed elsewhere (167). Under optimal conditions, starch accumulates during the day and breaks down in the dark for sucrose production and energy (56). Under osmotic stress or soil water deficit, carbon partitioning to starch is decreased, leading to osmolyte accumulation and carbon translocation to theArabidopsisroots (39,166). Similarly, salt stress induces carbon partitioning to sugars, but not to starch, in both source (leaf) and sink (root) tissues during the day inArabidopsis(33). In addition, salt treatment increases the level of root sugars, including fructose and glucose, in the root of tissue-specificArabidopsisAtHKT1;1 overexpressors, whereas these sugars were decreased by salt in the shoot of anhtk1;1mutant, where an increase in tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates was observed (62). In contrast, carbon translocation towards the roots of tomato is limited by salt stress (162). These findings imply that tissue-specific sodium content is likely playing a role in regulating spatial carbon influx and therefore limiting tissue growth.
Halophytes are plants that are able to grow and reproduce under high salt concentrations (>200 mM NaCl). In nature, most halophytic species occur in saltwater areas (marine areas or swamplands) or in dry desert regions. Halophytes share salt tolerance mechanisms withglycophytes, and they have evolved specific additional features to adapt to high-salinity conditions. For instance, osmoprotection is a general response to salt that is achieved by osmotic adjustment or ion membrane transport so as to maintain cellular osmotic and turgor pressure. Under salt stress, primary and secondary metabolites, including proline and sugar alcohols, function as osmolytes in both halophytes and glycophytes. (47).Prestress metabolite levels in the halophyteEutrema salsugineum(previously known asThellungiella halophila) are significantly higher than in its glycophytic relativeArabidopsis(54). This may explain its greater capacity for osmotic adjustment. In line with this, salt stress stimulates the accumulation of proteins involved in starch and sucrose metabolism in the leaf ofE. salsugineum(55). Similar to glycophytes, halophytes also use osmoprotective and ion-detoxification strategies consisting of Na+removal from cytosol, Na+transport from root cells to xylem, and ion compartmentation in the vacuoles, involving SOS1, HKT1, and NHXs ion transporters, respectively. Under salt stress, most halophytes accumulate more Na+in their shoots than in their roots while retaining higher levels of K+than do glycophytes and, thus, a more optimal K+/Na+ratio (47,134). These physiological observations suggest that halophytes may employ different mechanisms in ion transportation and homeostasis in salt. Indeed, recent molecular studies showed that expression ofSOS1andHKT1in the halophytesE. salsugineum(EsSOS1) andSchrenkiella parvula(previouslyEutrema parvula) (EpHKT1;2) confers stronger salt tolerance than does that of theirArabidopsishomologues (AtSOS1andAtHKT1;1) (3,66). The halophyteSalicornia(Figure 4a) has a constitutively high level ofSOS1expression but undetectableHKT1(78). In addition, next-generation sequencing has recently broadened opportunities to investigate the genomic basis of ion transportation in halophytes. For example, theS. parvulagenome has three tandem duplicates ofSpNHX8and two copies ofHKT1, which are associated with higher transcript levels of these two genes when compared withAtNHX8andAtHKT1;1(132). This finding suggests that genomic variation may contribute to the salt tolerance of these species. In addition,S. parvulaandE. salsugineum, but notArabidopsis, have higherSOS1expression and similar genomic structures in the promoter and upstream regions ofSOS1(131).

Figure 4Click to view


Secretion of salt via epidermal bladder cells (EBCs) is another salt tolerance mechanism developed by some halophytic species. Quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa) is a halophytic crop (Figure 4) containing EBCs, removal of which results in increased salt sensitivity (84). The developmental origin of EBCs is largely unclear, although they are considered to be similar toArabidopsistrichome cells. A transcriptomic analysis of quinoa EBCs revealed high expression of abiotic stress–responsive genes, ion transporters, and sugar transporters, while photosynthesis-related genes were downregulated, a finding consistent with differences between mesophyll and EBC chloroplasts (16,188). In addition, with regard to ion transporters, EBCs show higher expression ofHKT1,NHX1,HAK5, and the anion exchanger CLC-c but lower expression ofSOS1when compared with leaf and root tissue (16). Further study of the development and functional mechanisms of EBCs will be crucial for understanding the salt tolerance mechanism of quinoa.Now that its genome has been sequenced (188), quinoa is an ideal halophytic food crop species to study in an effort to develop other, more tolerant crops.
Few success stories about improving crops’ salt tolerance have been reported (26,121). In several species, including tomato, overexpression ofNHX1led to a positive effect on salt tolerance (11). In cereals, expression ofArabidopsis CIPK16andAVP1in barley improved salt tolerance in greenhouse and field conditions, respectively (145,150). Introgression of anHKT1allele from an ancestral wheat relative into durum wheat improved Na+exclusion from the shoot and salt tolerance in the field, with increased grain yield under these conditions (123). For other species, modulation of HKT1 expression could be a promising strategy, as natural variation occurs in many different species. More subtle regulation of HKT1 may be required, however, as the beneficial effect of HKT1 expression depends on the genetic background and age of the plants (75,118). For example, the higher salt tolerance of the wild tomato speciesSolanum pennellii(Figure 4b) versusSolanum lycopersicummay be due in part to an HKT1 gene with lower Na+affinity (5). Another promising research direction toward improvement of salt tolerance is modulation of the rhizosphere. A positive effect of plant growth–promoting rhizobacteria and mycorrhiza has been reported in several species, but the mechanisms need to be determined before they can be used as a reliable way to improve salt tolerance (44,129).
With the notable exception of quinoa, most crops areglycophyteslike the model speciesArabidopsis(Figure 4c). As such, knowledge of mechanisms of salt responses and tolerance ofArabidopsisis expected to contribute to the development of more salt stress–resilient crops. However, knowledge gaps remain, limiting this strategy. For example, we lack an understanding of how salt is perceived by the plant and of which signaling pathways affect the different responses that together determine the complex trait of salt tolerance (Figure 1). Better knowledge of time and spatial resolution is needed to steer a plant's response to salt in a favorable direction. This direction may differ among individual crops, depending on whether the harvestable parts are root, shoots, or fruits, as well as on other environmental constraints.
Research on halophytic species has shown that ion sequestration, synthesis and transport of compatible solutes, and more optimal developmental plasticity play a crucial role in tolerance. While it is not clear whetherhalophytetolerance mechanisms could be transferred to crops without a yield penalty, this is an interesting direction to explore further. In this case, the knowledge gap lies in our understanding of the physiology of halophytes (82). To this end, a focus on a selected number of genetically tractable model species would likely help us exploit the natural salt tolerance of halophytes as a means of improving our crops.




The writing of this review was funded by an ERC (European Research Council) Consolidator grant (Sense2SurviveSalt) to C.T. The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We thank Charlotte Gommers, Nora Gigli Bisceglia, and Ayodeji Deolu-Ajayi for critical reading. We thank Hongfei Li for providing pictures ofS. parvulain comparison withArabidopsis, Robert van Loo for the quinoa photographs, Remco Stam for theS. pennelliipicture, and Iko Koevoets for providing root microscopy and seedling pictures forFigure 3.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


