We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
The mountain pine beetle epidemic has highlighted the complex interactions of bark beetles with conifer host defenses. In these interactions, oleoresin terpenoids and volatiles, produced and released by the host tree, can be both harmful and beneficial to the beetle's success in colonizing a tree and completing its life cycle. The insect spends almost its entire life, from egg to adult, within the bark and phloem of a pine host, exposed to large quantities of complex mixtures of oleoresin terpenoids. Conifer oleoresin comprises mostly monoterpenes and diterpene resin acids as well as many different sesquiterpenes. It functions as a major chemical and physical defense system. However, the insect has evolved host colonization behavior and enzymes for terpenoid metabolism and detoxification that allow it to overcome some of the terpenoid defenses and, importantly, to co-opt pine monoterpenes as cues for host search and as a precursor for its own pheromone system. The insect-associated microbiome also plays a role in the metabolism of conifer terpenoids.
Article metrics loading...
The mountain pine beetle epidemic has highlighted the complex interactions of bark beetles with conifer host defenses. In these interactions, oleoresin terpenoids and volatiles, produced and released by the host tree, can be both harmful and beneficial to the beetle's success in colonizing a tree and completing its life cycle. The insect spends almost its entire life, from egg to adult, within the bark and phloem of a pine host, exposed to large quantities of complex mixtures of oleoresin terpenoids. Conifer oleoresin comprises mostly monoterpenes and diterpene resin acids as well as many different sesquiterpenes. It functions as a major chemical and physical defense system. However, the insect has evolved host colonization behavior and enzymes for terpenoid metabolism and detoxification that allow it to overcome some of the terpenoid defenses and, importantly, to co-opt pine monoterpenes as cues for host search and as a precursor for its own pheromone system. The insect-associated microbiome also plays a role in the metabolism of conifer terpenoids.
The mountain pine beetle (MPB;Dendroctonus ponderosae) has caused damage to an area of over 18 million hectares of pine forests across western Canada and the United States since the late 1990s and 2000s (5,80). During the current MPB epidemic, their geographic range expanded eastward across the Rocky Mountains and breached a new host species that extends across the Canadian boreal forest (38,39). The current outbreak has also affected fragile forest ecosystems at higher elevations than have been previously reported (77). This unprecedented range expansion has been attributed to climate change (9,90,102).
MPBs infest a range of different pine (Pinus) species, and the most common host in western Canada is lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta). In general, pines and other conifers are protected against most herbivores by their terpenoid-rich oleoresin. However, as a specialist that has coevolved with conifer defenses, the MPB interacts with terpenoids in many different ways; e.g., terpenoids act as host defenses that may require detoxification by the MPB, as volatile cues for host selection, and as MPB pheromone precursors. This review focuses on the interactions between the MPB and the terpenoids of the pine host, and specifically on how the MPB metabolizes these terpenoids.
We cover the production and function of terpenoids as pine host defense, the co-option of terpenoids as kairomones and pheromone precursors, and the MPB biochemical transformations and their genomic underpinnings that make this co-option possible.
The MPB spends most of its typically one-year life cycle in the cortex of its brood tree and only leaves the host for a few weeks to disperse and find a new host (13,101) (Figure 1). Except for the brief period of the dispersal flight, MPBs of all developmental stages, from egg to adult, are exposed to the oleoresin terpenoids in the tree (35). Female MPBs are typically the first to locate and attack the host tree. Once a female has begun to tunnel into the bark and phloem, she releases the aggregation pheromonetrans-verbenol that attracts males and other females (19,87,117). Attracted females will also releasetrans-verbenol, while joining males release the pheromoneexo-brevicomin and smaller amounts of frontalin. These pheromones affect the number of beetles that mass attack an individual tree (19,73). The burrowing insects damage resin ducts in the tree, which causes the release of oleoresin as a chemical and physical defense at the site of insect attack (35). The pheromone-mediated mass attack may allow the MPB to overwhelm the tree's oleoresin defenses. A threshold for overwhelming these defenses has been calculated to be ∼40 insect oviposition galleries per m−2of bark area. An optimum density for the MPB was calculated at ∼60 galleries per m−2(92), at which beetles can overcome the host defenses without being affected by intraspecific competition. MPBs release the antiaggregation pheromones verbenone, produced by females, and frontalin, produced by males, once they reach a high density, deflecting incoming beetles to neighboring trees.

Figure 1Click to view


The MPB is associated with fungal and bacterial symbionts that coinhabit the host tree. Fungal associates of the MPB includeGrosmannia clavigera,Ophiostoma montium, andLeptographium longiclavatum(69). These fungi are transported in the mycangia of the MPB from the brood tree to the new host (11). The MPB-associated fungi provide ergosterol as well as nutrients for the developing larvae and teneral adults (10,12,49). MPB-associated fungi and bacteria may also contribute to the metabolism of host terpenoid defenses (1,17,119,120). The bacterial and fungal communities change in abundance throughout the host colonization process and throughout the galleries of MPBs (2,3,69).
A common defense of conifers of the family Pinaceae is the production and accumulation of oleoresin (Figure 2), which is composed mostly of monoterpenes and diterpene resin acids (14,62,63) (Figures 3and4). In pines, oleoresin accumulates in resin ducts throughout the plant (46,70). Oleoresin is constitutively produced and stored in resin ducts; however, oleoresin production can also be induced as a response to biotic stress (91,93,127). Oleoresin serves as both a physical and chemical defense and can synergize with other conifer defenses to interrupt the development of stem-boring insects (125). When bark beetles damage resin ducts, the flow of resin can physically hinder the insect from progressing into the tissue (Figure 2). At the surface of the tree, the volatile monoterpenes of the oleoresin evaporate, allowing the diterpene resin acid to harden, which may trap invading insects and close the wound. In addition to acting as a physical defense, terpenoids can have toxic effects on insects (107,112).

Figure 2Click to view


Figure 3Click to view


Figure 4Click to view


Terpenoids are biosynthesized from the common five-carbon molecules isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP), which originate from the methyl-erythritol 4-phosphate pathway or the mevalonate pathway (113) (Figures 3and4). Isoprenyl diphosphate synthases, also referred to as prenyl transferases, use IPP and DMAPP as substrates to produce geranyl diphosphate (GPP; 10 carbons), farnesyl diphosphate (FPP; 15 carbons), and geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP; 20 carbons) (63). Conifer terpene synthases (TPSs) then convert DMAPP, GPP, FPP, and GGPP into hemiterpenes, monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, and diterpenes, respectively (28,63,67,103,121). Conifer diterpenes can be oxidized by cytochrome P450 enzymes (P450s) to produce diterpene alcohols, diterpene aldehydes, and diterpene resin acids (47,52,97). The oleoresin of pine consists primarily of monoterpenes and diterpene resin acids, as well as smaller amounts of sesquiterpenes (63). Pines also emit volatile hemiterpenes, monoterpenes, and sesquiterpenes from needles and damaged tissues (75,76,103).
The oleoresin terpenes of the MPB hosts lodgepole pine (P. contorta) and jack pine (Pinus banksiana) are well characterized (35,36,41,42,50,51). Several genes and enzymes of terpene biosynthesis have been characterized in these two species (50,51). Seven different prenyl transferases have been identified in lodgepole pine and nine in jack pine (50). In addition, eight lodgepole pine and nine jack pine monoterpene synthases (mono-TPSs) have been functionally characterized (50). Each of the mono-TPSs characterized in lodgepole and jack pine produced multiple monoterpenes, including (+)-α-pinene, (−)-α-pinene, (−)-β-pinene, (−)-α-phellandrene, (−)-β-phellandrene, (+)-3-carene, (−)-limonene, terpinolene, terpin-4-ol, (+)-α-terpineol, (−)-α-terpineol, (−)-camphene, (−)-sabinene, and myrcene. Eleven diterpene synthases have also been identified in jack pine and lodgepole pine and have been functionally characterized to produce the diterpenes abietadiene, pimaradiene, sandaracopimaradiene, isopimaradiene, palustradiene, levopimaradiene, dehydroabietadiene, and neoabietadiene, which are precursors for the formation of diterpene resin acids found in pine oleoresin (51). Members of the P450 family CYP720B have been functionally characterized in lodgepole and jack pine to produce some of the diterpene resin acids found in these species (47). The combination of multiple TPSs, many of which are multiproduct enzymes, and multiple terpene-oxidizing P450s accounts for the large diversity of terpenes that are found in pine oleoresin, with which MPBs must contend.
Recent studies have highlighted differences in the amounts and composition of terpenoids when comparing trees that were attacked or not attacked by MPBs, as well as trees that were treated in experiments by wounding, fungal inoculation, or methyl jasmonate application (16,21,93). In general, trees responded with increased terpenoid content in tissue or increased resin flow after a real or simulated MPB attack. Terpenoid profiles of induced resin also changed; for example, lodgepole pines treated with fungal inoculation had higher proportions of β-pinene, 3-carene, limonene, β-phellandrene, α-thujone, camphene, and terpinolene compared to those that were untreated (16). Oleoresin terpenoids have been compared between pines that are thought to have coevolved with the MPB in the historical range of the insect and pines in the area of recent or potential future MPB range expansion. Examples of historical host species include lodgepole pine in the southern range of British Columbia, limber pine (Pinus flexilis), and ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa). Examples of novel or naïve hosts include lodgepole pine in the northern range of British Columbia, jack pine, foxtail pine (Pinus balfouriana), whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis), and bristlecone pine (Pinus longaeva). Generally, historical host species appear to have higher amounts of β-phellandrene than the naïve host species (7,8,21,34,36,42,93,100). However, novel hosts such as jack, whitebark, bristlecone, and foxtail pine have higher proportions of α-pinene, and specifically (−)-a-pinene, than historical hosts as part of the monoterpene profile (7,36,42,93,100,110). Terpenoid defenses in lodgepole pines that survived MPB attack in a given area have been compared with those of trees that did not survive. Generally, trees that survived had higher levels of limonene compared to those that did not (35,41,91). A higher abundance of resin ducts was reported in lodgepole and limber pine that appeared to be resistant compared to susceptible trees of these species (43). Individual lodgepole pines that survived a MPB outbreak had higher resin duct defenses after the outbreak than before (126). Together, these studies showed that oleoresin terpenoids are quite variable in the defense systems of host trees in the current MPB epidemic.
Despite the successful coevolution of MPBs with pines as their hosts, the oleoresin terpenoids of pines still act as defensive chemicals against MPBs (29,96). During host colonization, adult MPBs, eggs, larvae, pupae, and teneral adults are exposed to high concentrations of terpenoids as airborne volatiles, through contact with oleoresin or by feeding on oleoresin-containing phloem (35). Early studies tested the general toxicity of pine oleoresin to MPBs and other bark beetles (104,105). Limonene has been consistently identified as the most toxic monoterpene to MPBs (95,96).
The comparison of different monoterpenes and their amounts that caused death of 50% of MPBs in toxicity assays (LD50) and the abundance of these monoterpenes in the host tree revealed that the most toxic monoterpenes to MPBs, (−)-limonene and (+)-limonene, are not the most abundant in the MPB pine hosts (29,96). Conversely, β-phellandrene, which is the most abundant monoterpene of lodgepole pine (>50% of the total oleoresin monoterpenes) (50), only displayed a middle-of-the-range toxicity towards MPBs (29,96). These results suggest that the MPB has successfully evolved to cope with the major monoterpenes in its common host, lodgepole pine, but may be affected by the higher toxicity of other monoterpenes that it may encounter if expanding into potential new hosts with a high abundance of (−)-limonene or (+)-limonene. Whitebark pine (P. albicaulis) is one example of a pine that accumulates abundant limonene in its oleoresin (7,93). Comparisons of the MPB monoterpene LD50values to those of other insects showed that MPB tolerance of monoterpenes is more than tenfold higher than that of insects that do not inhabit terpene-rich environments (29,107). This comparison suggested that the MPB evolved mechanisms to reduce the effect of conifer monoterpenes, while many other herbivorous insects would be excluded from conifer hosts due to the abundance of toxic terpenes.
Monoterpene volatiles released by pines can act as kairomones during MPB host location (55,88). Female pioneer beetles are guided to a suitable host by the attraction to host volatiles, avoidance of nonhost volatiles, and the visual cue of a tree silhouette (25,26). These cues, in particular the chemical cues, allow MPBs to distinguish a suitable pine host from nonhosts, reducing the energy cost of host finding relative to randomly landing on trees (20,23). The host monoterpene volatiles terpinolene and myrcene also synergize with aggregation pheromones and increase MPB attraction to the tree (18,81,88). The MPB must be able to detect the low concentrations of monoterpene volatiles during dispersal and host search and must also be able to cope with the high concentrations of the same compounds in the selected tree.
The female-released aggregation pheromone (−)-trans-verbenol is a oxygenated product of the pine monoterpene (−)-α-pinene (73) (Figure 5). It is plausible that the pheromone role oftrans-verbenol may have evolved from being a product of MPB detoxification of host monoterpenes. The original concept thattrans-verbenol may be derived from the conversion of host α-pinene by the MPB (85) was supported by research showing thattrans-verbenol appeared in collections of extracts and volatiles from female MPBs feeding on pine phloem (73,89,111,117) or treated with α-pinene (56,58). However, the release oftrans-verbenol can also be triggered in female MPBs without concurrent exposure to α-pinene. For example, the treatment of female MPBs with juvenile hormone III, without exposure to α-pinene, causes a release oftrans-verbenol (37,66). Therefore, hypotheses of more complicated biosynthetic relationships between host α-pinene and the production and release oftrans-verbenol by MPBs have been put forth.

Figure 5Click to view


Recently, novel monoterpene-derived compounds, specifically monoterpenyl fatty acid esters, have been identified in MPBs and appear to serve as reservoirs for the release oftrans-verbenol by adult female MPBs during dispersal and host search (30). Verbenyl oleate and other monoterpenyl esters accumulate in both sexes of the MPB during development from larvae to teneral adult in the brood tree, but surprisingly only the females retain this compound when they emerge from the brood tree (Figure 1). These esters may originate from theP450-dependent detoxification of host monoterpenes followed by conjugation to a fatty acid for the accumulation of a potentially less toxic derivative of the host monoterpene. The formation of monoterpenyl esters may be part of, or derived from, the overall monoterpene detoxification system in MPBs, whereby they first oxidize α-pinene totrans-verbenol and then produce verbenyl fatty acid esters, which may be stored without being toxic to the insects. The accumulation of the monoterpenyl esters in MPBs may be a metabolic link between monoterpene detoxification by feeding larvae and the evolution of an adult female MPB aggregation pheromone.
De novo biosynthesis oftrans-verbenol by the MPB through its endogenous mevalonate pathway, convergent to monoterpene biosynthesis in pine trees, has also previously been suggested (57,123). Monoterpenoid pheromone production in a related bark beetle species,Ips pini, has been shown to proceed via de novo biosynthesis. Similar to the MPB,I. piniproduces a sex-specific aggregation pheromone, ipsdienol, that is an oxygenated version of the host monoterpene myrcene (115).I. pinican obtain myrcene from the host or synthesize it de novo (48,79,114). However, evidence that the MPB does the same de novo biosynthesis is lacking.
Microbial production of MPB pheromones may also play a role. Ophiostomoid fungal associates can converttrans-verbenol to verbenone, an antiaggregation pheromone (24,59). However, evidence that microorganisms associated with the MPB are responsible fortrans-verbenol pheromone production is lacking because MPBs raised in a sterile environment produce as muchtrans-verbenol as those with their microbiome intact (37,58).
Although recent work has shed light on the metabolic origin of the female-specific MPB aggregation pheromonetrans-verbenol, there is much that remains to be discovered. The production oftrans-verbenol via de novo biosynthesis, microbial transformation, and the direct hydroxylation of α-pinene or the accumulation and release of verbenyl oleate are not mutually exclusive to each other. In the MPB,trans-verbenol may be produced through multiple pathways that are parallel to the monoterpenoid detoxification systems.
Detoxification and elimination are major mechanisms that insect herbivores use to cope with chemical defenses of their hosts. Insects generally use three different families of enzymes for detoxification: P450s, glutathione-S-transferases, and carboxylesterases. These enzymes are encoded by gene families, the size of which, in a given species, is correlated with the diversity of the insect's host species and exposure to different host chemicals (94). P450s are the best studied of these detoxification enzymes, and a number of P450s of insect herbivores have been shown to detoxify host defense compounds (45). P450s are a large family of heme-thiolate-containing enzymes. In insects, P450s are associated with the biosynthesis of ecdysteroids (molting hormones), juvenile hormones, and pheromones and the metabolism of host defenses and pesticides (44,45,72). The best-known mechanism of P450s is the monooxygenase reaction, in which one oxygen atom of molecular oxygen (O2) is inserted into the substrate and the other is used to form water (Figure 6). P450s typically oxidize the substrate, resulting in the formation of a hydroxyl group or an epoxide group. Beyond monooxygenases, P450s account for over 60 different types of catalytic activities, including dealkylations, dehalogenations, and carbon-carbon cleavages, and they act on a seemingly infinite number of substrates (45). The heme group of P450s is important to the activation of the oxygen, and the most conserved regions of P450s are associated with heme binding (122). A supply of electrons from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), which are transferred to the P450 by a redox partner that varies between different classes of P450s, is required for the reduction of the heme. Insect P450s are class II P450s, which are reduced by a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)/flavin mononucleotide (FMN)–containing P450 reductase and are located at the outer membrane surface of the endoplasmic reticulum (122). For convenience, the P450 nomenclature uses a hierarchical system of clades, families, and subfamilies based on the level of amino acid sequence identity (83). In this nomenclature, the prefix CYP forms the root of the name, followed by a first number representing the family (cutoff is 40% identity), letters for the subfamily (cutoff is 55% identity), and a second number that identifies the specific P450 enzyme. For example, CYP6DE1 shares at least 40% identity with other members of the P450 family CYP6, and at least 55% identity with other members of the subfamily CYP6DE. Members of a given P450 subfamily may be associated with similar biochemical functions or similar biological roles in a group of more- or less-closely related organisms. For example, many members of the insect CYP6 subfamily are involved in detoxification.

Figure 6Click to view


P450s in MPBs and other bark beetles have been studied for their role in metabolizing conifer terpenes (reviewed in61). Examples of early work that implicated P450s in MPBs are the findings of oxidase activity in MPB midguts (108) and the presence of oxygenated monoterpenes in female MPB extracts (84). In addition, female MPBs treated with P450 inhibitors and then exposed to α-pinene and myrcene had increased levels of monoterpenes and reduced levels of the hydroxylated productstrans-verbenol and ipsdienol (60). These observations indicated that P450s might be involved in the metabolism of monoterpenes in MPBs. More recently, the MPB genome was annotated and found to contain 85 different P450 genes (68). Additional transcriptome and proteome studies identified tissue-, sex-, and condition-specific patterns of expression of P450s in MPBs (6,15,65,66,82,86,98,99).
Toxicity studies showed that different host terpenes affected MPBs with different LD50values (29), suggesting that different terpenes may be converted by a MPB detoxification system that differs with regard to substrate specificities or catalytic efficiencies with different terpenes. Here, we highlight recent studies that assigned functions to a few MPB P450s with host pine terpenoids as substrates. Two MPB P450s,CYP6BW1 and CYP6BW3, oxidize diterpene resin acids (31,33). CYP6BW1 transcripts are abundant in the midgut, while CYP6BW3 is highly expressed in the antennae. Putative orthologs of these two MPB P450s are found in otherDendroctonusspecies,Dendroctonus rhizophagusandDendroctonus valens, as single-copy genes expressed in both the antennae and the midgut (27,74). MPB CYP6BW1 and CYP6BW3 may have originated from a common ancestral gene via gene duplication followed by the divergence (i.e., possibly subfunctionalization) of their spatial expression. Another MPB P450, CYP6DJ1, metabolizes the monoterpenes limonene and terpinolene in vitro, and the oxidized products were confirmed in MPB extracts treated with the same compounds. Limonene is the most toxic monoterpene in the monoterpene profile of lodgepole pine (29). CYP6DJ1 has higher expression in female compared to male MPBs (31,66,82,99); however, females did not survive limonene vapors significantly better than males (29). The transcript abundance of CYP6DJ1 in males and females may be below a threshold that would impact the toxicity of limonene.
The detection of volatile semiochemicals, such as pheromones, host terpenes, and nonhost volatiles, by the olfactory system relays important information about conspecifics and the host tree to the beetle. Electroantennographic detection studies have shown that MPB antennae respond to pheromones and host and nonhost volatiles, as well as pheromones from heterospecifics (55,88). The club antennae of the beetles detect odorants and have sensory hairs called sensilla (40). The antennal club of the MPB contains four types of sensilla: trichoidea III, trichoidea II, basiconia, and fluted sensilla (124). The sensilla house the olfactory receptor neurons, which express odorant receptors and an odorant coreceptor on the membrane of the dendrite (118). The binding of an odorant to the odorant receptor triggers action potential in the neuron, which sends a signal to the antennal lobe. Odorant receptors are encoded by a diverse family of genes; specifically, the MPB genome contains 49 odorant receptor genes (4). Some odorant receptors respond selectively to certain compounds, such as pheromones, while others respond to a broader range of metabolites. Other components of the peripheral olfactory system include the odorant-binding proteins, which may be involved in the transport of the odorants, and the odorant-degrading enzymes, which are proposed to inactivate odorants so that they do not accumulate in the system (71). In vitro experiments with antennal extracts and recombinant proteins indicate that aldehyde oxidases, aldehyde dehydrogenases, esterases, andP450sare potential odorant-degrading enzymes. As odorant-degrading enzymes, P450s would prevent the accumulation of odorants such as pheromones and host terpenes in the insect olfactory system. This may be important, as the MPB may experience a dynamic change in exposure to these semiochemicals. Several different MPB P450 genes (CYP6DE1,CYP6DE2,CYP6DJ1,CYP6BW1,CYP6BW3,CYP9Z18,CYP345E2) were identified in antennal tissue, indicating that the candidates could be monoterpene-degrading enzymes in the antennae (31). Some of these P450s were also expressed in other MPB tissues, suggesting their broader functions in pine monoterpene detoxifications. The CYP345E2, which is most highly expressed in MPB antennae, metabolized the pine host volatiles (+)-3-carene and (−)-camphene as well as both enantiomers of α-pinene, β-pinene, and limonene, with a possible role in odorant degradation (64).
Research has shown that MPB P450s have functions in the formation of the pheromonesexo-brevicomin andtrans-verbenol.exo-Brevicomin is derived from the fatty acid pathway. Fat bodies extracted from the beetle can convert decanoic acid to non6-en-2-one and can also convert (6Z)-non6-en-2-one to (6Z)-epoxynonan-2-one, the direct precursor toexo-brevicomin (106). Researchers have proposed that (6Z)-non6-en-2-one is converted to a keto-epoxide intermediate by a P450 enzyme (116). The MPB CYP6CR1, a P450 with an expression profile consistent with that ofexo-brevicomin production, converts (6Z)-non6-en-2-one to (6Z)-epoxynonan-2-one (106). This intermediate is subsequently cyclized toexo-brevicomin. MPB CYP4G55 and CYP4G56 also convert long-chain fatty acids and may be involved in the production ofexo-brevicomin as well as cuticular hydrocarbons (78).
The MPB P450s CYP6DE1 and CYP6DE3 both convert the host monoterpene α-pinene to the pheromonetrans-verbenol (32,82). CYP6DE1 uses the monoterpenes (−)-α-pinene, (+)-α-pinene, (−)-β-pinene, (+)-β-pinene, and (+)-3-carene as substrates. With either (−)-α-pinene or (+)-α-pinene as a substrate, CYP6DE1 producestrans-verbenol, with minor amounts ofcis-verbenol and myrtenol, a product profile that closely matched compounds in extracts of female beetles treated with the same two monoterpenes. CYP6DE1 may be a major contributor to the production oftrans-verbenol in the beetle and may contribute to the production of verbenyl esters, which are accumulated by MPB larvae while developing in the brood tree. CYP6DE3 and CYP6DE1 along with other P450s may contribute to the metabolism of β-pinene and 3-carene in the beetle. CYP6DE2 does not seem to metabolize monoterpenes and diterpene resin acids that are abundant in lodgepole pine.
A suite of bacterial associates of the MPB can detoxify a variety of pine terpenoids and may have played a role in the evolution of the MPB to overcome pine defenses (1–3,16,17). The MPB-associated fungusG. clavigeracan use limonene as a sole carbon source (119,120). It converts (+)-limonene through an oxygenation pathway system, producing carvone, p-mentha-2,8-dienol, perillyl alcohol, and isopiperitenol.G. clavigeracan also degrade (+)-limonene through the C-1-oxygenated pathway, producing limonene-1,2-diol as the most abundant intermediate.
Research in the MPB system highlighted the complex interactions of bark beetles with terpenoid metabolites of the conifer host defense system (Figure 7). Given the complex and variable composition of terpenoids in the pine oleoresin system, the role of individual compounds and their different mixtures requires further investigation. In future work, an extended analysis of the toxicity of monoterpenes and diterpene resin acids, as well as sesquiterpenes, in the MPB needs to include different methods of exposure, specifically contact and feeding, and it should include all stages of the MPB life cycle, from egg to adult. Different combinations of monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, and diterpenes need to be tested for possible synergic or neutralizing effects. A major aspect of terpene toxicity that is unknown is the mode of action at the level of the complete MPB organism, physiology, and cell biology. A detailed understanding of the toxicity of individual terpenes and their mixtures, along with knowledge of the modes of MPB tolerance or detoxification, would enable greater predictive power as to which conifer species may, or may not, be suitable hosts of the MPB as it expands its geographic range and may evolve in interactions with conifer species that have not previously acted as MPB hosts.

Figure 7Click to view


Future studies also need to identify the complete set of genes and enzymes of the MPB, in particular the larvae, involved in the conversion of α-pinene to verbenyl fatty acid esters, the mechanisms and tissues that facilitate the accumulation of these molecules, and, ultimately, the molecular and biochemical mechanisms that control the sex-specific release of thetrans-verbenol pheromone and its temporal and spatial regulation. New work should explore the presence of verbenyl fatty acid esters in otherDendroctonusspecies that releasetrans-verbenol, includingDendroctonus frontalis,Dendroctonus brevicomisandDendroctonus terebrans(22,109). A study across differentDendroctonusspecies and other more- or less-closely related species may clarify the patterns of the evolution of pheromone formation relative to monoterpene detoxification. Future work needs to validate the role of CYP6DE1 intrans-verbenol production. This could entail RNA interference (RNAi) or CRISPR approaches in the MPB. Experiments need to be designed to disentangle, if possible, the proposed role of CYP6DE1 in the formation oftrans-verbenol as a biologically important, female-specific aggregation pheromone from other, general roles of CYP6DE1 in monoterpene detoxification.
It is often an underlying assumption that the products of MPBP450oxidation of pine monoterpenes will be less toxic than the host monoterpenes themselves. However, without future research, the possibility cannot be ruled out that the oxidized monoterpene products remain toxic or that they could potentially be even more toxic than the monoterpene olefins of the pine oleoresin. Having identified the products of various MPB P450 activities, researchers may now test in future work the toxicity of both pine monoterpenes and oxidized monoterpene derivatives. Evidence of herbivore metabolism producing potentially more toxic compounds from plant defense metabolites exists, as, for example, with pyrrolizidine alkaloids (53,54).
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
J.B. is grateful for all the contributions of past and present members of his research group to the research on the conifer defense system and conifer–insect interaction. Research in the Bohlmann lab has been generously funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada, Genome Canada, Genome British Columbia, Genome Quebec, Genome Alberta, and other sources.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


