We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
The advent of high-throughput sequencing-based methods for chromatin conformation, accessibility, and immunoprecipitation assays has been a turning point in 3D genomics. Altogether, these new tools have been pushing upward the interpretation of pioneer cytogenetic evidence for a higher order in chromatin packing. Here, we review the latest development in our understanding of plant spatial genome structures and different levels of organization and discuss their functional implications. Then, we spotlight the complexity of organellar (i.e., mitochondria and plastids) genomes and discuss their 3D packing into nucleoids. Finally, we propose unaddressed research axes to investigate functional links between chromatin-like dynamics and transcriptional regulation within organellar nucleoids.
Article metrics loading...
afn1*These authors contributed equally to this article
The advent of high-throughput sequencing-based methods for chromatin conformation, accessibility, and immunoprecipitation assays has been a turning point in 3D genomics. Altogether, these new tools have been pushing upward the interpretation of pioneer cytogenetic evidence for a higher order in chromatin packing. Here, we review the latest development in our understanding of plant spatial genome structures and different levels of organization and discuss their functional implications. Then, we spotlight the complexity of organellar (i.e., mitochondria and plastids) genomes and discuss their 3D packing into nucleoids. Finally, we propose unaddressed research axes to investigate functional links between chromatin-like dynamics and transcriptional regulation within organellar nucleoids.
Since the discovery of DNA as the hereditary information unit of all living cells, every step in its research has revealed an increasing complexity in its structure. At the basic level, DNA wraps around proteins known as histones to form nucleosomes, which are elementary repeating structural units of chromatin. Chemical modifications on chromatin, such as DNA methylation and various posttranslational modifications of histones, play prominent roles in regulating chromatin activities along development and adaptation to environmental stimuli. Beyond this, complex 3D chromatin organization patterns, such as species-specific positioning of centromeres and telomeres in nucleoplasm, were already demonstrated by early cytogenetic studies. The introduction of conformation–capture techniques revolutionized 3D genomics over the past decades (22,96). A hallmark discovery in this field was the identification of higher-order chromatin structures such as self-interactingtopologically associated domains (TADs)in animal cells. In plants, pioneering studies demonstrated the lack of TADs in the model plantArabidopsis thaliana(Arabidopsis), questioning their relevance for the organization of plant 3D genomes. Subsequent works on a broad range of plants demonstrated that most of them possess TAD structures, placingArabidopsisas an outlier model. In animals, the key factors regulating TAD formation, including CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and cohesin, were identified (reviewed in157). However, no similar features were noticed for plant TADs, as plant genomes do not encode CTCF, making the topic of deciphering plant TAD formation a new hotspot in plant 3D genomics.
Additionally, we point out that plant 3D genomics is not limited to nuclear genomes. Mitochondria and plastids are DNA-containing membranous compartments in the cytoplasm. While the existence of mitochondria is widespread in all eukaryotes, plastids (e.g., chloroplasts) are restricted to plants and are at the origin of their autotrophy. Mitochondria and plastids are unique in hosting an independent genome with prokaryotic features, which is in agreement with their endosymbiotic origins (1). Mitochondrial and plastidial genomes underwent extensive genetic changes, including gene losses or flows into nuclear genomes, and are organized mainly as polycistrons separated by intergenic elements and repeats (38,50,106,117,118). Historical data endorsing the existence of 3D packing for organellar genomes can be traced back to the 1960s, when Ris & Singh (140) noticed membraneless DNA-containing spheroids within algae plastids. Termednucleoids, they can adopt different numbers, shapes, and patterns in different plant species or along organelle differentiation (81,82,134,143). Nucleoids do not consist of naked DNA but rather contain a wide range of nucleus- and organelle-encoded proteins playing structural and functional roles resembling those of nuclear histones (81,82,114,134,143). Whether this interactome drives the subcompartmentalization of nucleoids into nanodomains influencing gene expression and other processes, such as DNA replication, maintenance, and repair, remains virtually unexplored.
In this review, we discuss the current understanding of 3D plant nuclear and organellar genomes. For nuclear genomes, we focus on recent work on plant TAD structure and 3D genome evolution and propose future research directions. For 3D organellar genomes, we focus on the latest studies revealing the dynamics of nucleoid organization and distribution. Finally, we underpin the potential of cutting-edge cytogenetic and next-generation sequencing methods, when coupled with organelle transformation and purification, in decrypting the hidden rules of nucleoid organization and organellar gene regulation.
Chromatin activities, such as gene transcription, DNA replication, and DNA repair, are coordinated in the 3D space. Chromosome conformation capture (3C)-based methods, together with microscopy-based techniques, enabled researchers to reconstruct the 3D architecture of nuclear genomes, which can be subsequently analyzed in association with genomic and epigenomic features. Various techniques invented over the past 15 years have substantially fueled 3D genomics, advancing our understanding of the functionality of hierarchical 3D chromatin organization. Nowadays, researchers are able to describe the plant 3D chromatin interaction network at an unprecedented resolution (Figure 1). State-of-the-art methods in 3D genomics have been recently reviewed in detail (66,129) and therefore are not thoroughly discussed here.

Figure 1Click to view


Microscopy has long been fundamental to the study of plant chromatin structure (35). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a microscopy-based technique commonly used to visualize selected genomic regions in fixed nuclei via DNA or LNA probe hybridization. Following FISH experiments, image analysis tools can be used to quantify different aspects of chromatin organization, such as distance between genomic loci, chromatin volume, and chromatin positioning in relation to other nuclear factors. At the moment, FISH coupled with powerful microscopes allows one to sensitively detect single-gene loci that span a few kilobases (recently reviewed in8,9). In addition, a wide spectrum of real-time microscopic methods is available. For example, artificial chromatin tagging by a CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) tag system (15,136) has been used to monitor the dynamics of a given chromatin region within living cell nuclei (5,87).
Distinct from microscopy, 3C and its derivatives are methods that deduce chromatin organization patterns via computing chromatin contact networks. The 3C method is based on the proximity ligation principle, whereby interacting genomic loci can be ligated after fragmentation to form chimeric DNA. Subsequently, quantitative polymerase chain reaction or large-scale sequencing (in most cases, second-generation sequencing) can be performed to quantify these chimeric DNA molecules and allow researchers to infer chromatin contact strength (22,66). Depending on the extent to which genomic loci are covered by sequencing, chimeric DNA obtained from 3C can reveal detailed chromatin contacts between one or multiple loci and the genome (47,62,149,179), between multiple genomic loci of interest (32,33), or on a genome-wide level (96). The generation of chimeric DNA can also be coupled to methods analyzing chromatin-interacting proteins. In this case, researchers can specifically extract a subset of the chromatin interaction network that is associated with a protein of interest, such as a histone posttranslational modification or a transcription factor [representative methods are chromatin interaction analysis with paired-end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET) andhigh-throughput chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C)chromatin immunoprecipitation (HiChIP)] (45,120). The application of various 3C-derived techniques in plant genomics research is increasing rapidly. Among them, Hi-C, the method that permits genome-wide sequencing of DNA from 3C experiments, is the most popular (96). In plants, Hi-C has been widely used to study patterns of megabase- or submegabase-scale genomic structures, such aschromosome territories, chromatin compartments, and TADs. Also, Hi-C became a routine tool to assist chromosome-scale plant genome assembly (79).
Early cytogenetic studies revealed variable chromosome conformations in plants. With the Rabl, Rosette-like, or Bouquet chromosomal configurations, plants distribute telomeres and centromeres into distinct spatial patterns in the nucleus (144). In plants with large genomes (>1 Gb), such as wheat, barley, rye, and oat (29,111,145), chromosomes often exhibit a Rabl configuration, in which centromeres and telomeres are clustered at opposing poles of the nucleus (137). Non-Rabl genome configuration is often found in plants with smaller genomes. TheArabidopsisgenome (135 Mb) exhibits a Rosette-like configuration, in which centromeres are randomly distributed at thenuclear peripheryand telomeres congregate around thenucleolus(44). These early cytological studies of chromosome configurations, which were later supported by Hi-C, provided fundamental insights into plant 3D genome organization (20,40,49,111). Recent work exploring the variation of chromosomal conformations among different eukaryotes suggests that condensin II activities and chromosome lengths play decisive roles (58).
Soon after the invention of Hi-C, genome-wide analysis of plant chromatin organization was first conducted usingArabidopsisseedlings. The small size and excellent annotation of theArabidopsisgenome, as well as the availability of rich molecular tools and genetic resources, madeArabidopsisa favorable model species for 3D genomics. However, as plant genomes vary considerably in chromosome number and length, genome size, gene density, and content of repetitive sequences, insights gleaned fromArabidopsisstudies could not be readily extrapolated to other plant systems (40,49). Apart fromArabidopsis, high-resolution Hi-C maps of several crop species have been generated (20,25,31,111,132,165). Additionally, 3C-derived techniques such as ChIA-PET and HiChIP are popular tools to systematically quest for plant chromatin loops associated with gene promoters andcis-regulatory elements (20,92,132,177).
In this section, we present the main structural components of plant 3D genome organization, from the lowest to the highest size resolution, as well as distinct nuclear space hubs, such as the nuclear periphery and nucleolus. We also discuss how these features were identified, their functional characterization challenges, and their diversity between and within plant species.
A/B compartments refer to spatial compartmentalization of chromatin at the chromosome level. They are deduced from Hi-C maps and represent the top hierarchy of chromosome packaging (Figure 1). In most cases, a 2D Hi-C map is converted to a 1D vector before it is used in integrative analyses with other 1D transcriptomic/epigenomic data [e.g., RNA sequencing and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq)]. This conversion (dimension reduction) is achieved with principal component analysis on Hi-C maps. After principal component analysis, each genomic bin is given a numeric value in the first component (i.e., the new coordinate value). These values can be arbitrarily classified into two groups on the basis of their positive and negative signs. Comparison of chromatin regions of these two groups reveals their distinct properties, namely their enrichment with active and repressed chromatin, respectively (96). Hi-C studies of multiple species indicate that such spatial separation of chromatin is a consensual feature. For the ease of communication, the scientific community uses A/B compartments to annotate these two spatial chromatin groups, where the A compartment always refers to the active compartment. Such a binary compartment annotation strategy has been applied to plant Hi-C maps, revealing a propensity of plants to partition their 3D genome in accordance to histone marks, protein-coding gene density, and transcriptional activities (30,98,170). The A/B compartment annotation is conducted mainly at the megabase scale to identify large chromatin domains scattered across a chromosome but tending to occupy a common nuclear space.
Interchromosomal interactions between A/B compartments suggest that plants have adopted different strategies to arrange them. For rice, foxtail millet, sorghum, and tomato genomes, stronger interchromosomal contacts occur among A-compartment regions (30,98), suggesting that the A compartment of individual chromosomes is preferentially located at the surface of the chromosome territory. This organization is similar to that of mammalian genomes (154). However, forArabidopsis, its pericentromeric regions, which are annotated as the B compartment, show much stronger interchromosomal contacts than A-compartment regions do (28,40,49). This pattern correlates well with the observations thatArabidopsispericentromeric regions from different chromosomes often merge (44). Such strong interchromosomal B-B chromatin contacts inArabidopsisappear to be attributed largely to the H3K9me mark, as they are remarkably attenuated in mutant plants showing reduced H3K9me levels (e.g.,ddm1,met1, and thesuvh4 suvh5 suvh6triple mutant) (40,152). In animals, H3K9me3 and its reader Heterochromatin Protein 1 (HP1) proteins can coalesce and form liquid-like droplets by liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS), mediating the formation of highly compact heterochromatin (37,88,155,164). The counterpart of HP1 inArabidopsis, AGENET DOMAIN CONTAINING PROTEIN 1 (ADCP1), is required for maintaining H3K9me2 in pericentromeric regions, and it drives phase separation to modulate heterochromatin structure (178), possibly contributing to B-B chromatin contacts.
At the submegabase scale, A/B compartments can be subdivided into self-interacting domains calledTADs. On a Hi-C map, TADs appear as regions with stronger local chromatin contacts compared with interactions with neighboring chromatin (26). Such chromatin organization patterns potentially confer spatial specificity to interactions between regulatory elements and their target gene loci. TADs are considered essential structural units of genome topology, as they are distributed widely across animal genomes. The demarcation of mammalian TADs was initially found to overlap with several genomic features, such as the binding sites of CTCF proteins, euchromatic epigenetic marks, and active gene expression (26), which were later demonstrated to be directly involved in regulating TAD formation (139,158,161). In recent years, the generation of high-resolution mammalian Hi-C maps has led to a surge of in-depth studies of structure–function relationships of TADs (reviewed in6).
Arabidopsiswas initially selected as a representative plant species to study 3D genomics, which surprisingly showed the absence of TADs (49,99,163). However, over the years, along with the adaptation of Hi-C protocols to many plant species, TAD structure has been identified in wheat, maize, tomato, sorghum, foxtail millet, rice, and cotton (20,30,31,98,129,167). The annotation of TADs is essentially the end product of digital processing of Hi-C maps for identifying self-interacting blocks, which is sensitive to computer algorithm and argument settings (183). TADs are also highly heterogeneous. For instance, epigenetic profiles across the TAD body are highly diverse (Figure 2) and TADs have flexible sizes (e.g., from a few to hundreds of kilobases), and therefore the definition of TADs is not yet standardized. In the plant science community, terms such as TAD, TAD-like, and domain are used to describe chromatin regions that appear similar to TADs on animal Hi-C maps. In this review, we use the term TAD to refer to these plant genomic regions, which on the basis of Hi-C maps appear to be relatively insulated from neighboring chromatin and form self-organized structures. How plant TADs are organized in relation to their neighboring chromatin has not yet been examined with microscopy.

Figure 2Click to view


Studies characterizing plant TADs in relation to other genomic data sets have expanded quickly to a long list of species. These integrative analyses have uncovered a consensus pattern: TAD border regions are enriched with active gene expression and euchromatic epigenetics marks, whereas features of repressed chromatin are depleted (16,25,30,31,75,98,132,156). This pattern strongly suggests an intimate coupling between gene expression and plant TAD structure formation/maintenance. In animals, such a close relationship is supported by a growing number of case studies (reviewed in157,161). In a recent representative example, transcriptionally active HERV-H (human endogenous retrovirus subfamily H) retrotransposons, upon insertion into a new genomic locus, could induce the formation of a TAD boundary (176). Another important factor involved in modulating TAD formation in animal genomes is the joint action of cohesin and the CTCF insulator proteins. With loop extrusion, they delineate TADs and pair up their boundary regions (reviewed in53). However, such a mechanism is absent in plants because they do not have CTCF proteins. The hunt for mechanisms regulating plant TAD formation is still in process. In summary, although TADs in many plant genomes have been profiled, in-depth functional investigation is highly needed for a better understanding of plant TADs.
At the next organizational level, chromatin forms loops that establish physical contacts between distant genomic regions such as enhancers and promoters. Chromatin loops can be investigated by various methods, most of which were developed from proximity ligation assays. The first reported plant enhancer–promoter loop was thebooster 1(b1) locus in maize (102). Using the 3C technique, researchers showed that several enhancer elements, located up to 107 kb upstream of theb1locus, generated a multiloop conformation and interacted with theb1promoter. This chromatin conformation, which promotedb1expression, was formed in a tissue-specific manner (102).
High-throughput methods that aim for systematic identification of chromatin loops, such asHi-C, ChIA-PET, HiChIP, and Capture-C, have been recently applied to several plant species (20,92,99,127,132,177). These large-scale studies revealed unprecedented details of the chromatin interaction network at the gene level that have greatly advanced our understanding of the coordination of various genomic elements in modulating gene expression. For instance, among all the chromatin loops identified inArabidopsis, rice, maize, and wheat, those concerning promoter–promoter interactions are associated with gene coexpression, and those showing tissue-specific patterns are linked to tissue-specific gene expression (20,61,92,127,132,177). InArabidopsis, H3K27me3, a histone mark that is associated primarily with gene silencing and is regulated by Polycomb group repressor complexes, has received the most attention in chromatin loop analyses. Individual gene loci, for example, the long noncoding RNAAPOLO(AUXIN-REGULATED PROMOTER LOOP) locus, and biosynthetic gene clusters such as the thalianol cluster, were shown to have H3K27me3-dependent chromatin loop conformation (2,127). A large-scale analysis of chromatin loops identified fromArabidopsisHi-C data revealed that chromatin regions carrying the H3K27me3 mark had a propensity to interact with each other over long distances (99). Furthermore, a recent study reported that, at a genomic level, loci with decreased H3K27me3 inArabidopsisPolycomb group mutants had weakened interaction among themselves; meanwhile, they established new contacts with regions bearing active chromatin marks (61).
Aside from long-range chromatin loops that connect genic/promoter regions with distalcis-elements, relatively short chromatin loops that connect the 5′ and 3′ ends of the same gene appear to be another feature worth noting. In plants, theFLOWERING LOCUS C(FLC) gene was initially found to be associated with such a type of chromatin loop (21). At theFLClocus, this loop correlates positively withFLCexpression, and it is negatively regulated by BAF60, a subunit from the switch/sucrose nonfermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin-remodeling complex (21,65). Later, such structures named self-loops were found in large numbers inArabidopsisand rice (31,99). Generally, genes having self-loops showed higher expression than genes without such conformation, suggesting that self-loops might be a promoting mechanism or a consequence of active gene expression.
In eukaryotes, genomic DNA in interphase nuclei has nonrandom distribution patterns with respect to subnuclear space. Besides early FISH work, recent studies using high-throughput sequencing have provided researchers more details ofArabidopsischromatin distribution at thenuclear peripheryandnucleolusat a genomic scale.
It is well known that in metazoans, chromatin positioning at the nuclear periphery is an intrinsic part of establishing interphase chromosome topology and appropriate transcription regulation (12,160). At the molecular level, specific positioning of genomic regions named lamina-associated domains at the nuclear periphery requires the repressive histone mark H3K9me, the nuclear lamin protein network (lamina), and multiple bridging proteins that connect chromatin to the lamina (56,112,160). InArabidopsis, the nuclear periphery is enriched for repressed protein-coding genes and transposons, which is similar to that in animal nuclei (7). Such perinuclear chromatin positioning requires direct interactions between chromatin and the plant-specific lamin-like protein CROWDED NUCLEI 1 (CRWN1) (59). The nucleolus is another special nuclear compartment. InArabidopsis, it is enriched with telomeres and 45S ribosomal RNA loci. From a functional perspective, theArabidopsisnucleolus defines a subcompartment for regulating rRNA gene expression and telomere maintenance (73). The discovery of nucleolus-associated chromatin domains inArabidopsisrevealed that the nucleolus is also enriched with silenced protein-coding genes and transposable elements (TEs), suggesting that this nuclear compartment functions as a hub for gene silencing (133). A recent comparative FISH-based study of seven members of the mustard (crucifers) family demonstrated that plants with smaller (215–381 Mb) genomes shareArabidopsis-like configuration with nucleolus-associated telomeres, whereas plants with bigger genomes (2,611–4,264 Mb) distribute their telomeres scattered throughout the nucleus (148).
As mentioned in the previous section, Hi-C studies have made theArabidopsisgenome distinct from many crop genomes, as the former does not display TAD structures (Figure 2a). In this regard, plant genome sizes and the distribution pattern of large repressive chromatin regions in plant genomes were speculated to account for the presence/absence of TADs in plants (131,144,153). Recent studies reporting TAD patterns in the common liverwort,Marchantia polymorpha(Marchantia), challenge genome size being a factor responsible for the non-TAD Hi-C patterns inArabidopsis(75,116).Marchantiapossesses a relatively compact 225.8-Mb genome with a relatively low repeat content of 22% packed into eight autosomes and a sex chromosome (11). High-resolution Hi-C analysis ofMarchantiaautosomes has shown TAD-like structures (28), introducing this species as the smallest examined plant genome with TADs. Notably, the total amount of genomic DNA in a diploidArabidopsisnucleus is comparable to that in a nucleus from vegetativeMarchantiatissues (haploid). Further, the physical lengths of individual chromosomes in these two species are comparable (approximately 20 to 30 Mb). A close relative ofArabidopsis,A. lyrata, with a genome size of approximately 210 Mb, does not show TAD structures either (181). Therefore, it appears that theArabidopsisfamily does not stand out as a representative for other plant species regardingTADstructures.
Recent work shows that tissue-specific TAD borders are often associated with transcriptional activation (30,156). Similar findings for species-specific TAD borders were reported in a comparative analysis of three cotton species (166). Moreover, TAD borders from large plant genomes (e.g., maize: ∼2.3 Gb; wheat: ∼16 Gb), which overlap with protein-coding genes, manifest strong chromatin contacts (20,30,67), implying a connection between TAD border formation and gene expression control. Assuming that proteins (e.g., transcription factors) interacting with plantTADborders contribute to TAD formation, which is analogous to mammalian andDrosophilaproteins (157), the plant community has been in search of sequence motifs and transcription factors associated with plant TAD borders. Several motifs, such as zinc-finger binding sites in rice (98), wheat (67) and cotton (167), were identified. Also, binding motifs of the plant-specific transcription factor TCP (Teosinte branched1/Cincinnata/Proliferating) correlated with TAD borders inMarchantia(75), rice (98), maize (156), and soybean (165). However, testing the possible relationship between TCP1 protein and TAD organization inMarchantiarevealed a correlation but not causation, as knockout of TCP1 had no disruptive effects on TCP1-bound TAD borders (75). Another interesting feature detected at TAD borders in wheat and rice is higher CHH DNA methylation together with depletion of CG and CHG methylation (67,98). Methylated CHH islands in the maize genome enforced boundaries between euchromatin and heterochromatin (93). The chase after plant TAD-forming agents is still underway, which is highly challenging because our knowledge of plant architectural proteins is extremely limited and there is no platform available to perform high-throughput genetic screening for TAD-deficient mutants.
Analyses of genomic features of chromatin overlapping with TAD-forming regions (i.e., TAD body) suggest that plant TADs are highly heterogeneous, although they resemble each other on Hi-C maps. On the basis of chromatin accessibility, H3K27me3, and CG DNA methylation (features enriched in active chromatin, facultative heterochromatin, and heterochromatin, respectively), Dong et al. (30) showed that TADs in crop genomes could be classified into several types and that the composition of TAD types varies substantially among species. Notably, with the use of CG methylation as an indicator, TADs inMarchantiaand soybean can be readily separated into different groups (Figure 2b). InMarchantia, a subset of TADs carrying low levels of CG methylation shows extensive interaction with the transcription factor TCP (75). Analogous to that finding, a recent survey of transcription factor ChIP-seq data in relation to human TADs led to the identification of a type of TAD showing dense chromatin–transcription factor interactions (16). Our unpublished analysis of data from previous studies (75,98,165) shows that TAD bodies fromMarchantia, rice, and soybean (representatives of liverworts, monocots, and dicots) are all significantly enriched with genes encoding transcription factors (Figure 2c). In conclusion, TADs in a plant genome are likely a collection of chromatin regions with distinct genomic/epigenomic profiles. Given such a heterogeneous mixture, we recommend future plant TADs analyses to be conducted together with a clustering algorithm. Variation of TAD bodies raises questions concerning the biological functions of plant TADs, of which scientists have extremely limited knowledge thus far.
Among the TAD patterns in all investigated plant species, the one fromMarchantiasex chromosomes appears unique. TheMarchantiamale chromosome (V chromosome) is 7.5 Mb long and enriched with TEs and repressive chromatin marks such as H3K9me2 (116). Because it is highly heterochromatic, the V chromosome appears more condensed than autosomes on the Hi-C map (116). Across this chromosome, TADs with sizes comparable to those of mammals' TADs are located next to each other (Figure 3a). In line with the findings fromMarchantiaautosomes and from other plant species, TAD borders ofMarchantiaV chromosome are highly correlated with actively expressed genes. These patterns strongly suggest that TADs in this chromosome are tightly linked to gene expression and epigenetic landscape. Note that the abovementioned results were from Hi-C data produced with vegetative tissues, in which several sex-specific genes are not expressed. The latestMarchantiagene annotation reveals several unusually long genes, eight of which are between 90 and 550 kb, and all of them are in the V chromosome. Alignment of gene annotation to Hi-C map shows overlap between these giant gene bodies and the internal regions of TADs (Figure 3c). This correlation resembles that inDrosophila, in which a considerable fraction (42%) of long genes (>50 kb) constituted their own TADs (95). Publicly available transcriptome data from two different studies further indicate that transcription of these large genes inMarchantiahappens exclusively in the male sex organs (11,43) (Figure 3c). The transcription of these genes as single units might need experimental validation. We also noticed increased transcription from TE-rich introns of these genes in the male gametes (see an example inFigure 3c), suggesting silencing release and possible heterochromatin decondensation. Future studies might show whether the TAD structure is also developmentally dynamic. Thus, a certain extent of transcription reprogramming, including the activation of giant genes, is expected in the sex chromosome during sexual reproduction, offering researchers a unique opportunity to study the potential interplay among TAD structure, heterochromatin, transcriptional activation, and giant gene regulation. Furthermore, discoveries from investigating the 3D structure of theMarchantiasex chromosome might promote research on other plants’ sex chromosomes, which are also typically highly repetitive (reviewed in14).

Figure 3Click to view


Polyploidization and hybridization played a prominent role in plant evolution (reviewed in158,174,175). Comparative genomic studies revealed ancient genome duplication events in the common history of seed plants (159) and multiple more recent events along speciation within monocots and dicots (68,159). These phenomena have been extensively studied in terms of physiological, genetic, and epigenetic consequences, revealing alterations in chromosomal structure, epigenetic landscape, and TE activity following hybridization and polyploidization (reviewed in29,158,165,176).Polyploidy, including autopolyploidy (doubling of the same genome) and allopolyploidy (combining genomes of two or more different species in the same nucleus), is a diverse phenomenon. Naturally occurring auto- and allopolyploid varieties exist in theArabidopsisgenus. Recent work focusing on laboratory-generated nascentArabidopsisautotetraploids demonstrated the immediate effects of a polyploidization event on the 3D genome (175). This event was associated with spatial changes in genome organization. For instance, some loose structure domains (equivalent to the A compartment) transitioned to compacted structure domains (equivalent to the B compartment) or vice versa, in correlation with switches between active and repressive histone mark patterns.Hi-Canalysis of tetraploidArabidopsisshows increased interchromosomal and decreased intrachromosomal interactions, suggesting that whole-genome duplication (WGD) weakens the segregation of chromosome territories (175). At the gene level, genes demonstrating differential chromatin interaction patterns in the nascent polyploid, compared with its parent, overlapped significantly with differentially expressed genes. Meanwhile, large-scale structures such as chromosome territories remained preserved. After doubling the amount of DNA per nucleus without major changes in chromosome size and composition, no novel TAD-like structures had formed, suggesting that WGD alone is not sufficient to trigger plant TAD formation.
Compared with nascent autopolyploids, natural autopolyploids offer a glance into the spatial organization of doubled genomes that underwent evolutionary processes. The cultivated soybean (Glycine max) is a representative of such species. The ancient progenitor of the common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) andG. maxexperienced a WGD event approximately 56.5 MYA, which was followed by the divergence of these two species approximately 19.2 MYA (89). After that,G. maxunderwent an additional WGD approximately 10 MYA (146). Since then, this species has been undergoing a slow diploidization process, and 75% of its genes still exist in multiple copies (146). Recently, comparative Hi-C was utilized to investigate changes in genome topology following autopolyploidization, diploidization, and domestication (165). In this study, Wang et al. (165) reported that noticeable variation of TAD demarcations in collinearity blocks in the diverged species (P. vulgarisandG. max) formed after polyploidization and diploidization. Furthermore, chromosomal breakpoints appeared to be void of TADs.
Investigating an allopolyploid rather than an autopolyploid species posed different questions, such as how two different genomes localize and interact in the same nucleus. The allopolyploid species initially investigated in this regard were the tetraploid cotton speciesGossypium hirsutumandGossypium barbadense, which originated from a hybridization event between progenitors with diploid A and D genomes over 1 MYA (147). Polyploidization caused transitions between some of the A and B compartments and the formation of new TAD borders in subgenomes of these allopolyploid plants (167). Genes in nonconserved TAD boundaries were more likely to be differentially expressed (167). Another study focused on comparing diploid cotton species with large differences in genome size, which was attributed mainly to TE expansion (166). This study concluded that TE expansion was connected to the changes of A/B compartment layout, in which the species with TE distributed widely across each chromosome had a large number of smaller A/B compartments, whereas the species with TEs accumulated in a block region in each chromosome showed only a few larger A/B compartments. Additionally, this study highlights the enrichment of expressed TEs (especially long terminal repeat retrotransposons) in TAD boundaries (166). Together, these findings suggest that polyploidization and TEs jointly drive the evolution of cotton genome topology.
An additional allopolyploid crop of great importance is wheat (Triticum aestivum). The large and highly repetitive genome of modern bread wheat was shaped by two allopolyploidization events, which had combined A and B subgenomes in the same nucleus approximately 350,000–500,000 years ago and added the D subgenome approximately 10,000 years ago (39). Two research groups recently reported preferential interchromosomal contacts within individual subgenomes of the wheat genome (i.e., forming genome territories in 3D) (20). Such interaction patterns are sensitive to Hi-C read mapping strategy, as they disappeared when reads with multiple hits were excluded. However, random permutation of Hi-C reads indicated that these patterns were not caused by mapping errors (67). These results suggest that nonrandom interchromosomal contacts in the wheat genome are mediated by subgenome-dominant homologous TEs. This potential mechanism may also be one of the driving forces changing interchromosomal contacts in introgression lines. In a case study, an introgressed rye chromosome fragment in the wheat genome (cultivar Aikang 58) showed fewer interchromosomal contacts than did the counterpart from the parent wheat genome (67). Another feature of wheat interchromosomal interactions is gene–gene contacts. Specifically, RNA polymerase II–associated interchromosomal gene–gene contacts tend to have positively correlated transcription rates (20).
Over the past decade, the characterization of 3D genomes has been conducted on several plants. The intimate relationship between spatial genome organization and various aspects of genome function establishes 3D genomics as an indispensable component for understanding genome function. Following annotation of spatial chromatin domains (e.g.,TADs), we anticipate that the next important goal in plant 3D genomics is to gain more functional insights into them. In the animal field, significant advances were made, showing that TADs are functionally linked to modulating enhancer specificity (104), replication timing (reviewed in110), and DNA damage control (3). With the help from ever-advancing tools that allow us to examine high-resolution chromatin interaction networks, future studies of plants with complexTAD-possessing genomes will hopefully elucidate the functional implications of plant TADs.
With respect to chromatin positioning, the interactions of plant chromatin with nuclear laminae, nuclear pore complexes,nucleoluses, and nuclear bodies present us with a largely uncharted research field. For example, genome-wide identification and characterization of lamina-associated domains inArabidopsishave been reported only recently. It is unknown how much variation there is betweenArabidopsisand other plants, as the former's non-TADs Hi-C map has already surprised the plant science community. Plant nuclear surface area was found to be dynamic, for instance, via the formation of extensive grooves and invaginations (19) or changes in nuclear shape and size (reviewed in150). It is intriguing to explore whether changes in nuclear morphology, which result in changes in the nuclei's surface-to-volume ratio, can alter perinuclear chromatin positioning and correlate to gene expression.
Another promising research direction is increasing the experimental resolution beyond the tissue and organ levels. The single-cell Hi-C technique was utilized in 2019 to characterize distinctive spatial genome structures of rice egg, sperm, zygote, and mesophyll cells (180) and provided insights into the zygotic genome activation process. Subsequent single-cell studies of various plant species could reveal novel structural details that were previously masked in cell populations.
Last, we would like to highlight the potential role of TEs and other repetitive sequences in plant 3D chromatin organization. TEs have not been paid as much attention as protein-coding genes andcis-regulatory elements in plant 3D genomics, probably due to the technical challenge of their read mapping. TEs can serve as anchor points for genome folding in mammals (71,103,176), and their possible contribution to the scaffolding of highly repetitive plant genomes is worth investigating. In plants, several studies described the impact of TEs on nearby gene expression due to their promoter and/or enhancer sequences (4,13,63,109; reviewed in57), but whether TEs might serve as distant regulatory sequences remains to be investigated. Recent counterevidence from maize seedlings demonstrated depletion of TEs at anchor points of loops between active chromatin areas (132), but further research will reveal whether TEs are generally excluded from regulatory loops.
Endosymbiosis is a theoretical evolutionary scenario whereby free-living prokaryotes have been engulfed and withheld by a proto-eukaryotic cell, giving rise to mitochondria and plastids (1). The endosymbiotic theory was popularized by the microbiologist Lynn Margulis in the late 1960s (142). That time period coincided with the first cytological descriptions of non-nuclear DNA in higher-plant chloroplasts (17), in the photosynthetic lamellae of various alga species (140), and in chicken embryo mitochondria (121,122). Analysis of accumulatingmitogenomeandplastomesequences unraveled their bacteria-type gene content and organization (38,106). Nonetheless, mitochondrial and plastidial DNA retained only a minimal set of genes encoding for transcription and translation components and respiration-/photosynthesis-related proteins (38,106). Other genes were either lost or functionally integrated into the host nuclear genome through endosymbiotic lateral gene transfer and became nuclear mitochondrial DNA and nuclear plastidial DNA. Organellar genomes are usually depicted as multicopied double-stranded master-circle units bearing the entirety of the genetic information (50,118). Nevertheless, homologous recombination between repeats can generate a set of coexisting circular/linear organellar DNA, the complexity of which is not fully appreciated (50,117). They include concatenates, as observed forArabidopsis, tobacco, and pea chloroplasts (97), and multipartite chromosomes, as reported forSilenemitochondria (151). Homologous recombination–mediated fragmentation can be so iterative that approximately 40 subgenomic linear and single-stranded particles of 1 to 7 kb for Cladophorales chloroplasts (23) were observed.
Core physiological aspects related to organelles have been enlightened alongside the eukaryogenesis quest. Early observations that mitochondrial and plastidial DNA molecules are not evenly distributed in the matrix/stroma (121,122,140) but congregate in membraneless compartments callednucleoids(Figure 4) have been of particular interest. Mitochondrial nucleoids during mitosis in higher plants were extensively examined by scientists (143). Hydrophilic embedding compatible with DNA dyes favored their spatiotemporal analysis in the root meristem ofPelargonium zonale(83). This report puzzled out a positive correlation between mitochondrial nucleoid thickness and mitotic activity of cells, a parameter associated with their position and identity. Mitochondrial nucleoids are bulky in initial cells, just above the quiescent center, and progressively get slimmer with cell differentiation and elongation (83). In 2017, Paszkiewicz et al. (130) examined mitochondrial nucleoids in the cotyledon cells ofArabidopsisgerminating seeds, wherein mitochondria become energetically active upon imbibition. Along with this process, mitochondria exhibit enhanced motility and rearrangement in a tubuloreticulum surrounding the nuclear membrane. Afterward, they disunite again and readopt a spherical shape (130). The formation of tubuloreticular structures associates with a sudden increase in mitochondrial nucleoid motion. This phenomenon is thought to favor their mixing among mitochondria, while the amount and integrity of mitochondrial DNA remain virtually unchanged from imbibition to late germination (130). The morphology of plastidial nucleoids has been thoroughly documented (82,134,143). The phylogenetic and cytogenetic exploration of their distribution led researchers to classify their systems into three main categories intimately linked to the evolution of thylakoid membranes (85): scattered (SN), central (CN), and circum-peripheral (CL). The SN-type plastid, found among land plants and in as many as seven alga groups, seems to be widely adopted (82). Within CN- or CL-type plastids, nucleoids are centrally positioned and wrapped by a lamella or located in the vicinity of the inner membrane, respectively (82,143).

Figure 4Click to view


Nucleoids are mutable structures and can adopt different patterns within a single species (143). Along the differentiation of proplastids into chloroplasts, nucleoid organization alternates between SN, CN, and CL types (115,134,143). In recent years, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)-based supersensitive epifluorescence was used to investigate the dynamics of plastidial nucleoids throughout the development ofArabidopsis, maize, sugar beet, and tobacco mesophyll cells (48). The quantification of nucleoid size, number, and ploidy during chloroplast development and differentiation into gerontoplasts suggests complex regulatory mechanisms underlying cellular genome–plastome homoeostasis during leaf development (48). In another example, the shape of plastidial nucleoids alternates between spherules and a network across the cell cycle ofChlamydomonas reinhardtii(36,74,143).
Dynamic nucleoid structures imply the handling of mitochondrial and plastidial DNA molecules by RNA/protein effectors for structural, functional, and regulatory aims (Figure 4). It was readily seen in early experiments that nucleoids were a mixture of DNA and proteins (143). For instance, nucleoids isolated from tobacco Bright Yellow-2 (BY-2) cells can resist RNase A activity but disorganize upon treatment with DNase I, proteinase K, or high levels of salt (125). Comprehensive proteomic studies using mass spectrometry were conducted on nucleoids, identifying proteins with a broad spectrum of activities such as DNA replication, repair, and transcription and RNA processing, splicing, and editing (60,107,114). Different sets of DNA-binding proteins were identified in the nucleoids of tobacco proplastids and chloroplasts (123) and found to interact with specific sites (124). Comparing protein data sets untangled how shifts in nucleoid-enriched proteomes modulate their functions. In maize, differential protein enrichments confer predominant roles for proplastid nucleoids in RNA metabolism/reactive oxygen species defense and for chloroplast nucleoids in translation, protein homeostasis, and DNA repair (107). Note that, as nucleosomal histones, constituent proteins required for nucleoid organization (hereafter termed organizers) were identified and reviewed in Reference114. They comprise, for example, SILENT INFORMATION REGULATOR (SIR); WHIRLY, SUPPRESSOR OF VARIEGATION 4/MESOPHYLL-CELL RNAi LIBRARY LINE 7 (SVR4/MRL7); SWITCH/SUCROSE NON-FERMENTABLE (SWI/SNF) complex B-containing (SWIB); and SAF-A/B, Acinus and PIAS (SAP) domain-containing proteins, chaperones, and various heat-shock proteins (81,114,134). The diversification of nucleus-encoded organizers occurred among the Viridiplantae clade (including chlorophytes/charophytes and land plants) and might have contributed to further establishing and complexifying organellar chromatin-like structures (78). For example, orthologs of WHIRLY1 from monocots but not dicots cause nucleoid compaction upon expression in bacteria (128). Often, impairing the expression of organizers affects nucleoid homeostasis, emphasizing the biological relevance of nucleoid structures. InArabidopsis, knocking out theWHIRLY2gene disassembles mitochondrial nucleoids and affects germination (46). Of note, a newly found function for WHIRLY proteins is associated with the surveillance of organellar genomes. WithinArabidopsischloroplasts, WHIRLY1 and WHIRLY3 accumulate at double-strand breaks and protect single-stranded DNA overhangs from microhomology-mediated break-induced replication, a repair mechanism leading to deleterious chromosomal rearrangements (168). As WHIRLY proteins are also involved in structuring nucleoids (128), it would be interesting to decipher how the DNA surveillance and repair mechanisms couple with the establishment of nucleoid 3D organization. SUPPRESSOR OF HOT1-4 1 (SHOT1) and SHOT1 BINDING ATPASES (SBAs) are two newly discovered organizers; the corresponding mutants display disrupted mitochondrial nucleoids, a decrease in complex I accumulation, and heat tolerance (76). Curiously, the nuclear core histone H3 is targeted to mitochondria in cauliflower (174). Nevertheless, recent work suggests histone H3 may act as a permeabilizing factor triggering the release of cytochromecduring programmed cell death (108). The role of nuclear histones in nucleoid packing thus remains to be addressed. Recent studies also highlighted a role of cytoskeleton in structuring nucleoids. F-actin was detected in the inner membrane, intermembrane space, matrix, and contact sites (with other organelles) of mung bean mitochondria (101). F-actin binds mitochondrial DNA, porins, and ADP/ATP carriers and its depolymerization causes the loss of membrane potential and cytochrome discharging (101). In the mitochondria of mouse embryonic fibroblasts, β-actin falloff leads to the clustering of nucleoids and impairs the transcription of oxidative phosphorylation-related loci (171).
LLPS is a driving force in the embodiment of euchromatic and heterochromatic domains in the nucleus (169). Increasing evidence pinpoints a link between LLPS and nucleoid organization (42). In bacteria, ParB proteins interact with centromeric-like sequences and regulate the condensation of DNA during cell division (51,64). In addition, bacterial RNA polymerases can also nucleate and form biomolecular condensates via LLPS (86). MITOCHONDRIAL TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR A (TFAM), a major DNA-binding protein in mammal nucleoids, exhibits low-complexity motifs fostering nucleoid self-assembly and coalescence (41). LLPS-mediated nucleoid aggregation negatively influences gene expression and accompanies mitochondria dysfunction and diseases (41,171).
Cues suggesting the existence of higher-order, fine-tuning gene expression in plant nucleoids are scarce (81,134). A core of nucleoids, called the central body (CB), resists proteolysis and high-salt treatments while the rest vanish (143). The CB might be a firm state of DNA compaction protecting proteins from degradation and involving RNA chaperones (143). Indeed, proteins bound to CBs cannot be extracted with routine protocols (81). The physical behavior of nucleoids upon protein relief suggests that organellar chromatin-like structure opts for a Rosette-like organization, as observed for bacterial nucleoids and nuclear chromosomes (81,134). In the chromoplasts of daffodil, no loops extrude out of CBs whereas extrusion occurs for chloroplast nucleoids (54). It remains unclear whether the differential compaction of organellar chromatin-like structures participates to spatiotemporally segregate active and inactive loci (81). InEscherichia coli, a conserved nucleoid organizer named HEAT UNSTABLE (HU) packs DNA in nucleoids into condensed cores surrounded by relaxed domains (138). Such analogous features of the eukaryotic A/B nuclear compartments govern the transcriptome of bacteria in different growth conditions (138). The constriction of bacterial and plastidial DNA can also corroborate strong transcriptional activities, suggesting that CBs might not be entirely repressed (24,81,84). Furthermore, packing mitochondrial and plastidial DNA into nucleoids is likely concomitant with tight surveillance pathways because their integrity remains balanced throughout developmental processes (48,130). Whether and how nucleoid Rosette-like structures reflect the stability of organellar genomes are open questions.
Membrane tethering of mitochondrial and plastidial DNA is another cue to be underlined (81,134). Whether it participates in the subcompartmentalization of nucleoids, whether inner mitochondrial and plastidial membranes exert functions similar to those of the nuclear lamina, and the transcriptional statute of loci anchoring such regions remain elusive (81,134). For instance, the thylakoid docking of nucleoids is proposed to play a role in regulating DNA replication and transcription according to redox state (134). Further, membrane-localized proteins also contribute to the scattering of nucleoids. Knockdown of YLMG1-1, a thylakoid membrane protein, results in nucleoid fusion inArabidopsis(72). In mammals, mitochondria tubularization at the endoplasmic reticulum triggers interactions between nucleoids and the inner membrane complex MICOS (MItochondrial contact site and Cristae Organizing System) (135). MICOS possesses an intermembranous domain recognizing Mitochondrial Rho GTPase 1 (Miro1), a protein accumulating at contact sites between mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum (135). In turn, Miro1 binds cytoskeleton-associated kinesin and promotes the motility ofnucleoidsalong the inner membrane of mitochondria (135).
A major impediment to deciphering the relation between nucleoid suborganization and transcriptional regulation is the lack of epigenetic markers for chromatin-like structures. Organellar DNA methylation has been controversial (91,113). The lateral transfer and heterochromatinization of consequent parts of mitochondrial and plastidial DNA in plant nuclear genomes hinder the mapping of bisulfite-sequencing data when they are obtained from total genomic DNA (173). Two members of theRicinus communisDNA methyltransferase family (i.e., RcDRM1 and RcDRM3) possess putative motifs for their organelle targeting (34). InC. reinhardtii, plastidial DNA methylation was demonstrated by immunofluorescence and is deposited by CrMET1 in maternal gametes (126). Whether DNA methylation regulates organellar genome packing and gene regulation remains to be elucidated, but current data emphasize its importance in cytoplasmic male sterility and maternal inheritance (91,126).N6-Methyldeoxyadenosine (6mA) is enriched in mammal mitochondrial DNA and is deposited by the methyltransferase 4,N6-adenosine (METTL4) (55). 6mA negatively influences the binding of TFAM and represses transcription (55). Thus, 6mA represents a meaningful mark to be further explored within plant nucleoids. The import of histone deacetylases into organelles also implies that posttranslational modifications might occur on nucleoid organizers, but it remains to be investigated (18).
Cracking the code of organellar genome packing presents new challenges for functional genomics. A better understanding of how mitochondrial and plastidial DNA molecules are subcompartmentalized necessitates high-resolution FISH that enables researchers to probe loci within fixed nucleoids. In this regard, signal amplification by exchange reaction successfully permitted single-gene analysis by FISH (77) and represents a suitable method to be coupled with super-resolution microscopy approaches such as stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (172). The stable expression of nucleus-/organelle-encoded fusion proteins, coupled with organelle isolation, will allow in-depth studies of protein–nucleoid interactions with methods such as ChIP-seq or CUT&Tag (cleavage under targets and tagmentation). The engineering of organellar genomes has been used mainly for crop improvement (94). Its use in addressing fundamental questions of nucleoid organization thus far remains virtually uncharted. The integration of transgenes into organellar DNA by biolistic bombardment of plant tissues/cells, assisted by in vitro organogenesis, is a strategy proven successful inArabidopsis(141). However, selecting for mitochondrial and plastidial homoplasmy in transgenic plants is highly challenging. In our opinion, alga species hosting one conspicuous chloroplast, such asC. reinhardtii, will represent straightforward models for creatingtransplastomic lines. In addition to conventional proteomic techniques, proximity labeling and modular bimolecular fluorescence complementation will allow researchers to trace interacting networks, and will elucidate mechanisms regulating nucleoid organization and gene regulation (52,162). A deeper view of the epigenomic landscape of nucleoids will require routine use of immunocytochemistry (126). In association with transcriptomic assays, the overlap of these technical viewpoints will provide conceptual advances to the basis of organellar biology as well as to our understanding of intergenome crosstalk (10,80).


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
The authors are grateful to Qingxin Song from Nanjing Agricultural University for providing the soybean Hi-C map. The authors acknowledge financial support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (LI 2862/4 to C.L.) and the European Research Council under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (757600 to C.L.).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


