We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) has developed into an indispensable approach to gene function analysis in a wide array of species, many of which are not amenable to stable genetic transformation. VIGS utilizes the posttranscriptional gene silencing (PTGS) machinery of plants to restrain viral infections systemically and is used to downregulate the plant's endogenous genes. Here, we review the molecular mechanisms of DNA- and RNA-virus-based VIGS, its inherent connection to PTGS, and what is known about the systemic spread of silencing. Recently, VIGS-based technologies have been expanded to enable not only gene silencing but also overexpression [virus-induced overexpression (VOX)], genome editing [virus-induced genome editing (VIGE)], and host-induced gene silencing (HIGS). These techniques expand the genetic toolbox for nonmodel organisms even more. Further, we illustrate the versatility of VIGS and the methods derived from it in elucidating molecular mechanisms, using tomato fruit ripening and programmed cell death as examples. Finally, we discuss challenges of and future perspectives on the use of VIGS to advance gene function analysis in nonmodel plants in the postgenomic era.
Article metrics loading...
Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) has developed into an indispensable approach to gene function analysis in a wide array of species, many of which are not amenable to stable genetic transformation. VIGS utilizes the posttranscriptional gene silencing (PTGS) machinery of plants to restrain viral infections systemically and is used to downregulate the plant's endogenous genes. Here, we review the molecular mechanisms of DNA- and RNA-virus-based VIGS, its inherent connection to PTGS, and what is known about the systemic spread of silencing. Recently, VIGS-based technologies have been expanded to enable not only gene silencing but also overexpression [virus-induced overexpression (VOX)], genome editing [virus-induced genome editing (VIGE)], and host-induced gene silencing (HIGS). These techniques expand the genetic toolbox for nonmodel organisms even more. Further, we illustrate the versatility of VIGS and the methods derived from it in elucidating molecular mechanisms, using tomato fruit ripening and programmed cell death as examples. Finally, we discuss challenges of and future perspectives on the use of VIGS to advance gene function analysis in nonmodel plants in the postgenomic era.
In 1995, work by Kumagai et al. (67) showed virus-induced gene silencing for the first time: They inserted a fragment of thePHYTOENE DESATURASE(PDS) coding sequences into a viral vector to transfectNicotiana benthamianaleaves. Subsequently, they observed downregulation ofPDSexpression in combination with the characteristic systemic white leaf phenotype. Their results showed that a manipulated RNA vector can be used to diminish target gene expression in a sequence-specific manner. This finding sparked a new episode in plant research because it provided a novel method for knockdown of gene expression in plants without the need for stable transformation protocols or the establishment of large-scale mutant populations. This method was named virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) and was soon integrated into the genetic toolkit for research of nonmodel plant species, those species recalcitrant to stable transformation, and those with only a small research community unable to provide genetic tools. While between 1995 and 2000 only 23 publications included the key words “VIGS” and “plants,” the PubMed database (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) counted 249 in 2020 alone. The number of viral vectors developed for VIGS is ever increasing, as is the number of species for which gene function analysis via VIGS is feasible (for a comprehensive compilation of VIGS vector systems and species, see34).
Here, we summarize our current knowledge of VIGS as a multipurpose tool to manipulate plants genetically. However, we do not comprehensively review the species amenable to VIGS, provide a list of VIGS vector systems, or detail how VIGS vector systems are constructed, as this has been done previously (34). Instead, we explain the recent views on the molecular mechanisms of plants’ processing and defense against viral RNAs as introduced by VIGS from RNA- and DNA-virus systems, referring mainly toArabidopsis thalianawhen discussing the proteins and mechanisms involved. We then introduce briefly the practical aspects of the method and its modifications to adjust VIGS for purposes other than transcriptional downregulation of target genes. Subsequently, we outline methods derived from VIGS. Finally, we introduce examples of VIGS-derived methods advancing plant biology.
VIGS is based on the use of engineered plant viruses to directly inoculate plants or to achieve infection via modifiedAgrobacterium tumefaciensstrains, transforming plant cells with the viral genome. Plant viruses are the epitome of a parasite, as they solely depend on their host for replication, and they do not have the ability for protein biosynthesis or energy production. Their genomes consist of single- or double-stranded DNA or RNA, which encode only a few genes, packed into a protein casing called a capsid. They cannot enter any host on their own but rely on wounded tissue or a vector (e.g., aphids) for penetration into host cells. However, they account for roughly 15% of preharvest crop loss, ranging even to 50–100% for rice and cassava cultivation (12).
Viral transcription and replication in the plant cell's cytoplasm producedouble-stranded RNA (dsRNA), triggering RNA silencing, which is broadly defined as sequence-specific blocking of gene expression induced by small RNAs (7) (Figure 1). This is the plant's first line of defense against viral pathogens, but plants also react to viral infection with the hypersensitive response (HR), leading to the programmed cell death (PCD) of the infected cell. Furthermore, viral transmission vectors such as aphids are the target of resistance (R)-gene-mediated defense (12). HR- and R-gene-based defense mechanisms can also affect VIGS experiments as these are specific viral disease symptoms one tries to avoid.

Figure 1Click to view


The vectors used for VIGS are derived from mostly single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) such as the tobacco rattle virus (TRV) or DNA viruses such as the African cassava mosaic virus (ACMV). The plant's innate immune system thus reacts toward VIGS in much the same way as against wild-type viral strains, with the following modifications: (a) In wild-type viruses, the first step in the plant cell is the disassembly of the virus particles to release the viral genome into the plant cell (5). VIGS often relies on only the viral genome being delivered to the plant cell, e.g., viaA. tumefaciens–mediated transformation, with the genome integrated intoA. tumefaciens’ T-DNA requiring host-cell-dependent transcription to produce the first viral particles (Figure 1a). (b) Genes responsible for viral transmission and the HR are often removed from the VIGS vectors. Otherwise, the HR would mask the resulting phenotype, and the vector could be transmitted to other individuals by sap-sucking pests.
When a single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) virus, such as the geminivirus ACMV, enters the cell, its genome undergoes rolling circle replication (RCR), relying on many host proteins (55) (Figure 1b). This replication process is located to the nucleus where the viral DNA aggregates as circular double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) minichromosomes of the cell cycle (4). Interestingly, geminiviruses can efficiently replicate in the G phase when the cells normally shut down replication, as they can reactivate replication processes and thus have control over the host's cell cycle (55). The host's RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcribes the dsDNA genome, which contains origins of replication and promoter elements that are often bidirectional. Bidirectional (partially overlapping and annealed to each other) transcripts are then synthesized, and they are proposed as dsRNA precursors of primary viral short interfering RNAs (vsRNAs) (4).
When a positive-strand RNA (+ssRNA) virus enters a plant cell, the virally encoded replicase [with helicase, methyltransferase, and virus-encoded RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) activity] is translated by the host's translation machinery at the cellular membrane, and the subsequent viral replication occurs often within membrane invaginations (Figure 1b). More than 100 host proteins, including translation initiation and elongation factors and heat-shock proteins, are involved in this process (68). The replicase then synthesizes a negative-strand RNA (−ssRNA) virus complementary to the viral genome. This process is primed mostly by a specific RNA structure at the 3′ end of the viral genome to which the replicase binds to initiate RNA synthesis (55). The viral genome and its negative-strand complementary sequence are then copied many times by the replicase. However, it is most likely the secondary or tertiary structure of the viral ssRNA that is the most dominant source of vsRNAs (4).
To simplify matters, we use the term vsRNA for viral transcripts and viral genomes and useshort interfering RNA (siRNA)to describe dsRNAs that are being or have been processed by enzymes of the posttranscriptional gene silencing (PTGS) machinery.
vsRNAs are recognized by the four types of plant-encoded DICER-LIKE (DCL, dsRNA-specific RNase) proteins that chop long, near-perfectdsRNAsinto primary siRNAs of different lengths. DCL1 and DCL4 produce 21-nt-long siRNAs, DCL2 siRNAs are 22-nt long, and DCL3 siRNAs are 23-nt long (4).A. thalianaplants infected with RNA viruses produce mainly DCL4-dependent 21-nt and/or DCL2-dependent 22-nt siRNAs owing to their transcription in the cytoplasm (4,42). After cleavage by DCLs, siRNAs are methylated at their 3′ end by HUA ENHANCER 1 (HEN1) to protect the siRNAs from uridylation and possibly influence their susceptibility as primers for RdRP (57,134).
vsRNAs derived from DNA viruses are treated like the host's endogenous transcripts from genes requiring silencing, such as heterochromatic regions and transposons. They are mainly processed into 24-nt siRNAs by DCL3, owing to their transcription in the nucleus (4). However, depending on the DNA virus, other DCL proteins are also involved in vsRNA biogenesis: Geminiviruses also require DCL2, and the dsDNA cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) needs DCL1, suggesting that all DCLs may be necessary for siRNA biogenesis of DNA viruses (10,139). InA. thaliana,DCLgenes generally act redundantly in terms of genetics and also in response to RNA virus infection, as they can bind to and process any long dsRNA. Only DCL1 is exceptional because it is mainly responsible for microRNA (miRNA) processing (11). A comprehensive summary of which viruses—and, thus, whichVIGSsystems they derived from—require which DCL actions is found in Reference139.
In many plants, antiviral silencing requires amplification of thevsRNAsby host-encoded RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RDRs), some of which are encoded by theA. thalianagenome (RDR1–RDR6), and also by the RNA-virus-genome-encoded RdRP, as a part of the replicase complex. Primary vsRNAs are synthesized from replicases, while secondary vsRNAs are mainly synthesized from host-encoded RDRs. RDR6 is the most important RNA polymerase for replicating primary vsRNAs inA. thalianaand, to a lesser extent, RDR1 (48,100). These are supported by additional factors, such as ANTIVIRAL RNAI-DEFECTIVE 1 (AVI1) and AVI2, phospholipid flippases required for membrane-bound vsRNA biogenesis (48). Interestingly, and in contrast to earlier hypotheses, profiling vsRNAs from RNA virus–infected plants shows that most vsRNAs are derived from the genomic strand, especially from several hotspots in the viral genome, and not from double-stranded replication intermediates (139). For optimizing VIGS vectors from RNA viruses, this has consequences: The target gene fragment requires close proximity to the dsRNA-like secondary structures within the viral genome for efficient production of the vsRNAs required for systemic silencing.
Plant DNA viruses do not code for replicases, and their primary vsRNA synthesis does not involve the host's RNA Pol II to transcribe their genomes, as was shown for CaMV (10). Most likely, DNA virus–derived dsRNAs are generated from the annealing of complementary sense/antisense and structured transcripts (4), and consequently, target gene fragments require positioning where converging sense/antisense transcripts are formed after transcriptions of VIGS vectors. Those vsRNAs are the primary template for RDR-dependent secondary vsRNAs.
Once a pool of primary vsRNAs is generated, sequence-specific PTGS is achieved by loadingARGONAUTE (AGO)nucleases with siRNAs, which act as specificity determinants to activate antiviral silencing. AGO proteins loaded with single-stranded siRNAs, together with cofactors, are part of theRNA-induced silencing complex (RISC)targeting complementary viral RNAs to cleave them and trigger translational arrest or DNA methylation (18). AGO proteins contain a PIWI domain and RNAse H-like activity to cleave target RNA, leading to the silencing of complementary nucleic acids (18). Ten AGO proteins (AGO1–AGO10) are encoded by theA. thalianagenome, which fall into three classes. Of these, AGO1, AGO2, AGO4, AGO5, AGO7, and AGO10 were shown to function in RNA virus silencing (38,109). They associate with the siRNA to identify and cleave complementary viral RNAs and endogenous gene transcripts included in VIGS vectors that are RNA-virus derived (79,139). Different AGOs associate with small RNAs of defined sizes (Figure 1b); for example, inA. thaliana, AGO1 associates with 21- and 22-nt-long RNAs that have uracil at their 5′ end. Most RNAs associated with AGO2 are 21-nt long with adenine at their 5′ end. AGO5 associates with RNAs that are 24-nt long with a 5′ cytosine (84). Specific AGOs play important roles in the PTGS of different viruses modified into VIGS vectors. For example, AGO2 and AGO4 target TRV-derived vsRNAs, brome mosaic virus (BMV) vsRNAs are targeted by AGO1, and turnip mosaic virus (TuMV) vsRNAs are cleaved by AGO1, AGO2, AGO5, AGO7, and AGO10. The specificity of AGOs to RNA and DNA viruses has been extensively reviewed in References18and139.
Naturally, the action of AGO proteins results in the degradation of viral RNAs in both RNA viruses and endogenous genes targeted by VIGS, leading to their posttranscriptional silencing (Figure 1b).
A second, most likely less important pathway to silence viral and VIGS-targeted endogenous genes is via translational inhibition mediated by 22-ntsiRNA(Figure 1b). These also include vsRNAs and are only produced by DCL2 activity and at low abundances because, at least inA. thaliana, DCL2 processes dsRNA mainly if DCL4 is absent (13,115). Target gene translational repression by inhibition of protein biosynthesis was shown to be an integral function of 21-ntmiRNAaction and requires the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized membrane protein ALTERED MERISTEM PROGRAM1 (AMP1) and AGO1 (73). Recently, it was also found that the 22-nt siRNA generated by DCL2 also binds to AGO1 to repress translation but without the AMP1 protein. This pathway is thus distinct from the miRNA-mediated translational repression and induces not only global but also gene-specific translational repression (130).
DNA virus methylation and VIGS-mediated endogenous target gene methylation follow the canonical RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway and are also termedtranscriptional gene silencing (TGS;Figure 1b). The RdDM pathway is mostly directed against the host's heterochromatin, including inverted repeats and transposons, and this mechanism is also used for defense against DNA viruses (87,104). RdDM is mediated mainly by AGO4, when it associates with siRNAs processed from DCL3 and is reimported into the nucleus. There, the AGO4/siRNA complex recruits de novo DNA methyltransferases that methylate cytosines at CG, CHG, and CHH positions (H represents A, C, or T) (87), leading to transcriptional gene silencing (TGS), and the AGO4/siRNA complex is hence termedRNA-induced transcriptional silencing complex (RITS). This hypermethylation of viral DNA following infection was observed, for example, after cabbage leaf curl virus (CaLCuV) and beet curly top virus (BCTV) infections (18) and is also thought to occur during DNA-virus-mediated VIGS. During this process, DNA methyltransferases that are linked to AGO4 carry out de novo methylations in the viral genome and het-erochromatin that can be maintained during DNA replication (87). Furthermore, RdDM is also extended to chromatin compaction, resulting in suppression of gene expression by the deposition of repressive H3K9me2 histone marks. Following viral infection and RdDM activity, transposable element–associated chromatin is also methylated to ensure genome integrity and subsequent full recovery from viral infection (28).
Viruses generally spread throughout the infected plants from the initially infected cells, mostly via the phloem. Then they unload from the sieve cells to infect cells of other plant parts, as does VIGS. Systemic silencing of viral or target gene expression relies on cell-to-cell (intercellular) spreading, presumably via plasmodesmata, and long-distance (systemic) spreading through the phloem (3,89) (Figure 2). Generally, siRNAs spread faster than the viral infection, and it is thought that this primes tissues far away from the infection sites to prevent their infection and inhibit spreading of the virus. Apparently, there is no selective export of RNAs, and it was observed that many small RNAs can move, suggesting that the proteome of the recipient cell determines if a siRNA can transmit a silencing signal (106). This systemic silencing mechanism is also employed in VIGS experiments to systemically silence endogenous target genes throughout the plant and is thus a major determinant of experimental success.

Figure 2Click to view


For systemic spreading of the double-stranded siRNAs as silencing signals, mainlyDCL4-generated 21-nt siRNAs are required inA. thaliana, and they move between leaves to induce intercellularPTGS(Figure 2). DCL2 is also involved in this context but more indirectly: Its production of 22-nt siRNAs stimulates 21-nt siRNA biogenesis viaRDR6and DCL4 (36,96). But recently it was shown that DCL2 is not the only protein required for RDR6-dependent PTGS in the source cells and in the recipient cells of systemic silencing (115). By contrast, DCL4 also seems to play an inhibitory role in cell-to-cell movement (141), especially in VIGS-induced cell-to-cell movement, which somewhat contradicts earlier findings on DCL4’s involvement in systemic siRNA spreading.
For VIGS-induced cell-to-cell spreading of silencing inN. benthamiana, DCL2-derived 22-nt vsRNAs are essential, while DCL4 suppresses spreading, possibly by downregulating DCL2 action. Furthermore, cell-to-cell spreading of turnip crinkle virus (TCV) VIGS-mediated silencing inN. benthamianarequires RDR6 and the TCV movement protein (102,103).
Long-distance silencing occurs in the apical-basal direction and vice versa with species-specific requirements (Figure 2c). For example, several Solanaceae use phloem-mediated long-distance silencing, butA. thalianauses reiterated cell-to-cell transport of central stele cells through plasmodesmata to spread the silencing signal in the basal-apical direction (74,141). By contrast, the phloem-mediated long-distance PTGS ofN. benthamianarequires DCL2-generated 22-nt siRNAs, while DCL3 attenuates systemic spreading (24). Phloem loading may occur via plasmo-desmata from the neighboring parenchymatic cells and, potentially, by exosomes or vesicles (78).
Interestingly, PTGS remains undiluted over cell divisions, during cell-to-cell and long-distance spreading, suggesting an amplification mechanism that acts during these processes (105). However, a tissue zone below the apical meristem inA. thalianais resistant to the silencing signal, preventing the spread of the silencing possibly by modulating elements of the cytoskeleton. This may prevent the spread of the silencing signal to provide a barrier against small RNA signaling in the meristem (74) and may explain why many viruses cannot infect meristematic tissues. The latter may cause a lack of inheritability as reproductive tissues develop from meristematic tissue. This can be advantageous with regard to gene technology safety regulations because, in many cases, the seeds of plants from VIGS or VIGS-derived methods do not carry viral parts and can be considered wild type. However, this is a disadvantage for research, as each plant generation needs to be VIGS treated anew. Interestingly, TRV- and barley striped mosaic virus (BSMV)-based vector systems were reported to show VIGS inheritance (9,110), and they can be used in studies requiring VIGS inheritance.
A fascinating aspect of PTGS is its ability to cross species or even kingdoms, e.g., from plants to fungi. This specific transport of small RNAs is mediated by the formation and secretion of extracellular vesicles (EVs), which encase the small RNAs (Figure 2d). Recent work inA. thalianashows that the host's small RNAs silenced virus-related genes of the fungal pathogenBotrytis cinerea(17).AGO1and DEAD-box RNA helicases were reported to colocalize with EV-enriched small RNAs, and they may facilitate their packing and stabilize plant-secreted small RNAs in EVs (51). This and several other cases of cross-kingdom PTGS were comprehensively summarized by Wang et al. (122) and suggest a broader role for small RNAs as a means of communication between interacting organisms, including those with beneficial symbiotic or pathogenic relationships.
Following an infection by wild-type virus strains orVIGSvectors, recovery from the symptoms of viral infection is often observed because the plant host silences the viral gene expression, a phenomenon termed recovery (81). Furthermore, recovered plants are resistant to subsequent infections by the same or related viruses (39). In addition, for TRV-mediated VIGS research has shown that viral RNA associates less frequently with ribosomes, suggestive of translational repression or TRV RNAs (79).
Plant viruses have evolved several types ofviral silencing suppressors (VSRs)to evade the plant's antiviral RNA-silencing defense. Evading of RNA silencing can be simple, for example, by replication in specific cellular compartments such as ER spherules or by replicating and moving faster than mobile silencing signals (29). VSRs have been reported independently in almost all plant virus families, and they act through diverse mechanisms, providing excellent examples for convergent evolution (100). VSRs can be grouped into either the protein-based or RNA-based strategies. The former include inactivation by binding to components of the silencing machinery, mainly AGO and DCL proteins together with their cofactors, degradation of the silencing machinery, or targeting its components for ubiquitination. RNA-based strategies include decoy RNA production (mainly by DNA viruses), primary and/or secondaryvsRNAbinding, or vsRNA cleavage into smaller fragments (comprehensively reviewed in29). However, genes encoding VSRs are, when known, removed for VIGS vector construction, and this requires deep knowledge about the virally encoded proteins of future VIGS vectors.
While VIGS provides the only means to garner information about gene functions, inherent challenges remain when working with VIGS in many species in comparison to stable mutants or transgenics. Because VIGS relies on PTGS andTGSand systemic spread of the silencing signal, the extent of silencing varies between individuals, organs, and tissues and is in part dependent on the movement ability of the vector (14,15,126). Start and duration of the silencing may also vary between individuals and species, and the VIGS vectors sometimes produce viral disease symptoms (49,132) or general disturbances to the transcriptome (50), such that finding a suitable negative control for VIGS experiments may prove challenging. These drawbacks inherent to the VIGS principle require careful experimental design, including a larger number of plants to be analyzed when compared to stable mutant lines, as well as rigorous reporting (34).
Turning a viral pathogen into a suitable VIGS vector system involves several steps (120). For example, pathogenicity-related genes may be removed such that viral particles are not transmitted between plants (27,60) or genes causing severe symptoms of infection, such as movement proteins (107). Furthermore, some viruses combat PTGS and TGS by effector proteins, which are also removed from the virus genome to construct a VIGS vector system (118). Finally, constitutively active promoters and transcriptional terminators are added to ensure expression of viral RNAs, as well as multiple cloning or gateway cloning sites to insert a fragment of the gene of interest (GOI) (30). Then, depending on the inoculation method, the modified viral genome is cloned either into a transfer DNA (T-DNA)-based vector forA. tumefaciens–mediated transformation or into expression vectors to use the viral genomes directly as inocula (9,30).
Starting a VIGS experiment requires a viral vector system suitable for the species being researched. For many species within the monocots or dicots, efficient vector systems are readily available already, especially for those of economic importance. However, for nonmonocots, nondicots, and nonangiosperms, VIGS vector systems are largely missing (34). The available vector systems can be divided based on the molecular nature of the vector (Figure 3): (a)ssRNAviruses such as TRV, used for a wide variety of dicots, or the barley striped mosaic virus (BSMV), applied to many Poaceae crops (61,82); or (b) ssDNA viruses such as the tomato mottle virus (ToMoV) or ACMV, both with a more limited host range (e.g., onlyN. benthamianaandManihot cassavafor ACMV) (34). Many viruses distribute their genomes in two (e.g., TRV and ToMoV) or three fragments (e.g., BSMV), of which only one will be modified by inserting part of the target gene transcript sequence for VIGS (Figures 3and4).

Figure 3Click to view


Figure 4Click to view


Regardless of the viral nature, the fragment size of the GOI to be inserted into the VIGS system is limited due to the space constraints of the viral capsid or instability of the VIGS fragment. Typically, a 200- to 400-bp fragment of the GOI is cloned into the VIGS vector and is either gene-specific or specific to genes sharing high levels of sequence homology to silence multiple genes. For subsequent inoculation of the VIGS vectors in their host plants, different methods such as spraying, rubbing, vacuum infiltration, and injecting by syringes, as well as vascular puncture inoculation ofA. tumefaciensor the viruses directly can be applied (32,61,126) (Figure 3). Observation of silenced control plants and quantification of the silencing success are required for every VIGS experiment because of the aforementioned labile phenotypes and possible symptoms caused by the viral infection. A thorough quantification of silencing success by controlled gene silencing (e.g.,PDS) allows monitoring of the many experimental variables. This quantification requires calculation of silencing frequency (plants with visible silencing phenotype), effectiveness (target organs with visible silencing phenotype), and efficiency (silencing strength quantification) (14). Dommes et al. (34) describe the setup of VIGS experiments and analysis of the silenced plants in more detail and propose minimal reporting guidelines for VIGS experiments.
Manipulating plants by modified viruses has sparked a number of applications (Figure 3), of which the most widely adopted at present is VIGS, used mainly to elucidate the function of host plant target genes. However, VIGS can also be used to silence genes of plant pathogens that take up viral particles or RNAs from their host plants (Figure 2d). This approach was termedhost-induced gene silencing (HIGS)ortrans-kingdom VIGS (TK-VIGS) and targets fungi, viruses, nematodes, insects, and even parasitic plants (Figure 3). When the silencing RNA is produced by a fungus to affect the plant's defense system, it is termed fungus-induced gene silencing (FIGS). All of these applications utilize the ability of small RNAs to traverse from host plant to pathogen and vice versa (7,65,66). HIGS is most effectively triggered bydsRNAs, which may be delivered transiently by VIGS, providing a vast potential as a biotechnological application for plant protection. Recent work documenting the feasibility of this approach includes protectingTriticum aestivum(wheat) fromFusarium culmorum, tomato againstVerticillium dahliae, andHelianthus annuus(sunflower) against the holoparasitic plantOrobanche cumana(21,44,59,111).
In recent years, the demand for plant-based biologicals, for example, to provide vaccines, monoclonal antibodies, immunotherapeutics, and cancer-targeting agents is increasing because plants have become more commonly used as safe and efficacious production platforms (31). Previously, plant-based protein expression used to rely on stably transformed plants requiring tissue culture and regeneration. Recently, large-scale commercial facilities for transiently expressed plant-based medicines relying on modified viruses were established (53,117).N. benthamianais often used as a production host in combination with a tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) expression system introduced byA. tumefaciensinfiltration, turning each plant into a bioreactor (99). Generally, achieving overexpression from a viral vector requires few modifications to the viral genome, ensuring transcription and translation of a GOI's protein-coding sequence (CDS) without the usualPTGSexpected for viral transcripts (Figure 4).
Interestingly, the same virus can be modified to serve as a system for bothVIGSandvirus-induced overexpression (VOX), for example, TMV, the foxtail mosaic virus (FoMV), or the BSMV (71,88). Two different approaches were followed to engineer overexpression vectors. The first one retained a fully functional, stable virus that retained systemic virulence in the host while the infected plant overexpressed a heterologous CDS. In an alternative strategy, the virus was “deconstructed” to eliminate sequences that were limiting (e.g., species specificity) or undesired, such as the production of infectious virus particles (46).
TMV is a rod-like virus with a single-stranded genome consisting of four separate open reading frames (ORFs) and can be utilized for VOX in dicots. The TMV protein overexpression system, which is most often delivered byA. tumefaciens–mediated infiltration, is supplemented by co-infiltration of anA. tumefaciensT-DNA driving the P19 RNA silencing suppressor from the tomato bushy stunt virus (TBSV) to evade PTGS (77). For TMV-mediated VOX, a commercial system trademarked as magnICON®is available and was shown to produce up to 4.8 g/kg fresh weight of immunoglobulin G in two weeks. These proteins can be used for personalized vaccination, for example, in tumor protection (8,45). Furthermore, vector systems may be specifically engineered for assembly in the host plant's cytoplasm by the use of recombinases or the addition of signal peptides, purification domains, or cleavage sites to the target protein, such that a wide variety of peptides and proteins may be produced in a customized way (46).
For monocots, BSMV is an attractive system used to overexpress even large GOIs of more than 2 kb (25). The BMSV genome consists of 3 RNAs (RNAα, RNAβ, RNAγ), all producing a tRNA-like hairpin secondary structure at their 3′ terminus to initiate transcription byRdRP. Capped transcripts of all three genome parts are required for inoculation, and when the viral transcriptomes are cloned intoA. tumefaciensvectors, a strong promoter (e.g., 2×35S) is added upstream of the coding and self-cleaving ribozyme sequence downstream of the viral coding sequences (44). The RNAγ encodes for the RdRP part of the replicase complex and for the γG protein related to viral pathogenicity. In the BSMV-VOX vector system, the CDS for the GOI is translationally fused to the γG protein (70). The system is further developed by insertion of a small synthetic CDS encoding for the autoproteolytic 2A peptide between the γG CDS and the CDS of the protein of interest. Soon after BSMV has entered the host cell, the fusion CDS is translated and undergoes autoproteolysis, releasing the heterologous protein (25,71,137).
VOX provides an efficient method for customized protein expression, and its vast potential is being explored extensively in basic research and industry settings.
One of the fastest and most efficient ways to permanently modify plant genomes is the transfer of the bacterial or archaeal adaptive immune system to plants in a modified way. Originally, this clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeat (CRISPR) system helps to defend prokaryotes from bacteriophage infections. It recognizes and destroys foreign nucleic acids, based on identifying complementary sequences and their cleavage (128). The sequences required for the CRISPR-Cas system to function in any species are 20–50-bp direct repeats, which are separated by unique spacers derived from viral genomes or conjugative plasmids, and a leader sequence. Further, theCas9gene is required as it encodes a multidomain protein to process the transcribed CRISPR RNA (crRNA), or single guide RNA (sgRNA), and to carry out target gene identification and cleavage of any DNA fragment with a sequence complementary to the crRNA spacer (128). Six types of CRISPR-Cas systems were classified based on theirCasgenes, and in plants the type-II classCas9gene is most widely used (83,113). CAS proteins cleave DNA double strands, which activates the host's DNA repair system, triggering nonhomologous end joining or homologous-directed repair. The former may cause DNA disruptions, for example in CDSs, leading to frame shifts or premature stop codons (108).
VIGS has been used to deliver components of the CRISPR-Cas system since 2014, when a geminivirus vector system [combining the bean yellow dwarf virus (BeYDV) and the CaLCuV] was reported to transfer sgRNAs toA. thalianaandN. benthamianaplants (6). This combination of methods was termed VIGE (virus-induced gene editing;Figure 4a). Soon, the TRV vector system was as employed to shuttle CRISPR-Cas components into the two species (2). Since then, DNA and+ssRNA viruses have been employed for precision gene editing of a wide array of monocots and dicots of agronomically important species, such asT. aestivum(wheat),Zea mays(corn),Setaria viridis(green foxtail),Oryza sativa(rice),Solanum lycopersicum(tomato), andSolanum tuberosum(potato) (16,19,54,88,94,121,121).
Most viruses’ carrying capacity is practically limited to around 3 kb, but the CDS encoding for the CAS9 multidomain protein is more than 4 kb in size, and its introduction into plants by VIGS is challenging. Thus,Cas9is mostly integrated into the plant's genome by stable genetic transformation, and the delivery of the sgRNAs is mediated by VIGS using a variety of systems, such as FoMV, TMV, or BMSV, with the possibility of multiplexing (2,26,120). The main drawback of this approach is that most viruses fail to infect meristematic or germline cells, hindering inheritability of the gene editing. Edited plants then require tissue culture of the edited, somatic cells. Further, ectopic expression of the CAS protein is decreased by PTGS, leading to limited gene editing efficacy. However, this can be overcome by downregulatingAGO1homologs or coexpression of P19 by adding yet another transformation step to the experiment (86) or by FoMV-mediated delivery of P19 (140). Recently, Lei et al. (72) fused the sgRNAs to a short fragment of the FLOWERING LOCUS T mRNA, whose protein is transferred into the floral meristem ofA. thalianaplants stably expressing the CAS9 protein. The fusion mRNA, however, increased the heritability of the VIGE gene edits. VIGS-delivered sgRNA multiplexing was shown to be a very useful approach, especially for functional analysis of multigene families whose members act redundantly (37).
Generally, nontransgenic VIGE approaches that do not require genome integration of the CRISPR CDS are favorable as they are less time-consuming and more broadly applicable because many plant species are transformation and/or regeneration recalcitrant. Further, even if the CRISPR-Cas VIGE components are removed from the plants by often-lengthy crossing schemes, the resulting plants could still be legally considered transgenic. Recent approaches using the FoMV to express all VIGE components or the negativessRNAsonchus yellow net rhabdovirus (SYNV) (26,80,131,140) may be a favorable solution, because both systems are transgenesis free.
The more recent addition of VIGE to the family of VIGS-derived methods provides a great potential to overcome the transient and often chimeric nature of VIGS by stable gene edits that can be inherited. This would greatly advance gene function analysis in a postgenomic era.
So far, conventional agriculture heavily relies on the use of fungicides and pesticides to reduce crop loss in the field. However, even with the massive use of environmentally damaging fungicides and pesticides, crop loss in the field amounts to around 15%. Furthermore, postharvest diseases cause another 20–50% of crop reduction (122). Environmentally friendly and effective alternatives to chemical treatments are obviously needed, and one of the promising methods isHIGS, an example of how a VIGS-derived method can be developed to control crop diseases. The HIGS approach utilizessiRNAsthat can traverse across kingdoms, for example, between plants and fungi or plants and nematodes (17,51,64,65,122,127). It has been used to control plant pathogenic viruses, fungi, nematodes, and insects (extensively reviewed in101). For example, BSMV-HIGS of three pathogenicity-related genes in the wheat rust fungusPuccinia triticinasuppressed the disease phenotype in wheat (95). Since then, many genes from differentPucciniaspecies that contribute to virulence, plant growth limitation, or hyphae spread were silenced using BSMV-HIGS in wheat.
However, the challenges of HIGS for crop protection in the field lie in the reciprocity of small RNA transport between two interchanging organisms. While engineered plants can introduce siRNAs into the pathogen, the pathogens may also deliver siRNAs into their hosts to modify their defense responses. Furthermore, HIGS will most likely not be effective in necrotrophic fungi, as they feed on dead tissue, or in species that actively block small RNA transfer. In both cases, the host may not provide enough small RNAs to silence virulence genes in the pathogen (101). Having said that, HIGS is a very promising approach toward pest control and is more easily applicable when compared to the costly spraying ofdsRNAdirectly onto plants. Clearly, more research is required to bring the advantages of HIGS from lab to field.
VIGS-based knowledge has also advanced the research field of PCD, where specific plant cells undergo apoptosis to prevent the spread of pathogens from the site of infection throughout the plant (Figure 5a). This mechanism sacrifices single cells for the sake of the organism's well-being. The knockout phenotypes of many genes involved in PCD are lethal, rendering VIGS a suitable tool for gene functional analysis because of its transient nature.

Figure 5Click to view


Growth factor derivates, reactive oxygen species, or pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs, such as bacterial flagellin, glucans, chitin of oomycetes, and fungi) can induce PCD (40,98). PCD is one consequence of PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI) and can be triggered by PAMPs binding to pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), many of which are transmembrane receptor-like kinases that often include an extracellular leucine-rich repeat (LRR) for ligand recognition and an intracellular kinase domain for downstream signaling (91,129). The molecular mechanisms of PTI, including PAMP recognition and mitogen-activated protein kinase–mediated signal transduction, are examined using VIGS as a major technique to knock down the participating genes. In the following sections, we illustrate how gene function analyses by VIGS accelerated experimental approaches toward understanding the recognition and signaling cascade involved in PTI using the response ofN. benthamianatoPhytophthora infestansinfection, more specifically, the INFESTIN1 (INF1)-triggered cell death as an example (Figure 5a).
INF1 is a PAMP secreted byP. infestans, recognized by a two-component receptor-like kinase consisting of an ELICITIN RESPONSE (ELR) protein as the receptor and SUPPRESSOR OF BIR1-1 (SOBIR1) as the kinase-containing protein to transduce the signal (33,35,75). Further proteins associated with SOBIR1 and involved in triggering PCD are BRI-ASSOCIATED KINASE-1 (BAK1), HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN 90 (HSP90), and SGT1 (52,62,97). Upon activation of the receptor-like kinase, a MAP-kinase signaling cascade is initiated, including the MAP3K VASCULAR HIGHWAY1-interacting kinase (VIK). Interestingly, VIK is targeted by a protein secreted fromP. infestans, Pi17316, to promoteP. infestansvirulence by suppressing PCD, illustrating that proteins secreted from pathogens can interfere with the intracellular signaling cascade required for INF1-triggered PCD (93). In the field of PCD, VIGS-based approaches in combination with simple pathogenicity assays led to the rapid identification of proteins associated with and necessary for INF1-triggered PCD inN. benthamiana. This field is rapidly growing, and many other proteins involved in recognition and signal transduction of plant–pathogen interactions are under scrutiny.
Two important characteristics of VIGS are its transient nature and patchy action. While this poses experimental challenges, such as a larger number of plants that need to be included in the analysis for robust results, it allows the functional analysis of genes whose phenotypes are lethal when fully knocked out. Gene silencing also allows tempering with complex gene regulatory networks (GRNs) that require specific fine-tuning, show genetic redundancy, or have compensating elements. Here, we use the regulation of the fruit ripening process in tomato as an example illustrating how a combination of VIGS-based experiments leads to a better understanding of complex regulatory mechanisms and epigenetically masked gene functions.
Tomato ripening strictly requires an autocatalytic increase in ethylene concentration such that a slight increase in ethylene above the normal level triggers the ripening process and leads to a steep increase in ethylene concentration until the tomatoes are ripe, and then ethylene levels drop (1,63,136). Unraveling the genetics of ripening in the context of ethylene regulation, biosynthesis, and signal transduction ripening is challenging, because it involves a robust network including several genes regulating ethylene biosynthesis in partially redundant manners and thus, indirectly, ripening (1,63,124). Fruit ripening is a continuous process encompassing the disassembly of cell wall components, loss of cell-to-cell adhesion, and the conspicuous color change from green to red, when photosynthetically active chloroplasts transform into carotenoid-accumulating chromoplasts (1,63) (Figure 5b). The typical red color of most cultivated tomatoes is a result of lycopene accumulation, while its precursors like phytoene or ζ-carotenes show a pale yellow to tangerine color (20). Conveniently, fruit color, as the result of pigment composition, may serve as an inbuilt reporter for the degree of fruit ripening. In the following paragraphs, we focus on the function and regulation of the tomato ripening gene,COLORLESS-NON-RIPENING(CNR), which was identified in a naturally occurring mutant with a visual nonripening phenotype (116,119) (Figure 5c).The GRN controlling fruit ripening in tomato is complex and requires several other ripening factors, but we mainly focus on the aspect of changing pigment composition during ripening. (For a more comprehensive view on tomato ripening, see References1,63, and124.)
CNR is a member of the SQUAMOSA promoter binding protein-like (SBP-box) transcription factor acting upstream of ethylene biosynthesis and other ethylene-independent processes related to ripening. The naturalcnrmutant phenotype results from hypermethylation in theCNRpromoter, causing drastically reduced expression ofCNRleading to mostly decreased expression of other ripening genes (43,85). For instance, the synthesis of the carotenoid precursor geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGDP) is impaired incnrfruits; consequently, lesser total amounts of carotenoids are synthesized. In addition, the composition of carotenoids is altered incnrfruits containing fewer orange and red pigments, likely due to a downregulation ofPHYTOENE SYNTHASE 1(PSY1), causing a pale-yellow-to-tangerine-colored pericarp (41,43). Further,cnrfruits show reduced cell-to-cell adhesion, withCNRaffecting the expression of at least one expansin (41,43,116).
Interestingly, CRISPR-Cas9 knockout lines fail to phenocopycnr, as ripening is delayed in these lines but otherwise similar to the wild type, while VIGS experiments targetingCNRmRNA generate phenotypes similar tocnr(22,23,85). Other ripening-related genes in knockout lines show differences in expression strength and pattern when compared to the wild type, whilecnrplants show a general downregulation of these genes (43). This phenomenon indicates compensatory effects within the GRN, and, in the case ofCNR, full loss of function or so-far-unknown alternative splicing variants ofCNRcircumventing the CRISPR-Cas9-nonsense mutations (114,124).
CNRexpression is likely directly or indirectly regulated by other ripening factors like RIPENING INHIBITOR (RIN), epigenetically via methyltransferases such as METHYLTRANSFERASE 1 (MET1) or CHROMOMETHYLASE 3 (CMT3), and by miRNA157 (miR157) (22,23,135,142). Results obtained by a suite of VIGS experiments unraveled CNR regulation acting on different levels of gene expression control. For instance, VIGS ofMET1orCMT3partially rescues thecnrmutant phenotype, documenting epigenetic control ofCNRexpression (23,135) (Figure 5c). Further expression analyses showed thatRIN, among other ripening genes, is also affected by the silencing ofCMT3in thecnrbackground, pointing to the general importance of epigenetic regulation in tomato fruit ripening (23).
The introduction of miR157 into viral vectors aiming formiRNA-based silencing usingVOXvectors was used to modifyCNRexpression (22). Overexpression of miRNAs leads toPTGSvia 21-nt miRNAs, produced by DLC1 and processed byAGO1/AGO7/AGO10, resulting inCNRmRNA cleavage and translational inhibition (42). Experimental designs delivering precursor- and mature miRNA157 into tomato fruits revealed downregulation ofCNRby miR157, together with other ripening genes, also includingRIN(22). Both approaches caused a delayed ripening phenotype, reminiscent of theCNRknockout lines, in addition to nonripening sectors phenocopyingcnrbut to a lesser degree than theCNR-VIGS phenotype. This indicates a fine-tuning ofCNRexpression and/or transcript abundance by miR157 (22).
Interestingly, virally induced overexpression ofCNRcauses necrosis in tomato leaves, an effect that is quite likely to render genetically stable overexpression lines difficult, if not impossible, to maintain (69).
VIGS and its derived applications are important tools for fruit science and have seen intensive use in this field during the last decade. Its speed of use is in particular relevant for slow-growing species like apple (Malus domestica) or pear (Pyrus communis), where several years might pass before the first fruits are produced. For example, VIGS experiments identified the regulatory functions of transcription factors in anthocyanin biosynthesis flavonoids in pear and apple fruits (58,138).
These examples illustrate how VIGS and VOX accelerate our gain of knowledge, in this case, regarding the complex regulation of agronomically important traits like fruit ripening and secondary metabolite accumulation.
Despite the transient and mosaic nature of the phenotypes observed,VIGS,VOX,HIGS, andVIGEenjoy ever-growing popularity among plant biologists interested in the analysis of gene functions and molecular mechanisms of a large diversity of angiosperms. In addition to the research fields we have already introduced above, VIGS and its derived methods are especially successful in the areas of evolutionary developmental biology and the analysis of secondary metabolites, such as pharmaceutically relevant alkaloids, and symbiotic interactions including mycorrhiza fungi or rhizobia.
VIGS and its derived methods enable molecular mechanistic insights in species for which mutant libraries and simple-yet-efficient transformation protocols may never exist. Its transient nature, complicating gene function analysis, redounds to an advantage when lethal phenotypes are analyzed, an approach increasingly employed in genetic model plants such asA. thaliana,N. benthamiana, or tomato.
While VIGS is already a popular method to drive gene function analysis in nonmodel plants and accelerate research in model plants, some more recent developments expand the potential of VIGS even further: (a) In species for which transformation is possible but laborious, VIGS serves as an approach to rapidly select promising genes for stable transgenic knockout lines (56). (b) VIGS may also facilitate genetic analysis in woody crop plants, such as grape or kiwi, as recent work demonstrated that PTGS can be transferred via grafting (133). (c) Omics approaches are producing an ever-increasing amount of data, and VIGS will often be the only method used to analyze candidate genes identified in these explorative analyses, such as proteomics (123), transcriptomics (90), genomics (125), or even effectoromics (the screening of specific PRRs) (76). (d) VIGS is being combined with genome-wide association studies (GWASs) to identify the genes underlying important agronomic traits (47,112). (e) Automated phenotyping platforms can be used for efficient analysis of VIGS and VIGS-derived phenotyping (92).
However, we have illustrated in the sections above how massive the antiviral reaction in plants is and how many cellular functions are altered when VIGS and VIGS-derived methods are employed. Even if all virulence genes have been removed from VIGS vectors, the PTS and PTGS systems are under strain in VIGS-treated plants, causing stress to the treated plants, which can lead to enormous changes to the transcriptome (34).
Further, many open questions remain regarding the molecular mechanism underlying VIGS, limiting our understanding of how to improve the efficacy of VIGS. Few researchers address the question of whether VIGS-induced PTGS andTGSare different from those induced by wild-type viral strains. Moreover, even for PTGS and TGS induced by wild-type viral strains, open research questions remain, such as how the signal amplification ofsiRNAsof viral origin is achieved or the identification of the molecular base of their long-distance transport.
As a consequence of the many questions remaining open regarding VIGS-induced PTGS and TGS, and transcriptional changes in combination with transient and mosaic phenotypes caused by VIGS and related methods, thorough documentation of the experimental approach, statistics, and phenotypes is essential to ensure reproducibility of results.
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
Work in the Becker lab is funded mainly by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) to A.B. Funding from the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (DAAD) and Justus-Liebig-University Gießen is also acknowledged.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


