We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Following fertilization in flowering plants (angiosperms), egg and sperm cells unite to form the zygote, which generates an entire new organism through a process called embryogenesis. In this review, we provide a comparative perspective on early zygotic embryogenesis in flowering plants by using the Poaceae maize and rice as monocot grass and crop models as well asArabidopsisas a eudicot model of the Brassicaceae family. Beginning with the activation of the egg cell, we summarize and discuss the process of maternal-to-zygotic transition in plants, also taking recent work on parthenogenesis and haploid induction into consideration. Aspects like imprinting, which is mainly associated with endosperm development and somatic embryogenesis, are not considered. Controversial findings about the timing of zygotic genome activation as well as maternal versus paternal contribution to zygote and early embryo development are highlighted. The establishment of zygotic polarity, asymmetric division, and apical and basal cell lineages represents another chapter in which we also examine and compare the role of major signaling pathways, cell fate genes, and hormones in early embryogenesis. Except for the modelArabidopsis, little is known about embryopatterning and the establishment of the basic body plan in angiosperms. Using available in situ hybridization, RNA-sequencing, and marker data, we try to compare how and when stem cell niches are established. Finally, evolutionary aspects of plant embryo development are discussed.
Article metrics loading...
Following fertilization in flowering plants (angiosperms), egg and sperm cells unite to form the zygote, which generates an entire new organism through a process called embryogenesis. In this review, we provide a comparative perspective on early zygotic embryogenesis in flowering plants by using the Poaceae maize and rice as monocot grass and crop models as well asArabidopsisas a eudicot model of the Brassicaceae family. Beginning with the activation of the egg cell, we summarize and discuss the process of maternal-to-zygotic transition in plants, also taking recent work on parthenogenesis and haploid induction into consideration. Aspects like imprinting, which is mainly associated with endosperm development and somatic embryogenesis, are not considered. Controversial findings about the timing of zygotic genome activation as well as maternal versus paternal contribution to zygote and early embryo development are highlighted. The establishment of zygotic polarity, asymmetric division, and apical and basal cell lineages represents another chapter in which we also examine and compare the role of major signaling pathways, cell fate genes, and hormones in early embryogenesis. Except for the modelArabidopsis, little is known about embryopatterning and the establishment of the basic body plan in angiosperms. Using available in situ hybridization, RNA-sequencing, and marker data, we try to compare how and when stem cell niches are established. Finally, evolutionary aspects of plant embryo development are discussed.
Seed development of sexually reproducing angiosperms begins with the activation and fusion of two pairs of male and female gametes. During a double fertilization process, one sperm cell fuses with the egg cell, leading to the development of a diploid embryo, while the second sperm cell fertilizes the di-haploid central cell, giving rise to the triploid endosperm, an extraembryonic tissue providing nutrients to the developing embryo in eudicots and to the seedling in monocots (37,129). Although both sperm cells are capable of fusing with the egg cell (53,72,74), double or multiple fertilization of the egg cell is extremely rare (45,92). Before gamete fusion, division of the egg cell is prevented, as it requires activation by paternal factors delivered by the bursting pollen tube and/or one of the two sperm cells. After successful fertilization, a block to polyspermy is established, the decay of maternal transcripts is initiated, and RNA stored in the egg cell is simultaneously replaced by zygotic gene products that initiate development. In some plant species, the egg cell is autonomously activated by a process namedparthenogenesisor by haploid inducer lines that are used in plant breeding to generate doubled haploid lines. Polarity plays a major role inzygotedevelopment, culminating in an asymmetric division of the zygote that generates an apical cell (AC) and a basal cell (BC). The AC (or one-cell proembryo) gives rise to most cells and tissues of the embryo, while the often larger basal daughter cell forms a suspensor and contributes only to the root apical meristem of the embryo in many plant species, including those compared in this review.Oriented cell divisions, cell fate decisions, and the establishment of major cell types contribute to the patterning of the early embryo (12,139).
Our current understanding about zygote and early embryo development in flowering plants is largely derived from studies usingArabidopsis thaliana(Arabidopsis) as a model (69,139,150,162). This species is especially well suited, as it generates a minimalist embryo with all of the typical embryonic tissues and organs. In addition to primary shoot and root meristems that contain stem cell niches, there is a radial pattern with concentric layers of epidermal, ground, and vascular tissues, as well as two cotyledons. The cell division pattern during early embryogenesis is close to invariant and thus predictable, and imaging is relatively easy due to the small size and low number of embryonic cells. In contrast, embryos of grasses seem to develop rather chaotically, and cell division patterns appear less regular and oriented. A central emerging question, therefore, is how well embryogenesis inArabidopsisreflects homologous processes in other plant species or whetherArabidopsismainly serves as a model for the Brassicaceae (112). In contrast toArabidopsis, the micropylar domain of the embryo sac in grasses, for example, is surrounded by maternal nucellus cell layers. The egg cell contains multiple peripheral vacuoles instead of a large central vacuole, and it does not shrink, elongate, and repolarize after fertilization, but, instead, immediate movement of the egg nucleus was reported (162). After zygote division, further cell division patterns of both theAC lineage (ACL)andBC lineage (BCL)appear random and are less stereotypic; for example, cell division planes are not horizontal in the BCL of grasses, unlike those shown for the BCL inArabidopsis. This review, therefore, aims to provide an overview and compare early embryo-genesis in angiosperms to address whether and to what extent molecular components and cellular mechanisms underlying egg cell activation, zygote development, and early embryo patterning are conserved. Among other aspects, we discuss the role of Ca2+and auxin and highlight the role of transcriptional repressors/activators and embryogenesis-promoting genes. Cell polarity, identity, and fate decisions that play a major role during early embryogenesis are compared, also taking into account evolutionary aspects in other branches of the angiosperms.
Based mainly onin vitro fertilization (IVF)studies in grasses, descriptions of egg cell activation in plants often define it as the process that lasts from egg–sperm cell fusion (plasmogamy) until fusion of the gametic nuclei (karyogamy) (105,135,167). We also include prefertilization activation of egg cells and suggest that this process in plants initiates during pollen tube arrival and burst associated with the first detectable calcium transient (37). In animals, sperm entry causes single fertilization–induced Ca2+-transients/waves or repetitive oscillations in the oocyte/egg, which are generally considered to be the main signature of egg activation. The pattern depends on the species and lasts from a few minutes up to a few hours (62). As a second messenger, Ca2+elevations initially lead to the cortical granule release required to form a fertilization envelope that prevents penetration of additional sperm (polyspermy). Moreover, a number of Ca2+-binding proteins like calmodulin (CaM), Ca2+-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs), and Ca2+-dependent actin binding proteins (ABPs) are regulated and lead, for example, to modulation of the actin cytoskeleton and progression of the cell cycle (62).
Similar to studies in animals, in vitro gamete fusion studies performed mainly in maize have shown that Ca2+influx occurs as a single transient in the vicinity of the sperm cell entry site, spreads as a wave through the whole egg cell, and lasts on average about 24 min (5). In contrast, in vivo measurements in egg cells ofArabidopsishave shown that a Ca2+transient that occurs during successful plasmogamy lasts on average only 3 to 5 min (32,47). Notably, this Ca2+elevation appears to oscillate and consists of a few short repetitions (32) and thus is different from the pattern reported from in vitro studies in maize. Moreover, in vivo studies inArabidopsiselucidated a second single short transient in the egg cell about 4 min before the gamete fusion that is associated with egg cell membrane deformation during pollen tube burst (32,47). The role of this Ca2+elevation is not known, but it is likely associated with the release of the sperm cell activator EGG CELL 1 (EC1) and probably other proteins. EC1 proteins are stored in vesicles of the egg cell and secreted after pollen tube burst to activate released sperm cells and make them competent for plasmogamy (130). EC1 proteins are conserved in flowering plants and are also expressed in egg cells of basal angiosperms and grasses (129). It is therefore likely that prefertilization EC1 release is a general phenomenon, and we thus assume that prefertilization egg activation is the rule in flowering plants and not the exception like in animals (62). However, to substantiate this hypothesis it will be necessary to confirm and visualize the correlation of Ca2+rise and EC1 secretion in vivo during the fertilization process in plants, including the grasses.
Plasmogamy-induced egg cell activation triggers a number of morphological changes. First, cell wall material was already detected 30 s after in vitro gamete fusion in maize. A second sperm cell was no longer capable of fusing with the egg cell after about 20 min (75), indicating the formation of a proper cell wall. It is very likely that the above-described Ca2+transient initially triggers the secretion of cell wall material from egg cells, representing a relatively fast block to polyspermy that is functionally comparable to the generation of a fertilization envelope in animals (36). This hypothesis is supported by providing Ca2+ionophores to unfertilized egg cells, which results in Ca2+influx and the establishment of a cellulosic cell wall without sperm cell involvement (5). A similar polyspermy block likely exists also inArabidopsis, as fusion of the egg cell with more than one sperm cell is efficiently prevented even when four sperm cells are offered simultaneously (125).
A huge difference exists betweenArabidopsisand grasses in regard to the orientation and organization of the egg and zygotic cytoskeleton. InArabidopsis, the fertilized egg cell shrinks markedly, the microtubule pattern loses its original longitudinal orientation, and F-actin filaments consisting of thick parallel cables in the egg cell appear disorganized in the shrunken zygote (67). In contrast, little, if any, shrinkage was observed after IVF in maize and rice (75,100). In rice, migration of the sperm nucleus inside the egg cytoplasm appears to be mediated by preexisting actin filaments that interact with the nuclear membrane. Nucleus migration lasts about 5–30 min (100,102). After nuclei attachment, karyogamy occurs on average about 30 min after IVF and sperm chromatin starts to decondense. The whole process, including full decondensation of the sperm chromatin, is completed 4 h after IVF (101). A similar timing was reported in maize: It takes on average about 20 min for the sperm nucleus to reach the egg nucleus, and karyogamy occurs 1 h after IVF and is fully completed after about 5 h (38,75,90). Notably, an artificial increase in cytosolic Ca2+is sufficient to mimic sperm entry, can efficiently facilitate karyogamy of two egg nuclei, and accelerates fusion of egg and sperm nuclei in rice (100). These findings point again to a key role of Ca2+in egg cell activation. Although the timing of nuclear migration and karyogamy inArabidopsishas not been investigated in such detail, a first report indicated that plasmogamy occurs about 5 h after pollination, while karyogamy is initiated 1 to 3 h later and is completed about 9 h after pollination (39). However, the duration of these processes strongly depends on environmental conditions and is significantly accelerated at increased temperatures (T. Dresselhaus lab, unpublished observations). A live-cell imaging study showed that nuclear migration after plasmogamy also takes about 20 min (32), comparable to that in grasses, and thus altogether points toward a similar timing of these processes. Moreover, cytological studies have further shown that the cytoskeleton initially remains intact inArabidopsisegg cells and that filamentous actin associates with the sperm nucleus and is essential for nuclear migration and karyogamy (64). Thus, the preexisting cytoskeletal pattern in the egg cell ofArabidopsisis lost only after karyogamy. Disintegration of the cytoskeleton after karyogamy was not reported in rice or maize. In conclusion, although little is known about egg cell activation in angiosperms, we suggest that this process is tightly associated with Ca2+elevations initiated by a prefertilization Ca2+transient associated with pollen tube burst. This is followed by a second extended Ca2+transient induced after successful gamete fusion (Figure 1). Egg cell activation is completed with karyogamy, as all events such as the triggered secretion of vesicles containing EC1 and cell wall material as well as the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton and karyogamy appear to be associated with increased Ca2+levels in the egg cytoplasm. Although egg activation appears similar in the angiosperms investigated, further studies are necessary to elucidate, for example, how cell wall formation, nuclear migration, and karyogamy are achieved inArabidopsis.

Figure 1Click to view


Maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT) describes a series of events following egg cell activation, during which, in a two-step process, (a) maternal messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are successively degraded and (b) new transcripts are generated after zygotic genome activation (ZGA) and utilized to drive further embryo development. Both paternal and maternal genomes are then used in combination, but initially the maternal genome is more active than the paternal one. MZT is well understood and conserved in the kingdom Animalia. It lasts from a few hours, as in many invertebrates, to days in vertebrates and coincides with changes to the cell cycle in many organisms (79,146). The first step includes the phased regulation of maternal mRNA stability/decay and translation, the modulation of maternal protein stability, and the functions regulated by posttranslational modifications. ZGA in the second step is then associated with the cell cycle and the activity of transcriptional repressors and activators, as well as changes in chromatin organization. See Section 2.3 for details regarding ZGA.
mRNA decay in animals is already triggered uponegg activation, and about one-third of egg-stored mRNAs are cleared before ZGA occurs (for a review, see146). In flowering plants, the timing of MZT was debated for many years (9). However, a recent transcriptome study duringzygotedevelopment inArabidopsisindicated that MZT occurs also in plants as a two-step process of rapid maternal transcript degradation followed by large-scale de novo transcription (163). Transcripts of about 200 egg cell–expressed genes with a fragments per kilobase exon model per million reads mapped (FPKM) expression value >10 are fully degraded already at the elongated-zygote stage (16–18 h after fertilization and some 6 h before asymmetric division is initiated), including some of the most strongly expressed genes, such as those coding for the sperm cell activator EC1 (130), uncharacterized proteases and a number of transcriptional regulators. Transcript levels of about 3,000 genes are decreased at this stage (163). This observation indicates fertilization-induced activation of mRNA clearance. Compared withArabidopsis, maternal mRNA decay in maize and rice appears delayed: Although transcript levels of about 1,700 genes were already significantly reduced shortly after fertilization, including expression levels of the majority of the 100 most strongly expressed genes in the maize egg cell, only a few medium-strongly expressed genes are completely silenced in zygotes at G2 phase 24 h after pollination (about 16 h after fertilization and some 14 h before asymmetric zygote division is completed) (20). While transcripts encoding the two maize homologs for EC1 and those for EMBRYO SAC 1–EMBRYO SAC 4 (ES1–ES4) peptides regulating pollen tube burst are degraded during later zygote development and are fully absent after zygote division (3,20), highly abundantEGG APPARATUS 1(EA1) transcripts encoding proteins required for pollen tube guidance are detectable until the proembryo stage (20,86). Delayed degradation appears even more pronounced in a study of rice: Expression levels of the 1,000 most-strongly expressed genes are similar between egg cells and all analyzed zygote stages (4), in contrast to those in maize andArabidopsis. Only the levels of about 20 significantly expressed transcripts are reduced to less than 10%, comparing levels of egg cells and late zygote stages (8 h after plasmogamy and about 3 h before zygote division). Levels of the two riceEC1homologs, for example, are reduced to about 15% compared with the egg cell (4). In conclusion, MZT occurs in flowering plants but is much shorter than it is in animals, and it appears slightly delayed in the analyzed grasses compared withArabidopsis(Figure 1).
Regulation of the stability of maternal transcripts and their translation has not yet been investigated in detail in flowering plants. In animals, zygotic/embryonic mRNA decay can be separated into two phases. The first phase is regulated by microRNAs (miRNAs) and the second phase by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) (Figure 2). Modifications of maternal transcripts including terminal uridylation and N6-methyladenosine usage contribute to their activity and stability (146). In zebrafish andXenopus, for example, the miR-427/430 family whose members are activated during very early ZGA is involved in blocking translation and inducing the decay of about 40% of the maternal transcripts that are cleared during MZT (117). InArabidopsis, miRNAs like miR-845a, which targets transposable elements, are expressed in the egg cells together with many genes encoding proteins involved in small RNA pathways (131). These include ARGONAUTE 1 (AGO1) and AGO5 that interact with miRNAs to degrade target mRNAs and AGO9, which is also involved in silencing transposable elements (103) and which is most strongly expressed in egg cells (131). Whether the activity of small RNA pathway genes is modified after fertilization and whether maternal transcripts are cleared by fertilization-induced de novo expression of miRNAs as in animals is yet to be analyzed. However, mutants defective in DICER-LIKE 1 (DCL1), an RNase III-like enzyme involved in the biogenesis of miRNAs, show disturbedzygote polarity(7) and thus indirectly indicate that miRNAs are likely generated during zygote development in plants also.

Figure 2Click to view


Maternal RBPs are probably the key factors that regulate either the stabilization of stored maternal mRNAs or their decay, which is similar to processes in somatic cells. They do so by interacting with decapping enzymes, which are Xrn1-like nucleases mediating 5′-3′ transcript decay or 3′-5′ degradation by interacting with the exosome complex (76) (Figure 2a). Although the particular RBPs that mediate these processes vary among species in animals, they include Y-box and Pumilio (PUM) proteins that repress maternal mRNA translation and AU-rich element-binding proteins (ARE-BPs) that have a role in transcript destabilization during early MZT, as well as hnRNPA1 that binds to the 3′UTR of maternal transcripts through an AGGGA motif and acts in zygotically directed mRNA clearance (for a review, see146). The role of RBPs in regulating maternal mRNA decay in plants is not known, but homologs of the above-mentioned exoribonucleases such as Xrn1 and exosome complex components, PUMs, and ARE-BPs exist also in plants, and the encoding genes are expressed in egg cells and zygotes (4,20,163). Notably, one of the most strongly expressed genes in the maize egg cell encodes the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) named DiSUMO-LIKE (DSUL) because it consists of two head-to-tail SUMO-like domains (18,132). DSUL is covalently bound to target proteins of which the majority are cytoplasmic RBPs, including a number of RNA helicases and a PUM homolog. DSUL levels decrease during zygote development and disappear in the proembryo. Silencing zygotic DSUL activity by introducing a DSUL-RNA interference(RNAi) construct via sperm cells leads to zygote division and early embryo defects (18), indicating that zygotic DSULylation of RBPs is likely involved in MZT. Although DSUL is a grass-specific protein, RBPs involved in regulating translation and mRNA stability have also been reported as targets of SUMO inArabidopsis(15), suggesting that SUMOylation might play a similar role during MZT as the postulated role of DSULylation (18). In summary, the study of MZT in plants is still in its infancy, and significant efforts are necessary to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms, their conservation, and differences among plant families.
Here we discuss different aspects ofZGA, starting with the dynamics of transcriptome regulation. We then address the role of chromatin remodeling and finally briefly discuss a few candidate regulators and signaling pathways.
In animals, the zygotic genome is initially transcriptionally silent and requires reprogramming before transcriptional control is passed to thezygote. It was also reported that ZGA is not a single event but rather a period over which transcription is gradually activated (for a review, see124). Initially, (a) a minor ZGA wave occurs during the early cleavage divisions and (b) a major wave follows that coincides with cell cycle changes. In addition, ZGA in animals is associated with (c) the titration of maternally provided repressors, (d) the de novo expression of transcriptional activators, and (e) the slowing of division cycles by lengthening of S phase and addition of gap phases.
As discussed above, the timing of zygote development in various angiosperms appears initially similar but different at later stages. After plasmogamy, sperm nucleus migration in the egg cytoplasm takes about 20 min until karyogamy is initiated, and the latter is completed about 4–5 h after plasmogamy. In rice, zygotes develop quickly and were reported to be already in G2 phase at about 8 h, and zygote division takes place about 10–12 h after plasmogamy. Maize zygotes are in G2 phase after about 16–18 h, and zygote division is completed about 32–40 h after gamete fusion. Similar toArabidopsis, zygote division is delayed and only initiated about 24–26 h after plasmogamy (4,20,38,39,75,90,100,101,163). Some controversy exists about the timing of ZGA in flowering plants: Reporter gene studies and transcriptomic data based on partial sequencing of complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries indicated that ZGA in plants is delayed as in animals, although a few genes are already activated at the zygote stage, similar to the minor wave described above in animals (for a review, see6). This hypothesis was supported by a phenotypic study that investigated 49 embryo-defective genes inArabidopsis, although transcriptional activation was not directly measured. The authors concluded that ZGA occurs gradually and zygotic/embryonic genes are activated at different stages until full activity is reached at the globular stage (31). However, treatment with drugs like α-amanitin that block RNA-polymerase II transcription revealed that ZGA is already required inArabidopsisfor zygote elongation and division. In addition, several double mutants defective in cytokinesis did not show zygotic cell division (61). This indicates that de novo synthesized zygotic transcripts are essential for the establishment of zygote polarity and activation of further embryo development (60,163). However, only stage-specific transcriptomic studies are capable of showing the extent of de novo gene activation and ZGA dynamics.
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data, therefore, have recently been generated from egg and sperm cells and zygotes at different stages, as well as their daughter cells after asymmetric division fromArabidopsis, rice, and maize (4,20,163). These data demonstrate that ZGA does not occur gradually and in phases, as shown for some animal species, but instead the zygotic genome is globally activated soon after fertilization. InArabidopsis, about 4,400 genes are significantly upregulated in zygotes compared with egg cells, and about 2,900 genes (13.7% of all protein-encoding genes) are expressed de novo (163). Upregulated genes in early zygotes are enriched in functions associated with RNA metabolism like transcription and its regulation, as well as DNA replication, while genes enriched in elongated zygotes encode proteins involved in the cell cycle, cytoskeleton organization, and cell division. Similarly, in maize, some 3,600 activated genes (9.1% of annotated genes) were already expressed in zygotes 12 h after pollination (some 4 h after fertilization). About 50% of the activated genes are transiently induced in zygotes, indicating an overall highly dynamic expression pattern (20). In particular, genes encoding homologs ofArabidopsistranscriptional regulators of various families, including BABY BOOM-LIKE 1 (BBML1), BBML2, LEAFY COTYLEDON 1 (LEC1), WUSCHEL HOMEOBOX CONTAINING PROTEIN 9A (WUS9A), and WUS9B, as well as cell cycle regulators like all MINICHROMOSOME MAINTENANCE proteins (MCM2–MCM7), D-type cyclins, and RETINOPLASTOMA-RELATED 3, which mark the onset of DNA replication, are activated in early zygotes. Genes upregulated later during zygote development encode, for example, B-type cyclins and B2-type cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) characteristic of the G2 phase of the cell cycle as well as genes involved in cell division like those encoding MATH-BTB proteins that regulate the length of the spindle apparatus and likely also the initiation of translation by targeting substrates for ubiquitin-dependent degradation (10,57). For rice, researchers concluded that de novo gene expression starts about 3 h after gamete fusion and thus about 1 h before karyogamy is completed (101). Another report showed that only 181 genes (about 0.4% of annotated genes) are de novo expressed in the zygote (4). Compared withArabidopsisand maize, this number is very low and may be caused by contaminations of zygotic samples with egg cells, as indicated, for example, by the observation that the 1,000 most strongly expressed genes are not significantly changed in expression levels between egg cells and zygotes (see also above). Moreover, genes likeOsERF1(Os04g46220) and Os05g37730 encoding MYB transcription factors are not significantly downregulated in this report but are downregulated very strongly in another recent study (168). Regardless, thousands of genes are differentially regulated after fertilization in rice, and, similar to findings in maize, genes encoding embryonic transcription factors like three BBMLs, two WOX proteins (WOX2 and WOX8/9), and LEC1 are de novo activated. G1-S-phase-specific cell cycle regulators like MCM5 and E2F are transiently upregulated at the onset of karyogamy, and many upregulated genes are involved in DNA replication and cell division (4) similar to maize andArabidopsis.
Researchers suggested that plant egg cells containing DNA at the 1C level are arrested at G0 or G1 phase, and that they require activation before they are capable of progressing through the cell cycle (4,20,135,163). Moreover, the egg cell chromatin appears less compact, and its haploid nucleus is even larger than diploid somatic nuclei, indicating a very specific chromatin state. During karyogamy, decondensation of the sperm chromatin takes place after fusion with the egg cell nucleus, allowing for the initiation of transcription from the paternal genome (122). Moreover, a second nucleolus becomes visible, for example, in the early zygote nucleus of maize, indicating activation of the paternal ribosomal DNA (rDNA) locus (90). Altogether, these findings show that the zygotic chromatin is accessible and likely significantly remodeled soon after fertilization.
The chromatin structure in zygotes and early embryos of many animal species was reported to be relatively open, and the genome becomes more compacted during ZGA, while local accessibility increases (146). This is associated with the loss of repressors allowing transcription of repressed genes that include transcriptional activators and miRNAs. Chromatin remodeling was shown to result in changes of nucleosome positioning and histone modifications, including acetylation, methylation (e.g., by introducing H3H27me3 marks), and the exchange of histone H1 and H2A variants. Gene expression studies in plant gametes and zygotes indicate that the egg cell is almost devoid of transcripts encoding histone proteins, while in sperm cells many of the most strongly expressed genes encode specific histone variants, including the high-mobility group protein HMGD1, which represents, according to its expression level, the most abundant chromatin architectural protein in sperm cells (4,20). InDrosophila, HMGD1 was shown to compete with histone H1 for nucleosome binding (93) and thus probably keeps the highly condensed sperm cell chromatin at least partially accessible. Many histone genes are activated shortly after fertilization in plants, including a number of histone H2A variants that are not expressed in gametes (4,20,163). Further evidence that the chromatin architecture of zygotes is reorganized and thus contributes to the regulation of ZGA was provided in rice. Three-dimensional (3D) genome analyses showed that the egg cell and zygote nucleus contain a compact silent center (CSC) that is absent in sperm cells. In total, 59egg cell–expressed and 173sperm-expressed genes were reported to be silenced in zygotes and to locate to the newly established zygotic CSC, while 46upregulated genes in the zygote are released from the CSC of the egg cell (168). De novo activated genes includingBBM1show this pattern as well as silenced genes that encode various MYB and MADS-box transcriptional regulators. Altogether, these observations suggest that the zygotic chromatin is remodeled in flowering plants and the molecular mechanisms are at least partly similar to those described in animals. A battery of single-cell methods has been reported in recent years and hopefully will be applied soon to elucidate the epigenetic changes that occur during zygote development in plants.
In contrast to the identity of transcriptional activators whose expression is correlated withZGAand that are required for embryo development like the above-mentioned BBM-like, WOX, LEC1, and LEC1-like proteins, the identity of transcriptional regulators activating the expression of the above genes or of repressors that prevent egg cells from continuing the cell cycle are not known in plants. A number of genes for cell cycle regulators and transcription factors of various families such as WOX13 are highly expressed in sperm cells (20), and their transcripts or encoded proteins could represent major regulators of ZGA after gamete fusion. However, their function(s) and role(s) inzygotedevelopment have not yet been elucidated.Candidateegg cell repressors have also been reported: InArabidopsisegg cells, for example, transcripts that are overrepresented include a number of transcription factors, particularly those encoding type I MADS-box and plant-specific RWP-RK domain (RKD) transcriptional regulators (73,156). Similarly, in rice, MADS-box and MYB transcription factor genes are completely switched off after fertilization (168) as well as the AUXIN RESPONSIVE FACTOR 17 (ARF17) gene in maize (20). However, instead of egg cell repression and release from repression, gamete-specific transcription factors might also have a major role in sperm and egg cell differentiation and cell identity, as shown for RKD transcription factors (70), and thus might not play a role in the mature egg cell. Nonetheless, at least in the common liverwortMarchantia polymorpha, its single RKD gene is, in addition to gamete differentiation, also required to establish and/or maintain the quiescent state of the egg cell in the absence of fertilization (118), indicating that—as in animals—some transcriptional regulators keep egg cells in a repressed state. Further experimentation is needed, such as studies on maternal and zygotic TATA-box binding proteins (TBPs) that have been shown to be rate-limiting for timing of ZGA in animals (for a review, see124).
A signaling pathway that activates zygote-expressed genes after fertilization has so far only been discovered inArabidopsis(see142,150). This pathway is regulated by the central cell–accumulated peptide EMBRYO SURROUNDING FACTOR 1 (ESF1) (23) and a membrane-associated interleukin 1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK)/Pelle-like pseudokinase SHORT SUSPENSOR (SSP), whose mRNA is delivered by the sperm cytoplasm and translated in the fertilized egg. The protein is probably attached to the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane of the elongating zygote (11,150). Translated SSP activates a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade that includes YODA (YDA) MAPKK kinase (MAPKKK) and activates the transcription factor WRKY2 via sequential phosphorylation of downstream kinases MPKK4 and MPKK5, and MPK3 and MPK6. WRKY2 thereafter activates transcription ofWUSCHEL HOMEOBOX8(WOX8), which is essential to determine the cell fate of theBCLduring embryogenesis (141,143) (see also Section 3.1.2.).
In conclusion, ZGA in flowering plants occurs shortly after gamete fusion in a highly dynamic manner. This includes transiently activated genes required, for example, for stage-specific cell cycle progression and DNA replication, activation of a number of de novo–expressed embryonic transcriptional regulators, and simultaneous repression of a number of maternal gene regulators. As a result, the first cell cycle in the life of a new plant appears relatively long and is additionally extended in species like maize that contain very large egg cells or in species whose zygotes undergo dramatic polarity changes likeArabidopsis(see details in Section 3.1). Later cell division rates are much faster.
Contradictory findings from different studies mainly inArabidopsis, maize, and rice fueled a debate regarding to what extent maternal and paternal genomes are de novo transcribed in the zygote. RNA-seq data from reciprocal crosses betweenArabidopsisCol-0 and Cvi-0 accessions indicated that transcripts are generated in near-equal amounts from both genomes already at the 1- to 2-cell embryo stages (97). In contrast, a genetic study using early embryo mutants suggested nonequivalent contribution (31). The latter finding was supported by a deep-sequencing approach. It was concluded from reciprocal crosses betweenArabidopsisCol-0 and Leraccessions that 88% of transcripts are maternally derived at the 2- to 4-cell stages, and equal amounts are not even achieved at the globular stage (8). However, a recent transcriptomic study using the same reciprocal crosses showed 34% paternal reads already in spherical zygotes and equal parental transcriptome contributions in elongated zygotes (163). This study was further extended showing that both parental genomes contribute equally to the transcriptomes of bothACLsand BCLs of early proembryos, but a strong maternal effect was observed on the BCL generating the suspensor (164).
A partial analysis of allele-specific expression of 25 genes after fertilization in maize also showed immediate equivalent parental genomic contribution at 1 day after pollination (zygotes were likely at S/G2 phase in this analysis) (88). In rice, 23 allele-specific genes were identified that were upregulated afterIVFand showed high preferential or specific expression from the paternal allele. Biallelic expression was observed at later embryo stages. Genes preferentially expressed de novo from the maternal allele were not discovered (113). Similarly, theBBM1gene of rice is initially expressed exclusively from the paternal allele in rice zygotes, and expression is biallelic at later stages (4,66). In contrast, a whole-genome transcriptomic study showed that in early rice zygotes, 97% of transcripts are preferentially maternally derived. Of the 181 de novo expressed genes, 26 had parent-assigned transcripts containing 8 genes likeWOX8/9showing paternal allele expression only in one direction of reciprocal crosses and two genes, includingBBM1andBBM-related genePLETHORA 2(PLT2), showing paternal expression in one direction and biallelic expression in the other (4).
InArabidopsis, maternalCHROMOMETHYLASE3(CMT3) andDOMAINS REARRANGED METHYLTRANSFERASE2(DRM2) both regulate non-GC methylation but not the DNA maintenance methylasesMETHYLTRANSFERASE1(MET1) andDECREASED DNA METHYLATION1(DDM1), which regulate GC-methylation and control early expression of paternally transmitted markers. Researchers therefore suggested that a functional RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway is required for maternal control of paternal genome quiescence in the zygote (8). However, a recent study in rice analyzing 24-nt small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) representing a hallmark of RdDM showed that in both gametes these siRNAs are depleted from heterochromatic boundaries relative to vegetative tissues, but the pattern of CHH methylation is similar between eggs and sperm cells as well as in vegetative tissues (81) and thus does not explain unequal genome activation and instead indicates equal contribution.
In conclusion, it is obvious from these data, as well as additional reports showing activation of individual transgenes delivered by the sperm cell (e.g.,18,88,113,122), that the paternal genome is already activated shortly after gamete fusion in plants. The extent of paternal genome activation is still a matter of debate. Experiments to studybiparental transcriptionrequire reciprocal crosses between varieties or accessions that significantly differ from each other and that contain thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). It was therefore suggested that both the overall timing of ZGA and the activation of the parental genomes show some plasticity and largely depend on the genomes of both interacting gametes (9). However, the discrepancy between the studies may also be explained by the difficulties of accessing the material and by contaminations of transcriptomic data sets. ForArabidopsis, researchers recently demonstrated that RNA contamination from maternal tissues explains the poor reproducibility of some transcriptomic data sets and shows that data could be misinterpreted, including epigenetic phenomena (123). Moreover, isolation of egg cells and zygotes at different stages is challenging, as cells are also difficult to distinguish; thus, a few egg cells contaminating zygotic samples could cause erroneous assumptions on maternal preference in gene expression patterns. In summary, based on studies of the literature and our own data, we propose that not only does ZGA occur soon after gamete fusion in plants but also there is no significant delayed paternal genome activation. The generation of data from additional species and systematic approaches will hopefully soon settle this long-standing controversy.
In addition to sexual reproduction, embryo development can also be activated without fertilization of the egg. This process, known asparthenogenesis, is widespread in animals and plants. In many Hymenoptera insect species, for example, diploid females develop from fertilized eggs, while haploid males are generated from unfertilized eggs (50). Facultative parthenogenesis, the switching between sexual and clonal reproduction, in animals often depends on environmental conditions and has also been described in other invertebrates, such asDaphniaand aphids, but is rare in vertebrates, where it occurs, for example, in lizards, snakes, fish, and a few bird species (77). Parthenogenesis is frequent in mosses and algae but is relatively rare in angiosperms (2,147). In flowering plants, parthenogenesis is usually a component of apomixis (asexual reproduction through seeds) and occurs in about 400 of the 300,000 angiosperm species (80). It is completely unclear whether and how parthenogenetic egg cells are, for example, activated or triggered by their environment or by a genetic program directly after egg cell differentiation and, similarly, whether there is, at least transiently, a cell cycle arrest stage and whether typicalegg activationmarks like Ca2+elevations are required (Figure 1). Parthenogenetic egg cells in plants are usually unreduced and thus contain the complete genome of the mother plant. Researchers therefore discussed whether asynchronous expression of duplicate (male and female) genes may cause parthenogenesis (17). Unfortunately, apomixis does not occur in the typical model plants, and therefore little knowledge is available about the genomes of apomicts, their gene expression patterns or their functions. Moreover, attempts to identify genes associated with the parthenogenetic trait in different species have failed and, so far, have only been successful in one grass species.
By using the natural apomictPennisetum squamulatum, a single dominant locus, the apospory-specific genomic region (ASGR), was cloned and found to contain an APETALA 2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (AP2/ERF) transcription factor gene similar to BABY BOOM (BBM), which was discovered 20 years ago inBrassica napus. BBM was originally described as a positive regulator of somatic embryogenesis (13). It was further demonstrated that thePsASGR-BABY BOOM-like(PsASGR-BBML) gene is expressed in egg cells before fertilization and can induce haploid embryo formation in transgenic sexual pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum) in the absence of fertilization (21). Notably, PsASGR-BBML is strongly related to BBML, described in Section 2.3, in rice and maize, whose genes belong to fertilization-induced de novo expressed transcription factor genes. Together, these findings suggest that the zygotic gene expression program is already active in parthenogenetic egg cells probably lacking a resting stage.
Studies therefore tested whetherPsASGR-BBMLand zygoticBBMLgenes can be used to trigger embryogenesis from sexual egg cells. Such approaches have a high potential in plant biotechnology and breeding as the generation of (doubled) haploid plants significantly accelerates crop breeding processes (55,58). Indeed, by expressing thePsASGR-BBMLtransgene from the native promoter or the egg cell–specificEC1.2promoter fromArabidopsis(130), haploid embryo development could be induced in both rice and maize (22). This approach was also successful when zygotically induced riceBBMLgenes were expressed in rice egg cells before fertilization using the sameArabidopsis EC1.2promoter (66). Similarly, cell divisions of isolated rice egg cells could also be induced in vitro after transformation withOsBBML1using the constitutive35Spromoter (113), showing the reproducibility of the system. However, thePsASGR-BBMLtransgene failed to induce measurable haploid seed development inArabidopsis(22), and expressing BBM fromB. napusin embryo sacs of maize did not result in the induction of cell division or embryo development (S. Amien, K. Boutilier & T. Dresselhaus, unpublished data). These observations suggest that BBML transcription factors in grasses and Brassicaceae likely regulate different target genes.
An interesting observation is that de novo expression ofOsBBML1in the ricezygoteis initially specific to the male allele (66,113). This indicates the existence of a mechanism that prevents precocious embryo development by silencing keyZGAfactor genes in the maternal genome and explains the success of induced parthenogenesis by usingBBMLgenes. Moreover,OsBBML1is not the only transcription factor gene showing this pattern: In rice zygotes, genes encoding WRKY, MADS-box, and MYC transcriptional regulators are initially also only expressed from the male allele (113) and thus represent further potential candidates to stimulate embryo development. Identification of the silencing mechanism and target genes in sexual and parthenogenetic egg cells and zygotes will probably increase the number of possibilities to generate haploid plants for breeding and understand the phenomenon of parthenogenesis.
It is also unclear to what extent sperm cell factors are required to trigger embryogenesis or whether male genome transmission is sufficient. Sperm cells defective in the pollen-specific geneMATRILINEAL/NOT LIKE DAD/Zea mays phospholipase A(ZmPLA1) (43,65,82) can be used to generate about 2% haploid plants among their progeny. Due to a C-terminal truncation, ZmPLA1 in inducer lines can no longer be attached to the membrane, where it probably hydrolyzes phospholipids. Haploid induction rates are further increased to about 10% in mutants that are additionally defective in the enhancer geneZmDMP(166). A knockout solely inZmDMPdid not result in significant haploid induction rates (0.1–0.3%, which is similar to spontaneous haploid induction in maize). TheArabidopsisorthologs of ZmDMP, DMP8 and DMP9, have been shown to be specifically expressed in sperm cells and facilitate gamete fusion (25,138). Their double mutant shows a haploid induction rate of 1–4% (165), thus 10 times higher than in maize. Altogether, these observations indicate that sperm cells containing defective membranes and surface proteins are capable of activating egg cells. However, it is still unclear whether gamete fusion is only initiated and leads, for example, to the delivery of some cytoplasmic male factors and a Ca2+transient or whether it is completed and initially involves transcription from the paternal genome before the male genome is eliminated during further embryo development.
TheMiMesystem transforms female meiosis into mitosis, resulting in the formation of unreduced diploid egg cells, which can then be triggered bypla1mutant sperm cells, described above, to initiate embryogenesis. This combination has been used recently to successfully demonstrate that clonal seeds can be generated from hybrid rice (149). In the meantime, this approach has also been successfully applied in other grass crops (for a review, see55), but the haploid induction rate is still low and needs improvement. Further research on the understanding of egg cell activation in sexual species and parthenogenesis in natural apomicts will provide additional tools to activate embryo-genesis. Studies on somatic embryogenesis provide other candidates and have shown that, in addition to BBM-related proteins such as WOUND-INDUCED DEDIFFERENTIATION 1 (WIND1) or RAP2.4, a number of additional transcription factors like the LEAFY COTYLEDON (LEC) proteins LEC1 and LEC2, RWP-RK DOMAIN-CONTAINING 4 (RKD4)/GROUNDED (GRD), homeodomain-containing WUSCHEL (WUS), and MADS domain transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE 15 (AGL15) stimulate and promote embryogenesis (for a review, see51). InArabidopsissomatic embryogenesis, most of these transcription factors were shown to regulate auxin or cytokinin hormone pathways, indicating the importance of the two hormones for early embryogenesis (see also Section 4). Chromatin-modifying proteins regulate expression of these transcription factors but probably also simultaneously restrict expression of many other genes and thus are not well suited to manipulate the induction of embryogenesis. In summary,parthenogenesisis best understood in the grasses, and the knowledge generated from these studies has already been successfully applied to haploid induction and clonal seed production. Zygotic transcription factors appear to play a key role and might also be precociously expressed in egg cells of other apomictic plants, including those from eudicot families. Thus, in addition to proteins involved in gamete fusion, these represent primary candidates to stimulate embryo development for plant breeding and seed production purposes.
In flowering plants, the division of the zygote is critical for further embryo development, as it already leads to the formation of the apical-basal axis. In many plant species the zygote divides asymmetrically (127), often forming a smaller AC and a larger BC (Figure 3). The cytoplasm-rich AC, which is also considered as an embryo proper or embryo initial cell, gives rise to theACLthat forms most of the embryonic tissues (see also Section 4.3). The vacuolated BC, also termed the suspensor initial cell, generates theBCLvia extraembryonic development. In some species, this cell fate decision is delayed, and only one or more derivatives of the apical daughter cell initiate embryo development, whereas the remaining cells are extraembryonic and eventually form the suspensor, which anchors the developing embryo at the micropylar end of the ovule (see Section 4.3).

Figure 3Click to view


Here we discuss how cellular constituents such as vacuole and cytoskeleton as well as signaling components and other regulators contribute tozygote polarityestablishment and its consequentasymmetric cell division.
The establishment of zygote polarity is best understood inArabidopsis(Figure 3a). After fertilization and karyogamy, the fertilized polar egg cell loses its polarity, shrinks due to the disintegration of the large central vacuole and disorganization of cytoskeletal arrays, and thereafter reestablishes polarity duringzygoteelongation (for a review, see69). Vacuoles play a central role in zygote polarity and asymmetric division. Live-cell imaging studies have shown that they form tubular strands around the apically migrating nucleus after shrinkage, increase in volume, and accumulate in the basal area of the elongating zygote (68). Mutants defective inSGR2(At1g31480), which encodes a phospholipase A1-like protein localized on the vacuolar membrane (63), generate spherical and spotted vacuoles and lead to symmetric division (68,69), pointing to the importance of vacuoles for egg and zygote polarity as well as asymmetric division inArabidopsis. Similarly, the cytoskeleton is reorganized during zygote development. While the egg cell displays a longitudinal array of microtubules and mesh-like actin filaments, these structures are initially lost during zygote shrinkage and reorganized thereafter. A transverse microtubular ring appears and is maintained during zygote elongation near its growing chalazal pole, and actin filaments align longitudinally and direct zygote elongation and migration of the nucleus towards the growing apical pole (67,69). A comparable tip-growth-like system does not exist in grasses (90,120), and the described change in zygote polarity is also less pronounced (Figure 2b). Shrinkage was also observed afterIVFin some maize and rice zygotes, but in general the zygote has a similar volume as the egg cell (75,100). The egg cell already contains a number of peripheral vacuoles, and its nucleus, surrounded by the endoplasmic reticulum and other organelles, appears centrally located (90). After fertilization, the nucleus is also moved toward the chalazal or apical pole by actin filaments before karyogamy takes place, as shown in rice (102). In maize, for example, further movement of the nucleus was reported that determines the future asymmetric cell division plane (90), but it is unknown whether or to what extent actin, tubulin, or vacuoles are involved (for a review, see162).
A MAP kinase–dependent signaling pathway involved in the activation of zygote-expressed genes (see Section 2.3.3) also plays a major role in the zygote polarity ofArabidopsis. This pathway includes the MAPKKK YDA, the MAPKKs MKK4 and MKK5, and the MAPKs MPK3 and MPK6 (for a review, see150). Disruption of the pathway impairs zygote elongation and leads to symmetric zygote division and apparent loss of the BCL during further development. YDA itself is activated in the zygote by the plasma membrane–anchored BRASSINOSTEROID SIGNALING KINASES BSK1 and BSK2, possibly by phosphorylation (96). The latter are theorized as activated via SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR KINASE (SERK) receptor complexes in the zygote after interaction with extracellular ligands (150) like the central cell–secreted peptide ESF1, whose suspensor mutant can be rescued by a constitutively active version of YDA (23). Notably, in the Brassicaceae, YDA can also be activated in the zygote by sperm cell–delivered transcripts encoding the pseudokinase SSP/BSK12 (11,96). SSP resembles a constitutively active membrane-anchored version of BSK1 and is thought to activate YDA soon after fertilization without involving receptor complexes (150). It is unknown whether similar signaling pathways exist in grasses: In rice,GLOBULAR EMBRYO 4(GLE4/OsMPK6) encodes the homolog ofArabidopsisMPK6 that acts downstream of YDA (54). However, in contrast toArabidopsis, GLE4 is not necessary for asymmetric zygote division in rice but is for cellular differentiation, as specification of the basal embryo region was compromised in thegle4mutant. Kinases or pseudokinases delivered by sperm cells have, to our knowledge, not yet been reported in grasses. Moreover, considering that SSP is a Brassicaceae-specific variant of BSKs, it is unlikely that the activation of gene regulatory cascades in the zygote via receptor-independent paternally delivered signaling components is widely used in flowering plants.
In theArabidopsiszygote, the YDA signaling pathway directly phosphorylates the zinc finger transcription factor WRKY2 that is both paternally and maternally derived and is involved in zygote polarity establishment. Together with the HOMEODOMAIN GLABROUS11/12 (HDG11/12) transcriptional regulators of zygote asymmetry, activated WRKY2 leads to upregulation ofWOX8andWOX9transcription (141,143) and probably of other target genes. Activity ofWOX8and its redundant geneWOX9is then required to specify the BCL inArabidopsis(14), showing the importance of this signaling pathway for regulating zygote polarity, asymmetric division, and cell differentiation in plants. So far, it is unclear howWOX8activity is delivered from the zygote to the BCL and restricted to this cell lineage. Notably, WOX8 homologs are lacking in other eudicots, but expression ofWOX9in tobacco, for example, is also activated shortly after fertilization (169). Similarly,WOX8homologs are absent in grasses and, instead, duplicatedZmWOX9AandZmWOX9Bgenes are de novo transcribed after fertilization in maize (20) as well asOsWOX8/9in rice (4). Another report distinguished threeOsWOX8/9genes in rice (OsWOX8/9A,OsWOX8/9B, andOsWOX8/9C), of which onlyOsWOX8/9Ais expressed during early embryogenesis, and its expression is absent in the ricempk6orgle4mutant described above (54). Altogether, these findings point towards the existence of a conserved MAPK-dependent signaling pathway regulating zygote polarity establishment and asymmetric division in grasses also.
There are more factors involved in these processes, and probably additional signaling pathways exist: ZYGOTIC ARREST 1 (ZAR1), for example, encoding a kinase of the RLK/Pelle family is required for asymmetric zygote division and cell fate determination of the daughter cells inArabidopsis(159). ZAR1 physically interacts with calmodulin and the heterotrimeric G protein Gβ, suggesting that it functions as an integrator for Ca2+and G protein signaling.GNOMrepresents the first gene that was shown, 25 years ago, to be required for the asymmetric division of the zygote inArabidopsis(16). It encodes a membrane-associated guanine-nucleotide exchange factor on ADP-ribosylation factor G protein (ARF GEF) that was later shown to coordinate polar recycling of the auxin transporter PIN-FORMED1 (PIN1) from endosomes to the plasma membrane (133). This points to the necessity to establish polarity by localized accumulation of plasma membrane components, including transporters like PIN1, and additionally to the important role of accumulating auxin in the ACL in this species.Arabidopsismutants lacking ZYGOTE-ARREST 3 (ZYG3) or the two tRNA endonucleases SEN1 and SEN2 are also defective in zygote division. The single-copy geneZYG3encodes the transfer RNA (tRNA) ligase AtRNL required for splicing of intron-containing tRNA (157). These findings indicate that tRNA splicing is also critical, directly or indirectly, for zygote division inArabidopsis. Other mutants not described here are defective in general cellular processes like DNA methylation, cytoskeleton, or mitotic cell division (162).
In the model grasses, rice and maize, MATH-BTB protein genes are de novo expressed or strongly upregulated in the zygote, showing highest expression in the late zygote beforeasymmetric cell division(4,20). Although these genes encoding the substrate recognition component of cullin E3 ligases have not been functionally characterized in zygotes, there is strong evidence that they are important for asymmetric zygote division: The MATH-BTB domain protein geneMAB1that is exclusively expressed in the germ cell lineages and the zygote of maize was shown to regulate chromosome segregation and an asymmetric spindle apparatus during meiosis. Themab1mutant causes insufficient separation and migration of germ cell nuclei (57) and thus likely also in the zygote. Another maize protein that is involved in zygote division is the ubiquitin-like modifier DSUL (Figure 2a). The introduction of a DSUL-RNAiconstruct by sperm cells was shown to affect cytokinesis in zygotes, generating nonseparated daughter nuclei or multinucleate embryonic cells lacking cell plates. Its major targets are cytoplasmic proteins involved in RNA metabolism as well as regulators of cell plate formation (18,132). DSUL is a grass-specific protein expressed in egg cells and zygotes of maize and does not exist inArabidopsis.It will be interesting to analyze whether it represents a tool to study grass-specific processes of zygote development and whether other plants attach short SUMO chains instead of DSUL to similar target proteins and thus regulate molecular processes in a similar manner (Figure 2a).
In conclusion, our current understanding ofzygote polarityand asymmetric zygote division is almost exclusively derived from studies inArabidopsis, and thus it is difficult to make comparisons with other plants. The morphology of egg cells and zygotes is strongly different, but in all species discussed here, a highly asymmetric division generates a small AC containing few vacuoles and a large BC containing the majority of the vacuoles. Few molecular players studied in grass zygotes indicate, for example, that the above described YDA signaling pathway may also exist there, while other proteins like DSUL point toward grass-specific processes. It is also necessary to study whether proteins involved in polarity establishment during vegetative tissue development, like the recently discovered ancient SOSEKI proteins that assemble plant cell polarity complexes via their DIX domain, also play a role in zygote polarity (144).
The asymmetric cell division of thezygotegenerates two different cell types, an apical daughter destined to give rise to most of the embryo and a basal daughter that (mainly) produces an extraembryonic suspensor.
In eudicots likeArabidopsisand tobacco, the zygote does not establish embryo fate, which instead is the outcome of a biased competition among the progeny of the zygote and which is accomplished directly after zygote division: It was shown that isolated ACs are capable of developing exclusively into embryo-like structures, while the BCs form typical extraembryonic suspensor-like structures (108). Similarly, the mutants described above that lead to symmetric division often generate daughter cells that have eitherACLorBCLcell fate (see Section 3.1). That there is competition for embryo fate is best illustrated by the formation of a secondary embryo from suspensor cells when the primary proembryo fails to develop normally due to a disabling mutation or experimental interference such as ablation (44,83). This embryo potential of extraembryonic cells implies that the proembryo emanates a signal that prevents the conversion of fate in the adjacent extraembryonic cells. InArabidopsis, this signal appears to be auxin-dependent (or auxin itself) since inhibition of the auxin response in the BCL causes fate switch to an embryo (109). There is a distinct auxin response machinery in the suspensor comprising ARF9 and ARF13 as well as their inhibitor AUXIN/INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID 10 (IAA10). The ability to change fate appears limited to young suspensors up to the globular stage of embryogenesis, presumably due to their subsequent commitment to programmed cell death (83). Conversely, ablation of the basal daughter cell of the zygote does not entail regeneration of the suspensor from the apical lineage (44,83). Surprisingly, in tobacco, apical and basal daughter cells isolated from their neighbors and the surrounding maternal tissue do not change fate when cultured in vitro (108). This suggests that in addition to the removal of the inhibitory signal from the apical lineage, the cells of the BCL might need a promoting signal from the maternal tissue to adopt embryo fate secondarily. Indeed, auxin appears to accumulate in the uppermost cell of the basal lineage when the AC or proembryo has been ablated (83). Slightly later, this cell divides longitudinally rather than transversely and initiates a secondary embryo, thus behaving like an AC. Live-cell imaging also revealed that the second-generation topmost progeny of the BC can change fate after laser ablation of the AC, starting to express the apical marker DRNp:erGFP (44). Similar studies have not been done in grasses, and therefore it is unknown when and how embryo fate is determined after zygote division and whether there exists competition among the daughter cells.
Analysis of transcriptomic data revealed highly overlapping but already significantly different gene expression patterns between ACs and BCs ofArabidopsisand maize. InArabidopsis, genes specifically upregulated in the ACL from the AC onwards are involved in cell division–related pathways, such as DNA replication and mitotic cell cycle as well as embryo-related pathways including EMBRYO-DEFECTIVE (EMB) genes, a gene for the RKD3 transcription factor of the RWP-RK family, or auxin response. In contrast, the transcription profile of the BC remains similar to the zygote and is significantly enriched in transcripts encoding proteins involved in protein biosynthesis and defense responses but not in embryogenesis (170). Notably, the same report showed that asymmetric zygote division also results in differential expression of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) between ACs and BCs. Although the role of these lncRNAs is not known, it is very likely that they contribute to cell fate determination. Maize also shows a significant enrichment of cell cycle genes in the AC, which divides faster than the BC. However, a significant enrichment of embryogenesis-related genes or genes involved in auxin responses was not observed in the AC. For example, transcripts encoding homologs of key players in auxin-regulated early embryo patterning inArabidopsis, such as ARF5 (MONOPTEROS), IAA12 (BODENLOS), PIN1, and PIN7, are absent in maize zygotes and both daughter cells (20). Moreover,WOX2, marking the ACL inArabidopsis, shows a highly different expression pattern compared with grasses. InArabidopsis, WOX2 is a regulator of embryo patterning de novo expressed in the zygote and functions in the ACL by shielding stem cell progenitors from differentiation. It was further shown that WOX2 upregulates HD-ZIP III transcription factor genes required for shoot identity and balances auxin versus cytokinin hormone pathways (161). In maize, transcripts of theWOX2homologZmWOX2Aare not detectable in ACs and very low levels were observed in BCs (20). In situ hybridization and transcriptomics studies indicated thatZmWOX2is expressed later during development from the proembryo stage (when the embryo consists of about 20–30 cells) onward (94), but its main expression was found in the endosperm (126). De novo transcription of the riceWOX2homologOsWOX2was suggested to occur in the zygote (4), but in general, its transcription level is very low. A different study reported thatOsWOX2is specifically expressed in the rice endosperm during early seed development, which is in strong contrast toArabidopsis(151).
In addition to their role in zygote polarity as discussed in Section 3.1.2, WOX8 and WOX9 contribute to the cell fate of the BCL or suspensor lineage inArabidopsis(141,143) and are now widely used as markers for the BCL (170). Like their counterparts inArabidopsis,ZmWOX9AandZmWOX9Bas well asOsWOX8/9Aare induced shortly after fertilization, and higher levels were detected in BCs compared with ACs (20). However, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction experiments showed no significant expression of the threeZmWOX9genes (including alsoZmWOX9C) before the early proembryo stage (3 days after pollination), and in situ hybridization showed no expression in the outer layer of the suspensor before leaf stage 1 (94). Although functional studies are missing, this finding indicates that pattern formation and fate decisions in the ACL and BCL regulated by WOX and other genes likely occurs much later during embryogenesis in grasses than inArabidopsis.
In addition to the above-described role of the YDA signaling pathways and activity of WOX and other transcription factors such as WRKY2 and PLTs (for reviews, see12,139), auxin plays a major role in embryo fate establishment inArabidopsis. Auxin response in the apical daughter cell of the zygote changes the plane of cell division from transverse, as in the basal daughter cell, to longitudinal. This distinct event is altered in auxin-related mutants (42,49,116) and occurs in experimentally induced embryo fate change of the topmost suspensor cell after detectable auxin response (83). Fate-change-inducing inhibition of auxin response in the suspensor (109) was used to determine transcriptome changes during embryonic reprogramming. Auxin response genes are deregulated, and a newly identified auxin-dependent basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor network mediates the auxin activity suppressing embryo development in the suspensor (111). In a complementary approach, embryo-inducing genes were expressed in the suspensor. The reprogramming ofArabidopsissuspensor cells towards embryonic identity appears to be triggered by defined regulators following a conserved developmental trajectory and shares similarity to the process of somatic embryogenesis from postembryonic tissues (110).
InArabidopsis, auxin appears to be an externally generated signal that influences the fate of the apical daughter cell of the zygote. Auxin accumulation in the AC and its progeny had been inferred from the expression of theDR5promoter dependent on auxin transport from the basal pole (42). Efflux carriers (such as PIN7) inhibited by naphthylphthalamic acid play a role in this directional transport, but it is not known to what extent uptake carriers such as the auxin permeases AUX1 or LIKE AUXIN RESISTANT (LAX) are also involved (115). The endosperm is ruled out as the external source of auxin since endosperm development is not required for pattern formation during early embryogenesis (44). Instead, the source of auxin has been located to the surrounding maternal integument tissue of the ovule near the basal anchorage point of the zygote, as visualized by the expression of auxin biosynthesis genes (116). In addition, there is genetic evidence for a maternal source of auxin required for the longitudinal cell division of the apical daughter cell of the zygote. If auxin seems to pass through the BC from the maternal site of synthesis to the apical destination, why does the BC not respond? A conceivable explanation would be that YDA signaling directly or indirectly inhibits auxin response in the BC. This presumed interaction has to be flexible enough to allow for embryo fate change in the suspensor cells if the primary embryo is damaged. For example, YDA signaling might be limited to a brief period after fertilization, whereas the maternal supply of auxin to the basal pole of the embryo might continue until the globular stage of embryogenesis, when the suspensor cells cease to be able to change their fate. In contrast toArabidopsis, an accumulation of auxin visualized by theDR5promoter could not be observed in the AC of maize (19). This is not surprising, taking into consideration that ARFs and IAAs are generally lowly expressed in zygotic daughter cells (20). Similar to the situation inArabidopsis, maternal auxin is generated after fertilization in nucellus cells (instead of integuments) of maize connecting the developing embryo with the maternal tissue of the ovule (116). However, it is unclear whether maternally generated auxin is indeed transported into the zygote and/or apical daughter cells, asZmPIN8is the only auxin transporter expressed at higher levels in these cells. InArabidopsis, the homolog PIN8 is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (34) and thus does not contribute to auxin transport between cells. In conclusion, if auxin also contributes significantly to embryo cell fate determination, this likely occurs much later in grasses than inArabidopsis.
Apical-basal patterning is a stepwise process that involves dynamic changes inWOXgene expression domains and repeated auxin response that is mainly mediated by the MP (MONOPTEROS or ARF5)/BDL (BODENLOS or IAA12) module inArabidopsis. Indeed, MP and BDL are initially expressed in the AC and its progeny, but their expression becomes confined to the lower tier of the octant stage (see alsoFigure 3a). There they mediate the initiation of the inner tissues cell autonomously and, in a noncell-autonomous fashion, the sequence of developmental events in the adjacent uppermost cell of theBCL, culminating in the formation of the quiescent center (QC) and the columella stem cells of the root apical meristem (see also Sections 4.1.2 and 4.2.2). In contrast, MP/BDL-mediated auxin response plays no major role in the development of the upper tier where WOX2 and related genes as well as WUS promote the formation and functional organization of the shoot apical meristem (SAM).
The AC of theArabidopsiszygotegenerates an octant-stage embryo by two successive rounds of longitudinal cell divisions followed by one round of transverse cell divisions, resulting in an upper and a lower tier, each consisting of four cells. In otherembryo typesof flowering plant species, the sequence of cell divisions might be different, but the net outcome is two tiers of four cells each (see also Section 4.3.2). The upper tier mainly gives rise to the SAM and flanking cotyledons, whereas the lower tier largely produces the hypocotyl and embryonic root. The upper-tier cells continue to expressWOX2, whereas the lower-tier cells start to expressWOX9(46).WOX2and relatedWOXgenes later play a role in the establishment of the embryonic SAM (161). How the complementary expression domains ofWOX2andWOX9are established in the octant-stage embryo ofArabidopsisis not known (see also14).WOX9is initially expressed in the BC, butWOX9expression is restricted to the uppermost derivative of the BCL (futurehypophysis) at the 4-cell stage. At the octant stage,WOX9is also expressed in the lower tier of the proembryo, and this expansion of theWOX9expression domain depends on MP/BDL-mediated auxin response (46). Althoughwox8 wox9double mutants show strong defects in both the embryo and suspensor, thewox9mutant embryo is normal (14), raising doubts about the biological significance ofWOX9expression in the lower tier of the octant-stage embryo. In contrast to those inArabidopsis, cell division planes during early embryogenesis in grasses are less oriented and appear random (Figure 3b). Upper and lower tiers cannot be clearly distinguished morphologically.
The hypophysis is the uppermost derivative of the BCL inArabidopsisand gives rise, byasymmetric cell division, to the precursor of the QC (i.e., the organizing center of the root meristem) and of the central root cap initials. The fate of this single cell is largely specified in response to auxin. Asymmetric cell division of the hypophysis does not occur intir afbsextuple auxin-response-deficient embryos, which then fail to establish the root meristem (107). This auxin response is mediated by transcription factor ARF5/MP and its inhibitor IAA12/BDL, which play essential roles in hypophysis establishment (48,121,153). Both auxin synthesis in the epidermis of the embryonic shoot pole, starting at the 16-cell dermatogen stage (Figure 2a), and PIN1-dependent auxin transport to the root pole are required for hypophysis specification (33,114,134,153). Auxin accumulating in the presumptive hypophysis elicits a cell-autonomous response that is mediated by a suspensor-specific auxin response module comprising ARF9 and redundant ARFs as well as their inhibitor IAA10 (109). Thus, specification of the hypophysis requires two auxin responses, one cell-nonautonomous in the lower tier of theACLand one cell-autonomous in the uppermost cell of the basal lineage, i.e., the hypophysis to be. In addition, the bHLH protein TARGET OF MONOPTEROS7 (TMO7) whose expression is directly activated by MP in the provascular cells of the lower tier moves to the adjacent hypophysis, promoting its asymmetric cell division (121). Features of TMO7 involved in its intercellular movement have been studied in the postembryonic root (84). TMO7 movement might also be facilitated by its interaction with the endosomal protein SHORT-ROOT (SHR) INTERACTING EMBRYONIC LETHAL (SIEL), which was identified as an interactor of SHR that promotes SHR movement (71).
In addition to TMO7, the zinc finger transcription factor NO TRANSMITTING TRACT (NTT) and two closely related paralogs WIP4 and WIP5 also play a role in the asymmetric cell division that generates the precursors of QC and columella stem cells (24). Notably, misexpression of NTT is sufficient to transform other stem cell populations to a distal (i.e., columella) stem cell fate in both the embryo and mature roots. All three genes are expressed in the hypophysis in an auxin-dependent manner, and thenwwtriple mutant embryo displays amp-like phenotype.NTTwas identified as a direct target of MP by chromatin immunoprecipitation, and MP expression was detected in the hypophysis. This is in conflict with earlier studies that detected MP expression in the proembryo but not in the hypophysis; however, after asymmetric division of the hypophysis, MP was expressed in its upper lens-shaped daughter cell, the QC precursor (48,153). When and where MP mediates the expression ofNTTand paralogous genes remains to be determined.
Another MP-dependent gene that is expressed in the hypophysis isWOX5, which is a close paralog of the shoot meristem organizer WUS and plays a comparable role in the root meristem (119).WOX5is initially expressed in the hypophysis; however, after its asymmetric divisionWOX5expression becomes restricted to the lens-shaped upper daughter cell that gives rise to the QC (46).WOX5expression depends not only on MP/BDL-dependent auxin response but also on SHR/SCR signaling from the vascular primordium (119). WOX5 keeps the QC in a quiescent state by suppressing D-type cyclin in the QC (40). Loss of WOX5 affects the maintenance of the distal (columella) stem cells, suggesting a role for WOX5 in cell–cell communication within the root meristem. WOX5 appears to modulate auxin biosynthesis in the QC, which contributes to the maintenance of the auxin response maximum in the root tip and the distal stem cell population (140). In addition, WOX5 moves from the QC into the columella stem cells where it directly represses the differentiation-promoting transcription factor geneCDF4by recruiting TPL/TPR corepressors and the histone deacetylase HDA19 (106).
InArabidopsis, WOX5 is the main integrator of the apical-basal and provascular signaling that mediates the organization of the root meristem. In maize, there are twoZmWOX5genes, of which onlyZmWOX5Bis expressed in the QC and might play a comparable role, although its expression commences later thanWOX5expression inArabidopsis(162). Similarly, the riceWOX5counterpartQuiescent-center-specific homeobox(QHB) gene was only expressed in the transition-stage embryo and thus later thanArabidopsis WOX5(59). Although functional analyses have not been performed in rice and maize, the comparable expression domains ofAtWOX5,ZmWOX5B, andOsQHBsuggest evolutionary conservation. However, while the developmental regulation of WOX5 has been well studied inArabidopsis, it is not known howZmWOX5B/OsQHBgene expression is set up in grass embryos and whether a hypophysis-like cell or cell cluster exists at all.
The radial pattern of the embryo is set up in two distinct steps: (a) the formation of an outer epidermis layer surrounding the inner cells of the embryo, and (b) the partitioning of the inner cell mass of only the lower tier into ground tissue and provascular tissue. Both steps involve asymmetric cell divisions.
InArabidopsis, the cells of the octant-stage proembryo undergo (slightly asynchronous) periclinal cell divisions that produce an outer layer of eight epidermal cells and a compact mass of eight inner cells. These periclinal cell divisions require an auxin response since high-level expression of a stabilized form of the auxin response inhibitor IAA12/BDL or atir afbsextuple mutant prevents the change of cell division from the default (anticlinal) to the periclinal plane (107,158). Following their initiation, the epidermal cells then divide anticlinally, thus maintaining and enlarging the outermost cell layer to accommodate the proliferative growth of the inner cell mass. A comparable early establishment of an outermost cell layer occurs in embryos of various other plant orders, including Nymphaeales (basal angiosperms), Ranunculales (basal eudicots), and several orders of early diverging monocots (56). In contrast, epidermis establishment is delayed in embryos of grasses (Poales). This is also reflected in the expression of epidermis-specific class IV HD-Zip homeodomain transcription factors such as the maize counterpart ZmOCL5 ofArabidopsisATML1, which is expressed in the epidermis from the transition stage onward (107,162). However, anticlinal cell divisions occur preferentially already at the proembryo stage in maize and rice (Figure 3b), indicating that epidermis fate decisions are made at an earlier stage.
How the epidermal cell layer is established mechanistically is not known. As a major transcriptional regulator, ATML1 acts in concert with another class IV HD-Zip transcription factor PDF2 to maintain epidermal identity throughout plant life (98). This involves the formation of ATML1-PDF2 heterodimers, which not only regulate other target genes but also maintain the expression of their own coding genes (136).atml1 pdf2double mutant embryos are mostly arrested at the globular stage, displaying abnormal cells of unknown identity at the surface (98). Strong ectopic expression of ATML1 during leaf development can change the fate of subepidermal cells to generate stomatal guard cells (137). How the expression ofATML1is regulated during epidermis initiation in the early embryo is still an open question.ATML1is ubiquitously expressed in all cells derived from thezygoteup to the octant stage, but thenATML1expression is discontinued in the inner cell mass of the proembryo, following the establishment of the epidermal cell layer (136). It is thus conceivable that ATML1 is only expressed in cells occupying the outermost position in the embryo. This idea would be consistent with an earlier observation on the changing expression pattern of the epidermal marker geneAtLTP1in cytokinesis-defectiveknollemutant embryos: Unlike the situation in wild-type embryos,AtLTP1is initially expressed throughout theknollemutant embryo, but later, when gaps between cells have been closed, the inner cells discontinueAtLTP1expression (148). However, there is also evidence for posttranscriptional regulation of ATML1 activity (52) that is not discussed further here.
But what defines outermostness? The early embryo is surrounded by endosperm that might signal to the embryo, and this signal might be perceived in the outermost cell layer. Signaling between embryo and endosperm has recently been shown to play an essential role in the formation of the embryonic cuticle by the epidermis (35). Alternatively, the expression ofATML1might be regulated by mechanical tension or pressure, which differs between the epidermal layer and the subepidermal cells.
At the dermatogen stage of theArabidopsisembryo (Figure 3a), the four inner cells of the lower tier undergo periclinal divisions. Their inner daughter cells initiate the vascular primordium, whereas the other daughter cells initiate the ground tissue (91). These cells become the initials of their respective tissues, dividing transversely and asymmetrically to give off apical daughter cells that form tissue files in the hypocotyl-root axis of the developing embryo. Ground tissue marker gene(s) initiate expression at the 16-cell stage and continue to be expressed in all ground tissue cells of both root and hypocotyl (154). Similarly, other marker genes reveal that vascular identity has been specified in the 16-cell embryo (128).
An MP/BDL-dependent auxin response is instrumental in establishing both ground and vascular tissues. The inner cells divide abnormally intir afbsextuple mutant embryos (107). Also, inhibition of auxin response (Q0990≫bdlormpmutant) interferes with the asymmetric cell divisions of the first four ground tissue cells, which would normally generate daughter cells that, by asymmetric division, give rise to inner endodermis and outer cortex cells (91). Instead, the initial ground tissue cells often divide periclinally as if to generate another concentric tissue layer. It is not clear from the abnormal orientation of the division planes whether this auxin response is merely required for proper division plane orientation or whether MP-mediated auxin response promotes ground tissue identity. However, comparative transcriptome profiling of MP-inhibited versus wild-type embryos and expression analysis of differentially expressed genes revealed ground tissue–specific expression in an MP-dependent manner (91). In addition, the group of MP-dependent genes includes vascular primordium genes such asTMO5andSHRand alsoTMO7andWOX5playing roles inhypophysisdevelopment. SHR is involved in ground tissue development, including the asymmetric cell divisions generating the inner endodermis and the cortex. In contrast tompmutant embryos, however, neithershrmutant embryos nor thescr schizorizadouble mutant display abnormalities in ground tissue establishment. Additional experiments revealed that MP plays a cell-autonomous role in establishing the vascular and ground tissue primordia (91). The same study also demonstrated stronger auxin response in the four innermost (i.e., presumptive vascular) initials than in the four surrounding (i.e., presumptive ground tissue) initials, which may entail expression of different sets of auxin-dependent genes in the two primordia.
How the difference between the vascular primordium and ground tissue comes about has been addressed recently (128). Although required, ARF5/MP-dependent auxin response is not sufficient for tissue specification at the 16-cell stage. The G-class bZIP transcription factor GBF2 can modulate vascular gene expression by tuning MP output through direct interaction, hinting at a more complex gene regulatory network that controls the initial specification of vascular tissue identity.
Vascular patterning is regulated early on by another MP target, TMO5, which interacts with another bHLH transcription factor LONESOME HIGHWAY (LHW), and this dimer induces periclinal cell divisions (27,29). Target genes of the bHLH dimer, LONELY GUY3 (LOG3) and LOG4, are involved in cytokinin biosynthesis, and together with another target, AHP6, regulate cell fate in vascular development (27,28,99). Notably, the interacting bHLH transcription factors TMO5 and LHW appear to be conserved in evolution. Putative orthologs of the transcription factors described above have been detected in other angiosperms, basal land plants and charophytic algae (85). A representative sample of orthologs including OsTMO5 and OsLHW from rice were shown to rescuetmo5 lhwmutant embryos ofArabidopsis.
Following the establishment of ground tissue as an MP-dependent auxin response, signaling from the adjacent vascular primordium involving the mobile transcription factor SHR and its target SCR mediatesasymmetric cell divisionof the ground tissue stem cell daughter, generating an inner endodermis and an outer cortex cell. The endodermis cells express the SHR-related transcription factor SCR (for reviews, see91,104).
Compared to the root meri-stem, mechanisms underlying the initiation of the shoot meristem are still poorly understood (reviewed in78,104). For example, theArabidopsistranscription factors STM and WUS, which are well known for their requirement in shoot development, as well as their interactors play important roles in the maintenance rather than the initiation of the shoot meristem (1). This was surprising, especially for WUS, whose expression dynamics within the apical region of the developing embryo from the dermatogen stage onward seemed to suggest a guiding role in the establishment of the shoot meristem (87). Nonetheless, WUS is dispensable for stem cell initiation, in contrast to WOX2 and its partially redundant paralogs WOX1, WOX3, and WOX5 (161). Without these WOX functions, the apical region of the mutant embryo is no longer partitioned into a centrally positioned prospective shoot meristem primordium and flanking cotyledon primordia and instead expresses cotyledonary marker genes uniformly at the expense of shoot meristem markers. TheWOXgenes essentially establish a central domain corresponding to the future shoot meristem by repressing the alternative peripheral domain of future cotyledon primordia, which involves the regulation of HD-ZIP class III transcription factors and, indirectly, the balance of cytokinin and auxin (161). Although the WOX gene family is strongly conserved in flowering plants, the role of WOX2 in the shoot meristem development of grass embryos has not been clarified (155,162).
Mechanistic studies of embryo development have been largely confined toArabidopsis. However, it is not at all clear to what extent embryo patterning ofArabidopsiscan be regarded as representative of flowering plants or even only dicots.
The division of thezygoteis markedly asymmetric inArabidopsisand many other plant species (Figure 3) representing differentembryo types(see Section 4.3.2). In each case, the AC initiates embryogenesis, whereas the BC generates an extraembryonic suspensor. There are a few species (Piperad type) in which the decision of embryo versus extraembryonic suspensor appears to be delayed since the zygote divides longitudinally (56). It should be noted, however, that although the zygote divides asymmetrically in most species, the size ratio of the AC versus BC varies considerably (127). Whereas inArabidopsisthe AC is much smaller than the BC, zygotes of many other species may have two daughter cells of equal size or the AC may even be larger than the BC. Notably, there is no clear phylogenetic trend for the size ratio, and there are large differences within the same plant order. Nonetheless, it is always the AC that adopts embryo fate regardless of its size, suggesting that its relative position is the relevant feature.
Much attention was paid to the seemingly distinct patterns of cell division that are displayed in the early embryogenesis of angiosperms (56).Faute de mieux, those patterns formed the basis of classification, i.e., researchers categorized the different strategies of embryo formation in a large number of flowering plant species. A simplified version of the classification system presents six major embryo types, each with a number of minor variants (56) (Figure 4a). Early embryogenesis inArabidopsisand Brassicaceae in general conforms to the so-called Onagrad (or crucifer) type. The embryo types differ in the sequence and orientation of cell divisions in theACLas well as the contribution to the seedling body pattern made by the early embryo regions such as the upper and lower tiers of the octant stage. Different embryo types occur in related families within the same order (Figure 4b). Conversely, the same embryo type, e.g., Onagrad, has been described for early diverging dicots such as Ranunculales as well as the crown group of Brassicales. Thus, there is no obvious phylogenetic trajectory of embryo types (Figure 4b). The only exception might be the grass (Poales) embryos, which appear to develop so differently that they have been assigned their own embryo type named Gramins or Poad, which is characterized by oblique cell divisions in early embryogenesis (26). Nonetheless, the detailed analysis of cell division patterns might help to get a better perspective on the highly derived embryogenesis of Poales including maize and rice, which are the monocot species whose embryo development has been most-studied genetically and molecularly (as discussed above).

Figure 4Click to view


Alismatales are among the early diverging monocots whose embryogenesis has been described (56). Their embryos conform to the Caryophyllad type, with the AC dividing horizontally, which is followed by two longitudinal divisions. InNajas lacerata(Hydrocharitaceae), the single cotyledon derives from three cells of the upper tier, whereas the fourth cell gives rise to the epicotyl and the shoot meristem (56). The lateral position of the SM in the later-stage embryo is caused by the massive proliferation of the cotyledon-generating cells. Interestingly, the epidermal cell layer is also established by periclinal cell divisions when the (pro)embryo comprises only about 25 cells, which is comparable toArabidopsisand much earlier than in the embryo of Poales. Essentially, the same sequence of developmental events has been reported forSisyrinchium californicum(Iridaceae, Asparagales), another early diverging monocot (56), and also for a more derived monocot,Eichhornia crassipes(Pontederiaceae, Commelinales). Thus, it seems that the grass embryo is highly derived in comparison with other monocot embryos. If this is the case, can we expect genetic and molecular mechanisms to be conserved betweenArabidopsisand grass embryos?
There is not much information available on early embryogenesis in early diverging flowering plants. Several Nymphaeales have been described.Euryale feroxandNymphaea advenareportedly conform to the Asterad type (56). A detailed study of another Nymphaeales species,Trithuria submersa, revealed cell divisions in early embryogenesis resembling those inArabidopsis: The zygote divides asymmetrically and the AC gives rise to the embryo, whereas the BC directly forms the suspensor without further cell division (41) (Figure 4a). The AC divides transversely; the upper tier contributes to the shoot meristem, cotyledons, and hypocotyl; and the lower tier generates the root and root meristem and might also contribute to the hypocotyl. The epidermal layer originates from the upper tier only when the embryo consists of approximately 20 cells.
The zygotes of almost all flowering plant species analyzed divide transversely in the future apical-basal axis. Thus, the first division generates two different lineages that may be exposed to different inputs from their surroundings. Where the plane of division is placed along the apical-basal axis might not be so critical. In Brassicaceae, the zygote elongates approximately threefold (Figure 3a) before the asymmetric division that generates a very small AC. In general, the elongation of the zygote might stabilize the proper positioning of the cell plate so that the transverse cell division occurs by default, i.e., bisecting the longest dimension (30,145,158).
As a rule, the AC gives rise to an upper and a lower tier at the octant stage by dividing once transversely and twice longitudinally. The only exception is the Asterad type, in which the AC generates eight oblong cells by three rounds of longitudinal cell divisions (Figure 4a). Although the sequence of transverse and longitudinal divisions is different between Onagrad and Solanad embryos, the upper and lower tiers give rise to the corresponding parts of the seedling body in the different embryo types. Conversely, although the AC in Solanad and Chenopodiad embryos shares the same sequence of division planes, the lower tiers generate different parts of the seedling body (Figure 4a). Thus, interaction between adjacent cells might be more important than the cell ancestry. Whether the orientation of the cell division plane occurs by default or depends on genetic input is not obvious. InArabidopsis, the longitudinal division of the AC requires auxin response, as inferred from mutant phenotypes. One might speculate that the corresponding auxin response might be delayed in those embryo types in which the AC first undergoes a transverse division. It would be interesting to determine whether the timing of the interrelated shifts in the adjacent expression domains of WOX2 and WOX9 that occur at the octant stage inArabidopsismight be correspondingly altered.
Unfortunately, there is very little functional information about evolutionarily conserved genes that regulate major developmental decisions inArabidopsisembryogenesis. For example, the mere conservation of genes or gene families involved in auxin transport or response or the WOX gene family is not necessarily indicative of the evolutionary maintenance of gene regulatory networks in specific developmental processes. The best-analyzed monocots, rice and maize, are so different that it is not clear at present whether their peculiarities are just that or reflect a generally different developmental strategy in monocots (162).
The past decades have seen enormous progress in the mechanistic analysis of embryo patterning in only a few species, foremostArabidopsisand also tobacco, rice, and maize. However, it is not at all clear to what extent developmental mechanisms are or are not conserved even among flowering plants. It is also urgently necessary to perform more functional studies in grasses to understand the extent of the conservation of molecular players and regulatory networks described inArabidopsis. We see two major ways of moving forward to improve our understanding of embryo development from an evolutionary perspective. One approach would be to identify phylogenetically relevant flowering plant species that are suitable for molecular-genetic analysis akin to that inArabidopsisor rice and maize. A radically different approach might take advantage of recent technological advances such as high-throughput single-cell RNA-seq analysis that could be combined with multiplexed in situ hybridization (89) or 3D intact-tissue RNA sequencing (152). Such methods hold great potential, promising to deliver a high-resolution developmental expression atlas in time and space. One of the main advantages of these methods is that they are not limited by genetic constraints (transformability, generation time, etc.) but only require the accessibility of the material to be studied. We also expect that a lot will be learned by studying nonflowering plant embryos, e.g., from liverworts and mosses likeM. polymorphaandPhyscomitrium patens, respectively. In conclusion, we hope the reader agrees that comparative plant embryogenesis is not only an existing subject of study, as many cell biological processes such as cell activation,oriented cell divisions, and establishment of different cell fates and identities of daughter cells, as well as patterning and morphogenesis take place (30), but also relevant, as plant embryos represent our major and richest source of nutrition. The knowledge generated can be applied, for example, not only to improve the nutrient composition, architecture, and size of embryos but also to plant breeding to generate double-haploid plants and clonal seed production.




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
Work on early embryogenesis in the Dresselhaus lab is supported by the German Research Council (DFG) via SFB960.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


