We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
The foliar microbiome can extend the host plant phenotype by expanding its genomic and metabolic capabilities. Despite increasing recognition of the importance of the foliar microbiome for plant fitness, stress physiology, and yield, the diversity, function, and contribution of foliar microbiomes to plant phenotypic traits remain largely elusive. The recent adoption of high-throughput technologies is helping to unravel the diversityand spatiotemporal dynamics of foliar microbiomes, but we have yet to resolve their functional importance for plant growth, development, and ecology. Here, we focus on the processes that govern the assembly of the foliar microbiome and the potential mechanisms involved in extended plant phenotypes. We highlight knowledge gaps and provide suggestions for new research directions that can propel the field forward. These efforts will be instrumental in maximizing the functional potential of the foliar microbiome for sustainable crop production.
Article metrics loading...
The foliar microbiome can extend the host plant phenotype by expanding its genomic and metabolic capabilities. Despite increasing recognition of the importance of the foliar microbiome for plant fitness, stress physiology, and yield, the diversity, function, and contribution of foliar microbiomes to plant phenotypic traits remain largely elusive. The recent adoption of high-throughput technologies is helping to unravel the diversityand spatiotemporal dynamics of foliar microbiomes, but we have yet to resolve their functional importance for plant growth, development, and ecology. Here, we focus on the processes that govern the assembly of the foliar microbiome and the potential mechanisms involved in extended plant phenotypes. We highlight knowledge gaps and provide suggestions for new research directions that can propel the field forward. These efforts will be instrumental in maximizing the functional potential of the foliar microbiome for sustainable crop production.
The aboveground plant parts including both floral and vegetative foliar tissues, collectively referred to as the phyllosphere, are colonized by a variety of microorganisms including bacteria, fungi, yeasts, protists, and bacteriophages (79). Although the different compartments of the phyllosphere represent the same plant genotype, they typically harbor taxonomically distinct microbial communities (79,144). Here, we focus on microorganisms associated with the leaves and refer to them as the foliar microbiome. Microorganisms inhabit both the surface (i.e., epiphytic) and interior (i.e., endophytic) compartments of leaves, and their impacts on plant traits are wide ranging (137,144). Leaf-colonizing microorganisms can extend host phenotypes in ways that impact plant fitness (25,53). Pathogens that invade and infect leaves are classic examples of the adverse effects that microorganisms can have on plant fitness (e.g.,111). Various commensal leaf microbes can positively influence plant fitness via diverse mechanisms, including growth promotion by hormones, degradation of environmental pollutants, modulation of the plant immune system, and enhancement of biotic and abiotic stress tolerance (135). For example, foliar fungalendophytescan alter growth and survival rates of plant hosts exposed to drought, heat, and salinity (38,117), as well as modulate resistance to pathogens (11). These changes to the plant phenotype can be beneficial, but commensal (i.e., no effect) and parasitic (i.e., reduced growth) relationships are also common and depend on the biotic (e.g., host, microbial community) and abiotic (e.g., stress, resources) conditions (21,37). When the foliar microbiome modifies plant traits, the emergent microbiome-extended phenotype can also shift the plant's niche and change the host plant response to selection. To date, however, the processes that drive the assembly and activity of the foliar microbiome remain poorly understood.
The composition and abundance of the foliar microbiome are key to its effects on the host, underlining the need to understand the mechanisms that govern the assembly and spatiotemporal dynamics of these communities. Ecological theory suggests that community composition results from a combination of niche and stochastic processes, including local and regional species pools, dispersal, and filtering by local biotic and abiotic environments (144) (Figure 1). In this context, Leveau (79) depicted the concurrent processes that determine the assembly of the foliar microbiome, emphasizing the environment, plant genotype, and functional traits of the microbial colonizers to exploit leaf-specific resources and to withstand stresses. The primary source for foliar microorganisms is often thought to be local soil or litter. Support for this comes from Bai et al. (6), who found extensive overlap in both taxonomy and genome-encoded traits between the leaf and root bacteria ofArabidopsis thaliana. Moreover, by applying synthetic communities (SynComs) of defined bacterial species to axenically grownArabidopsisplants, bacterial assemblies were formed that resembled the composition of indigenous microbiota on their cognate host organs. Additional support for soil as an important source of foliar microbiomes comes from a study on foliar bacteria inPanicum virgatum, where taxa based on 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) from the leaf almost entirely overlapped with those in soil at a single site over multiple time points (40). However, leaf fungal communities based on internal transcribed spacer (ITS) rRNA from the same host species only shared approximately 50% of their taxa with soils at landscape scales (76), suggesting a larger role for fungal plant-to-plant dispersal. Stochasticity in dispersal is likely to increase with distance, but even for local source pools, some degree of stochasticity will determine which taxa arrive on the leaf and when.

Figure 1Click to view


After their arrival on the leaf, microorganisms face host and environmental factors that can act as an assembly filter by either supporting or preventing establishment (Figure 1). Such filtering is consistent with communities that track leaf traits over time, as well as with repeated associations of microorganisms across host replicates and seasons (40,89). Host filtering may be passive, with microbial taxa succeeding or failing based on the suitability of leaf conditions or ability to handle the host immune system. Active filtering may also occur via resource provisioning or other chemical attractants and/or inhibitors produced by the plant (33). Arrival order can play an important role, with priority effects determining both foliar microbiome community composition and host phenotypes, such as susceptibility to disease (78). Considering the importance of a robust foliar microbiome for controlling plant diseases, Morella et al. (96) recently conducted a successive passaging experiment with five genotypes of tomato and showed that selection for a reduced but stable foliar microbiome is indeed possible after four successive passages of 45 days. How the stable foliar microbiome contributed to host health was not determined in this study, but this community coalescence experiment highlighted that the late successional bacterial microbiome of the tomato leaves was robust against invasion by the original bacterial communities. Finally, microbe–microbe interactions can further shift microbiome effects on the host phenotype (21), leading to substantial dependence on community composition that can undermine functional predictions. Identifying the mechanisms underlying host–microbiome interactions will be needed to shed more light on how microbiome composition translates into extended host phenotypes.
The mechanisms underlying extended host phenotypes are varied but can include microbial production of metabolites, microbe–plant signaling, andepigenetics(135). For example, endophytes may directly suppress pathogens by competition (119), hyperparasitism (11), or antibiosis (18) or may indirectly do so by triggering host resistance (11) or producing metabolites and volatiles (18,58). These are not mutually exclusive, and multiple mechanisms for microbe-mediated phenotypes can operate simultaneously or in sequence.
In cases where the microbiome enhances disease resistance, recent findings indicate that plant microbiota members trigger the immune responses of the plant host (140). Induced systemic resistance (ISR) is well described inArabidopsisand mostly refers to microbiota-mediated stimulation of the innate, systemic immune system (108). Several gaps in the understanding of mechanisms underlying ISR still prevail, but the plant transcription factor MYB72 is known to play a major role in its regulation (128,138). Beneficial microbes with ISR-eliciting properties include severalphyllosphere-colonizing microorganisms (100,116). In contrast, however, some microbiome assemblies may enhance disease (11). As the classic disease triangle would foresee, disease severity is not only predicted by host susceptibility and pathogen virulence but also varies with environmental conditions—the plant microbiome being a fourth dimension that interacts with all three. In a recent study on the wheat leaf pathogenZymoseptoria tritici, Seybold et al. (130) revealed an opposite phenomenon, referred to as systemic induced susceptibility (SIS), in which the systemic immune response is suppressed. Based on coinfection assays, the fungus-induced changes in the metabolome correlated with changes in the wheat leaf microbiome, rendering the other plant leaves more vulnerable to subsequent infections. Chen et al. (17) further discovered thatArabidopsismutants defective in pattern-triggered immune signaling and MIN7 vesicle trafficking pathways exhibited spontaneous leaf necrosis and chlorosis, which was associated with a shift in the composition of the endophytic leaf microbiota and negative effects on leaf health in microbiota transplantations. The balance between ISR and SIS probably depends on the foliar microbiome composition and on microbial traits that change host susceptibility.
Other plant phenotypes are stimulated by the expression of microbial-encoded traits. Whole-genome transcriptional investigations performed on plant-associated microbiota typically reveal alterations in the global gene expression profile that assist in improving plant fitness, nutrient acquisition, stress response, pathogen defenses, and metabolic reactions (80). Defense genes and carbohydrate-active enzymes are among those observed to be upregulated by plants colonized with beneficial endophytic or epiphytic microbiota (4,92,120,148). As an example, transcriptome profiling ofArabidopsisleaves colonized bySphingomonasaffected approximately 400 genes, including signaling and defense responses that mediate protection against aPseudomonaspathogen (143). These studies highlight the intricate interplay between microbiome homeostasis and plant phenotype.
Epigenetic mechanisms may also play a role in the microbiome-extended plant phenotype. In plants, epigenetic-induced phenotypic variation allows the plant to rapidly adjust to environmental change (46). Although little is known about epigenetic effects underlying host–microbiome interactions, modifications in plant–microbiome symbiosis development were established through changes in DNA adenine methylation patterns (54). Since microbiome-associated gene expression alterations are known to impact the plant phenotype, it seems reasonable to propose the epigenome of the plant-associated microbiota as another possible driver of the extended plant phenotype.
Finally, specific plant traits might be obtained throughhorizontal gene transfer (HGT)from microbial symbionts. HGT is traditionally recognized as a common force driving evolution in prokaryotes, but HGT also appears to occur more frequently in eukaryotes than originally reported. Interestingly, the transfer and subsequent maintenance of beneficial genes from bacterial or fungal donors to recipient organisms, such as plants, might represent another potential mechanism for microbiota-mediated extension of the plant phenotype (147). Integration of tumor-inducing genes fromAgrobacteriumspp. into the sweet potato genome is a well-documented case of naturally occurring HGT from bacteria to crop plants (69). Similarly, thefbh7gene that confers wheat resistance toFusariumhead blight via mycotoxin detoxification appears to be the result of HGT from the endophytic fungusEpichloë(147).
Shifts in host plant traits generated by the microbiome appear to represent an extended phenotype upon which selection can act. However, when considering microbiome-extended phenotypes that benefit plant fitness, the question remains of how those beneficial relationships might be maintained in the face of inevitable cheaters. One possibility is intrinsically aligned benefits, which occur when microorganisms modify their own local environment in ways that also benefit the plant. Thereby, microbial and plant fitness are aligned without evolutionary change. For example, many microbes produce extracellular compounds that serve as protective osmolytes in response to osmotic stress, which could simultaneously benefit a plant experiencing drought stress (24). When such a microorganism enhances plant survival as a byproduct of its own activity, traditional infectious disease models predict its rapid spread through the population (44).
Evolutionary theory, however, suggests that maintenance of benefits requires eitherpartner choiceorpartner fidelitymechanisms (Figure 1). Classic partner choice mechanisms involve host discrimination of microbial partners, whereas fidelity requires cotransmission across generations (123). Partner choice may occur through active recruitment and filtering of microbial colonists or preferential allocation to beneficial symbionts. Both recruitment via exudates and differential plant allocation to symbionts that differ in resource provisioning have been demonstrated in roots (56,127), but empirical studies in leaves are still needed. Although some benefits may be difficult to discern, the recent discovery of nitrogen fixation by foliarendophytesin pine could provide a parallel to legume–rhizobia interaction studies (99). Moreover, experimental passaging studies demonstrate that host-mediated selection on the phyllosphere microbiome is possible without coevolution (96).
Fidelity mechanisms may be less likely given horizontal transmission of the majority of foliar microbiome taxa; nevertheless, repeated interactions and microbiome heritability could occur by limited dispersal of both host and microbes or strong host genetic control. Current evidence suggests limited genotype associations, large genotype-by-environment interactions, and low heritability for most microbial taxa (44). However, this may be sufficient if genotype associations and high heritability occur for microbial taxa that provide large, stable effects on the microbiome-extended host phenotype. For example, only 5 to 12% of microbial operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were associated with host genotype and showed some heritability inArabidopsisrosettes from 200 accessions planted in four common garden sites over two years (9).
Because of their ability to extend host phenotypes, foliar microbiomes are increasingly being targeted as potential tools for sustainable crop production systems (121,137) (Table 1). Here, we emphasize examples in the most commonly studied microbiome-extended phenotypes: disease resistance, abiotic stress tolerance, and plant growth promotion.
Overview of recent studies demonstrating the effects of foliar microbiomes (“Microbial modifiers”) on three classes of crop phenotypes: disease resistance, abiotic stress tolerance, and growth promotion

Microbial use in the biocontrol of pathogens is by far the most developed field (e.g.,114), and, indeed, screening of bacteria and fungi for antagonistic potential against plant pathogens has a long history (e.g.,63,114). Many studies translate interactions observed in vitro to gnotobiotic or greenhouse assays (118), but field evidence is much scarcer. The majority of studies find some reduction in disease severity (Table 1), and some indicate that this is caused by induced resistance pathways or other changes in disease-related gene expression (120). Additionally, Ambrose & Belanger (4) demonstrated that altered defense-related expression of the plant combined with expressed fungal molecules work together in battling disease.
Apart from disease suppression, the foliar microbiome can also affect plant physiology, for example, related to drought, heat, and salinity (Table 1). In some cases where single isolates were tested, the mechanisms have been clearly identified, with phyllosphere bacteria changing leaf traits related to maintenance of photosynthesis and protection from oxidative damage (68). Nevertheless, there is a wide degree of variation in how seemingly similar taxa will affect the crop stress phenotype. In the bioenergy cropP. virgatum, drought response varied across a range of fungal endophytes isolated from a rain gradient (38). In some cases, variation in the resulting phenotype may be due to the origin of the microbiome. For example, Rodriguez et al. (117) demonstrated that strains conferred benefits related only to the selective regime from which they were isolated (salt versus heat), an effect they coined “habitat-adapted symbiosis.”
Although plant growth promotion is often associated with the rhizosphere, the leaf microbiome can also enhance plant growth (Table 1). Leaf epiphytic bacteria of crops have been most commonly studied in this context, and often the increase in biomass or yield is related to production of indole acetic acid (IAA) or other growth hormones produced by the strains (1). Auxins such as IAA are important for plant growth, but they are also used as signals by microbiome members (112), suggesting that additional work is required to parse the mechanistic role of auxins in the microbiome-extended plant phenotype.
It should be emphasized, however, that most of the extended plant phenotypes reported to date are extrapolated from studies where single microbial strains, isolated from the leaf surface or interior, are reintroduced onto leaves and challenged with the biotic or abiotic stressors. In fact, very few studies to date have studied the effects of coinoculations or real indigenous complex microbiomes on plant phenotypes. An exception is the work by Ritpitakphong et al. (116), where entire microbiomes were washed from plants and reintroduced to rescue susceptibleArabidopsismutants from the fungal pathogenBotrytis cinereavia induced resistance. Others have examined simple combinations of isolates (e.g.,1) but found only a few that were beneficial. Future work should resolve the so-called minimal microbiomes needed to recreate beneficial extended phenotypes in crops.
An additional consideration with the current field of crop microbiomes is that beneficial effects observed in vitro and in the greenhouse are often lost when tested in situ (45). Some failures likely result from variable environmental conditions and interactions with existing members of the microbiome that are not accounted for in greenhouse trials and that offset actions of the introduced microbes. Other functions can be lost through lab passaging in culture, as the strains acclimate or adapt to the culture environment. Thus, to propel the field forward in ways that will benefit sustainable agriculture will require integrated observational and experimental efforts of composition and function that combine interactions between microbiomes and plant genotypes (7) with variation in environmental conditions (5) and their spatiotemporal dynamics (45).
Plant domestication has contributed substantially to a more productive and continuous food supply by altering plant phenotypic traits. However, domestication also reduced plant genetic diversity (22) and was accompanied by shifts in habitat and the concomitant overuse of pesticides and fertilizers to provide protection against pests and diseases and to promote stable high yields. In fact, most areas of crop production are disconnected from the regions where the crops’ wild relatives originated. In this context, Pérez-Jaramillo et al. (107) postulated that plant domestication may have led to a depletion of beneficial microorganisms and functions. Most studies conducted to date have looked into the effects of domestication on the rhizosphere microbiome (22), but recent studies are also considering how domestication affects thephyllospheremicrobiome. Coleman‐Derr et al. (19) observed lower bacterial and fungal diversity in the phyllosphere of cultivatedAgave tequilanathan of the native speciesAgave salmianaandAgave deserti. In wheat leaves, the domesticatedTriticum aestivumhad lower bacterial richness compared to its wild ancestors (Triticum urartuandTriticum boeoticum), but fungal richness did not differ (43). Therefore, next steps must resolve which components of the leaf microbiome are depleted with domestication and if these depleted taxa constitute a functionally important component of the microbiome of wild plants in their native habitats.
Microbial transplantation is one approach to examine how foliar microbiomes affect function in modern crops compared to their wild relatives. For example, Llorens et al. (83) found that leaf endophytes from wheat-related wild goatgrass (Aegilops sharonensis) inoculated on modern wheat varieties increased crop performance under water-stressed conditions. Interestingly, two of the isolated endophytes were selected because of their high abundance in goatgrass, while they were not detected in leaves of modern wheat varieties. Another study using the same model system concluded that wild grass relatives are likely to be a major resource for beneficial microbiome taxa (103). These exciting, yet descriptive, observations await further validation and identification of the underlying modes of action and mechanisms of coevolution and assembly of foliar microbiomes. In the long run, this fundamental knowledge will be highly instrumental for developing new strategies of plant breeding that take into account the taxonomic diversity and functional potential of the foliar microbiome.
Understanding and managing the phyllosphere microbiome will require substantial additional knowledge. Here, we focus on three key areas that we believe can be addressed in the immediate future. First, information on microbiome heritability will identify plant genetic control and likely target pathways for breeding. Second, microbe–microbe interactions that affect assembly and function are critical for any inoculation efforts in real-world systems. Third, the appropriate scales at which microbiomes should be addressed must be considered.
Heritability, in the broad sense, refers to the portion of variance in a phenotypic trait that is explained by host genes, meaning that microbiome heritability can be understood via analysis of microbial taxa and host genetic associations (7). For the phyllosphere microbiome,genome-wide association studies (GWASs)pointed to plant loci associated with defense and cell wall integrity (51), with significant associations between the abundance of specific microbial taxa and either pectin-related enzymes or ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter genes. Another GWAS by Wallace et al. (146) on 300 maize genotypes suggested that only a few bacterial clades were significantly heritable in the phyllosphere. At the functional level, however, a larger number of metabolic traits were heritable with a significant overrepresentation of short-chain carbon metabolism, secretion, and nitrotoluene degradation. These initial studies exemplify that GWAS can be a promising approach to identify the association between plant genetic variation and foliar microbiome composition, but additional studies are needed to understand whether there are any generalizable relationships in microbiome heritability. In this context, a workflow was presented by Beilsmith et al. (7) to resolve the plant genes and traits involved inmicrobiome assemblyand evolution.
To date, our understanding of the effects of microbial interactions on plant microbiome assembly and host phenotypes remains sparse. Past and present research has focused on cooperative interactions between plant microbiota members and nutritional or metabolic interdependencies, i.e., syntrophic exchange of metabolites among microorganisms to ensure survival in nutrient-poor environments (97). Signaling in multispecies microbial consortia can also initiate collective behaviors that gauge cell density and activate specific processes, such as biofilm generation (36), that can ultimately affect both community assembly and function. However, whether these interactions determine foliar microbiome assembly and function in situ remains to be discovered.
Competitive and antagonistic interactions among plant microbiota members include competition for limited resources, contact-dependent killing, predation, and secretion of metabolites (including volatiles) that target the growth of microbial opponents (42). Microbes will compete when they occupy the same niche. For example, fungal leafendophyteswith shared stress or metabolite traits were more likely to compete, resulting in subadditive effects on plant host growth and drought tolerance (21). Antagonism is also more likely to occur between closely related and ecologically similar microorganisms (122) and is often exploited for biological control of plant pathogens (65).
Predatory interactions with lytic bacteriophages (phages) can further shape the composition and function of plant-associated microbial communities (67) but remain a much-overlooked component of plant microbiomes. As in macroecological predator–prey interactions, phages can regulate populations of both beneficial and pathogenic microorganisms and change the structure and function of foliar microbial communities (95). Although the effects of phages on microbiome assembly are still poorly understood, negative frequency–dependent infection in a kill-the-winner strategy (90) can support higher diversity in the microbiome with putative concomitant effects on the host phenotype. Few studies have investigated these dynamics in aboveground tissues likely because of the lower abundance of bacteria and phages relative to soil or rhizosphere environments (110). By leveraging known ecological concepts for predation, competition, and antagonism, we may be able to more quickly develop our understanding of leaf microbe–microbe interactions.
One critical question is whether the diverse foliar microbiome should be treated as a single microbiological entity or as (a composite of interacting) individual taxa. Most traditional theories and models address pairwise interactions, which may be justified in cases where one microbial species dominates the effects on the host phenotype. Recent work parallels pairwise plant–microbe interactions by modeling the microbiome as a single unit (47), but the conditions under which this may be appropriate remain a subject of debate (e.g.,139). Moreover, interactions among strains are clearly an important component of the microbiome-extended host phenotype (see Section 3.2). Although additional work is needed to identify the appropriate scale of microbiome effects with heritability as noted above, comparisons of pairwise and single-unit models with diffuse evolution models (132) may facilitate our understanding of how microbiome-extended phenotypes evolve.
Our emphasis on microbial taxa may be altogether misplaced if functional redundancy is common in the foliar microbiome. Functional redundancy is well known in soil microbial communities, where high spatial heterogeneity in the habitat combined with phylogenetic niche conservatism are likely to support functional overlap among microbial lineages (57,145). High levels of functional redundancy were also found in tropical tree phyllosphere microbiomes, with approximately 50% of protein functional domains shared across four different host species despite high taxonomic divergence (71). Similarly, in maize, 200 microbial metabolic functions were associated with plant genotype, but only five bacterial clades showed such a relationship (146), suggesting selection on function rather than taxa. We are only beginning to understand function in host-associated foliar microbiomes (27), but we expect functional redundancy will play an important role. In particular, functional redundancy in the foliar microbial community will allow for host filtering on microbiome function rather than on taxa. Redundancy may thus act to stabilize microbiome effects on extended host phenotypes that might be more variable if they relied only on taxon-specific interactions. A shift from amplicons to combined shotgun metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and metabolomics as well as a greater focus on experimental tests of function will be needed to clarify the appropriate level of focus.
To address both near-term and long-term knowledge gaps requires advances in how we study microbiomes (Figure 2). In particular, we focus on methods that go beyond taxonomic identities to discover functionality, including various metagenomic and metatranscriptomic methods, metabolomics, and isotope tracer approaches.

Figure 2Click to view


High-throughput omics technologies, such as amplicon sequencing of rRNA genes, shotgun metagenome sequencing, and transcriptome profiling, have been used to assess and describe the structure and functions of complex microbiomes. The metagenomics approach is particularly useful to elucidate potential functions of taxa in the microbial community and detect noncultivable microorganisms (113), which constitute as much as 99.5% of the entire environmental microbiota (84). Recent improvements inmetagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs)provide an additional advantage to the shotgun approach (104). Finally, dual RNA sequencing transcriptome approaches allow for simultaneous assessment of host and microbiome gene expression (16,20); however, these have largely focused on single pathogens and must be extended to metatranscriptome approaches to capture gene expression in the full plant-associated microbial community.
Nevertheless, there are barriers to effective application of omics approaches to plant microbiomes. Amplicon metagenomics can be dominated by host chloroplast, mitochondrial, or ribosomal sequences (86). This can be remedied to an extent by primer choice (152), but, in many cases, approaches such as the use of peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) are needed to limit plant amplicons by blocking primer access to unwanted plant target sequences (35). The same problem arises in shotgun metagenomics and transcriptomics, which can be somewhat ameliorated by depletion or enrichment strategies to limit host contamination (113), as well as improvements in bioinformatics tools to identify and remove contaminant sequences (91). Others have separated microbial cells from plant cells by simple washing of leaf surfaces (70), density centrifugation (16), or combined chemical and physical separation (102). These efforts improve microbial sequencing, but bias in separation still needs to be investigated, particularly for filamentous fungi.
Despite its enormous utility, metagenomics does not provide actual isolates for further functional validation and downstream analyses. In contrast, cultivation of plant-associated strains allows for an extensive assessment of the microbial community function by comparative genomics, assembly and applications of synthetic communities and strain interactions, and generation of genetic mutants to identify functional mechanisms. Today, optimized incubation conditions along with various techniques, such as double encapsulation, microfluidic streak plate (MSP), isolation chips (ichips), diffusion chambers, and hollow-fiber membrane chambers (HFMCs) allow in situ and high-throughput cultivation. In addition, ongoing development of culture media, such as low-nutrient media, plant-based culture media, and media containing different stress conditions, continuously adds to the toolbox of strategies applied to improve the culturability of environmental microbiomes (124). Finally, by combining amplicon and metagenome sequencing with targeted culturing approaches, we can better estimate cultivable plant-associated taxa and characterize both the presence and function of the microbiome. For example, Bai et al. (6) demonstrated that more than half of the bacteria present in theArabidopsisrhizosphere andphyllospherecan be cultured based on 16S rRNA gene OTUs from the same environment, which is far more than expected from the general environmental estimates noted earlier (84).
The majority of microbial interactions, as well as their effects on the host, are chemical in nature, including esters, alcohols, phenolics, indoles, terpenes, lipids, peptides, and polysaccharides (74). Yet the chemical components leading to microbiome effects on plant resiliency are far from understood (93), and the enormous diversity in metabolomics profiles can make it difficult to identify key metabolites that extend the plant phenotype. Plant secondary metabolites have been shown to be affected by microbes, which also produce both secondary metabolites and volatile organic compounds (mVOCs) in the plant, but their connection to the plant phenotype remains largely speculative (21,59). A primary challenge to progress in metabolomics is the identification of specific compounds and their functions. For example, recent databases have been compiled for exometabolites and mVOCs (66,77), but these remain limited: At present only <10% of identified mVOCs have been associated with a function, and many mVOCs have not yet been identified.
To further capture the chemical complexity of the foliar microbiome requires more selective separation methods (61); more accurate detection strategies, particularly nondestructive and real-time (151); improved signal-processing tools (3); better compound identification (133); and more expansive compound databases (66,77). Finally, to link those compounds to the extended plant phenotype, we need to identify both the microorganisms and target compounds putatively responsible for a specific phenotype (134), link those compounds to their underlying genes (30), and develop both microbial and plant mutants with up- and downregulated compound production to demonstrate which partner is responsible for that function (2).
More mechanistic studies may shed light on appropriate taxa and chemistries to target based on microbial function in complex host-associated microbiomes. Stable isotope probing (SIP) of DNA can be used to identify key microorganisms responsible for assimilation of substrates highly enriched with18O or13C, thereby linking microbial identity to specific biogeochemical processes in situ (52). Recent work has also used SIP for metaproteomics (64). Although the SIP method has been extensively applied to soil and rhizosphere microbial communities, this approach was only recently used in leaves to identify isoprene-degrading bacteria (15,72). An alternative is the use of radioisotopes; for example,13N was used to detect and image N-fixation by foliarendophytes(99). In complex communities, isotope approaches are a robust method to explicitly link microbial identity to function, and often to functional rates, making them the current gold standard despite the difficulty and expense of implementation.
Understanding microbiomes across scales that vary from the leaf to the field requires the adoption of methods already in use for plant phenomics (Figure 2). Here we focus on how imaging methods can be used to link microbiomes to plant phenotypes and themachine learning and deep learningmodels that will enable prediction.
At the tissue and cellular levels, detection of the microbiome both on and beneath the surface of plants can also be achieved via microscopic and spectroscopic imaging methods (32). Destructive methods such as scanning electron microscopy, X-ray computed tomography, and confocal scanning laser microscopy allow for highspatial resolutionin two dimensions or three dimensions to capture processes such as pathogen movement into plants (13,14,153). Coupled with fluorescent probes, confocal imaging can even be used to detect specific microbial taxa or gene expression from specific microorganisms (106). However, these methods cannot be repeatedly used on the same tissue. An alternative is Raman spectroscopy, which measures biochemical signatures using inelastic scattered light (Raman scattering) to obtain a highly specific signal (32). Raman spectroscopy has been used to detect pathogens on maize, and the handheld devices used for this method make field measurements feasible (31). Similarly, the laser biospeckle activity method takes advantage of scattered light patterns from a laser source to detect movement inside living tissues, which has been used to identify colonization by foliar endophytes in situ (29). These methods are expected to be useful for studies of mechanisms in the microbiome-extended phenotype. However, scaling up to agricultural ecosystems will require linking mechanistic signatures from the tissue level to phenotyping at the field level.
Studies of plant genomes to phenomes have greatly benefited from the development of low-cost, high-throughput imaging methods, including automated and nondestructive measurements with high spatial, temporal, andspectral resolution(41). Imaging cameras can be handheld, mounted on ground-based vehicles, or mounted on airborne vehicles, allowing for different scales of measurements. Imaging methods, including red-, green-, and blue-band in standard color photography (RGB); multispectral; hyperspectral; thermal; laser scanning via light detecting and ranging (LiDAR); and fluorescence, can detect a wide range of leaf and canopy traits such as plant height, morphology, leaf area, chlorophyll content, and water stress (23). However, for plot-level image phenotyping, data sourced from satellites are currently not of sufficient spatial resolution to be practically applicable for analysis. The recording of images can range from nonchallenging, with simple RGB imaging, to potentially very cumbersome, with, e.g., hyperspectral imaging when artificial lighting is needed or when windy conditions and long acquisition times give overlapping scanlines. Although analysis of imaging data can be challenging, both spectral characteristics for vegetative indices and three-dimensional models (e.g., from two-dimensionally derived point clouds) have been successfully used to measure important plant traits such as biomass, nitrogen content, and grain yield (136). The microbiome, however, is largely missing from these measurements.
The vast majority of imaging methods for phenotyping that include a microbial component are focused on pathogens (88). Disease can be identified based on visible microbial structures or symptoms, but imaging may also detect underlying chemical or structural changes that are not visible. For example, solar-induced fluorescence imaging has been used with unmanned aerial vehicles for the phenotyping of fungal wilt pathogens in olive trees, by detecting crown temperature and pigment content (12). The development of imaging methods for beneficial foliar microbiomes will require a deeper understanding of how their presence affects light interception, transmission, reflectance, and other optical properties that reflect biophysical and biochemical interactions with the leaf. References containing purely microbial content are desirable for signal decomposition (8) to calibrate any detection in field-derived images, where mixed pixels that capture more than one desired area or subject are unavoidable. Although this is likely to be a challenge given the spatial and temporal diversity of the leaf microbiome, we expect that the identification of key mechanisms driving beneficial aspects of the microbiome-extended phenotype will allow for imaging development comparable to that achieved for pathogens.
Nevertheless, this will require the development of models to relate images to plant microbiome traits. Such traits may be community-wide, such as total microbial load, or specific to individual strains shown to have outsized effects on host phenotype, requiring more tailored spectral indicators. Whereas indices using simple algebraic expressions of various spectral bands are well defined in terms of measurements, their relation to plant status and yield may be very complex, and that complexity will no doubt extend to the indices for microbiome traits. Often, principal component analysis and regression methods are used (82). Machine learning has been used to discover the complex relations in specific cases that relate hyperspectral imaging to plant status and also in some cases on wheat (81). Still, to our knowledge, the relation to the plant microbiome remains to be discovered.
In foliar microbiomes, a major challenge will be to predict how the microbiome affects plant phenotypes, such as crop yield and resilience.Machine learning and deep learningmethods can do this by coupling diverse data sets. The increasing amount of data sources as well as the size of the individual data sets enable the possibility of harnessing recent developments in machine learning and deep learning. Deep learning is inspired by the biological neural network of the brain, and neural networks have been applied in a wide array of fields within the last 50 years (for an overview, see75). Importantly, neural networks can learn nonlinear relationships in the data, which makes them exceptionally good at identifying previously unseen patterns (e.g., new hypotheses). This has been shown in numerous examples where these algorithms, training on large data sets, have shown state-of-the-art performance with biological data (e.g.,87,109).
In microbial communities, deep learning methods to date have been primarily applied to shotgun metagenomics data andMAGs. The large amount of genome fragments that are reconstructed using de novo assembly approaches are amenable to machine learning through metagenomics binning. Current approaches such as MetaBAT2 (60), MaxBin2 (150), and, recently, a deep learning method (101) have enabled the reconstruction of hundreds of thousands of MAGs from diverse environments (104). From these MAGs, it is possible to detail differences between the microbial taxa, community associations, structures, and potential functions. Furthermore, such data can even inform about the viral composition of the communities (115), adding a new aspect in community analyses and understanding. Finally, long-read sequencing using Pacific Bioscience or Oxford Nanopore technologies provides a new means of studying and reconstructing microbial genomes directly from in situ communities (98).
The increase in coupled data from plant genetics, microbiomes, metabolomics, environment, and imaging linked to plant phenotype information makes deep learning an intriguing approach for predicting crop yield and resilience in the field. Additionally, unsupervised learning of the combined data sets through representation learning with deep neural nets such as generative adversarial networks (39) and variational autoencoders (62) allows for simultaneous data integration and hypothesis generation. Therefore, such networks can integrate existing mechanistic models (e.g.,49) with new multiomics, environmental, and imaging data to generate a more holistic view of crop yield. Additionally, temporal aspects can be modelled using time-resolved networks such as long short-term memory networks (50) to predict cluster or trajectory memberships, which can be used in the field for resilience prediction and to design interventions. Such models could be used to predict at a given state (e.g., sample time) what the probabilities and intervention options are for a crop to follow a healthy or high-yield trajectory. To validate such models, the hypotheses and models can be tested and fine-tuned using conventional experiments and controlled greenhouse experiments.
Given the above documented beneficial effects of added individual components or consortia of the foliar microbiome, the potential for gain in targeted manipulation is similarly high. Agricultural microbiome products are currently a $2.9-billion market, which is only expected to grow in the future (131). The majority of common commercially available inoculants focus on roots and soils for nutritional enhancement or disease suppression. Aboveground, the biological control market is dominated byBacillus thuringiensis(Bt) products. Bt targets lepidopterans (105), but, for most farmers, pest control is still mainly a matter of choosing the right crop variety combined with applications of synthetic pesticides. Entomopathogenic fungi that live endophytically in plant leaves are also common biological products in agriculture. According to Vidal & Jaber (142), more than 800 entomopathogenic fungi have been commercialized worldwide, but the majority are based on only two:Beauveria bassianaandMetarhizium anisopliae. More recent products that target stress include BioEnsure®inoculants from Adaptive Symbiotic Technologies (85) that increase yields under drought stress by 25 to 80%. Similarly, Indigo Cotton™ inoculates seeds with a foliar fungalendophyteisolated from Texas cotton fields that also increases yield under water stress by 11 to 14% in West Texas fields (55).
To develop consistently effective microbiome products is a daunting task, as the manipulability and persistence of beneficial effects across seasons, plant genotypes, and environmental variability is largely unknown (34). For example, many organisms have been positively tested for their efficacy to controlFusariumhead blight in wheat, but very few have been transformed into commercial products because of inconsistent field performance (105,118). Also, the foliar environment is far from closed, and any given microbiome in time or space will continually be bombarded with new arrivals, potentially offsetting an otherwise positive balance.
Managing the foliar microbiome can therefore take two routes: (a) inoculation with specific strains or consortia or (b) managing the indigenous microbiome by selecting germplasm and management regimes to optimize beneficial interactions between plant and microbiome (see Section 6.2). Effective manipulation of the foliar microbiome can be preemptive, where seeds are inoculated with microbes that provide known benefits under expected conditions, such as dryland agriculture. Alternatively, inoculation can be reactive, with foliar applications only in the face of unexpected conditions, such as a rise in pathogens or short-term summer droughts, that can affect yield. Preemptive treatments must be able to persist despite new arrivals—priority effects via seed inoculation should support this (45,78). Reactive treatments, in contrast, must be able to invade an existing resident microbiome, which may be possible when conditions favor the growth of the treatment microbe more than that of residents. For both treatment types, resilience to potential environmental variations within the geographic region where the product is used will make the product more broadly useful.
Finally, monitoring is essential. As added components will most likely be included in a species-rich consortia, specific molecular markers can help to evaluate the success of any inoculation treatment as well as track potential unwanted side effects. Alternative methods of imaging microbiomes in situ are in early developmental stages (see Sections 5.1–5.2). See also Parnell et al. (105) for a discussion of practical aspects such as formulation, shelf life, persistence, and cost.
The plant phenome is determined by the complex interactions between a genome (G) and varying environmental conditions (E). In agriculture, different crop management practices (P) add to this complexity. For example, environmental conditions and crop management practices cover a broad range of controlled and uncontrolled variables, which modify the plant's ability to acquire resources, reproduce, and resist biotic and abiotic constraints. Traditional plant breeding is a targeted process of selecting new phenotypes among thousands of genotypes for specific traits that perform under varying environmental conditions and different crop management systems, or G×E×P. However, for beneficial microbiome-extended phenotypes, some component of the microbiome (M) also plays a role, and thus a G×E×P×M framework (47) may improve the selection process.
For decades, crop breeders have selected genotypes to resist pathogens; tolerate abiotic stressors; and improve nutrient, water, and radiation use efficiency. Yet many of those phenotypes are further enhanced by the microbiome, including shifts in phenotypic plasticity (38). Selection for specific aspects of beneficial plant–microbiome interactions may therefore be an important strategy for breeding in the future (141). However, in some cases, plant–microbe interactions can generate phenotypes that are not associated with variation in the host genome, presenting difficulty for traditional plant breeding methods in selecting improved genotypes (149). This may be partly due to the lost microbial diversity due to domestication and selection described earlier (see Section 2.2) (107). Based on recent advances inGWASs, an alternative may be to identify genomic regions harboring microbial recruitment traits and to reintroduce these traits into modern crop varieties.
Overall, a better mechanistic understanding of microbiome-extended phenotypes is required to identify targets of selection that enhance plants’ ability to foster favorable interactions. Research into the complexity underlying extended phenotypes using new methods of omics, imaging, and deep learning should identify genes and gene networks and facilitate identification of favorable plant traits and genotypes. Understanding the genetic and epigenetic bases for the microbiome-extended phenotype will be key to designing future breeding for microbiome-mediated traits.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
All authors developed the ideas and contributed to writing and editing the manuscript. Specific contributions to the sections were as follows: C.V.H. contributed to Sections 1.1, 1.3, 3.3, and 6.1; R.K. contributed to Sections 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, and 6.1; J.M.R. contributed to Sections 1.1, 1.2, 2.2, and 3.1; L.R. contributed to Sections 1.2 and 4.3; S.C. contributed to Sections 5.2 and 6.2; S.R. contributed to Section 5.3; J.H.C. contributed to Section 4.2; A.B.D. contributed to Section 5.1; J.C.W. contributed to Section 5.2; M.N. contributed to Section 5.2; G.B.G. contributed to Section 6.2; and L.H.H. contributed to Sections 3.2 and 4.1.Table 1was assembled by R.K. and C.V.H.Figure 1was developed by J.C.W. and edited by C.V.H. The entire manuscript was edited by C.V.H. and J.M.R.
We thank Ross Sozzani for the opportunity to develop the ideas in this manuscript.Figure 2was generously created by Je-Seung Jeon [Netherlands Institute of Ecology (NIOO-KNAW)]. The authors were supported by the Novo Nordisk Foundation (grant NNF19SA0059348).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


