We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Cotton is not only the world's most important natural fiber crop, but it is also an ideal system in which to study genome evolution, polyploidization, and cell elongation. With the assembly of five different cotton genomes, a cotton-specific whole-genome duplication with an allopolyploidization process that combined the A- and D-genomes became evident. All existing A-genomes seemed to originate from the A0-genome as a common ancestor, and several transposable element bursts contributed to A-genome size expansion and speciation. The ethylene production pathway is shown to regulate fiber elongation. A tip-biased diffuse growth mode and several regulatory mechanisms, including plant hormones, transcription factors, and epigenetic modifications, are involved in fiber development. Finally, we describe the involvement of the gossypol biosynthetic pathway in the manipulation of herbivorous insects, the role ofGoPGFin gland formation, and host-induced gene silencing for pest and disease control. These new genes, modules, and pathways will accelerate the genetic improvement of cotton.
Article metrics loading...
Cotton is not only the world's most important natural fiber crop, but it is also an ideal system in which to study genome evolution, polyploidization, and cell elongation. With the assembly of five different cotton genomes, a cotton-specific whole-genome duplication with an allopolyploidization process that combined the A- and D-genomes became evident. All existing A-genomes seemed to originate from the A0-genome as a common ancestor, and several transposable element bursts contributed to A-genome size expansion and speciation. The ethylene production pathway is shown to regulate fiber elongation. A tip-biased diffuse growth mode and several regulatory mechanisms, including plant hormones, transcription factors, and epigenetic modifications, are involved in fiber development. Finally, we describe the involvement of the gossypol biosynthetic pathway in the manipulation of herbivorous insects, the role ofGoPGFin gland formation, and host-induced gene silencing for pest and disease control. These new genes, modules, and pathways will accelerate the genetic improvement of cotton.
Cotton belongs to the genusGossypiumin the family Malvaceae and produces the single most important textile fiber, accounting for ∼35% of the world's total annual fiber demands. It is also used as a model system to study plantpolyploidization, cell elongation, and cell wall biogenesis (36,137). TheGossypiumgenus comprises 45 diploid species (2n= 2x= 26) and seven tetraploid species (2n= 4x= 52) with extraordinary morphological variations, including different plant architectures ranging from wild perennial small trees and shrubs to cultivated herbaceous annuals, with variable leaf shapes and different fiber characteristics (Figure 1).

Figure 1Click to view


Cotton has long attracted attention from agricultural scientists, taxonomists, and evolutionary biologists, as it exhibits extraordinary genomic diversity with global radiation, which has led to the evolution of eight diploid cotton groups (A-, B-, C-, D-, E-, F-, G-, and K-genomes) plus an AD-genome clade. TheGossypiumgenus can be divided into three major lineages primarily based on morphological and geographical evidence: the New World clade (D- and AD-genomes), the African-Asian clade (A-, B-, E-, and F-genomes), and the Australian clade (C-, G-, and K-genomes) (Figure 1k). Most wild cotton species have very short fibers that adhere tightly to the seed; only four cotton species, A1, A2, (AD)1, and (AD)2, have beendomesticatedto produce textile fiber (Figure 1l). Upland cotton,Gossypium hirsutum[(AD)1], presently dominates the world's cotton commerce by producing ∼95% of the natural lint fiber used by the textile industry (34,49). There are four overlapping stages during fiber development: initiation, elongation,secondary cell wall (SCW)biosynthesis, and maturation, which are defined on the basis of the number of days postanthesis (DPA). Cotton fibers can be further classified into two types: adherent fuzz fibers, which initiate at 5 to 10 DPA and grow to a final length of less than ∼5 mm, and spinnable lint fibers, which initiate before flowering and grow to a final length of ∼3 cm.
Since the publication of the first draft of the cotton (Gossypium raimondii) genome in 2012 (111), 24 genome assemblies from 10 different cotton species have been reported (5,11,14,34,35,49,50,58,70,101,114,136,140,147). In this review, we present and discuss recent advances in cotton genome and cotton biology. We also describe functional genomics research into cotton fiber development, secondary metabolism, and biotic and abiotic stress responses. Finally, we address current challenges and suggest future directions for cotton research.
There are 45 diploid cotton species throughout the world.G. raimondii, also known as the D5-genome that originated in Mexico, possesses one of the smallest nuclear genomes and is regarded as a potential donor to all polyploid cottons. The African nativeGossypium herbaceumand the Asiatic nativeGossypium arboreumwere collectively called the A-genome and named specifically as the A1- and A2-genomes, respectively. BothG. herbaceumandG. arboreumhave similar genomic characteristics and diverged in a short evolutionary time, ∼0.7 million years ago. These diploid cottons have a relatively long history of cultivation, with ∼1.5-cm fiber cells that are barely fit for human clothing. It is widely accepted in the cotton community thatG. herbaceum- orG. arboreum-like andG. raimondii-like cotton were reunited by transoceanic dispersal that ultimately led to the rise of at least seven allotetraploid AD-genome species (2n= 4x= 52) [(AD)1- to (AD)7-genomes] (35). Two of them,G. hirsutum[(AD)1-genome] andGossypium barbadense[(AD)2-genome], were domesticated for human use ∼8,000 years ago and became the major cotton cultivars, since they produce ∼3.0-cm-long fiber cells suitable for the modern textile industry (121).
TheG. raimondiigenome was the first to be sequenced and assembled, perhaps because it not only served as the D-genome donor, but it also is one of the smallest diploid cotton genomes (∼800 Mb). To date, threeG. raimondiiassemblies from accessions D5-3(111), Ulbrich (70), and D5-4(101) have been released. Substantial chromosome rearrangements and a hexaploidization event ∼115–146 million years ago (Mya) that is common to eudicots (123), as well as cotton-specificwhole-genome duplicationsat 13–20 Mya, were indicated to have occurred duringG. raimondiievolution (70,111). D5-4, the most up-to-dateG. raimondiigenome, successfully improved the genome quality and completeness by filling up gaps, resulting in a final genome size of ∼761 Mb (101). It is well suited for various comparative, genetic, and genomic analyses.
CultivarShixiya1ofG. arboreum(A2-genome), which represents one of the phylogenetically closest relatives to theAt-subgenomeof tetraploid cottons, was first sequenced and assembled in 2014 (50) and further updated in 2018 (14). A third and final assembly of the A2-genome has recently been published (35). In this latest version, ambiguous sequences and misassembled, unknown repeat sequences were substantially reduced, resulting in a more accurate genome size (1,637 Mb) and transposable element (TE) content (80.1%). The current assembly represents a chromosome-scale reference forG. arboreumwith high completeness and accuracy (35). A comprehensive and high-resolution gene map ofG. arboreum, which revealed thousands of tissue-specific expressed genes, alternative uses of transcription start sequences, and polyadenylation sites and alternative splicing hotspots in cotton, was published and deposited in public databases (105,110). An A1-genome,G. herbaceumvar.africanum(A1-0076), was reported in the same article (35), as part of a large-scale comparative genomic study. The resulting assembly captured 1,556 Mb of genome sequence and a genome localization rate of 95.7% (35).
To date, there have been seven successful assemblies for the most widely cultivated cotton species,G. hirsutumline TM-1 [(AD)1-genome], and one for the cultivar ZM24 genome (11,34,35,49,114,136,147). Comparative genomic studies revealed that there are three large-scale (>4 Mb) inversions located at chromosome 8 of the At-subgenome between TM-1 and ZM24, which led to isolated haplotypes for the two populations and suppressed meiotic recombination in this region (136). The final genome size reported in the latest assembly is 2,290 Mb without gap-filling sequences, 99.2% of which were anchored and oriented on 26 chromosomes (35), which may supplant prior assemblies as a chromosome-grade reference genome forG. hirsutum.
The genomes of three accessions, including Xinhai21 (58), 3-79 (11,114,140), and Hai7124 (34), all from the much-less-cultivated tetraploid cottonG. barbadense[(AD)2-genome], have been published, suggesting that scientists have great interest in this species, probably because of its longer and stronger fiber. The currentG. barbadensereference genome (114) is 2,267 Mb in size, and its anchoring rate reaches 97.7%. AlthoughG. barbadenseandG. hirsutumdiverged over a relatively short period of time (∼0.4–0.6 Mya), these two genomes underwent distinguishable genomic divergence, with an average of 5.89 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) per kilobase and one 170.2-Mb inversion. Meanwhile, in-depth comparative transcriptome analysis showed that the transcriptional activation of genes associated mainly with membrane transport, glycan biosynthesis, and carbon metabolism was associated with the longer-fiber phenotype in Hai7124 (34). Continuing efforts to update diploid and allotetraploid genomes will provide valuable resources for the cotton community to accelerate breeding programs aimed specifically at better fibers.
Cotton is an excellent system in which to study genome size evolution, as huge variations were found amongGossypiumspecies, even within diploid genomes (109). All diploid cotton species have 13 chromosomes with genome sizes ranging from ∼738 Mb in the D5-genome to ∼2,858 Mb in the Australian K-genome. Thus,Gossypiumhas undergone a greater-than-threefold increase in genome sizes in the approximately 13 to 15 million years since it began to diverge from a common ancestor, mainly due to the accumulation of long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposon activities (50). Among sequenced Malvales genomes (2,21,35,95,102,142),Gossypiumis phylogenetically closest to theGossypioides/Kokialineage, and the smallest cotton D-genomes have similar genome sizes toBombax ceiba(895 Mb) andDurio zibethinus(715 Mb) (Figure 2). An analysis of 22 American D-genome accessions suggested that diploid D-genome cotton (subgenusHouzingenia) originated ∼6.6 Mya, with subsequent diversification events during the mid-Pleistocene at ∼0.5−2.0 Mya. The D-genome species range from ∼750 Mb to ∼900 Mb, a narrow range that may have resulted from a process called genome downsizing bias, which counteracts genome size growth by TEs (23). Compared with the two diploid A-genomes (A1-genome, 1,556 Mb; A2-genome, 1,637 Mb), the At-subgenome ofG. hirsutum(1,449 Mb) is significantly reduced, whereas its Dt-subgenome is expanded from 738 Mb in the putative D-genome donorG. raimondiito the current subgenome of 822 Mb (49). This genomic downsizing in the At-subgenome and amplification in the Dt-subgenome are closely related to substantially more active TE insertions in the Dt-subgenome than in the At-subgenome. Both A1- and A2-genomes experienced a further twofold expansion in genome size relative to that of the D5-genome, and, as a result, they consist of ∼80% TEs, especiallyGypsy-type LTRs (35,50). A Gaussian probability density function analysis (35), which overcame the major pitfall of most previous similar studies that relied on the presence of both ends of full-length LTRs (34,50), was used to estimate the insertion time of full and fragmentedGypsy-type LTRs in cotton genomes. The earliest LTR peak was found at ∼5.7 Mya, which corresponds to the expected speciation time for the A- and D-genomes. The second peak, at ∼2.0 Mya, in both Dt- and At-subgenomes, suggests that allotetraploid cotton may have formed at this time. The third peak, at ∼0.89 Mya, occurred only in the two A-genomes, whereas the fourth peak, at ∼0.61 Mya, and fifth peak are unique to the A1- and A2-genomes, respectively (35). These TE bursts ultimately shaped the distinct genomic architecture of cotton and contributed significantly to its genome size expansion, speciation, and evolution.

Figure 2Click to view


Although the A1- and A2-genomes diverged over a relatively brief period of time, the two A-genomes accumulated substantial genomic and genetic differences. For example, the A2-genome underwent a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 1 and 2, and the A1-genome experienced two large-scale (>40 Mb) inversions in chromosomes 10 and 12 after their speciation (22,35). The genetic divergence between the two A-genomes reached nearly 1.0, suggesting that the A1- and A2-genomes can be clearly distinguished as two cotton species. By comparing two A-genomes with the At-subgenome ofG. hirsutum, a large number ofstructural variants (SVs), including 61,053 in the A1-genome and 61,383 in the A2-genome, were characterized, with 35,997 (41.64%) of these SVs being shared in both A-genomes (35). These huge genetic differences and chromosomal SVs provide compelling evidence to suggest that the two A-genomes originated independently with no ancestor–progeny relationship between them, which may explain why interspecific hybridization between the two A-genomes is often unsuccessful.
Despite its different geographical origins and morphological and cytogenetic diversities,Gossypiumconstitutes a single monophyletic group that originated from a common ancestor ∼5–10 Mya (121). Thus far, there are two views with regard to cotton evolution: One suggests that the B-genome is the primitive group that produced all other cotton species (12,125); the second suggests that the D-genome is the common ancestor of all cotton taxa (13). The incongruence of phylogenetic relationships in this genus has highlighted the necessity of using multiple and independent studies, especially genome analyses, to fully elucidate the origin of any given group of higher plants.
To date, seven allopolyploid cotton species, including (AD)1, (AD)2,Gossypium tomentosum[(AD)3],Gossypium mustelinum[(AD)4],Gossypium darwinii[(AD)5],Gossypium ekmanianum[(AD)6] andGossypium stephensii[(AD)7], have been reported (18). Phylogenetic studies indicated that, among the first five species, (AD)4may serve as the basal clade, with (AD)1and (AD)3forming the second clade, whereas (AD)2and (AD)5form the third clade (Figure 3a). This means the Dt-subgenome and At-subgenome in all of the five species originated from common diploid D- and A-genome species at 1.0 to 1.6 Mya and then gradually branched into five species within 0.20 to 0.63 Mya (11). The two subgenomes in each of the five polyploid species are highly conserved at the chromosomal, gene content, and nucleotide levels, with more substantial diversifications found in evolutionary rate, heterogeneities, and the expression patterns of gene families and homologs.

Figure 3Click to view


All tetraploid cottons are known to be directly descended from an allopolyploidization event involving hybridization between the A- and D-genome ancestors, followed by genome doubling (11,49). Abundant studies support aGossypiumspecies resemblingG. raimondii(D5-genome) as the D-genome donor (34,49,114,147). However, controversy persists as to which is the actual A-genome donor in tetraploid cottons. An early phylogenetic analysis suggested that a hybridization between Asiatic cotton (A2-genome) and the American diploid cotton (D5-genome) produced the ancestor for all tetraploid cottons (88). Based on a second study, African cotton (A1-genome) was suggested to be an appropriate partner in the tetraploid cotton, as its genome is more primitive than the A2-genome (22). Chromosomal-scale analysis of A1-, A2-, and (AD)1-genomes revealed that neither the A1- nor A2-genome is the actual A-genome donor (35). Instead, a common and possibly extinctA0-genome, which may serve as an ancestor to the A1- and A2-genome clade, is the closest relative to the At-subgenome rather than either the A1- or A2-genome (35). SNP analysis based on cotton populations showed that the At-subgenome was much closer to the outgroup D5-genome (with 30.54% ancestral alleles) than the A1- (20.52%) or A2-genome (20.04%). Estimation of divergence time indicated that allotetraploid cottons were formed at ∼1.0–1.6 Mya, which preceded the speciation of A1- and A2-genomes at ∼0.7 Mya. Apparently, hybridization of this A0-genome with a D5species produced the current allotetraploid cotton, whereas it subsequently diverged into the present-day A1- and A2-genomes (35) (Figure 3a). This genome-based analysis will likely shut down the A1- versus A2-genome argument, especially if archaeological data are someday uncovered that confirm the existence of the currently extinct A0-genome.
Asymmetric genome evolution seems to have occurred in bothG. hirsutumandG. barbadense, as there is an overall acceleration in evolutionary rate in the Dt-subgenome relative to that of the At-subgenome (49). The averageKsvalues for collinearity-supported gene pairs were 0.463 for the Dt-subgenome versusTheobroma cacao(a close relative to cotton) and only 0.422 for the At-subgenome in the same assay. Analysis of intergenic collinear regions also showed that the single-nucleotide variation rate for the Dt-subgenome versus the D-genome was greater than that for the At-subgenome versus the A-genome (49). Large variants in the genome, including two reciprocal translocations between chromosomes 2 and 3 and chromosomes 4 and 5, chromosomal rearrangements, and large pericentric inversions were specifically found in the At-subgenome, suggesting that the A-genome in diploid cotton was reorganized sometime after the A0-genome was incorporated into the allotetraploid cotton genome (35,114).
Polyploidization in cotton induced a wide spectrum of gene expression changes and novel interactions. A transcriptomic analysis of 35 vegetative and reproductive tissues has demonstrated that 20 to 40% of homoeologous gene pairs showed At- or Dt-subgenome-biased expression inG. hirsutum(147). Comparative fiber transcriptomes among wild strains, domesticated strains, and their F1hybrids uncovered genome-wide and novelcis- andtrans-regulatory patterns (3). A total of 1,655 fiber-expressed genes withcis- andtrans-regulatory variations were found to form through divergence and domestication. Of these, 513 genes exhibitedcis-only divergence, 301 genes exhibitedtrans-only divergence, and the remaining 841 genes exhibited bothcis- andtrans-divergence. At-biased expression is more often associated withtrans-only regulatory mechanisms, whereas Dt-biased expression is more closely related tocis-only regulatory changes (3). In addition, up to 80% of the long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) were reported to exhibit allelic expression in the allotetraploid cotton, leading to the hypothesis that hybridization and polyploidization enabled the neofunctionalization of lncRNA transcription (149).
Cotton was one of the earliest domesticated economical crops, and it has experienced at least four parallel domestications that resulted in the production of diploid and allotetraploid cotton species (30,78). Perhaps the most obvious phenotypic change in domesticated cotton is its significantly elongated and much-strengthened fiber cells (Figure 3b).G. hirsutumwas initially domesticated from a wild race namedyucatanensein the Yucatan peninsula. In addition toyucatanense, there are six other recognized races (punctatum,palmeri,latifolium,marie-galante,morrilli, andrichmondi) in the same group that may be considered as semiwild forms of cotton (17). Studies of a variation map from 352 wild and domesticated Upland cotton accessions revealed a total of 93 domestication sweeps that occupied 178 Mb of the genome (74 Mb in the At-subgenome, 104 Mb in the Dt-subgenome). Also, 1,228 genetic loci from the Dt-subgenome and 549 from the At-subgenome were found under strong selective pressure (113). Another experiment showed that 4,754 genetically selected loci associated with fiber-related traits were located in the Dt-subgenome, while only 2,587 were found in the At-subgenome (62), suggesting that the coexisting subgenomes ofG. hirsutummay have undergone asymmetric domestication selections.
A survey of genetic diversity forG. barbadensegermplasms indicated that its early domestication might have taken place in coastal regions of northwestern Peru and southwestern Ecuador around Guayaquil Gulf. Thus, northwestern Peruvian and southwestern Ecuadorian accessions have a high diversity of primitive types and are basal to otherG. barbadenseaccessions (122). A number of interspecific reciprocalintrogressionevents have been found betweenG. hirsutumandG. barbadense, and the introgression pattern is significantly biased toward the gene flow fromG. hirsutumintoG. barbadense(16). Comprehensive epigenomic analysis of wild and domesticated cottons identified 519 differentially methylated genes, some of which, such as flowering time and seed dormancy, contribute significantly to domestication traits (86). These identified genetic loci reveal the molecular basis underlying phenotypic changes and provide targets for cotton breeding.
Both diploid cottonsG. herbaceumandG. arboreumhave short, coarse, and weak fibers with very low commercial value today, although they were historically domesticated for human clothing. Morphological evidence and genomic data support the assumption that the wild progenitor ofG. herbaceumwas descended from the southern African subspeciesafricanum(35) (Figure 3b). Although the ancestor ofG. arboreumis not clearly known yet, we have reasons to suggest that it might have been domesticated first in either Madagascar or the Indus Valley before being dispersed to China from India and/or Pakistan and subsequently to other areas (35,120). The first variation map of diploid cultivated cotton was constructed by the resequencing of 230G. arboreumand 13G. herbaceumaccessions mostly collected from China (14). Phylogenetic analysis based on SNPs is consistent with the hypothesis that the ChineseG. arboreumgeographical race originated in South China and was subsequently introduced into the Yangtze River and Yellow River regions (14). Pairwise comparison among accessions from the South China, Yangtze River and Yellow River regions identified a number of genetically divergent regions that overlap with identified quantitative trait loci encoding traits related to maturity, yields, boll weight, and disease resistance, which indicated that ChineseG. arboreumaccessions have been under strong human and/or geographical selections (14). These identified domesticated loci represent an important high-resolution genetic resource that will facilitate the improvement of complex cotton traits and enable important characteristics of diploid cottons to be transferred into the tetraploids through interspecific hybridization.
Cotton fibers grow in a highly polarized manner governed by the actin cytoskeleton and microtubule organization. Quite a number of cytoskeleton-related genes, such as the actin-relatedGhACT_LI1(96),GhACTIN1(53),GhADF1(107),GhFIM2(143), andGhPFN2(108); the tubulin-relatedGhTUA9(51); and the kinesin-encodingGhKCH1(71), are critical for fiber elongation and cell wall formation in cotton. RNA interference (RNAi) ofGhACTIN1expression disrupts the actin cytoskeleton network with significantly reduced fiber elongation growth without affecting fiber initiation (53). Downregulation of the gene encoding an actin depolymerizing factor,GhADF1, increases both fiber length and strength (107). Overexpression ofGhFIM2, which encodes an actin-bundling protein, accelerates fiber growth with increased actin bundle formation (143). Conversely, overexpression of a gene that encodes fiber-preferential actin-binding protein,GhPFN2, results in the termination of cell elongation and a short-fiber phenotype, possibly caused by the formation of thicker and more abundant F-actin bundles during the early elongation stages (108). Thus, the actin cytoskeleton and actin depolymerization may play an important role during the fast and robust fiber elongation growth period.
The mode of cotton fiber cell elongation has been a topic of heated discussions among scientists working in this field in the past several decades. Fiber cells were once regarded as tip-growing cells that depended exclusively on apical cell wall synthesis (89) or a diffuse growth mode due to the presence of transversely arranged microtubules perpendicular to the growth axis of an elongating fiber cell (71,100). Alinear cell-growth modewas proposed based on the finding that a large number of genes involved in vesicle coating and trafficking were preferentially expressed at various stages of fiber growth (76). Live-cell imaging of elongating fiber cytoskeletons showed that these cells may elongate via a unique tip-biased diffuse growth mode (139). Observations of actin networks in cotton fibers, as imaged by the F-actin reporter ABD2-GFP, in multiple transgenic cotton lines, discovered several common properties withArabidopsishypocotyls or root epidermal cells that are known to elongate via a diffuse growth mode. Also, microtubules in the fiber shanks, as monitored through an mCherry-tagged microtubule plus-end tracking protein EB1b cassette, were also deposited transversely to the growth axis, with a clear microtubule-depleted zone in the fiber apex. Four-dimensional images show endosomal vesicles, stained and visualized using the FM4-64 lipophilic dye as a membrane marker, evenly distributed along the elongating fiber cells and moving bidirectionally along the fiber shank to and from the fiber tip. Taken together, they concluded that cotton fibers probably elongate via a tip-biased diffuse growth mode, similar to the previously proposed linear cell-growth mode (139).
Fiber cell wall formation occurs in three phases: (a) a cell elongation period at ∼5–25 DPA, characterized solely by the synthesis of the primary cell wall (PCW), which may contain ∼23% cellulose fibrils, ∼22% proteins, and various amounts of polysaccharides including xyloglucan and pectins; (b) the transition stage; and (c) the SCW deposition period at ∼20–45 DPA (76,85). The extensibility of the PCW is mediated in part by xyloglucan hydrolases, as overexpression ofGhXTH1in transgenic cotton results in 15–20% longer fibers when compared with those of wild types (47). During the PCW synthesis stage, several cell wall−loosening proteins, such as GhRDL1 and GhEXPA1, have been characterized to play key roles in cell wall reconstruction (130).
The SCW in cotton fibers is composed of 95% cellulose with almost no lignin, which is a notable difference from other cell types in higher plants, and is synthesized and deposited inside the PCW (76). Cellulose synthesis, which is catalyzed by the cellulose synthase complexes (CSCs), is the predominant event during the SCW deposition stage. The catalytic subunits of plant CSCs forArabidopsisPCW synthesis are encoded by at least three cellulose synthase (CesA) genes (CesA1,CesA3, andCesA2orCesA6) with three differentCesAgenes (CesA4,CesA7, andCesA8) being responsible for SCW synthesis (1). Analysis of theG. hirsutumgenome revealed that there are 32CesAgenes in Upland cotton in contrast to 10 inArabidopsis. Among them,CesA4,CesA7, andCesA8were predominately expressed in fiber cells during SCW biosynthesis at levels 1.5- to 40-fold higher in cultivated species than in wild cottons, suggesting their potential role in enhancing lint yield and quality (49,147). Although CSCs are likely crucial for producing cellulose microfibrils, the number of CesA monomers in a given CSC and the organization of CesAs in the plant kingdom, including cotton, have been debated for many years. The architecture of a poplar tree PttCesA8 complex with homotrimers giving rise to 18 cellulose chains in the context of rosette-like CSCs, stabilized by cytosolic conserved regions and transmembrane helical exchanges, has recently been revealed by cryogenic electron microscopy (73). Researchers will need to further explore the precise architecture of CSCs to better understand the molecular mechanisms of cellulose biosynthesis.
Other genes that encode proteins essential for cellulose biosynthesis have also been heavily scrutinized. For example, sucrose synthase (SuSy) catalyzes a reversible reaction with a preference to convert sucrose into fructose and uridine diphosphate (UDP)-glucose, both of which are substrates for cellulose biosynthesis (79). Several SuSy genes, includingGhSusA1(44) andSusC(4), are involved in SCW synthesis or fiber cell elongation. Sucrose efflux, which provides the major osmotically active solute to generate the turgor pressure required to drive fiber cell elongation (90), is regulated byGhSWEET12, which encodes a sucrose transporter. In plants, RNAi that reduces expression ofGhSWEET12or its main regulator, myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog (MYB) transcription factor (TF)GhMYB212, significantly decreases sucrose accumulation and results in shorter fibers and a lower lint index.
Using deep transcriptome sequencing, scientists characterized 35,802 lncRNAs and 2,262 circular RNAs, among which 645 lncRNAs were preferentially expressed in thelintless-fuzzless(fl)mutant and 651 in fiber-attached lines (32). Virus-induced gene silencing experiments showed that silencing lncRNA XLOC_545639 and XLOC_039050 in theflmutant increased the number of sites of fiber initiation on the ovules, whereas silencing XLOC_079089 in wild-type Xu142 resulted in a short-fiber phenotype. Fiber cells contained higher rates of DNA methylation, mediated predominantly by an active H3K9me2-dependent pathway rather than the classical RNA-directed DNA methylation pathway, when compared to ovule tissue (115). Reduced expression ofGhHDA5, a histone deacetylase that is preferentially expressed from −1 to 0 DPA, results in very few fiber initials and a much lower lint yield. These RNAi cotton lines showed alterations in H2O2homeostasis and elevated autophagic cell death, suggesting thatGhHDA5may modulate the expression of stress- and development-related genes involved in fiber growth and development (46).
Atrans-acting small interfering RNA (tasiRNA) gene,TAS3, that represses the auxin response factorARF4expression during the rapid fiber elongation stage is triggered by miR390, whereasTAS4is triggered by miR828 and miR858 to generate 21-nt tasiRNAs responsible for fiber initiation (25). Suppressing microRNA (miRNA)156/157 function results in a significant reduction in the mature fiber length, which further illustrates an essential role of these miRNAs in fiber elongation (57). Applications of the CRISPR/Cas9 genome-editing system and similar techniques (9) may help us understand the roles of small RNA and epigenetic regulation in cotton.
InArabidopsis, the MYB-basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-WD40 (MBW) complex including GLABROUS1 (GL1), GL3, ENHANCER OF GLABRA3 (EGLf3), and TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1 (TTG1) regulates expression of the homeodomain leucine zipper (HD-ZIP) IV TF GL2, which promotes trichome growth, whereas TRIPTYCHON (TRY) and CAPRICE (CPC) counteract the complex-formation process by competing with GL1 for GL3 and EGL3 binding (77,119). Cotton fiber is a distinct type of trichome derived from seed epidermis that is composed of unbranched and extensively elongated single cells. Over 400MYBgenes, including those encoding the GL1-type R2R3 MYBs (80), are expressed preferentially in at least one stage of fiber development. As a homolog ofArabidopsis GL1, the R2R3 MYB TFGaMYB2, which is specifically expressed in the early stages of fiber development, is able to rescue trichome formation in theArabidopsis gl1mutant (117). When the homeodomain-containing protein (HOX)GaHOX1, a homolog ofArabidopsis GL2, was introduced intoArabidopsis thalianaplants under the control of an authenticGL2promoter, the trichome-deficient phenotype ofgl2-2was complemented successfully (24). Other homologs of theArabidopsisMBW components, including two WD40-repeat proteins (TTG1 and TTG3), GL3 homologs (GhDEL65/61 and GhMYC1), CPC, and TRY, were also functionally characterized in cotton (56,83). Although these MYB genes may be functionally equivalent toArabidopsisGL1, silencing ofGhMYB109led to only a mild reduction in fiber length (72). GhTTG2, a homolog ofArabidopsisAtTTG2, promotes proanthocyanidin biosynthesis, which results in the production of a brown color in cotton fibers (132), suggesting that the GL1-type MYBs have diverse roles in cotton fiber development.
Several lines of evidence suggest that MIXTA-like MYB TFs, such as the ovule-specificGhMYB25andGhMYB25-likegenes, have been identified to act as the master regulators of cotton fiber initiation. RNAi of theGhMYB25-likegene results in glabrous or fiberless cotton seeds, phenocopying theflmutant (103). Map-based cloning of the so-called naked (fuzzless) seed mutantN1indicated that theMYBMIXTA-like TF 3(MML3)/GhMYB25-likegene (located on chromosome A12) is associated with fuzz development. Further studies showed that this locus contains twoMMLgenes,MML3andMML4, arranged tandemly to control fuzz initiation (104). Analysis of cotton mutants with impaired fiber development fixed a fiber determinant locus to the homologous region on chromosome D12 (124), where the target geneGhMML4(GhMML4_D12) functions together with its partner, a diverged WD40 repeat protein (GhWDR), to regulate spinnable lint production (99).
Thirteen HD-ZIP IV genes inG. arboreumand 26 inG. hirsutumwere identified by a genome-wide analysis (8), and three of these, which encode the TFs HOX1 to HOX3, were isolated from both cotton species (24). Although HOX1 is most similar toArabidopsisGL2 (66% identical), experimental data from transgenic cotton plants indicated that GhHOX3 may act as a core regulator of fiber elongation. Silencing ofGhHOX3expression inG. hirsutumby RNAi or as a result of cosuppression drastically reduces fiber length, with fuzz-like short fibers produced on the seeds (82). GhHOX3 interacts with GhHD1 as well as with the cotton DELLA protein GhSLR1, which is a repressor of the phytohormone gibberellic acid (GA) that is well known for promoting plant cell growth. The GhHOX3-GhHD1 complex exhibits higher transcriptional activity towardsGhRDL1andGhEXPA1than either alone, whereas GhSLR1 competitively binds to GhHOX3 to impede the transcriptional activation required for transmitting the GA signal for fiber cell elongation (Figure 4).

Figure 4Click to view


TCP proteins form another plant-specific TF family and contain a conserved noncanonical bHLH domain for DNA binding. A class I TCP gene ofG. barbadense,GbTCP, is preferentially expressed in fiber cells and is proposed to regulate jasmonate (JA) levels and, subsequently, the level of reactive oxygen species, as well as calcium signaling (28). PRE1, an atypical bHLH factor, promoted hypocotyl cell elongation inArabidopsis. In tetraploid cotton,GhPRE1Afrom its At-subgenome is expressed specifically in fiber cells and is presumed to regulate fiber elongation, whereas its Dt-subgenome homolog is inactivated by a TATA-box fragment deletion in its promoter region (148).
The NAM, ATAF1 and ATAF2, and CUC2 (NAC)-type TFs inArabidopsisact as the primary regulators of SCW formation (94). OneG. hirsutumNAC gene,GhFSN1, is specifically expressed in fiber cells during the SCW biosynthesis stage. Overexpression ofGhFSN1significantly increases cell wall thickness at the expense of fiber lengths, with bothGhMYBL1andGhKNL1TFs known to controlGhFSN1expression directly (141). Recently, miR319-regulated CIN-typeTCPgenes, such asGhTCP4, were shown to play a role in modulating cotton fiber cell elongation and promoting SCW biosynthesis as well (6). GhTCP4 interacted antagonistically with GhHOX3 to constrain fiber elongation growth. At the early stages of cotton fiber development, miR319 is abundant, and its target TCPs are maintained at low levels, whereas GhHOX3 actively promotes fiber cell elongation. When miR319 expression declines during later stages of fiber growth, the levels of TCPs increase to promote cellulose biosynthesis and SCW formation. Overexpression of an miR319-resistant form reduces fiber cell elongation and accelerates SCW deposition, resulting in short fibers with thicker cell walls (6). Thus, the dynamics ofGhHOX3expression and the miR319-targetedTCPexpression patterns modulate the cotton fiber transition from cell elongation to cell wall thickening (Figure 4). Additionally, two LIM-domain TFs, GhXLIM6 (54) and WLIM1a (27), affect SCW biosynthesis, although their specific molecular mechanisms remain largely elusive. Experimental analyses combined with newly acquired genomic data will further our understanding of fiber cell development and cellulose biosynthesis for both fiber yield and quality improvement.
The plant hormones GA, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), JA, ethylene, and brassinosteroids (BRs) are known to play pivotal roles in fiber cell development (84,119,128). Exogenous application of GA or elevation of its endogenous level by introducingGhGA20ox1, a GA biosynthesis gene, promotes significant cotton fiber initiation and elongation (129). Manipulation of endogenous IAA levels by overexpression ofGhiaaM, a gene responsible for IAA biosynthesis, under an epidermal-specific promoter, greatly enhances fiber initiation and yield (144). Addition of exogenous IAA stimulatesGhTCP14expression predominantly during the fiber cell initiation and elongation stages (116). GhTCP14 binds directly to the promoters of genes encoding the auxin uptake carrier (AUX1), the auxin response protein (IAA3), and the auxin efflux carrier (PIN2). Thus, GhTCP14 may play a role in IAA-mediated cotton fiber cell differentiation and elongation. By contrast, overexpression of a JA signaling pathway repressor,GhJAZ2, which interacts with GhMYB25-like/GhMML3 and GhGL1, results in fewer fuzz fibers and shorter lint fibers with smaller cotton seeds (31).
Ethylene biosynthesis is the most upregulated biochemical pathway during early cotton fiber development, and the exogenous application of C2H4in the semi–in vivo ovule culture system promotes significant fiber, but not ovule, cell growth (84). Genes responsible for ethylene production, mainly 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid oxidases 1 through 3 (ACO1–ACO3), are expressed at significantly higher levels during this growth stage, and the amount of ethyl-ene released from cultured ovules is correlated with ACO expression and with the rate of fiber growth. Ethylene may promote cotton fiber elongation by increasing the expression of SuSy, tubulin, and expansin genes (84). Differences in ethylene production and its regulatory mechanisms in three cotton species—G. raimondiiwith nonspinnable fibers,G. arboreumwith shorter fibers, andG. hirsutumwith long fibers—have been further elucidated from a genomic viewpoint by sequencing and assembling these cotton genomes (49,50). Elongating fibers contain high levels of ACO activities, likely promoted by elevated levels of saturatedvery-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs), as external C24:0 added to the ovule culture medium results in significant fiber cell elongation, preceded by a rapid and significant increase inACOexpression with a prompt and robust ethylene production. This C24:0 effect is blocked in the presence of an ethylene biosynthesis inhibitor (75). Overexpression ofKCS6, a key gene in VLCFA biosynthesis in Upland cotton, increases the final length of the fiber significantly (∼6.0–12%) (35), indicating that VLCFAs may act upstream of the ethylene pathway (76,127). Comparative proteomics between theflmutant and wild type revealed that most of the wild-type ovule preferential proteins were involved in the biosynthesis of pectic precursors important for PCW during cotton fiber andArabidopsisroot hair elongation (69). Collectively, these data support the notion that ethylene and C24:0 may promote cotton fiber andArabidopsisroot hair growth by activating the pectic network, especially via enhanced UDP-l-rhamnose and UDP-d-galacturonic acid biosynthesis.
BRs regulate cell elongation, as a BR-deficient cotton mutant,pag1, displays a dwarf plant phenotype with reduced fiber length (112,138). Elevation of BR levels by overexpressing the BR biosynthetic gene steroid 5α-reductase,GhDET2(60), or its regulator, the bHLH TF GhFP1 (59), substantially increases the final fiber lengths in transgenic plants. GhFP1 was confirmed to bind with the E-box sequences located at the promoters of two genes related to BR synthesis,GhDWF4andGhCPD(59). Also, external BR application induces the expression ofbrassinazole-resistant 1(GhBZR1), whereas phosphorylation of BZR1 by GhBIN2 kinase facilitates its binding to an acidic regulatory protein Gh14-3-3. Overexpression of Gh14-3-3 results in a significant increase in mature fiber length, and lines in which its expression is suppressed show a retarded fiber initiation process with significantly shorter final fibers (150). The molecular mechanisms regarding fiber cell growth mediated by either BRs or 14-3-3 proteins need to be scrutinized further.
Bioactive and specialized metabolites are often stored in defined plant tissues or structures to avoid self-toxicity. For example, the cotton gland forms a cavity surrounded by thick-walled cells in which specialized metabolites accumulate and are stored. There are glandless cotton cultivars, such as the recessive mutant (gl2gl3) ofG. hirsutumand the dominant mutant (Gl2e) ofG. barbadense, which do not accumulategossypoland related sesquiterpene aldehydes in aerial organs, including seed (66,92). Genetic mapping ofGl2eby cross populations identified a pigment gland formation gene (GoPGF) that encodes a bHLH TF. RepressingGoPGFexpression by virus-induced gene silencing leads to emerging leaves that are glandless or have very few glands (61). Sequence analysis of recessive glandlessG. hirsutummutants showed that a single T or A is inserted intoGhPGF, located in the At-subgenome or Dt-subgenome, respectively, which results in the premature termination of the corresponding protein, whereas the molecular mechanism that dominantly impairs PGF function remains obscure (61). RNA-seq analysis of embryos of the near-isogenic glanded versus glandless plants identified 33 genes expressed immediately prior to gland formation, among which are three homologous genes, including the cotton gland formation 1 (bHLH TF CGF1), NAC TF CGF2, and synonym ofGoPGF(CGF3). Knockout ofGhCGF3resulted in a glandless phenotype, which supports the hypothesis that bHLH TFs serve as master regulators of lysigenous gland formation (42). Phylogenetic analysis showed that PGF is closely related to bHLH14 and distantly related to threeArabidopsisMYCs (MYC2, MYC3, and MYC4) that have important roles in JA signaling (74) (Supplemental Figure 1). Comparative transcriptomes of three glandless versus four glanded cultivars identified an MYB TF, CGP1, as a regulator of sesquiterpene phytoalexin biosynthesis (20). CGP1 contributes significantly to gland pigmentation, probably by interacting with GoPGF to form a heterodimer in the nucleus, which suggests the presence of a molecular linkage between gland development and the biosynthesis of its metabolic contents. Both the signal involved in gland formation and the mechanism underlying cell death in the gland chamber require further investigations.
Another type of glandular structure in cotton, named extrafloral nectary, contains an array of metabolites enriched in saccharides and amino acids that function in plant defense against herbivores (29). Quantitative trait locus analysis identified a Phox-Bem1 domain−containing gene,GaNEC1, that participates in regulating nectary formation (33). Whether they use packed poisons for deterring predators or sweet juice for engaging ants and other insects, glands of various types are important in mediating plant interactions with other organisms, serving as a driving force for coevolution and biodiversity.
Cotton plants produce a group of lineage-specific sesquiterpenoids, such as gossypol and hemigossypolone, which have antifungal, antibacterial, or insecticidal activities toward diverse herbivores, including the devastating lepidopterans cotton bollworm and beet armyworm (97,126). Gossypol is the major, if not only, sesquiterpene phytoalexin present in cotton seeds, while hemigossypolone predominates over gossypol in leaves.
Progress in cotton genomics has facilitated the elucidation of the gossypol biosynthetic pathway from farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) to hemigossypol (98) (Figure 5). FPP is synthesized by FPP synthase (FPS) from the cytoplasmic mevalonate and is then catalyzed by (+)-δ-cadinene synthase (CDN) to produce the bicyclic (+)-δ-cadinene with high efficiency (>98%) in cotton (10,41). Silencing theCDNgene in cotton ultimately generated cotton lines with ultralow seed gossypol content (91). Six enzymes, including four P450 monooxygenases (CYP706B1, CYP82D113, CYP71BE79, and CYP736A196), one 2-oxoglutarate/Fe (II)-dependent dioxygenase, and one short-chain alcohol dehydrogenase, have been identified as being responsible for the oxidative modifications of the (+)-δ-cadinene skeleton (Figure 5).

Figure 5Click to view


Hemigossypol harbors a naphthalene core with two fused benzene rings. A specialized Zn2+-dependent glyoxalase (GLX) variant, SPG,aromatizesboth rings of the naphthalene core efficiently without cofactors, completing the biosynthetic pathway for hemigossypol (37,38) (Figure 5).G. hirsutumhas two GLXI genes, located on chromosome 13 of each subgenome, and six SPG genes (including a psuedogene), which form two homoeologous pairs in a cluster on chromosome 3. Compared with parental GLXs, SPG has lost the signal peptide for exclusive cytoplasmic localization and the GSH-binding domain to shift the pocket to accommodate cyclic substrates. While the aromatization mechanism seems distinct, the specialization process of SPG represents a textbook example of enzyme evolution: Upon gene duplication and subsequent local duplications, the newly derived copies undergo functional innovations, starting from the catalytic promiscuity of the parental enzyme, along with the removal of unnecessary domains (37).
Oxidative dimerization of hemigossypol into gossypol likely occurs in apoplastic space and requires peroxidase or laccase activities (15). TransgenicArabidopsisplants expressingGaLAC1, a root-specific secretory laccase gene fromG. arboreum, produce significant laccase activity that is able to transform polluting phenolic compounds in soil to non- or less-toxic forms for phytoremediation (106). Because of the restricted rotation of the internaphthyl bond, gossypol exists as a racemic mixture in cotton; the ratio of the two atropisomers, (+)-gossypol and (−)-gossypol, varies with plant organs and among different species and cultivars. For example, the ratio of (+)/(−)-gossypol is ∼3:2 inG. hirsutumcultivars grown in the U.S. but can be as high as 98:2 in the same cultivars when grown in Brazil. Dirigent (DIR) proteins steer regio- and enantioselective coupling of phenoxy radicals catalyzed by nonspecific enzymes.GbDIR2fromG. barbadenseandGhDIR3andGhDIR4fromG. hirsutumwere cloned and are known to confer atroposelective synthesis of (+)-gossypol (15).
A variety of insect herbivores, such as the Lepidopteran chewing caterpillar, the cotton bollworm, and theHemipteransucking insect, the cotton aphid, are frequently found in cotton fields. Predation by cotton bollworm induces JA, ethylene, and GA pathway genes and downregulates the salicylic acid (SA) pathway inG. hirsutumplants (39). JA is a regulator for mediating insect defense, together with miR156 and its target, SPL9 (65). The JA response is prompt in young plants but shows progressive delays with an age-dependent tendency that has an inverse correlation with the levels of SPL9 group proteins. Herbivorous insects have also evolved complex mechanisms, including the release of effector molecules into the host and the production of diversified detoxification enzymes, to overcome host resistance. Since the cloning of the first effector glucose oxidase fromHelicoverpa zea(68), several effectors, such as HARP1 (7) and cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (81,93), have been identified. Not only phytochemicals but also phytohormones (JA and SA) are able to activate insect P450 genes during insect invasion (52,93). Both structural changes in P450 proteins and upregulations of P450 gene expression have been associated with insect tolerance to gossypol and insecticides (deltamethrin and fenvalerate) (45,93). When adouble-stranded RNA (dsRNA)construct targeting the gossypol-inducible P450 geneCYP6AE14(i.e.,dsCYP6AE14) was introduced intoArabidopsisplants,CYP6AE14expression was reduced significantly with a concomitant reduction in larval weight gain (64). Similarly, usingHelicoverpa armigera−targetingdsNDUFV2(encoding a mitochondrial complex I subunit),dsJHAMT(juvenile hormone acid methyltransferase),dsJHBP(JH-binding protein), anddsFAR(fatty acyl-CoA reductase), which targetsMiridaesap-suckingAdelphocoris suturalis, to transform cotton plants produced positive results for pest control (Supplemental Figure 2). These data suggest that RNAi-triggered signals are successfully delivered into target organisms during pest ingestion or pathogen infection and produce sequence-specific and selective effects for biological invasion control.
Cotton yield losses are caused mainly by the fungal pathogenVerticillium dahliaeand cotton leaf curl virus disease (CLCuD). Phytohormones SA, JA, and ethylene (126,133) and nucleotide-binding site (NBS)-leucine-rich repeat (LRR) protein genes (135) are involved in the plant defense responses againstV. dahliae, which secretes a deacetylase that modifies chitin oligomers to avoid lysin motif (LysM) recognition and prevent pattern-triggered host immunity (19). Plant cells, however, produce chitinase to disrupt the fungal cell wall, whereasV. dahliaereleases VdSSEP1, a secretory serine protease with hydrolytic activity toward class IV (such as Chi28) cotton chitinase, to protect its cell wall chitin from being digested. The cotton apoplastic protein CRR1 binds to and protects Chi28 from being attacked by VdSSEP1 to maintain the plant defenses (26).
The Ca2+-dependent cysteine protease (Clp-1) and isotrichodermin C-15 hydroxylase ofV. dahliaedetermine the virulence of this fungus. Cotton plants export endogenous miRNAs, including miR166 and miR159, via plant vascular systems intoV. dahliaehyphae that proliferate extensively in vascular tissues, and these miRNAs recognize fungalClp-1andHiC-15transcripts and trigger an RNAi-like process (146). Transgenic cotton plants expressing an RNAi construct against anotherV. dahliaevirulence gene,hygrophobins1, show enhanced resistance to the fungus (145) (Supplemental Figure 2). An miRNA-like small RNA fromV. dahliaewas found to epigenetically repress a fungal virulence gene via chromatin remodeling during pathogenicity (118), which may help develop novel cross-kingdom RNAi strategies for plant protection (87,131).
CLCuD, which is caused by whitefly-transmitted monopartite begomoviruses in association with the modulation of satellites, is widespread and has been a serious problem since the 1980s (63). The sole satellite-encoded protein βC1 was shown to inhibit the host plant ubiquitination process through an interaction with the SKP1/CUL1/F-box complex to impair plant hormone signaling, leading to viral accumulation and symptom aggregation in host plants (43). βC1 also disturbs the plant autophagy pathway via interfering with the cytosolic glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and autophagy-related protein 3 in host cells (40). As onlyG. arboretum, among all cultivated cotton species, is immune to current CLCuD viruses, elucidation of the responsible genetic and molecular mechanisms will likely help introduce CLCuD-resistant traits into widely grown allotetraploid cotton cultivars.
Among major commodity crops, the highest portion of cotton (∼57%) is grown in water-deficient areas. Overexpression of abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthesis genes, includingABI3andAtABI5, in cotton plants elevates endogenous ABA levels, which results in enhanced drought tolerance with higher water use efficiency (67). A WRKY TF gene,GhWRKY59, confers drought tolerance in cotton plants (48), whereas a genome-wide association study indicates that the sodium/calcium exchanger GaCATX8 is likely responsible for drought tolerance inG. arboreumpopulations (14). Several other genes, including the bZIP TF GhABF2 (55) and aldehyde dehydrogenaseALDH21fromSyntrichia caninervis(134), were also determined in transgenic cotton plants to confer drought stress resistance. This progress inspires further research with regard to adaptation traits obtained from different cotton cultivars or species, which will help cotton field management in arid and semiarid regions.
As more high-quality genome sequences are completed for cotton species and cultivars, especially the remaining diploid wild cotton and related plant genomes, along with efficient gene manipulation techniques and the use of other omics datasets, complex regulatory networks and metabolic pathways will be deciphered to provide cotton breeders with functionally new genes and modules for crop improvement. Comparative genomic analysis may help to accurately determine the divergence time amongGossypiumspecies, the closest relative ofG. raimondii, and the time of whole-genome duplications in this tribe. Whether all cultivated and wild tetraploid cotton species originated from the hybridization of the A0-genome with aG. raimondii−like genome and then diversified into the present-day allotetraploid cotton species remains to be determined through further in-depth genomic analyses.
Two unique regulatory mechanisms—networks centered on MML-type TFs (104,124) and a positive regulation by VLCFA-mediated ethylene biosynthesis (75,84)—are in operation during cotton fiber development. How these MML and HD-ZIP IV TFs function in cotton fibers, what their major downstream targets are, what crosstalk or coupling mechanisms exist between ethylene and VLCFAs as well as the orchestration with other plant hormones such as BR and GA are questions that all await answers. Cell wall biosynthesis via theCesAgenes plays an important role in fiber growth, yet direct evidence with regard to specific CesA functions and structures and the organization of various CesA complexes, in addition to the similarities and differences between the fiber cell wall and other cell wall types, is lacking. Genetic mutations of individualCesAgenes in cotton and high-resolution protein structures of the CesA complex will likely resolve these challenging questions.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We thank Drs. Li Zhang, Ning-Jing Liu, Zhi-Wen Chen, Xin Li, Jun-Feng Cao, Chao-Chen Huang, and Zi-Shou Zheng for helpful discussions and assistance. We apologize to any authors whose work may not have been referenced owing to length restrictions. This work was supported by grants from the Natural Science Foundation of China (31690090 and 31690091 to Y.-X.Z.), the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by the Chinese Association for Science and Technology (CAST) (2019QNRC001 to J.-Q.H.), and the National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talent (8206200045 to G.H.).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...

DownloadSupplemental Figures 1-2(PDF).

Literature Cited


