We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
There is now a wealth of data, from different plants and labs and spanning more than two decades, which unequivocally demonstrates that RNAs can be transported over long distances, from the cell where they are transcribed to distal cells in other tissues. Different types of RNA molecules are transported, including micro- and messenger RNAs. Whether these RNAs are selected for transport and, if so, how they are selected and transported remain, in general, open questions. This aspect is likely not independent of the biological function and relevance of the transported RNAs, which are in most cases still unclear. In this review, we summarize the experimental data supporting selectivity or nonselectivity of RNA translocation and review the evidence for biological functions. After discussing potential issues regarding the comparability between experiments, we propose criteria that need to be critically evaluated to identify important signaling RNAs.
Article metrics loading...
There is now a wealth of data, from different plants and labs and spanning more than two decades, which unequivocally demonstrates that RNAs can be transported over long distances, from the cell where they are transcribed to distal cells in other tissues. Different types of RNA molecules are transported, including micro- and messenger RNAs. Whether these RNAs are selected for transport and, if so, how they are selected and transported remain, in general, open questions. This aspect is likely not independent of the biological function and relevance of the transported RNAs, which are in most cases still unclear. In this review, we summarize the experimental data supporting selectivity or nonselectivity of RNA translocation and review the evidence for biological functions. After discussing potential issues regarding the comparability between experiments, we propose criteria that need to be critically evaluated to identify important signaling RNAs.
The first evidence for intertissue transfer of macromolecules was found in plant viruses. These pathogens, which have minimal genomes, produce specialized proteins required to transfer their genomes to neighboring cells and, via the phloem, to distant tissues. In the beginning of the nineteenth century, it became clear that plant viruses differed in their transmissibility. Some viruses could be transmitted by inoculation using phloem or leaf sap from infected plants, while transmission of others was only detected after grafting with infected plants. Pioneering studies by Bennett (6,7) led to the discovery thatCucumber mosaic virus(CMV), which has an RNA genome, can be transmitted from an infected to a healthy plant through a bridgingCuscutaplant parasitizing via its haustoria on the phloem of two distinct host plants. More than 75 years later, researchers showed thatCuscutaspp. feeding onArabidopsis thalianaalso take up functional host proteins (47), protein-encodingmessenger RNA (mRNA)(17,40,74), and small interfering RNA (siRNA) (1).
Today, we recognize that all RNA viruses produce specialized movement proteins, forming larger viral RNA–protein complexes that interact with host factors to facilitate intercellular transfer of viral DNA or RNA genomes via pores, calledplasmodesmata (PD), that cross the cell walls (51). Most viruses can move from infected sugar-producing (photosynthetically active) source tissues via the sugar-conducting phloem vessels to sugar-requiring (photosynthetically inactive) sink tissues; i.e., they can follow the flow of sugar through the plant. Researchers proposed that most, if not all, macromolecules detected in the phloem and in phloem-feedingCuscutaare imported and exported from phloem vessels in a similar fashion via PD channels. PD are intercellular conduits that contain and connect the cytoplasm, the endoplasmic reticulum, and the plasma membrane of most adjacent cells. Depending on the tissue type, PD can be structurally highly complex, forming one or several branches and a central cavity. PD are formed either at the cell plate during cell division (primary PD) or newly at existing cell walls (secondary PD). The symplasmic connection established by PD allows plant cells enclosed by cellulosic walls to exchange large and small molecules that otherwise cannot be transferred between and within tissues. In the plant body, dynamically closing and opening PD channels form symplasmic (cytosolic-connected) domains that change during the diurnal cycle and developmental transitions, permitting a dynamic and controlled exchange of PD-transported signaling molecules. As most tissues are symplasmically connected by PD pores, an individual plant should be conceived—at least in part—as a symplastic entity (for reviews, see50,68,89). An important feature of PD is their spatiotemporal dynamics that allow for transport to be regulated (for reviews, see2,13), enabling complex intercellular communication, as postulated more than 100 years ago by Eduard Tangl (72), who first described PD while he was working at Czernowitz University during the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy.
Convincing evidence for a selective endogenous PD-based transport system for RNAs was first found in viroids. These tiny, infectious, plant-specific pathogens have a small (∼200-nt-long), circular, nonencapsidated RNA genome that is stably folded. Groundbreaking work by Biao Ding (21) at Ohio State University revealed that viroid RNAs form distinct pseudoknot/hairpin motifs that are necessary for replication and moving to specific cell types via PD (67,93). Viroid RNAs do not encode for proteins and thus must hitchhike via the host endogenous intercellular transport system.
Initial evidence for intercellular transport of both endogenous mRNA and protein was found with the homeodomain transcription factor KNOTTED1 (KN1) expressed in the meristem inner cell layers but detected in the outer layers ofZea mays(71). Based on this observation, researchers proposed that KN1 protein, and potentially its mRNA, moves across cell layers via PD. Indeed, fluorescently tagged recombinant KN1 RNA—binding its own protein—moved to neighboring cells after being microinjected into a single mesophyll cell (52). In a similar line, a tomato mutant,mouse ears, was described producing an anomalous homeodomain fusion protein whose mRNA moved from rootstock to scions, where it accumulated in leaf primordia. The presence of the anomalous mRNA induced leaf shape changes (41). Again, these insights support the notion of a selective PD-based transport system for endogenous RNAs and translation of the transported mRNA.
In general, it seems that the identified population of potentially mobile RNAs strongly depends on the experimental approach. The most comprehensive information about (potentially) phloem-mobile RNAs was obtained from phloem exudate (sap) samples and from grafting experiments (Figure 1).

Figure 1Click to view


In most species, phloem sampling is difficult, and the amounts that can be obtained are small. Sampling methods mainly differ in the length of the harvest period and the volume and purity of phloem content that can be collected but also in the degree of injury imposed, defining the level of potential contaminations and artefacts (20).
Aphid stylectomy is the most elegant approach, yielding very small volumes of phloem that allow only limited analyses. It is minimally invasive, although insect-induced effects cannot be fully excluded (19,20). Using this technique, only a limited number of RNAs have been identified (22,70,77). Even fewer reports have successfully identified RNAs from samples obtained through ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-facilitated exudation (18), an easy sampling technique prone to contamination and degradation (20).
Most phloem sap RNA-profiling studies have been performed in plants showing spontaneous exudation. In these studies, to avoid contamination by cell debris produced by the injury, the first exudate is removed, and samples are tested for the presence of marker transcripts. The approaches used to collect phloem exudate differ significantly in invasiveness, ranging from cutting whole organs (e.g., leaves) or complete stems (25,26,60,88,92) to making tiny incisions (11,12,64,65) (Figure 1).
Also, phloem anatomy can influence sample content. Cucurbits, for example, have long been used for studying phloem exudate composition because of the large amount of sap that can be easily obtained from cut petioles or stems. However, members of the Cucurbitaceae family show an unusual phloem anatomy with fascicular and extrafascicular phloem, and sap composition is dependent on its origin from one or the other phloem type (49). Because of this unusual anatomy, RNAs found in phloem exudates from cucurbits might not necessarily be representative of those of other vascular plants (49).
Differences in plant species, developmental stages, sampling techniques, and sampling sites make a direct comparison challenging. Nevertheless, available studies of phloem content reveal a picture of a large and dynamic set of RNA molecules from all major classes, including mRNAs, ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs), transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and fragments thereof, small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), siRNAs, andmicroRNAs (miRNAs)(reviewed in39). Moreover, although several attempts were made, no translation or RNase activity could be detected within several different phloem exudates (22,27,70,90), suggesting that the phloem stream is a safe environment for RNA transport.
Grafting is a classical agricultural technique used for more than 2,000 years to improve agricultural performance of dicotyledonous crops. The simplest approach to create a grafted plant is to combine a rootstock with a heterologous scion. In a successful graft, the cells will connect via secondaryPDand vascular continuity will be reestablished (reviewed in79), allowing an efficient systemic transfer of nutrients, water, and signaling molecules.
Grafting also has a long tradition in plant research. Here, different grafting methods, e.g., cleft grafting or flat grafting, are used, depending on plant species and research. In plants with rosette leaves, likeArabidopsis, the most suitable grafting positions are the inflorescence stem and the hypocotyl (79,80) (Figure 1).
To study long-distance RNA transport, different combinations of mutants, transgenics with wild type, cultivars, and even plant species have been used over the last decades. By exchanging scion and rootstock, directional long-distance transport events can also be addressed. If grafting and sampling sites are sufficiently distant, artefacts caused by lost cell integrity, such as callus formation at the graft union, can be excluded. In small plants or seedlings that are micrografted, this can be a challenging task (5). Here, great care must be taken to avoid and control for cross-contamination of the grafted tissues as highly sensitive deep sequencing approaches are used to identify the transported RNA population.
Different grafting approaches in different plants have identified thousands of RNAs that are able to cross graft junctions, includingmRNAs, miRNAs, and siRNAs (reviewed in39). Researchers must consider that approaches differ according to grafting techniques, tissue and time of sampling, growth conditions (soil versus in vitro), plant age (juvenile versus adult), and the parts from which plants were combined. Therefore, a comparison of the results is not a simple task, and may be impossible.
The following sections provide a short overview about the populations of miRNAs and mRNAs identified as (potentially) phloem-mobile, using the different approaches described above, and also highlight theRNA-binding proteins (RBPs)that have been found in phloem samples.
After the first discovery of evidence for mRNA presence in phloemsieve elements (SEs)(43,70), research during recent decades has identified a remarkably large number of potentially translocated transcripts, driven by advances in sequencing technology.
In phloem samples, a limited number of mRNAs has been identified in different plant species (18,22,23,37,60), but only a few studies using more global approaches have recently identified 955 differential transcripts in mulberry phloem sap during phytoplasma infection by full-length RNA sequencing (25).
Most insights that we have about mobile transcripts to date come from grafting experiments combined with deep sequencing and relatively complex bioinformatic analysis to identify heterologous transcripts present in grafted plant parts. Here, the identification of mobile mRNAs based on sequence differences [single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and insertions/deletions (INDELs)] between rootstocks and scions has revealed a genomic dimension to mRNA transport. In a study between two hypocotyl-grafted ecotypes ofArabidopsis, 2,006 mobile transcripts were identified, and an estimated 20% of the complete transcriptome might have the potential to move (74). The hypocotyls of small seedlings, six days after germination, were micrografted and harvested two to three weeks later when they were bolting. Surprisingly, ∼25% of the identified mobile transcripts moved from roots to shoots (74), opposite to the expected direction of phloem flow. Researchers proposed that these mRNAs might move either in the phloem against the source-to-sink bulk flow or cell to cell and not through the translocation stream (39,74). Interestingly, a significant fraction of mobileArabidopsisRNAs overlapped with graft-mobile mRNAs found in grapevine and cucumber/watermelon, suggesting a certain degree of conservation (78). Another study between soybean and common bean found 1,322 soybean and 874 common bean mobile mRNAs and, in contrast to small RNAs, no strong accumulation in recipient tissues. In this study, 7-day-old seedlings were grafted and sampled 10 days after grafting (44). In watermelon/bottle gourd grafts, 130 and 1,144 mRNAs moved upwardly, and 167 and 1,051 mRNAs were downwardly transmitted under normal and chilling-stress conditions, respectively. Seedlings were grafted and collected 17 days after grafting (81).
In grapevine, more than 2,600 transcripts were reported to be mobile in in vitro cultured young grafts. Interestingly, far fewer graft-mobile transcripts (987) were identified in field-grown mature grafts (87). By wedge graftingNicotiana benthamianastem scions into a slit ofArabidopsisbolting stems, only 138 mobileArabidopsistranscripts were identified moving from stock to scion (57). In this interspecies graft setting, larger, four-week-old plants were used, stems were grafted on stems of floweringArabidopsiswell above the rosette, and samples were collected three weeks after grafting. Also using aN. benthamiana/tomato heterograft system, only 183NicotianamRNAs were moving from shoot to root. Here, three-week-old plants were used for hypocotyl grafting and harvested several weeks after (83). These numbers and results suggest that the translocated mRNA population might depend on the plant species, their age and developmental stage, growth conditions, and the time point of harvest after grafting. Also, the number of biological replicates and used bioinformatic pipelines probably play an important role in how many mobile transcripts were identified and considered significant. While the knowledge about mobile transcripts is steadily increasing, there are still only a few cases where a function could be demonstrated.
Since the first detection of selected endogenous miRNAs and siRNAs in phloem exudates of pumpkin, cucumber, castor bean, and yucca (88), researchers suggested that these small RNAs could be systemically mobile. Meanwhile, a much larger set of miRNAs has been identified from the phloem sap of more plant species, including different cucurbits, rapeseed, apple, mulberry, and lupin (11,12,26,48,65,69,77). For example, in rapeseed phloem sap, up to 161 miRNAs from 37 different families have been found using microarrays and RNA-seq (11,65), and in mulberry, 86 conserved and 19 novel miRNAs were identified by deep sequencing (26). The phloem miRNA population observed contains miRNAs involved in development (e.g., miR156, miR159, miR173) or in responses to nutrient deprivation (e.g., miR395, miR398, miR399, miR2111). miRNA mobility seems to be rather conserved, as several miRNAs, for example, miR156, miR167, miR169, miR390, and miR398, are phloem enriched in different species, such as rapeseed, cucurbits, apple, and mulberry, while others are absent (26,77).
In addition to miRNAs, other small RNAs, such as siRNAs, tRNAs and tRNA halves, and rRNAs, have been shown to be enriched in phloem sap, but these are not the focus of this review (39). Moreover, genomic analyses of grafted tissues identified numerous transposon-derived and phased secondary small interfering RNAs (phasiRNAs) that were capable of trafficking from shoots to roots and inducing genomic methylation changes or precursor cleavage in target tissues, respectively (44,56).
It is well established that viral RNAs in the phloem are always found inribonucleoprotein (RNP)complexes with viral proteins and that host factors can assist virus phloem transport (34). Also, the first plant endogenous phloemRBPsinteracting with mobile RNAs were found by studying host factors interacting with viroids and viruses. The abundant phloem lectin PHLOEM PROTEIN 2 (PP2) seemed to bind RNA in a non-sequence-specific manner and facilitated the translocation of viroid RNA in Cucurbitaceae heterografts through the phloem (29).
Researchers estimate that 10% of the phloem proteome are RBPs, and the binding of RBPs to phloem-mobile RNAs may be important for loading, transport, and unloading of RNAs (45,69,88). A significant part of the phloem proteome encompasses RBPs with known RNA-binding domains, including ribosomal proteins and proteins involved in translation initiation and elongation. Furthermore, glycine-rich RBPs and several uncharacterized proteins with unknown functions have been identified (28). It seems highly likely that these phloem RBPs are involved in RNA transport. InCucurbita maxima, CmPP16 has been shown to bind to its own RNA to form an RNP complex. This complex interacts with a PD-associated protein, NCAPP1, and can thereby facilitate RNA entry into the phloem (73,84).
CmRBP50 from pumpkin has been shown to preferentially bind to mRNAs harboring the polymer-pyrimidine CUCU domain. This leads to the formation of a large RNA–protein complex with additional proteins that was proposed to facilitate long-distance RNA transport via the phloem (30). The RBP50 homologs in potato, StPTB1 and StPTB6, can bind to the 3′ UTR region of StBEL5 mRNA to facilitate phloem transport and improve tuber yield (15). However, again highlighting the complexity of the RNA transport system, no significant enrichment of CUCU sequences was found in the graft-mobile cucurbit andArabidopsismRNA population when compared to the overall mRNA population (86,87). Additionally, studies in other plant species suggest that long-distance translocation via the phloem occurs in the form of RNPs (29,30,62,63).
There are different interpretations of the term selective. We use one of the common definitions (55) of selective: the discriminatory power of a process to act on a defined subset. For an RNA transport process to be selective, we would expect that from a pool of different RNA molecules only a subset would be transported. If a process is 100% selective (in this case meaning that only those RNA molecules with the same properties are transported), it is said to be specific (55).
Since the discovery of the high numbers of RNAs detected in phloem sap and identified as graft-mobile, researchers have been debating the origin of mobile RNAs and whether transport is selective, and the following sections will discuss these open questions. Selectivity could occur at any stage of transport: translocation to and movement through PD, entry into the phloem, transport in the phloem, or export from the phloem into target tissue (Figure 2).

Figure 2Click to view


The phloem transport complex consists ofcompanion cells (CCs)andSEsthat are the result of the division of a common mother cell. They stay intimately connected by specializedPDcalled pore–plasmodesma units (PPUs) that have, compared to other PD, a high size exclusion limit (SEL), allowing the passage of macromolecules of up to about 70 kDa or larger depending on their Stokes radius (66). To fulfil their function as transport conduits, SEs differentiate and lose their nuclei and remodel their organelles and cytoplasmic structures when they maturate. Therefore, it cannot be ruled out that the contents of the formerly intact SEs may still be present in SEs, and this might explain the high number and diversity of macromolecules observed in these conduits (42,61). In addition, the SEL of PPUs should prevent the passage of particles as large as the ribosome or proteasome components identified in exudates (63). This should also hold true for large RNAs bound to RBPs. If loading through PD from neighboring cells into SEs is impossible, large complexes can only originate from within the sieve tube system itself. Knoblauch et al. (42) estimated the expected concentration of macromolecules in phloem exudate based on the assumption that they are remnants from immature SEs. Their estimates suggest that components of SEs prior to differentiation might contribute significantly to the composition of phloem exudates and that the mere presence of a molecule in the translocation stream does not imply a specific function in the phloem or the target tissues (42). However, several observations cast doubt on all mobile RNAs being cellular leftovers.
For diffusion, molecular size is a key determinant of movement, yet such correlations are at best only very weak for long-distancemRNAtransport (14). Given current estimates of size exclusion limits and molecular stoke radiuses of transported macromolecules, mRNA molecules would likely be too large to diffuse from cell to cell and intoSEsand would require an active transport mechanism. Accordingly, the transport mechanisms for small RNAs and mRNAs might be different (44). Furthermore, different phloem anatomy and loading modes might also be important. InN. benthamiana/Arabidopsis(57) andN. benthamiana/tomato (83) heterografts, belonging to the mainly apoplastic loading species like most herbaceous plants, no correlation between the mobile RNA and the level of the transcripts in source leaves was found. However, in grapevine, a woody species where symplastic loading is driven by diffusion through PD, 17 of the 33 highly abundant leaf transcripts were graft mobile (87). Researchers proposed that highly expressed mRNAs are more likely to reach the phloem only in symplastic loaders with numerous PD connections between mesophyll and phloem cells. In apoplastic loading species with a CC–SE complex highly isolated from the surrounding leaf cells, such asA. thaliana, the expression levels in CCs might be the suitable reference (74,83). In watermelon/bottle gourd grafts, researchers also observed that most mobile mRNAs are lowly or very lowly abundant in tissues (81). Cucurbitaceae belong to the third category of phloem loading called polymer trapping, and the RNA loading mechanism could again differ from the two other loading types.
ForArabidopsis, researchers have postulated that mRNAs in CCs with higher abundances are more likely to be mobile (14). However, studies that overexpressed a few selected mRNAs did not observe increased mobility in mRNAs or mobility of reporter transcripts (66,83,86,91). Despite this, detection of mRNA mobility could be influenced by RNA stability, secondary modifications, RNA motif(s), interactions with RBPs, or retention mechanisms. Comparing the relatively small number of mobile transcripts inArabidopsis/N. benthamianagrafts, no transcript length dependence and no previously known sequence motifs in promoter or transcript sequences were found (57). However, others reported that tRNA-like sequence (TLS) motifs are significantly enriched in and make up 11% of the graft-mobile mRNA population (92). Deletion of such motifs could abolish the mobility of theCK1transcript, while the addition of the same or related TLS motifs to the normally immobileGUSorDMC1transcripts triggered mobility (92). However, many transcripts with a predicted TLS motif in leaves ofN. benthamiana/tomato heterografts did not seem to move to roots. Although only a very small number of mobile transcripts were identified in these grafts and dicistronic occurring TLS motifs were not considered, the authors concluded that TLS motifs are only effective in mRNAs transcribed in CCs (83).
Also, posttranslational modifications are suspected to influence RNA transport selectivity. Five-methylcytosine (m5C) methylation was found to be highly enriched in graft-mobile mRNAs, and two transcripts,TCTP1andHSC70.1, were not graft mobile in RNA methylation-deficient mutants in the juvenile growth phase (86).
Recent research using fluorescence-based RNA labeling also suggests that some mobile mRNAs are selectively and actively targeted to PD, whereas nonmobile mRNAs are not. It was suggested that plant RBPs could be involved in PD targeting (53). These RBPs could recognize specific sequence or structural motifs and facilitate transport (53), which is in line with the observation that transcript mobility of, e.g., TCTP1 depends on a relatively small sequence stretch and not on its abundance (86). Also, modifications like methylation could influence RNA structure and RBP interactions. As described above, many RBPs could be identified in phloem exudates, and their involvement in targeting mRNAs to PD and facilitating phloem transport remains to be investigated.
From the existing data, we conclude that the phloem import of at least some mRNAs appears to be selective but not all mobile mRNAs are the result of selectivity. Accordingly, researchers have proposed that RNA mobility has both regulated and nonregulated components (83) similar to those suggested for protein mobility (13,32,89). While there is evidence for motifs as well as for methylation playing a role in import (47,86), what this selection is based on remains an open question.
If a subset of mRNAs were being selected, researchers might expect that this would be based on their functionality, yet Gene Ontology (GO) analyses of mobile mRNA species report overrepresentations of very different and diverse GO terms. This broad distribution of functions does not suggest that specific molecular processes are being selected for.
Researchers have suggested that macromolecules up to a given size can enter phloem sieve tubes by unselective leakage from the phloem-associatedCCs(14,66). Given their small size,miRNAswould be good candidates for diffusion through the PPUs that have an exceptionally high SEL (66). Such a passive mechanism would, however, not rule out selectivity. For instance, if transport through phloem PD was diffusive (passive), the level of miRNAs translocated from CCs to SEs still might not directly reflect their level of expression in CCs, but selectivity might still depend on their retention, their degradation rate in CCs, or their posttranscriptional modifications that might affect the interaction withRBPsfacilitating transport.
Phloem sap has been shown to contain a larger population of miRNAs that differs from that of leaves and roots. Also, miRNA responses to nutrient stress differed from those of the other tissues (11). However, since the translocated miRNAs, at least in apoplastic loaders (see Section 4.2), can be expected to be synthesized mainly in CCs, a comparison between crude extract and phloem sap might be misleading, and cellular resolution would be required. Some miRNAs have not been found in phloem samples at all, e.g., miR171 (11,12,65,88). This could be most easily explained if miR171 is not expressed in CCs. Selectivity could, of course, also be achieved by specific modifications that alter intercellular localization, PD permeability, and/or interactions with RBPs. In addition, selective retention mechanisms could be active in CCs. In plant crude extracts, for example, miRNAs with highly different AGO loading capacities were found by size-separating small RNA pools. Some mature miRNAs appeared in the small fraction that was not bound in protein complexes (16). It seems likely that the efficiently AGO-bound miRNAs could be excluded from movement unless they are highly expressed. This loading efficiency differed between leaves and flowers (16), and one could speculate that it is also cell-type specific in CCs.
After enteringSEs, imported molecules are expected to be passively swept away with the translocation stream driven by bulk flow, although some unexpected root-to-shoot movement was observed in a few grafting studies (see Section 3.1). In addition, in long-stem grafts betweenN. benthamiana/tomato, a significant number of transcripts passed the graft junction but disappeared during their movement from shoot to root, including some of those with TLS motifs (83). Since phloem sap lacks RNase activity (22,27,70,90), this suggests potentially selective mRNA unloading along the transport route. Here, RBPs could provide selectivity and specificity through binding and exporting individual RNA molecules. A similar turnover of phloem proteins was first proposed based on radioactive labeling experiments combined with aphid stylet sampling at different locations along the transport pathway in wheat (24). Fisher et al. (24) proposed a highly selective protein turnover in the transport phloem and a nonselective unloading in sink tissues, which contrasted with findings in similar experiments performed on rice (3). Here, the abundant CmPP16 phloem protein was injected and shown to be specifically allocated to distant tissues. These insights suggest that some small macromolecules can be selectively distributed, whereas most move without restrictions and only large molecules (>50 kDa) require facilitating mechanisms (reviewed in61).
Mobile miRNAs and mRNAs have the capacity to act as long-distance signals. However, considering the large number of mobile RNAs, it seems unlikely that all of these RNAs function in long-distance signaling. But no matter how active, passive, or (non)selective RNA long-distance transport is, the mobile molecules might still serve a function in the phloem and/or in distant tissues, but for most mobile RNAs the potential functions are yet unclear. In the easiest interpretation, they could deliver carbon and nitrogen skeletons to sinks (42). However, there is strong evidence that at least some mobile RNAs are involved in coordinating stress responses and growth within the plant body.
Some specific mobile mRNAs have been shown to play important regulatory roles in plant development in recipient sink organs such as young leaves, roots, and potato tubers (4,41,58). In grafted plants in different species,GAImRNA moved from source to sink over graft junctions and could be correlated to changes in growth (33,35,85). Similarly, mobile mutant homeodomain transcription factor fusions were shown to induce changes in leaf shape in tomato (41). In contrast toGAIor homeodomain transcription factors, mRNAs encodingGFP,YFP,GUS, or other markers such as herbicide (BASTA) resistance did not move from transgenicArabidopsisrootstocks to wild-type scions (33,35,86,91). Also, the potatoStBEL5mRNA is known to move from the leaf via the phloem to roots and stolons to induce tuberization (4,31). InArabidopsis,AtIAA18andAtIAA28transcripts are synthesized in mature leaves and can move to roots to regulate lateral root development (58). Also, shoot-derivedAtTCTP1mRNA stimulates the emergence of lateral roots along the primary root (10), and mobileCK1enhances shoot growth (91). Although it is compelling to assume that the above examples correlate with the expression of a functional protein from the mobile transcript, currently only two conclusive reports demonstrate, based onGUS-TLSandYFP-TCTP1fusion constructs, that translation of phloem mobile transcripts in target tissues can occur (86,91).
In addition to development, some mRNAs could potentially be involved in nutrient stress responses. InArabidopsis, a subset of translocated mRNAs was reported to be induced under phosphorus or nitrogen starvation (74). Even more than 3,000 mRNAs were phloem-mobile in cucumber/watermelon heterografts in response to phosphorus deficiency (92). A more recent study identified mobile mRNAs specifically induced by low nitrogen, phosphorus, or iron inN. benthamiana/tomato heterografts (82). Of the 294 mobile mRNAs identified in total, 112 appeared under all growth conditions, indicating that they are not involved in information transfer. Some of the stress-induced mRNAs could potentially be related to altered root development. A comparison to the results in the other graft systems yielded no overlapping mRNAs to theArabidopsissystem and only four to the cucumber/watermelon system. This suggests that, if the transported mRNAs are involved in specific stress responses, these responses are species-specific and not conserved. However, the lack of overlap of stressed-induced mobile mRNAs could also be explained by the different grafting systems, growth conditions, and potential detection issues such as limited number of replicates, depth, and distinguishable SNPs and INDELs or by sequencing quality, bioinformatic pipelines used to identify heterologous RNAs, and the sequencing method used. It should also be noted that most studies did not, or were not able to, assess whether the identified mobile mRNAs are full length and did not include this criterion in the discussion of potential physiological functions.
It is puzzling that many mobile transcripts are transported to tissues where they are already expressed and noteworthy that the fraction of imported mRNA originating from source tissue is extremely small compared to its expression in the destination tissue. Transfer ratios between source and destination tissue have been estimated to be between 0.00001% and 0.76% for mRNA in grapevine grafts, with most transcripts having transfer values of less than 0.01% (87). This suggests that only a small fraction of any one type of mRNA is transported. These transport ratios could be modulated in response to environmental cues, but how can these mobile transcripts arriving in target tissues be distinguished from the locally transcribed mRNAs and thus impose their function? Could differential responses in distal tissues be evoked by secondary RNA modifications that enhance the translation or stability of transported mRNAs, as suggested for m5C transcripts (9)?
Taken together, the available data show that hundreds to thousands of different mobile mRNAs are transported but in relatively low concentrations compared to their local expression levels. A few specific mobile mRNAs have been shown to be important for the regulation of developmental processes, but the biological functions for most mobile transcripts are yet to be determined.
The first evidence for a mobile miRNA signal came from two independent reports (46,64) demonstrating that miR399, a phosphate starvation–inducible miRNA, strongly accumulated in rapeseed phloem sap under stress and could move across graft junctions from miR399-overexpressing scions to wild-type rootstocks to degrade its target transcriptPHOSPHATE 2(PHO2) and thus regulate phosphate homeostasis. Similar observations in wild-typeArabidopsisandhen1-1mutant heterografts confirmed the shoot-to-root mobility of miR399 and the sulfate deficiency–responsive miR395 under the respective nutrient starvation (11). As observed for miR399, the translocation of miR395 led to the downregulation of one of its targetmRNAs,APS, in roots. Another study using wild-type/hen1 micrografts showed that in addition to miR399, miR827 and miR2111 were also phosphate responsive and graft transmissible (36). In addition, miR398 was shown to accumulate in phloem sap during copper starvation, but the study did not attempt to confirm its mobility in grafts (12). In all of these grafting studies inArabidopsis, transport was almost exclusively observed from scions to rootstocks and from high-expressing to low- or no-expressing tissues. Also, in soybean/common bean heterografts, all miRNAs and other small RNAs were synthesized in shoots and transported almost exclusively to roots where they were not expressed, suggesting the functional importance of the transfer (44).
In addition to nutrient stress responses, phloem miRNAs were analyzed in the context of infection and development. miR2111 has been shown to stimulate root nodule formation in leguminous plants during infection by nitrogen-fixing bacteria (59,76). Mulberry miRNA (mul-miR482a-5p) was upregulated in phloem sap upon infection by phytoplasmas, and researchers suggested that it might negatively regulate resistance to infection (26). Other examples of the involvement of miRNAs in the systemic regulation of development stem from potato, where miR172 could induce tuberization, and this effect is graft transmissible from leaf to stolon (54). In tobacco heterografts, a role of miR172 in the establishment of source–sink relationships was suggested (38). miR156 was shown to move across graft unions in potato from overexpressing scion to wild-type stock and affect the leaf trichome shape, while its precursor was nonmobile (8). Accordingly, no miRNA precursors could be detected inBrassica napusphloem samples by Northern blotting (12,64). These observations support the general notion that mature miRNAs, rather than their precursors, are the transported form. However, a more recent study claimed to find particular primary miRNAs (pri-miRNAs) in RNA-seq data sets fromC. maximaphloem samples, which they confirmed by RT-PCR (75).
In addition to sense miRNA strands, some of their near-complementary miRNA*strands are also thought to be mobile. One study demonstrated that, in addition to miR399, its miR399*strand was mobile inArabidopsisgrafting experiments. In the case of mobile miR827 and miR2111, the miRNA*strands were not graft translocated (36). However, miR399*, miR827*, and miR2111*were detected in phloem samples inBrassica(65). Also, other miRNA*s were detected inBrassicaphloem (12). In all studies, miRNA*s were not present at concentrations corresponding to their sense miRNA strands. Nutrient starvation responses were observed for the phosphate-responsive 399 and 2111 miRNA*s in phloem sap (65) but not for miR395*and miR398*under sulfur or copper starvation, respectively (12). This might suggest that miRNAs are mobile, as single strands and miRNA*s might exert specific functions (36). However, issues with selective instability of one or the other strand during transport or sample preparation cannot be excluded. Taken together, the available data suggest that specific mobile miRNAs (and other small RNAs) seem to qualify well as potential long-distance signals.
An increasing wealth of data demonstrates that different types of RNAs are present in phloem sap and can be transported between tissues of grafted plants. Only a subset of the transcribed RNAs is mobile, suggesting selectivity, but the physical or chemical nature of this selection remains to be determined, as does the biological function of most mobile RNAs. Existing data point to physiological and signaling roles, but it seems unlikely that all mobile RNAs are signals. Identifying potential RNA-signaling molecules from this plethora seems like looking for a needle in a haystack.
But which criteria must be met by a given mobile RNA to qualify as a signaling molecule? (a) The mobile RNA population must change over time and in response to a stimulus; i.e., it must encode something. (b) The mobile RNA molecule must be produced in source tissues, be present in the phloem, and leaveSEsin target tissues; i.e., it must be transmitted. (c) The mobile RNA must be functional after transport (this likely means that the full-length RNA must be mobile); i.e., there must be a decoding process.
For manymiRNAs, the signaling role is well established. In the example of miR399, (a) its expression changes over time and in response to phosphate starvation; (b) it is expressed in the shoot and then transported to the root; and (c) the mode of action of miR399 is well known, and its binding to target mRNAs provides signal amplification and readout mechanisms. So the encoding, transmission, and decoding pipeline is instantiated in a way that is consistent with a communication and signaling system.
For transported mRNAs, strong data to support a physiological function are available for only very few cases, and questions remain about the potential function of the hundreds to thousands of mRNAs that are transported over long distances. A signaling role has been hypothesized, but evidence is sparse. Many mRNAs are transported to tissues where they are already transcribed. How might these transported mRNAs be distinguished from the locally produced mRNAs; how might this signal be amplified, and what functionality would be gained? Or are most of the mobile transcripts just playing a role by providing redundancy and thus robustness to the biological system?
Mobile miRNAs play crucial roles in plant development and stress responses, and evidence also supports important functions for mobile mRNAs. The main challenge now is to identify and understand the signaling pathways based on mobile RNA molecules within and across species, to reveal their biological functions, and to understand how miRNA and mRNA molecules are licensed with a travel permit. This will be a tedious task, given that so many transcripts are exchanged between tissues and that RNA modifications and interactions with specificRBPscould modulate not only their transport but also their activity in receiving cells. The development of a predictive framework for identifying mobile RNAs and assessing their impact on signaling or physiological processes will be key for unraveling the mysteries of mobile RNA and for putting our understanding to the test.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We apologize to all colleagues contributing to RNA transport in plants whose valuable work and insights are not discussed in this review due to space limitations. This article is part of a Synergy project that is receiving funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement no. 810131).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


