We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Trehalose 6-phosphate (Tre6P) has a dual function as a signal and homeostatic regulator of sucrose levels in plants. In source leaves, Tre6P regulates the production of sucrose to balance supply with demand for sucrose from growing sink organs. As a signal of sucrose availability, Tre6P influences developmental decisions that will affect future demand for sucrose, such as flowering, embryogenesis, and shoot branching, and links the growth of sink organs to sucrose supply. This involves complex interactions with SUCROSE-NON-FERMENTING1-RELATED KINASE1 that are not yet fully understood. Tre6P synthase, the enzyme that makes Tre6P, plays a key role in the nexus between sucrose and Tre6P, operating in the phloem-loading zone of leaves and potentially generating systemic signals for source-sink coordination. Many plants have large and diverse families of Tre6P phosphatase enzymes that dephosphorylate Tre6P, some of which have noncatalytic functions in plant development.
Article metrics loading...
Trehalose 6-phosphate (Tre6P) has a dual function as a signal and homeostatic regulator of sucrose levels in plants. In source leaves, Tre6P regulates the production of sucrose to balance supply with demand for sucrose from growing sink organs. As a signal of sucrose availability, Tre6P influences developmental decisions that will affect future demand for sucrose, such as flowering, embryogenesis, and shoot branching, and links the growth of sink organs to sucrose supply. This involves complex interactions with SUCROSE-NON-FERMENTING1-RELATED KINASE1 that are not yet fully understood. Tre6P synthase, the enzyme that makes Tre6P, plays a key role in the nexus between sucrose and Tre6P, operating in the phloem-loading zone of leaves and potentially generating systemic signals for source-sink coordination. Many plants have large and diverse families of Tre6P phosphatase enzymes that dephosphorylate Tre6P, some of which have noncatalytic functions in plant development.
Trehalose 6-phosphate (Tre6P)is a signal metabolite that regulatessucrosemetabolism in plants and links their growth and development to their metabolic status. It is the intermediate in a two-step pathway for the biosynthesis of trehalose (α-d-glucopyranosyl-(1→1)-α-d-glucopyranoside) mediated byTre6P synthase (TPS; EC 2.4.1.15) andTre6P phosphatase (TPP; EC 3.1.3.12) (18). This pathway is common in bacteria, and it plays a central role in the carbon metabolism of fungi and many invertebrates, which usetrehaloseas an osmolyte, storage reserve, transport sugar, and stress protectant. The presence of trehalose in some nonflowering plants was reported over a century ago (3), but for many years it was thought to be unimportant, or even absent, from flowering plants. This view changed about 20 years ago, when genes encoding TPS and TPP enzymes were found in the model plant speciesArabidopsis(Arabidopsis thaliana) (14,106).TPSandTPPgenes have since been identified in all major plant taxa (6,7,62). In parallel, attempts to engineer trehalose metabolism in plants, by expression of heterologous TPS and TPP enzymes from bacteria and yeast, unexpectedly led to abnormal growth and development of the plants, even though they contained only trace amounts of trehalose (82). It was also discovered thatArabidopsis tps1null mutants, lacking the predominant TPS enzyme in this species, fail to completeembryogenesis(34). Even when viabletps1seeds were obtained by inducible or embryo-specific expression of TPS1 during embryogenesis, the resultingtps1plants were severely stunted and did not flower (45,102). Together, these observations led to the conclusion that the pathway of trehalose biosynthesis is present in all plants and is essential for normal growth and development at all stages in the plant's life cycle.
With only a few exceptions, flowering plants contain barely detectable amounts of trehalose, with levels that are typically 100 to 1,000 times lower than those of more abundant sugars, especially sucrose (19,64). Sucrose (β-d-fructofuranosyl α-d-glucopyranoside), like trehalose, is a nonreducing disaccharide and in most flowering plants is the major product of photosynthesis and the sugar that is most commonly transported in the phloem from source leaves to growingsinkorgans, such as roots, flowers, seeds, fruits, and tubers (63). In quantitative terms, trehalose biosynthesis is thus a relatively minor pathway in plant sugar metabolism, so it was initially surprising that disturbance of this pathway led to such severe growth and developmental defects. A key breakthrough for solving this conundrum was the discovery that expression of bacterial TPS or TPP enzymes inArabidopsisgave rise to strong, but opposite, phenotypes; TPS-expressing plants had small leaves, early flowering, and a bushy growth habit, whereas TPP-expressing plants had large leaves, late flowering, and few shoot branches (89). This led to the conclusion that changes in the level of Tre6P, the intermediate in the pathway, rather than in the level of trehalose itself, are responsible for the aberrant phenotypes when the trehalose biosynthetic pathway is perturbed. Since this discovery, there has been intense interest in elucidating the function of Tre6P to understand how it exerts such a profound influence on plant growth and development. What has emerged is the concept that Tre6P functions primarily as a signal and regulator of sucrose levels in plants (40,65,114).
In this review, we begin by exploring the diverse families of TPS and TPP enzymes in plants, highlighting recent advances that shed new light on how the level of Tre6P in plant tissues is controlled. There follows a description of the sucrose:Tre6P nexus model (114), with a critical examination of this model as a basis for interpreting the function of Tre6P insourceleaves andsinkorgans. We then discuss our current understanding of how Tre6P influences some of the key developmental processes in the plant life cycle—flowering, embryogenesis, and shoot branching—linking these to the metabolic status of the plant. Finally, we draw some general conclusions, highlighting gaps in our knowledge and proposing areas to focus on in future research. Due to space constraints, some important and active areas of Tre6P research cannot be covered in depth. These include the roles of Tre6P (and trehalose) in abiotic stress responses and interactions of plants with beneficial and pathogenic microorganisms and the engineering of Tre6P/trehalose metabolism in crop plants to improve their resilience to biotic and abiotic stresses in the field. The reader is referred to previous reviews that cover these topics (35,46,64,82,83,92) and some successful examples of engineering Tre6P metabolism for crop improvement (47,77,80).
TPSandTPPgenes are present in single-celled chlorophyte algae, streptophyte algae, and all major groups of land plants, indicating that the pathway was already present at the beginning of the green plant lineage (7,62). Following the initial identification ofTPS(AtTPS1) andTPP(AtTPPAandAtTPPB) genes inArabidopsis(14,106), the sequencing of theArabidopsisgenome revealed these were members of large gene families, with a total of 11TPSgenes (AtTPS1–AtTPS11) and 10TPP(AtTPPA–AtTPPJ) genes in this species (53). Phylogenetic analyses revealed that theTPSgenes divide into two distinct clades: class I (AtTPS1–AtTPS4) and class II (AtTPS5–AtTPS11) (58) (Figure 1). Both clades are represented in chlorophyte algae and throughout the green plant lineage, and both theTPSand theTPPgene families have expanded independently in different divisions of the plant kingdom (7,62,86,104,105,115). The functions of the class I TPS, class II TPS and TPP proteins are discussed in the following sections, along with the potential significance of their diversity.

Figure 1Click to view


InArabidopsis, the class I clade contains fourTPSgenes, three of which—AtTPS1,AtTPS2, andAtTPS4—have been shown to encode catalytically active TPS enzymes based on complementation of the yeasttps1Δmutant (14,29,101,105).AtTPS3is most likely a pseudogene (62). To date, none of the class II TPS proteins have been reproducibly shown to complement the yeasttps1Δmutant or have TPS activity in vitro (48,86,105). The AtTPS1 protein and its orthologs in other species contain N- and C-terminal domains flanking a central glucosyltransferase domain that contains the catalytic site and has similarity with single-domain TPS enzymes in bacteria (e.g., OtsA fromEscherichia coli) (Figure 1).
The functions of the three domains of AtTPS1 have been investigated by complementation of theArabidopsis tps1-1mutant with various constructs based on the genomic sequence ofAtTPS1, including the native promoter, untranslated regions, and introns, and encoding wild-type, truncated, or mutated versions of AtTPS1 (38). These investigations showed that the N-terminal domain contains a putative monopartite nuclear localization signal (R28-E-K-R-K32) (Figure 1) that targets the majority of the AtTPS1 to the nucleus in various cell types, with the remainder being located in the cytosol. The N-terminal domain also contains a Leu/Arg-rich motif that has been conserved from chlorophyte algae through to flowering plants (6,7,62) and has an autoinhibitory effect on the enzyme's activity when expressed in yeast (101). However, disruption of this motif by substitution of Leu27by Pro had little impact on the enzyme's activity in complementedtps1-1lines expressing the mutated enzyme (38).
The C-terminal domain has similarity with plant TPP enzymes but lacks some of the residues associated with the active site of TPP enzymes (Figure 1), including an Asp residue that plays a central role in catalysis (62) (see Section 2.2). Expression of truncated forms of AtTPS1 lacking the C-terminal domain (AtTPS1[ΔC]) was able to rescue thetps1-1mutant throughembryogenesis, but the resulting plants were severely stunted and unable to flower (38). Very similar phenotypes were observed whentps1-1was complemented with AtTPS1 carrying an A119W point mutation within the catalytic domain (38). In both cases, the plants contained readily detectable levels of two unidentified disaccharide-monophosphates that were either absent or in trace amounts in wild-type plants. As these two molecules were isomers ofTre6P, it was suggested that they were the products of catalytic errors by the AtTPS1[A119W] and AtTPS1[ΔC] forms of AtTPS1 during Tre6P synthesis (38). The levels of these two compounds were lower, and the growth defects less severe, in AtTPS1[ΔNΔC] and AtTPS1[ΔN A119W] lines, in which the N-terminal domain of the AtTPS1 protein had also been removed, indicating functional interactions between the three domains in the wild-type AtTPS1 protein (38).
The C-terminal domain contains two experimentally demonstrated phosphorylation sites (Ser827and Ser941), along with a putative SUMOylation site (Lys902) (Figure 1). The latter occurs within a peptide motif—S895⋅W⋅N⋅V⋅L⋅D⋅L⋅[KSUMO]⋅G⋅E⋅N⋅Y⋅F⋅S⋅C909—that matches the SUMOylation site consensus sequence and is highly conserved in class I TPS enzymes in all the major land plant groups and streptophyte algae (38). Complementation oftps1-1by expression of AtTPS1 with a 48-amino-acid truncation at the C terminus (TPS1[ΔC895–942]) gave rise to plants with very similar phenotypes to the AtTPS[ΔC] lines, including elevated levels of the two unknown disaccharide-monophosphates. Thus, much of the functionality of the C-terminal domain of AtTPS1 appears to be associated with the putative SUMOylation site and distal phosphorylation site (Ser941), suggesting that posttranslational modifications at these sites are important for regulating the enzyme's activity (38).
In contrast toAtTPS1, which is expressed in all major organs of the plant, expression of the other two functional class I genes inArabidopsis,AtTPS2andAtTPS4, is largely restricted to specific tissues within developing seeds (40,105). TheAtTPS2andAtTPS3loci are adjacent on chromosome 1 in theArabidopsisgenome, and this tandem repeat lies within a region of conserved synteny with theAtTPS1locus, indicating thatAtTPS2andAtTPS3arose via a segmental duplication (62). The origin of theAtTPS4gene is less clear. The AtTPS2 and AtTPS4 proteins share similar glucosyltransferase and C-terminal domains with AtTPS1 but lack an N-terminal domain (Figure 1). When heterologously expressed in yeast, they appear to have higher enzymatic activity than AtTPS1 (29), consistent with the absence of the Leu/Arg-rich autoinhibitory motif. Such short forms of class I TPS proteins have so far only been found in members of the Brassicaceae (62). The significance of this limited distribution is unknown. The potential function of these short class I TPS proteins during embryogenesis is discussed in Section 4.2.
Phylogenetic studies indicate that the class II TPS proteins inArabidopsisand other flowering plants can be divided into at least two separate clades, with AtTPS5–AtTPS7 clustering separately from AtTPS8–AtTPS10 (51,62,115). The phylogenetic relationship of AtTPS11 and its orthologs is less clear, with some studies placing them on a deep-rooted branch of the AtTPS8–AtTPS10 clade, while others put them in a separate clade of their own. The class II TPS proteins resemble those of the class I in having a glucosyltransferase-like domain and a C-terminalTPP-like domain, but they lack an N-terminal domain (Figure 1). Their glucosyltransferase-like domain contains some but not all of the active site residues (Figure 1), and they are unable to complement, reproducibly, the yeasttps1Δmutant (86,105). The TPP-like domains of the class II TPS proteins contain three peptide motifs that are associated with the active site of TPP enzymes and characteristic of all members of the haloacid dehalogenase (HAD) superfamily of proteins (62) (Figure 1). Despite the high conservation of TPP active site residues, none of the class II TPS proteins have been demonstrated to have TPP activity, either by complementation of the TPP-deficient yeasttps2Δmutant or by in vitro assay of recombinant proteins (48,86,107). In the absence of demonstrable TPS or TPP activities, the functions of the class II TPS proteins remain largely a mystery nearly 20 years after this enigmatic family of proteins was first described (58).
Loss-of-function mutants and overexpression studies have implicated class II TPS proteins in responses toabscisic acid (ABA)signaling (TPS5) (98), thermotolerance (TPS5) (96), basal pathogen defense (TPS5) (109), the regulation of cell shape (TPS6) (20), cold tolerance (TPS11) (61), and aphid resistance (TPS11) (91). However, details of the molecular mechanisms involved remain sketchy. Molecular functions that have been proposed for the class II TPS proteins include (a) the regulation of class I TPS enzyme activity, based on the similarity of these proteins to noncatalytic subunits of thetrehalose-synthesizing complex in yeast (62) and the association of rice class I and II proteins in yeast two-hybrid and bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays (116); (b) signaling proteins, based on the conservation of ligand-binding site residues in their glucosyltransferase-like and TPP-like domains, giving them the potential to bind Tre6P and other related molecules (62). It has also been noted that the class II TPS proteins have some resemblance to the bifunctional synthase-phosphatase enzymes that are responsible for the synthesis of glucosylglycerol in cyanobacteria (67) and floridoside and isofloridoside in red algae (Rhodophyta) (81) via phosphorylated intermediates. These heterosidic compounds are rare in flowering plants and have not been reported inArabidopsis. Nevertheless, the possibility that the class II TPS proteins do have catalytic activity and are involved in synthesizing some kind of disaccharide, other than trehalose, has not yet been definitively excluded.
There are 10TPPgenes inArabidopsis(Figure 1), all of which encode catalytically active TPP enzymes based on their ability to complement the yeasttps2Δmutant (104,106). This large gene family arose via repeated genome duplication events, and 8 out of the 10 genes are paralogous pairs:AtTPPBandAtTPPC,AtTPPEandAtTPPH,AtTPPFandAtTPPG, andAtTPPIandAtTPPJ(104). Such a high degree of paralog retention is unusual for enzyme genes and is more often seen in transcription factor and other regulatory protein gene families. Promoter analysis with β-GLUCURONIDASE (GUS) and GREEN FLUORESCENT PROTEIN (GFP) reporters revealed that the 10AtTPPgenes have different spatiotemporal expression patterns, indicating neofunctionalization after gene duplications (104). The AtTPP proteins also differ in their subcellular compartmentation, with some being localized in chloroplasts (AtTPPD and AtTPPE), the nucleus (AtTPPG), or both nuclei and peroxisomes (AtTPPI), and the remainder being cytosolic (52,54).
SeveralTPPgenes have been linked to abiotic stress responses. In rice,OsTPP1andOsTPP2are induced by cold stress (84,90), while theOsTPP7gene confers resistance to anaerobiosis during germination, a useful trait that has been lost, along with theOsTPP7gene, from many commercial cultivars (55). Expression of theOsTPP1gene in developing maize ears under the control of theOsMAD6promoter improved yield under drought conditions by preventing kernel abortion, with no yield penalty under well-watered conditions (77). This was linked to changes in expression ofSWEET(SUGARS WILL EVENTUALLY BE EXPORTED TRANSPORTER)genes encodingsucroseefflux carriers and a shift in sucrose allocation to the seeds (80). InArabidopsis, a redox-regulated plastidial isoform, AtTPPD, has been linked to salt and oxidative stress resistance (54), and two other isoforms, AtTPPF and AtTPPI, are involved in responses to drought (59,60).
Several TPP proteins have also been shown to play significant roles in plant development. In maize (Zea mays), theRAMOSA3(RA3) gene is expressed in localized regions of inflorescence primordia and encodes a catalytically active TPP. Loss-of-functionra3mutants show increased branching of both the ears and tassels (88), although there were no significant differences inTre6Por trehalose levels compared to wild-type primordia (19). A screen for enhancer mutants in thera3mutant background identified four allelic mutants with similarly increased inflorescence branching, all of which had lesions in theZmTPP4gene (24). TheZmTPP4gene was upregulated in thera3mutant, has a similar expression pattern toRA3in inflorescence primordia, and also encodes a catalytically active TPP (24). However, there were no significant differences in Tre6P levels between wild-type,ra3, andra3 tpp4inflorescence primordia. Among the fourZmTPP4allelic variants, some retained up to 40% of wild-type TPP activity, while others were catalytically inactive, yet all of thera3 tpp4double mutants had essentially the same degree of inflorescence branching (24). Together, these results suggested that the branching phenotype was independent of the loss of TPP catalytic activity in the mutants. This was confirmed by the demonstration that a mutated (D110E), catalytically inactive form of RA3 expressed under the control of theRA3promoter could substantially complement thera3mutant (24). Researchers concluded that the branching defects in thera3andra3 tpp4mutants are independent of the catalytic activities of RA3 and ZmTPP4 and that these two proteins have noncatalytic moonlighting functions in the regulation of maize inflorescence development (24). Potential signaling functions might involve binding of Tre6P in a noncatalytic conformation or binding of other ligands and interactions with other proteins. A connection between TPP andauxinsignaling has been observed inArabidopsis tppiknockdown mutants, with auxin movement by PIN1 and PIN3 auxin efflux carriers being compromised, leading to restriction of primary root growth (59). The roles of Tre6P and trehalose metabolic enzymes in plant development are discussed further in Section 4.
A recurring theme in studies of Tre6P in plants is a connection withsucrose, the dominant sugar in vascular plants. When Tre6P was first identified as a molecule of interest in plants, researchers proposed that it played a role in the regulation of sucrose utilization (89). Mass spectrometric methods that were sensitive and specific enough to measure the very low amounts of Tre6P in plant tissues revealed that the level of Tre6P inArabidopsisseedlings and rosettes is highly correlated with that of sucrose (65). The level of Tre6P is highly dynamic, with up to 40-fold increases in Tre6P content observed when sucrose was supplied to carbon-starvedArabidopsisseedlings (65,78,114). Tre6P also changes in response to endogenous fluctuations in sucrose levels, for example, during the diel light-dark cycle in leaves, and these two metabolites were highly correlated inArabidopsisrosettes across a wide range of growth conditions (2,19,31,39,65,69,95,112). Correlations between sucrose and Tre6P levels have also been observed in otherArabidopsistissues, including theshoot apical meristem (SAM)(108), and in other species, including potato (Solanum tuberosum) (27), wheat (Triticum aestivum) (68), maize (51), and cucumber (Cucumis sativa) (119). The responsiveness of Tre6P to sucrose appears to be specific, with responses to changes in the levels of other sugars, such as glucose and fructose, or nitrogen supply explained by concomitant changes in sucrose levels (114). InArabidopsisseedlings, the kinetics of the Tre6P response and differential sensitivity to various inhibitors showed that the rise in Tre6P after sucrose feeding was not simply due to mass action effects, i.e., the increased availability of the substrates for Tre6P synthesis: Glc6P and uridine diphosphate glucose (114). The dynamic responsiveness of Tre6P to changes in sucrose levels led to the proposal that Tre6P might function as a signal metabolite, reporting the availability of sucrose (65) as well as regulating its utilization for growth (89).
Another intriguing observation was that sucrose levels change in the opposite direction to Tre6P when Tre6P levels are manipulated by overexpression ofTPSorTPP(114). In an attempt to provide a conceptual framework for understanding these various findings, the sucrose:Tre6P nexus model was proposed. This model postulates that Tre6P has a dual function as both a signal and a negative feedback regulator of sucrose levels (40,114). Researchers hypothesize that as Tre6P follows the diel fluctuations in sucrose insourceleaves it acts to lower sucrose production if the levels of sucrose in the leaves rise too high and to stimulate sucrose production if levels fall too low (40) (Figure 2). Such homeostatic regulation of sucrose has been likened to the function of insulin in the control of blood glucose levels in animals (40,114). Researchers envisage the sucrose-signaling function of Tre6P coming to the fore insinkorgans, with high Tre6P being a sign that sucrose supplies are abundant and low Tre6P indicating that supplies are limited. By signaling sucrose availability, Tre6P provides information about the metabolic status of the plant that can be integrated with other endogenous signals (e.g., phytohormones) and environmental cues to bring about appropriate developmental responses. These responses include a commitment to flowering, growth of new shoot branches, and seed production, all of which have a significant impact on the carbon budget of the plant in the future. According to this model, once a developmental commitment has been made, Tre6P continues to play a role in monitoring sucrose supply to the growing sink organ and regulating its utilization of sucrose for growth accordingly.

Figure 2Click to view


Another feature of the nexus relationship between sucrose and Tre6P in this model is its flexibility, with the sensitivity and response range of Tre6P being adjusted to suit the particular needs of individual tissues and developmental stages. Evidence for this flexibility comes from a comparison of leaves and shoot apices; in each tissue, Tre6P is highly correlated with sucrose, but the sucrose:Tre6P ratio in leaves is tenfold higher than in shoot apices (19,64,69,108). The nexus can also respond to changes in environmental conditions, as indicated by the fivefold-higher sucrose:Tre6P ratio in leaves of cold-grown (8°C)Arabidopsisplants than in plants grown at 20°C, with Tre6P closely tracking the diel fluctuations in sucrose levels at both growth temperatures (19). Such adaptation of the nexus can explain why in some circumstances the sucrose-Tre6P relationship appears to break down. For example, in grapevine (Vitis vinifera), there were huge changes in both the sucrose and Tre6P contents of the berries at different stages of development, but the levels of these two metabolites were poorly correlated if compared across the whole 2-month period of fruit development and ripening (26). Similarly, the correlations between sucrose and Tre6P levels in developing wheat and maize seeds were also weak when metabolite levels were compared over the whole course of seed development (50,68). At first sight, these findings seem to contradict the nexus model. However, it must be remembered there are major developmental changes in growing tissues over these long timescales, with transitions from cell division to cell expansion, followed by accumulation of storage reserves and then fruit ripening and seed maturation. It is well established that there are major adjustments in metabolism during these developmental transitions, so it should not be surprising if the relationship between sucrose and Tre6P were also adjusted to new settings that are appropriate for that particular stage of development. Thus, comparingsinkorgans at different developmental stages could easily lead to the conclusion that the relationship has broken down, when in reality it has simply been adjusted to a new state. Differences in timescale probably explain why strong correlations between sucrose and Tre6P are reproducibly observed in leaves and seedlings over relatively short time periods (minutes to hours), but correlations have not always been seen in experiments over longer time frames (e.g., seed and fruit development) when sampling intervals are typically measured in days or weeks and major metabolic and developmental changes are occurring.
The sucrose:Tre6P nexus model is continually evolving, and some or even all aspects of the model may eventually be rejected as we improve our understanding of Tre6P and its functions in plants. Nevertheless, for the moment, we consider that it provides a plausible explanation for most of the phenotypes reported from plants with altered Tre6P levels and is a useful framework for formulating hypotheses and designing experiments to investigate the functions of Tre6P in plants.
Constitutive overexpression ofTPSorTPPwas the key to recognizing the importance ofTre6Pin plants (89), but such plants have limitations, as the phenotypes are so pleiotropic that it can be difficult to disentangle primary and secondary effects. Later studies using chemically inducible promoters to drive TPS expression (39,69), or pharmacological approaches with membrane-permeable analogs of Tre6P (47), allowed the impact of short-term increases in Tre6P to be investigated. InArabidopsisleaves, an induced rise in Tre6P led to a shift inphotoassimilate partitioning, with less carbon going intosucrosesynthesis and more being used for organic and amino acid synthesis (39). This shift was brought about by posttranslational activation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase, increasing anaplerotic flux of carbon into the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and posttranslational activation of nitrate reductase (39). Together, these changes will increase the supply of reduced nitrogen and carbon skeletons, both of which are needed for amino acid synthesis. At night, an induced rise in Tre6P inhibited the remobilization oftransitory starchreserves to sucrose in leaves (69). The inhibition appears to operate at an early step in the pathway of starch breakdown in the chloroplasts and is integrated with the regulation of this process by the circadian clock, but the molecular mechanism has not yet been elucidated (31,69). In this context, it is worth noting that modulation of the clock by sugars is dependent on AtTPS1 (41).
Complementation of theArabidopsis tps1-1mutant with GUS- or GFP-tagged AtTPS1 showed that in leaves the protein is located primarily in and around the vascular tissue, especially the companion cell-sieve element complex; around the phloem parenchyma of the bundle sheath; and in stomatal guard cells (38) (Figure 2). Previous studies onArabidopsis tps1,tppg, andtrehalose1mutants revealed the importance of Tre6P andtrehalosemetabolism for the regulation of stomatal conductance, including sensitivity toABA(45,103,104). The potential functions of Tre6P in stomata were reviewed in Reference40.
Arabidopsisis an apoplastic phloem loader, and the presence of AtTPS1 in cells on either side of the apoplastic barrier places it in strategic sites at the interface betweensourceandsinktissues (Figure 2). The phloem parenchyma cells of the bundle sheath are symplastically connected, via plasmodesmata, with the mesophyll cells where sucrose is produced and are responsible for the movement of sucrose into the apoplast viaSWEETsucrose efflux carriers (21). If the production of sucrose in the leaves exceeds the transport capacity of the phloem or demand from growing sink organs, it will accumulate in the phloem parenchyma and mesophyll cells, triggering a rise in Tre6P made by AtTPS1 in the phloem parenchyma. Tre6P will be able to diffuse symplastically into the mesophyll cells, where it can divert photoassimilates away from sucrose toward organic and amino acids during the day or slow down the remobilization oftransitory starchreserves at night (Figure 2). Conversely, if sucrose production is too slow to meet demand, sucrose and Tre6P levels will fall, allowing more photoassimilates to be directed towards sucrose synthesis in the light or faster turnover of starch reserves at night. Such homeostatic regulation of sucrose production by Tre6P in leaves helps the plant to balance the supply of sucrose with demand. Leaves also export amino acids, alongside sucrose, via the phloem, and Tre6P might also help to ensure that the supplies of sucrose and amino acids from the leaves are properly matched to meet both the carbon and nitrogen needs of growing sink tissues (39,40).
The molecular mechanisms by which Tre6P responds to fluctuations in sucrose are still poorly understood. Inhibitor studies indicated that inArabidopsisseedlings the Tre6P response to exogenous sucrose supply is dependent on de novo translation but not transcription (114). More recently, complementation studies with theArabidopsis tps1-1mutant showed that AtTPS1 plays an important role in connecting Tre6P with sucrose (38). In most of the complemented lines expressing wild-type or modified forms of AtTPS1, Tre6P levels in rosettes were highly correlated with sucrose (38). Expression of theE. coliTPS (OtsA), under the control of theAtTPS1promoter and other potential gene regulatory elements, rescued thetps1-1mutant throughembryogenesis(38). Root growth was impaired in the OtsA-complemented plants, but otherwise their growth and development were very similar to that of wild-type plants (38). Although the OtsA-complemented plants had Tre6P and sucrose levels in a similar range as those in wild-type plants, Tre6P and sucrose were poorly correlated, indicating that AtTPS1 is important for tying Tre6P to sucrose. This result also appears to question the physiological importance of the relationship between sucrose and Tre6P, at least insourceleaves. However,photoassimilate partitioningis regulated by a complex network of transcriptional, posttranslational, and allosteric mechanisms (94). The near wild-type metabolite levels in the OtsA-complementedtps1-1plants indicate that some of these other mechanisms were indeed still operating to regulate sucrose levels, even though the sucrose:Tre6P nexus mechanism appeared to be broken. Such robustness is a common feature of many metabolic networks, and there could be sufficient redundancy within the network to allow the OtsA-complemented plants to grow relatively normally, at least under standard laboratory conditions. It remains to be tested whether disruption of the nexus in these plants has a more severe effect when the plants are grown under suboptimal conditions.
In addition to the leaves, sucrose can also be provided by remobilization of short- and long-term storage reserves (e.g., starch, fructans, and oil) in germinating seeds and in sprouting bulbs and tubers. Stem reserves of starch or fructans can make a major contribution to grain filling in cereals, and many perennial woody plants accumulate starch reserves in their stems or roots during the growing season to fuel springtime growth. It seems likely that Tre6P is involved in the management of such reserves and their remobilization to supply sucrose, but so far there have been few studies in this area.
Nonphotosynthetic organs, such as roots, flowers, developing seeds, and tubers, are dependent on the supply ofsucrosefromsourceleaves for the carbon and energy they need for growth and accumulation of storage reserves (63). Here, the sucrose-signaling function ofTre6Pthat regulates sucrose utilization is the dominant aspect of the sucrose:Tre6P relationship (40,89) (Figure 2). Researchers propose that in meristematic and dormant tissues Tre6P provides information about the plant's capacity to supply sucrose, influencing developmental decisions, e.g., flowering and shoot branching (Figure 3), that will create increased demand for sucrose in the future (see Section 4). The growth that follows developmental transitions is also regulated by Tre6P to ensure that it matches the availability of sucrose from the leaves and other source tissues. Two protein kinase complexes,SUCROSE-NON-FERMENTING1-RELATED KINASE1 (SnRK1)and TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN (TOR), are central hubs in metabolic regulation and act antagonistically on growth, with SnRK1 repressing and TOR activating growth (8). InArabidopsis, expression of genes encoding subunits of the TOR or SnRK1 complexes overlaps with that ofAtTPS1in the leaf and root vasculature, indicating that interactions between TOR, SnRK1, and AtTPS1/Tre6P could be occurring in these tissues (38,72,111). At present, we have no direct evidence of regulation of TOR by Tre6P. However,Arabidopsis lst8mutants, lacking a regulatory subunit of the TOR complex, have similar metabolic profiles (72) to plants with elevated Tre6P levels (114), suggesting a possible connection between TOR and Tre6P. In contrast, connections between Tre6P and SnRK1 have been more extensively studied. This topic has been recently reviewed (9), so here we highlight only some key points.

Figure 3Click to view


Several of theArabidopsisclass IITPSproteins are potential targets for phosphorylation by SnRK1 (43,48) (Figure 1), but the impact of this on Tre6P metabolism and function in vivo, if any, is not yet understood. Suppression of SnRK1 in developing pea (Pisum sativum) seeds led to developmental stage–dependent changes in expression of the class ITPSgene (PsTPS1), downregulation of class IITPSgenes (PsTPS5andPsTPS9), and increased levels of sucrose and Tre6P in the seeds (85). More is known about Tre6P-SnRK1 interactions in the opposite sense, i.e., the impact of Tre6P on SnRK1. It was shown that Tre6P can inhibit SnRK1 in developingArabidopsistissues, with inhibition being dependent on a heat-labile factor that is present in young, but not older, leaves (118). Inhibitory effects of Tre6P on SnRK1 have since been reported from other growing tissues (e.g., seedlings) (78,79) and in other species (e.g., developing potato tubers) (27). The inhibition of SnRK1 activity by Tre6P leads to changes in gene expression, mediated, at least in part, via modulation of the bZIP11 transcription factor (25,28,66). A second mechanism of SnRK1 regulation by Tre6P involves direct binding of Tre6P to the catalytic subunit (SnRK1α) of the SnRK1 complex (117). This inhibits interaction of the SnRK1 complex with two SnRK1-activating kinases [SNAK1 and SNAK2, also known as GEMINIVIRUS REP-INTERACTING KINASE1 (GRIK1) and GRIK2], thereby lowering SnRK1 activity in vivo (117). Conversely, it was also observed that Tre6P activates SnRK1 activity when assayed in vitro in the absence of SNAKs (117). It should also be noted that, although generally considered to be a repressor of growth, SnRK1 is also essential for growth (9). As discussed in the following sections, Tre6P might also be influencing the metabolism and growth ofsinkorgans via other mechanisms, including interactions with phytohormone signaling and modulation of sucrose transport. The emerging picture is one of multifaceted interactions between Tre6P and SnRK1, embedded within a wider network of regulatory mechanisms that coordinate plant growth with metabolic status (9).
The life cycle of flowering plants, from germination to seed production, involves developmental transitions that generally commit the plant to a new growth phase that will consumesucroseand other resources. Developmental transitions that occur in most flowering plants include seed germination, the juvenile-to-adult transition in leaves, flowering, shoot and root branching, and, finally, seed set and fruit production. Other more specific examples include tuberization; sprouting in bulbs, corms, and tubers; and breaking of winter or dry-season dormancy in woody perennials.Tre6Phas been implicated as a regulatory factor in several developmental transitions, potentially providing information on whether the plant's capacity to supply sucrose is sufficient for the new growth that will follow the transition. In the following sections, we describe our current understanding of how Tre6P influences some of the key developmental transitions inArabidopsis: flowering, embryogenesis, and shoot branching.
A connection between Tre6P and flowering time was established by the precocious or delayed flowering whenTPSorTPP, respectively, was overexpressed inArabidopsis(89). Flowering time is controlled by multiple interacting pathways involving environmental inputs (e.g., photoperiod, temperature, and nutrient availability) and endogenous cues (e.g., phytohormones and the age of the plant).FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT)is a phloem-mobile protein that is synthesized under long-day conditions in the companion cells of the leaf vasculature (Figure 2) and moves to theSAM, where it triggers the floral transition (100). Expression ofFTis under the control of theCONSTANS(CO) gene, and FT shares some of its functions with a close homolog, TWIN SISTER OF FT (TSF). Using a reverse genetic approach, researchers found that expression ofFTinArabidopsisleaves is dependent on AtTPS1 (108), although a strict dependence on Tre6P was not formally demonstrated. When thetps1-1mutant was complemented by expression of theE. coliTPS (OtsA), the complemented plants flowered at the same chronological age and leaf number as wild-type and AtTPS1-complemented plants when grown under long-day conditions (38). This observation definitively showed that the dependence ofFTexpression on AtTPS1 is due to its Tre6P-synthesizing activity, rather than any putative noncatalytic functions (38).
As noted previously, AtTPS1 is predominantly located in the vascular tissue of the leaves, especially in companion cells (38), whereFTis expressed (Figure 2). Localized overexpression of TPS (OtsA) in the vasculature, under the control of theFlaveria trinervia GLDPAgene promoter (4), led to higher Tre6P levels; increased expression ofCO,FT, andTSF; and early flowering, whereas expression of a heterologous TPP to lower Tre6P in the vasculature delayed flowering (36). These flowering phenotypes resembled those of constitutive TPS- and TPP-overexpressing plants (89) and indicated that the leaf vasculature is the major site of action of Tre6P in the photoperiodic induction of flowering viaFT(36). In general, high Tre6P levels are associated with early flowering inArabidopsis. However, when thetps1-1mutant was partially complemented by expression of some of the mutated (AtTPS1[A119W]) or truncated (AtTPS1[ΔC]) forms of AtTPS1, the plants never flowered, even though they had up to four times more Tre6P than wild-type plants (38). The AtTPS1[A119W]- and AtTPS1[ΔC]-complemented plants contained elevated levels of two unidentified compounds that were isomeric with Tre6P, and it was proposed that these were interfering with Tre6P signaling, thereby preventing the usual flowering response to elevated Tre6P (38).
Using reverse genetic approaches, AtTPS1 was also shown to affect flowering under short-day conditions via interactions with the age-related pathway (108), in which age-dependent decay in the levels of microRNA 156 (miR156) modulates expression of severalSQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE(SPL) genes in theSAM(Figure 3). The molecular interactions connecting AtTPS1/Tre6P to this pathway in the SAM remain to be elucidated. In situ RNA hybridization showed thatAtTPS1is expressed around the central zone of vegetative meristems and in the floral primordia of inflorescence meristems (108), and the AtTPS1 protein was located in the peripheral and rib zones of the SAM, where cell division, differentiation, and expansion occur (38). AtTPS1 has been reported to bind to two proteins associated with the cell cycle—cyclin-dependent kinase A:1 (CDKA:1) and a CDKA:1-interacting kinesin—in yeast two-hybrid binding assays (42). AtTPS1 is also present in the protovasculature subtending the SAM and in leaf primordia (38). Together, these findings suggest a potential role for AtTPS1 (and Tre6P) in the regulation of cell division and vascular development. AtTPS1 was also found in several floral tissues, including the vasculature in stamens (filaments and anthers), the guard cells of the anthers, and the nuclei of mature pollen grains (38) (Figure 3). The functions of AtTPS1 (and Tre6P) in these male reproductive cell tissues are not yet known. In the next section, we discuss the potential functions of AtTPS1 and Tre6P in maternal and filial tissues after fertilization.
The arrest ofArabidopsis tps1embryos at the torpedo stage was one of the earliest observations to show the importance of thetrehalosemetabolic pathway in plant development (34). Compared to wild-type, the arrestedtps1embryos had fewer cells; abnormal cell walls; and higher levels ofsucrose, starch, and hexoses, but lower levels of storage lipids and proteins (44). Chemically induced expression ofAtTPS1during seed development allowed thetps1mutant embryos to completeembryogenesisand yield viable seeds (102), as did embryo-specific expression ofAtTPS1under the control of theABA INSENSITIVE3promoter (45). Complementation of thetps1mutant by AtTPS1 expression was shown to be dependent on its catalytic activity, and AtTPS1 could be substituted by expression of theE. coliTPS (OtsA) under the control of theAtTPS1promoter (38), showing that the restoration of Tre6P synthesis in thetps1mutant is both necessary and sufficient for it to complete embryo development and showing the dependence of embryogenesis on Tre6P, rather than on AtTPS1 per se.
The precise functions of Tre6P during embryogenesis are less clear. In maternal tissues, AtTPS1 is located in the vasculature and abscission zones of siliques and in the funiculus and regions of the developing seed where phloem unloading of sucrose and other nutrients (e.g., amino acids) occurs (38) (Figure 3). AtTPS1 is also present in filial tissues (38) (Figures 3and4). Based on transcript profiling, two other functional members of the class I TPS clade,AtTPS2andAtTPS4, are also expressed in seeds, but their expression is restricted to the chalazal and peripheral endosperms, whereasAtTPS1is expressed in the embryo itself and in the endosperm (38,40,57,105) (Figure 4). The highly localized expression ofAtTPS2andAtTPS4, with little or no expression in the embryo and endosperm, probably explains why these two genes cannot compensate for the loss of AtTPS1 in thetps1mutant (40).

Figure 4Click to view


The arrest oftps1embryos at the torpedo stage implies a critical function for Tre6P during this stage or in the transition to the final stages of seed development, i.e., storage product accumulation (seed filling) and maturation (dehydration and establishment of seed dormancy). The cellularization of the endosperm begins during the early heart stage of embryo development and is completed during the torpedo stage (15) (Figure 4). This process is important for nutrient uptake by the developing seed, coincides with a switch from a high to a low hexose:sucrose ratio in the seed, and is regulated byauxin(12,56,73). Mutants that are impaired in endosperm cellularization often fail to produce viable seeds, with embryo arrest in the late heart to early torpedo stages (12,49), resembling the phenotype oftps1embryos.Arabidopsisseeds accumulate lipid reserves during the later seed-filling stage of development. This is under the control of the WRINKLED1 transcriptional activator, which is targeted for proteasomal degradation after phosphorylation bySnRK1(117). The inhibition of SnRK1 by Tre6P therefore promotes lipid accumulation by stabilizing WRINKLED1 (117). In pea (P. sativum) seeds, which accumulate mainly starch during the seed-filling stage, Tre6P also promotes storage product accumulation, in this case via the induction of the auxin biosynthesis geneTRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE RELATED2(71). The final stage in seed maturation is the establishment of dormancy, which is triggered by the movement ofFT, expressed in maternal tissues, to the seed (22,23,93). Given the dependence ofFTexpression in leaves on Tre6P, there is potential for Tre6P to also regulateFTexpression in siliques and thus the onset of seed dormancy.ABAplays a central role in seed dormancy, and seed germination is generally inhibited by ABA. However, this sensitivity is lost in several trehalose pathway mutants (45,103,104). It has also been reported that expression of theABA INSENSITIVE4gene, a key player in ABA signaling, is dependent on AtTPS1 (5,44,87). These findings strongly implicate Tre6P in ABA signaling and the maintenance of seed dormancy.
Axillary meristems in the leaf axils give rise toaxillary budsthat usually become dormant after formation and remain quiescent unless triggered to grow out into a new shoot. In many species, the axillary buds remain dormant if the main shoot remains intact, a phenomenon known as apical dominance. Auxin is produced at the shoot tip and transported towards the roots. For many decades, this polar auxin stream was thought to be a key factor in suppressing axillary bud outgrowth, acting viastrigolactonesand antagonized by cytokinins, which regulate expression of theBRANCHED1(BRC1) branching repressor (1,10,16,17,30,32,33,75). However, this phytohormone-based mechanism for repression of axillary bud outgrowth has been questioned by observations that the onset of bud outgrowth after decapitation of pea plants is poorly correlated with auxin levels in the stem (70,74) but is positively correlated with changes insucrosesupply to the buds (70). Axillary bud outgrowth is also triggered by the exogenous supply of sucrose in pea,Arabidopsis, and rose (Rosa hybrida) stem explants (11,13,37,70), while dormant buds have a transcript profile that is indicative of carbon starvation (97).
Following decapitation of pea plants,Tre6Plevels in axillary buds from near the base of the stem were found to rise within 1–2 h, coinciding with the onset of measurable bud outgrowth (37). Tre6P levels continued to rise for at least 8 h after decapitation, and during this period there were marked changes in the levels of respiratory intermediates and amino acids (37). These findings suggest that Tre6P might play a role in both the release of bud dormancy when sucrose supply to the buds is increased and the reconfiguration of central metabolism to provide the building blocks needed for growth (37). Although indicative of an important role for Tre6P in the regulation of shoot branching, these correlative results did not prove a causal relationship. To address this, a heterologousTPPwas expressed inArabidopsisunder the control of theBRC1promoter to lower Tre6P levels specifically in axillary buds. The resulting plants initiated rosette branches more slowly than wild-type plants and ended up with fewer branches, indicating that shoot branching is dependent on Tre6P in the buds (36).
AtTPS1 is present inArabidopsisaxillary buds (Figure 3), showing that they have the potential to synthesize Tre6P themselves in response to changes in sucrose supply (36). It was also found that overexpression of a heterologous TPS in the vasculature promoted shoot branching, whereas overexpression of a heterologous TPP suppressed branching (36), replicating the branching phenotypes of constitutive TPS- or TPP-overexpressing plants (89). This indicated that changes in Tre6P levels in the vasculature outside the axillary buds also influence shoot branching. One possibility is that Tre6P moves systemically in the phloem to axillary buds where, in combination with Tre6P made in the buds themselves, it promotes bud outgrowth. Expression of severalSWEETgenes, encoding sucrose efflux carriers, was upregulated in the plants with overexpression of TPS in the vasculature, potentially enhancing the loading of sucrose into the phloem insourceleaves and the unloading of sucrose insinkorgans, including the axillary buds (36) (Figure 2). It is unknown whether the upregulation ofSWEETexpression was associated with increased wall ingrowths in phloem parenchyma transfer cells, whose development is regulated by sucrose, independently of Tre6P (110). The enhanced branching phenotypes in plants with TPS overexpression in the vasculature were shown to be dependent on FT, which can move to axillary buds, as well as theSAM, to control the floral transition in the axillary bud meristem and growth of the bud into a new shoot (76,99). These findings reveal the potential for Tre6P to generate long-distance signals in plants, acting indirectly by modifying the transport and allocation of sucrose and by modulating the expression of FT. It is also possible that Tre6P itself is a long-distance signal, moving within the phloem from source to sink organs to regulate metabolic and developmental processes in the latter. If Tre6P were shown to move over long distances and have an impact on distal parts of the plant, this would qualify Tre6P to be counted as a new type of phytohormone.




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council [postdoctoral fellowship to F.F. associated with the Georgina Sweet Laureate Fellowship (FL180100139) awarded to Professor Christine Beveridge] and the Max Planck Society (J.E.L.).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


