We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Synthetic signaling is a branch of synthetic biology that aims to understand native genetic regulatory mechanisms and to use these insights to engineer interventions and devices that achieve specified design parameters. Applying synthetic signaling approaches to plants offers the promise of mitigating the worst effects of climate change and providing a means to engineer crops for entirely novel environments, such as those in space travel. The ability to engineer new traits using synthetic signaling methods will require standardized libraries of biological parts and methods to assemble them; the decoupling of complex processes into simpler subsystems; and mathematical models that can accelerate the design-build-test-learn cycle. The field of plant synthetic signaling is relatively new, but it is poised for rapid advancement. Translation from the laboratory to the field is likely to be slowed, however, by the lack of constructive dialogue between researchers and other stakeholders.
Article metrics loading...
afn1*These authors contributed equally to this article.
Synthetic signaling is a branch of synthetic biology that aims to understand native genetic regulatory mechanisms and to use these insights to engineer interventions and devices that achieve specified design parameters. Applying synthetic signaling approaches to plants offers the promise of mitigating the worst effects of climate change and providing a means to engineer crops for entirely novel environments, such as those in space travel. The ability to engineer new traits using synthetic signaling methods will require standardized libraries of biological parts and methods to assemble them; the decoupling of complex processes into simpler subsystems; and mathematical models that can accelerate the design-build-test-learn cycle. The field of plant synthetic signaling is relatively new, but it is poised for rapid advancement. Translation from the laboratory to the field is likely to be slowed, however, by the lack of constructive dialogue between researchers and other stakeholders.
In their famous review “Genetic Regulatory Mechanisms in the Synthesis of Proteins,” Jacob & Monod (57) systematically laid out the evidence that microbial “enzymatic adaptation” is accomplished by the combined actions of repressors, inducers, and operators. This tectonic shift away from the strictly structural view of the genome introduced a new view of the cell as an information processing unit, continually modifying its operation according to its environment. The field of synthetic biology can trace its origins to this historic conceptual breakthrough, and seeks to extend it by making explicit the parallels between biological and engineered systems.
Synthetic signaling, a subdomain within the larger synthetic biology landscape, seeks to decipher the design principles that shape genetic regulatory mechanisms through the application of the three foundations of engineering: standardization, decoupling, and abstraction (33). Stated simply, synthetic signaling aims to engineer linear pathways or multi-node networks within living organisms, taking the form of either entirely novel implementations or the rewiring of native systems (77). The engineering of synthetic signaling pathways or networks requires components that allow for sensing, signal processing, and output (18,77) (Figure 1). Sensing systems connect signal detection to signal processing. Signal processing allows for the integration of multiple signals and the ability to compute the appropriate response output. Outputs can take many forms, including the production of proteins such as reporters, the activation of metabolic pathways, or the stimulation of cell behaviors such as growth or differentiation.

Figure 1Click to view


The promise of synthetic signaling is twofold: (a) It will elucidate the principles that underlie natural biological systems through analysis of novel devices built frombiological parts(32), and (b) it will enable the rapid engineering of systems to solve human-defined challenges (70). The major advances in synthetic signaling have been done in prokaryotic and eukaryotic single cells. The most prominentchassisfor synthetic biology work have been the bacteriumEscherichia coli, the yeastSaccharomyces cerevisiae, and a number of human cell lines (47,50,83). Complex signaling pathways have been engineered to achieve a variety of objectives such as rewiring host signaling to generate new outputs (8,25), controlling the response time of signaling (47), and generating spatial cellular patterns (137). This early phase of synthetic signaling has been built with well-characterized protein signaling pathways. The broad application of these approaches to other pathways and organisms remains a major challenge.
Synthetic signaling in plants is in its infancy, but there are compelling features that suggest progress could be rapid. First, plants have evolved a number of sophisticated yet well-studied mechanisms to sense and process dynamically changing environments and integrate this information on the fly with the plant's developmental and metabolic states. Another advantage of engineering in plants is their indeterminate and plastic body plan (101). A critical feature of this decentralized information processing is a diverse suite of small molecules, many of which can be synthesized by organic chemists. Unlike the core animal signaling pathways, many plant signaling pathways are quite short and occur in the nucleus via regulated degradation of transcriptional repressors (94). These two features—a small molecule trigger and a short signaling pathway—have already been exploited to engineer auxin-induced degradation as a tool to study protein function in diverse nonplant eukaryotes (100). Second, there is a long history of modifying yield-associated traits for agriculture and a wealth of studies that provide blueprints for connecting cellular phenomena to larger-scale processes such as development or immunity. Excitement about the potential impact of a plant synthetic approach can be seen in several large international moonshot efforts. For example, one consortium aims to develop tool kits to port nitrogen fixation into any plant (121), while another seeks to increase plant performance in hotter and drier climates by converting target plants from the C3to the C4mode of photosynthesis (126). Several plant species are being developed to serve as models for engineering synthetic signaling pathways (see the sidebar titled Model Systems Being Used for Plant Synthetic Signaling), and several tools are being developed to facilitate the introduction of foreign DNA into plant genomes (64).
MODEL SYSTEMS BEING USED FOR PLANT SYNTHETIC SIGNALING
While the extensive community, resources, and tools for the angiospermArabidopsis thalianahave made it the premier target for proof-of-principle engineering efforts, there is no doubt that having a selection of readily transformable and morphologically less complex test beds (reviewed in22) will accelerate the rate of progress for plant synthetic biology. The development of the single-cellChlamydomonas reinhardtii, the mossPhyscomitrella patens(118), and the liverwortMarchantia polymorpha(14) as model plant organisms has opened up new lineages for circuit design. In particular,Physcomitrellahas high rates of homologous recombination, making it attractive for rapid integration of linear DNA constructs (60).Medicago truncatula(http://www.medicagogenome.org) is a model legume and is capable of recruiting symbiotic bacteria for nitrogen fixation, which makes it attractive for circuit design to test or leverage this symbiosis. The allohexaploidCamelina sativahas been developed as an attractive oilseed model for testing metabolic engineering (86).
Because of the ease of its transient transformation,Nicotiana benthamianais a favorite for rapid design/component prototyping (87). Tested circuits can be transitioned into crop plants such as rice [Oryza sativa, i.e., Golden Rice (31)], tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), and maize (Zea maysL.) for larger field studies or prototype development. Photosynthetic diatoms have also been used as synthetic chassis (reviewed in40) for large-scale aquatic production of compounds, as has the aquatic monocotLemna gibba(21). As the emerging model tree, poplar [Populus trichocarpa(150)] is a promising candidate to develop synthetic circuits at the largest physical scale of individual plant growth, as poplar is transformable byAgrobacterium-mediated approaches (19). Plant synthetic biologists of the future will need to develop expertise in multiple plant and microbial species to increase the speed at which prototyping in model species transitions into full instantiation of designs in target species.

The objective of this review is to help plant biologists better understand the opportunities and challenges of engineering synthetic signaling networks and to help synthetic biologists understand the opportunities and challenges of working in plants. It is divided into four subsequent sections. In Section 2, we review how synthetic biology defines, composes, and characterizes biological parts in functional circuits. Section 3 describes existing devices with the potential to engineer or re-engineer complex and orthogonal signaling circuits. Section 4 discusses the essential role of mathematical models for designing, testing, and learning from synthetic signaling applications. In Section 5, we propose near-future goals for the field, for both scientific advancement and broader acceptance of potential products.
Composable, standardized, orthogonal, and insulatedbiological partsare required for the rational and automated engineering of complex cellular circuits. As with natural systems, DNA is the operating system that runs most synthetic signaling implementations. DNA sequences have been abstracted and decomposed into context-independent biological parts with specific biological functions (78), such as regulatory regions, including promoters and transcription factor binding sites; short sequences that confer specific localization (132) or stability on the encoded RNAs or proteins [thermosensitive degron (36), ubiquitin (6) and RNA stability (102)]; and functional modules encoded within the open reading frames. Genomic insulators have been developed and widely used in bacterial synthetic signaling to reduce crosstalk from neighboring genes (97); however, there are few reports of successful implementation of similar approaches in plants. The synthetic biology open-access language, a common language for sharing biological parts, has been widely adopted (98), aligning well with recent calls for plant part standardization (109).
A catalog of orthogonal regulatory regions that confer distinct spatiotemporal control and different rates of transcription is critical for engineering targeted synthetic signaling interventions, as well as for reducing the likelihood of triggering the silencing of transgenes. To date, most transgenic plant work uses a small number of constitutive promoters, most prominently promoter and/or enhancer sequences from theCauliflower mosaic virus(30). Finding candidate sequences in plants is facilitated by resources like the eFP database where gene expression states can be visualized from a large number of different development stages and environmental perturbations (http://bar.utoronto.ca/efp/cgi-bin/efpWeb.cgi) (148). There are also collections of enhancer trap lines inArabidopsisthat can be used to drive expression in specific domains (52). Unfortunately, there are only a small number of well-characterized promoters in any plant system. An alternative approach is to design synthetic promoters consisting of a core promoter in combination with multimerized motifs that respond to specific conditions (79). While such synthetic promoters are derived from natural sequences that can be identified using computational tools (71), the design rules for regulatory regions remain among the most elusive areas in eukaryotic signaling. As a result, regulatory sequences remain one of the largest obstacles to implementing synthetic designs.
Significant efforts have been made to allow for modular composition of plant biological parts. While in bacterial systems most circuits are now constructed by direct DNA synthesis, in plants this approach is not yet cost-effective, as the parts are significantly larger. Type IIS restriction enzyme-driven systems [e.g., GreenGate (72), GoldenBraid (124,140), and other GoldenGate-based methods (13,34)] are the favored methods for DNA construction. The GoldenBraid standard (124,140), the Loop Assembly (114), and the yeast-based recombination JStack (129) each allow construction of multi-operon circuits. Integrase-based assembly such as GAANTRY (26) has also been used. Researchers across the synthetic biology community have constructed and shared plant biological part libraries compatible to these construction standards (34,72,124,140). The efficient transformation of large constructs into nonmodel plants remains a challenge, especially outside of large dedicated facilities (64).
Even with the development of construction standards, the large-scale assembly of parts into libraries of testable circuits remains a bottleneck. With the development of robotic DNA synthesis, sequencing, and assembly technologies, circuit construction can be outsourced, decoupling design from construction and characterization. Characterizing circuits in plants requires extensive infrastructure that could be centralized in biofoundries, as has become routine for some microbial systems, increasing experimental reproducibility and accessibility. While plant biofoundries exist in the private sector, there are few public examples. The BioFab at the University of Washington (http://www.uwbiofab.org) is one exception. It offers circuit construction and characterization in bacteria or yeast with plant protocols and facilities in development (65a). Developing a network of biofoundries [i.e., a Global Biofoundry Alliance (54)] could significantly lower costs and increase the scale of plant synthetic signaling projects. Decoupling design from fabrication could accelerate the characterization and optimization of circuits, following the model used in the engineering of computer microchips.
A typical synthetic device is composed of an input signal detected by a sensing module that gives rise to a specific output response. Thesensor modulecan be further broken down into sensing and actuating functions that bridge the information flow from input/signal to output/function. This decoupling makes it possible to use each sensing device and/or module (input, sensor, actuator, output) independently or in groups.
Plant synthetic signaling is at an early stage in developing the tools and resources to create individual modular devices that have well-characterized behaviors. To date, several sensor devices have been developed to respond to endogenous, exogenous, or synthetic inputs with a range of modularity and integration with the natural pathways of the plant (Figure 2). Light and small molecules (natural or synthetic) have been the most widely explored input modules, while control of gene expression is the most common output module. The devices described here are broadly classified into two categories based on whether the engineering effort was directed at the sensor or the output modules.

Figure 2Click to view


Several synthetic tools have been designed as biological sensors of natural small molecule inputs such as fluorescent proteinFörster resonance energy transfer(FRET) sensors for inputs like calcium (55) or hormones such as abscisic acid (ABA) [ABACUS (59), ABAleons (143)] or gibberellic acid (GA) (119). FRET sensors and other fluorescent protein–based reporters are clearly important for quantitatively measuring and tracking the dynamics of biological inputs in plant cells (reviewed in144), especially with respect to targeting processes to modulate with synthetic tools. While FRET-based sensors detect and report input signals, they lack actuator function, meaning that although they are useful for quantifying signaling dynamics, which can be helpful for building accurate models to guide engineering efforts, they cannot be readily linked to transcriptional or cellular output responses.
Small molecule phytohormones provide an excellent inroad toward creating orthogonal chemical control of well-characterized and agriculturally relevant signaling pathways. For example, under drought stress conditions, plants produce abscisic acid to reduce water consumption and confer stress tolerance through the binding of endogenous abscisic acid receptors [PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE 1 (PYR1) and family members] to protein phosphatase 2C (PP2C) (142). Park et al. (108) engineered the abscisic acid receptor PYR1 to allow specific binding with the well-established agrochemical mandipropamid to generate PYR1MANDI(Figure 2). Mandipropamid was identified as a candidate molecule through the screening of a library of agrochemicals by a library of binding-pocket-saturated PYR1 mutants, followed by subsequent build-test cycles of ligand–receptor pair refinement through mutagenesis and selection. Subsequent in vitro and in vivo test cycles determined the specificity of the Mandi–PYR1MANDIinteraction, confirming that PYR1MANDIallows an orthogonal input control over the abscisic acid response, allowing farmers to intervene in times of impending water limitations.
A second example of an engineered synthetic phytohormone receptor is the auxin-derived convex-auxin (cvxIAA) and its engineered receptor concave transport inhibitor response 1 (ccvTIR1) (138) (Figure 2). Uchida et al. (138) engineered ccvTIR1 such that it was able to bind a synthetic convex auxin (cvxIAA) and not bind endogenous auxin, creating an orthogonal input-processing pair. The ccvTIR1 receptor was rationally engineered based on the crystal structure of the auxin-binding pocket using a build-test cycle with cvxIAA candidate molecules and site-directed mutations in theTIR1-binding pocket. In the presence of cvxIAA, any cell expressing the ccvTIR1 receptor activates the native auxin signaling response. This technology made it possible to conclusively determine that the canonical nuclear auxin receptor is responsible for mediating both rapid nongenomic and genomic responses to auxin (38). In the case of both of the engineered receptors PYRMANDIand ccvTIR1, researchers were able to circumvent genetic redundancy within the receptor gene families to activate responses in specific tissues within the plant even with a broad application of the hormone input.
In addition to orthogonal plant hormone receptor systems, plant hormone analogs that can discriminate between different hormone receptor subtypes have successfully been created, such as a jasmonic acid (JA) analog that allows researchers to separate JA signaling in plant growth and herbivore response (134) and auxin agonists that discriminate between AUX/IAAs and allow the specific modulation of plant development (139).
Optogenetics have been extensively implemented in systems such as bacteria and mammalian cells; however, their use in plants has been limited, in part due to crosstalk with native photoreceptors and interference from native pigments. Two recent studies have made headway in circumventing these obstacles. The first device created a light-responsive synthetic transcription factor that is inactivated upon stimulation with green light (525 nm) and was demonstrated to be functional in both mammalian cell culture andArabidopsisprotoplast culture (23). This device turns genes on when green light is absent via a bacterial light-responsive transcription factor (CarH) fused to a transactivation domain (VP16) actuator that forms a tetramer with its cofactor 5′deoxyadenosylcobalamin (AdoB12). Of note, the acid patch VP16 is a widely used actuator for gene expression activation (20). A fusion of four copies of the acid patch transactivation domain of VP16 (called VP64) increases transcriptional output. The CarH-VP16 tetramer is disrupted by illumination with green light. The next steps will be to test the device in whole plants in lab and, ultimately, in field conditions.
More recently, a synthetic, light-gated K+channel called BLINK1 was used inArabidopsisguard cells to activate solute fluxes controlling stomatal aperture (105). The BLINK1 receptor acts as a sensor and actuator by fusing a LOV2-Jα photoswitch fromAvena sativaphot1 to the small viral K+channel Kcv. Upon blue-light stimulation it causes a voltage-independent K+conductance (27). When introduced into plants lacking the endogenous blue-light photoreceptors Phot1 and Phot2 and expressed under a strong stomata-specific promoter, BLINK1 rescues stomatal opening in response to blue light. When expressed in the presence of Phot1/2, BLINK1 was able to enhance stomatal closure above the wild-type threshold. These transgenic plants exhibited an increase in biomass that resulted from enhanced carbon assimilation without the increased water usage phenotypes that are directly linked to the improved kinetics of stomatal closure. While this device is specific to stomatal function, it is promising to see a single-module optogenetic input integrated into plant pathways underlying transpiration, and it indicates that significant engineering of stomatal dynamics is possible under either artificial laboratory conditions (synthetic light input) or field conditions (rewiring natural pathway) (Figure 2).
In addition to natural and engineered detectors for small molecules such as oxygen (56), there are also examples of biosensors that detect novel ligands like the explosive TNT (4), the opioid fentanyl (12), or the drug digoxin (39). Inducible gene expression systems, such as those using domains from an insect ecdysone receptor (88), the glucocorticoid receptor from rat (5), or the human estrogen receptor (155), have fully orthogonal and synthetic inputs and provide a high-output inducible gene expression mechanism. Recent reviews have detailed tables allowing for the rapid identification of characterized synthetic parts and applications for many of these signaling systems (3,120). The design principle of these systems is fairly simple. For example, the estrogen system relies on a chimeric transcription factor known as XVE that combines the DNA binding domain of the bacterial LexA protein (X), the transactivating domain of VP16 (V), and the regulatory domain of the human estrogen receptor (E) (155). The transcriptional activator (the actuator) is provided by the XV part of the protein with the E domain acting as the sensor for estradiol. The E domain is sufficient to retain XVE in the cytoplasm through interactions with HSP90 until the input (estradiol) is introduced, at which point it homodimerizes and translocates to the nucleus to control transcriptional activation of a synthetic promoter (LexA operator sequence) to produce the output (Figure 3).

Figure 3Click to view


The digoxin receptor follows a similar design principle of connecting small molecule binding to the unmasking of a transcriptional activator (39). It is based on the fusion of a synthetic digoxin ligand binding domain (DIG1, the sensor), a degron (MATα2), a DNA binding domain (GAL4), and a transcription activator domain (VP16, the actuator) (Figure 3). In the absence of the digoxin input, the fusion protein is constitutively degraded. In the presence of the ligand, the transcription factor is stabilized, and it promotes the expression of genes regulated by the syntheticGAL4promoter. The digoxin ligand binding domain was engineered in silico through protein design (136). Theoretically, a similar approach could be used to design peptides that bind to any number of small molecules or other peptides over a range of affinities. In combination with the highly modular framework for the rest of the sensor, it should be possible, at least in principle, to engineer a library of orthogonalsensor modules.
Connecting sensing directly to transcriptional outputs (Figure 1) has been a challenge that may be answered with DNA-binding sensor/actuators that incorporateCRISPR-Cas-based transcription factors. Relatively soon after CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) technology was widely adopted for genome editing, a version of Cas9 was engineered that eliminated endonuclease activity without a loss in DNA binding potential (dCas9) (58,116). Transcriptional modulation of target genes has been engineered using dCas9 fused to protein domains that guide transcriptional activation or repression in plants (80,81,107,112). The fusion of multiple activation domains has yielded transcriptional activators with high levels of transcriptional output (dCas9-TV) (76), demonstrating that dCas9 is tolerant to the addition of multiple modular protein domains.
dCas9 can also be a protein scaffold for interactor recruitment as in the case of the transcriptional activator dCas9-SunTag-VP64 (107,136), which has been validated in plants. The dCas9-SunTag-VP64 system consists of two separately expressed modules: dCas9 fused to tandem GCN4 peptide repeats and a single chain variable fragment GCN4 antibody fused to superfolder-GFP and VP64. This approach allows each dCas9 to recruit multiple VP64, increasing transcriptional output without increasing construct size. Similarly, the SunTag approach has been utilized for sequence-specific epigenetic modulation through recruitment of the human TEN-ELEVEN TRANSLOCATION1 CpG demethylase catalytic domain (TET1cd) (41), or theNicotiana tabacumDRM methyltransferase catalytic domain (106). Recruitment of regulatory modules to dCas9 has also been demonstrated through RNA-mediated scaffolding, where the addition of viral RNA aptamer sequences at the 3′ end of the single guide RNA allows binding of cognate RNA binding proteins (152). Fusion of transcriptional regulators to these RNA binding proteins allows extensible control over gene output as has been demonstrated in plants using the MS2 sequence (CRISPR-Act2.0) (82). The use of RNA-mediated scaffolding also increases the potential to integrate multiple inputs in a dCas9 sensor to create more complex processing outputs.
One application of this approach in plants is a set of synthetic and modular hormone activated Cas9-based repressors (HACRs) that can respond to three hormones: auxin, gibberellins, and jasmonates (67). HACRs are fusions of a nuclear localized dCas9 protein (44), a hormone-induced degron [auxin (93),JA(63),GA(96)], and the first 300 amino acids of the TOPLESS transcriptional corepressor (TPL) (113). The dCas9 protein associates with a guide RNA that targets the HACR to a promoter with sequence complementarity where it coordinates transcriptional repression. Upon hormone accumulation, the degron sequence targets the HACR for ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation, thus activating expression of the target gene. The HACR-type sensor is both a sensor and actuator in one, where the output is transcriptional activation. The HACR sensor mirrors the endogenous use of the phytohormone degron and the TPL-based repression mechanism used in the auxin, jasmonate, and gibberellin pathways in an effort to achieve similar repression and activation dynamics as the natural pathways.
Recognition of DNA or RNA could be agriculturally beneficial if it enabled recognition of specific viral pathogens, such as geminivirus (43). Sequence-specific targeting of RNA molecules through Cas13a (known previously as C2c2) (1) has been used in plants to target and cleave viral genomic RNA (4). In theory, a dCas13a-based viral RNA sensor could be used to reprogram and optimize host defense responses (84).
While nuclear pathways have been a major focus of plant synthetic biologists, transmembrane receptor proteins and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascades, which have been extensively re-engineered in other eukaryotes [synthetic chimeric antigen receptors (149), synthetic Notch (92,122), and MAP kinases (49,103,123)], have been relatively unexplored in plants. Two-component systems, where inputs are perceived by membrane-localized histidine kinase receptors and signals are transduced through a phosphorelay to activate nuclear transcription factors, are employed in both cytokinin and ethylene signaling. A two-component relay was reprogrammed in plants to detect TNT (4), and a similar strategy could be applied with an array of sensor modules. Indeed, many kinase families are similarly ready for synthetic redesign; for example, the large gene family (>600 members) of transmembrane receptor-like kinases (RLKs) is overrepresented in plant genomes (130) and has evolved to recognize diverse ligands, making it an attractive target for sensor engineering. RLKs are characterized by a cytoplasmic serine/threonine protein kinase domain, a single-pass transmembrane domain, and varied extracellular ligand recognition domains. Their defined ligand inputs range from hormones, such as brassinosteroids (receptor BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE1) (15,128), to small peptide signals, such as EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTOR (receptors ERECTA and TOO MANY MOUTHS) (75), RAPID ALKALINIZATION FACTOR (receptors FERONIA and THESEUS) (46,51), the LURE pollen tube attractant proteins (receptors POLLEN-SPECIFIC RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE6, MALE DISCOVERER1 and 2, and MDIS1-INTERACTING RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1) (133,145), and even exogenous biotic signals such as bacterial flagellin (receptor FLAGELLIN-SENSITIVE2) (45). When examined through the lens of synthetic biology, many of the structural investigations of the RLK family ectodomains [i.e., BRI1 (15,128)] have yielded modular domains where ligand binding has been well-mapped and quantified. Additionally, phylogeny-guided domain-swapping experiments, such as with the FERONIA-related RLKs (66), have begun to map a path to producing RLK chimeras in between different extracellular domains and intracellular domains. RLK activity has been demonstrated to hinge on the ability of these receptors to form ligand-dependent signaling complexes at the membrane to carry out a form of signal processing, as in the case of BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE1 (68). It will be critical to decipher which RLKs undergo such signal processing and whether synthetic transmembrane sensors may help unlock these signaling dynamics. Furthermore, many of these RLKs use well-defined MAP kinase cascades, which have high potential for synthetic design (47).
Mathematical models play an essential role in the design-build-test-learn cycle that is at the core of the synthetic biology approach. Models aid in design, in the synthesis of existing knowledge, and in the generation and testing of hypotheses. Models that lend themselves to engineering efforts put a premium on simplicity, and this makes them distinct from models that aim to simulate all of the molecular features of a complex process like development. Rules for composing single-cell behaviors into multicell functions are elusive and highly divergent between microbes, plants, and animal systems. This has been seen already in metabolic engineering where models that considered all cells to be equivalent and experiencing a constant environment failed when tested in large fermenters where different cellular populations are created by small differences in local environments (73).
In plants, several mathematical models have attempted to recapitulate form and function (reviewed in91,115). Although extremely informative, many of these models lacked specification of molecular control mechanisms. For example, we can simulate the geometry of tree branch bifurcation using simple assumptions (16), and the mechanical properties of tissue can be used to generate biophysical models that accurately predict shape and organ formation (17). These simulations provide little or no information about how to modify the underlying genetic regulatory mechanisms to alter these patterns. Over the last decade, there have been concerted attempts to integrate biological knowledge, quantitative data sets (including molecular characterization and imaging platforms), and gene regulatory networks with mathematical models to understand tissue morphogenesis (24,53,95). In context of synthetic design, integrative gene regulatory networks andcell-based modelsdescribe tissue- or organismal-level processes on the molecular and cellular levels and could serve as starting points for synthetic design.
In silico approaches allow multiple data types and methods to be combined, allowing for integration across biological scales.Gene regulatory networks(GRNs) (reviewed in74) and cell-based modeling (reviewed in53) approaches have been widely applied in plants. GRNs involve studying a series of regulatory factors that interact with one another to tune gene expression, giving rise to new spatiotemporal patterns of development or changes in cellular metabolism. Dynamic GRN models are powerful tools for identifying decision-making nodes [e.g., shoot meristem (110)] or simulating perturbations [e.g., floral development (89)] and, in this way, can serve as a means to pinpoint molecular targets for synthetic design. In contrast to the subcellular scale of GRNs, cell-based models predict emergent behavior for groups of cells that arise from the interaction of individual cells. Biological rules from experimental evidence form the framework of how individual cells interact in these cell-based models and can be integrated into how they respond to a stimulus or intercellular biochemical signaling (90). Cell-based models capture tissue-level dynamics (104) and have been used to simulate vascular patterning (95) and hormone transport in roots following gravitropic stimuli (7). Therefore, cell-based models that are integrated with GRNs capture the complexity of biological processes and are better poised to connect biological processes to a specific molecular node that is necessary for synthetic design. In the following case studies, mathematical models were used to design and test synthetic signaling interventions.
Synthetic approaches to metabolic engineering in plants are more advanced than those developed for plant synthetic signaling. Part of this advantage reflects the foundation of precise metabolic flux models and well-annotated databases of metabolic enzymes. Together, these resources facilitate the semiautomated design of de novo metabolic pathways, such as via the retrosynthesis workflow [e.g., Retropath 2.0 (29)].
One example of model-based metabolic engineering is the bypass of the Calvin-Benson cycle to rewire photorespiration (Figure 4). Plants that use C3carbon fixation have a relatively high rate of photorespiration, which reduces the efficiency of photosynthesis. There are several natural adaptations that either reduce the extent of photorespiration or use alternative metabolic pathways to reduce energy losses due to metabolism of photorespiration by-products (reviewed in111). Several studies indicated that, at least in principle, engineering bypass pathways by introducing groups of enzymes that divert photorespiration by-products into useful metabolites could reduce metabolic cost (65,85). Metabolic flux modeling of wild-type and engineered bypass pathways predicted that photosynthesis efficiency could be further enhanced if the energy cost of photorespiration could be reduced and if CO2release from photorespiration could be moved to the chloroplast (151). These insights guided the engineering of a new bypass pathway that was introduced into tobacco where both higher photosynthetic efficiency and increased biomass accumulation were observed (65,85,131). This is just one of several synthetic metabolic pathways that have been engineered following a model-based strategy (127).

Figure 4Click to view


There are few examples of model-guided rewiring of signaling pathways in plants to achieve specific alterations in development or environmental responses, reflecting in part the limited number of models available to guide designs. One recent proof-of-principle attempt relied on the HACR sensor/actuators described above to alter shoot branching pattern (67) (Figure 4). Extensive molecular and modeling work predicts that the strength with which auxin promotes its own polar transport would be a major controller of lateral organ placement (115,117). One prediction of the model was that if auxin were less able to upregulate the activity of the major auxin transporter PIN-FORMED1 (PIN1), fewer branches would be produced. To implement this design, an auxin-regulated HACR was targeted to the PIN1 promoter, essentially sharpening the slope of the transfer function between auxin levels and gene induction. TransgenicArabidopsisplants carrying this design did indeed have fewer branches. However, there was high variation in the phenotypes observed between individual transformation events, suggesting that there are still many gaps in the knowledge needed to design and implement this type of rational engineering of plant form (67).
In an ideal future world, computer-aided design (CAD) would be routinely used to compose (and perhaps even assemble) individual characterized parts into devices with a desired specification. A present-day example of CAD in synthetic biology is CELLO (http://cellocad.org), which facilitates the design of genetic circuits implementing a logic function of interest (99). CELLO, for now implemented forE. coliand with a limited set of parts and circuits, simulates the behavior of genetic circuits selected for best fitting the required logic function. Its output is an abstracted diagram of the circuit, the DNA sequence, and its corresponding predictive behavior. CAD in synthetic biology is still in its infancy and, for now, only in microbial systems. Predicting circuit behavior remains challenging, especially with complex interactions between synthetic circuits and variable experimental conditions.
For the next generation of synthetic signaling in plants, new features will need to be incorporated into CAD software. These features would allow for the engineering of cell-to-cell interactions, rewiring of existing signaling pathways, shunting cellular metabolism, or re-engineering development. These achievements will only be possible with greater knowledge about plant biology and will likely require new computational approaches. For example, agent-based modeling is playing an increasingly vital role in microbial synthetic biology applications (48).
Jacob & Monod (57) concluded their review on genetic regulatory mechanism with the critical insight that “coordination [in the building of individual cellular constituents] is evidently of absolute survival value” (p. 354). The future success of plant synthetic signaling depends on our ability to make progress in two areas that are fundamental to understanding signal coordination: (a) the implementation of logic circuits that allow for multi-input processing in a reliable and reprogrammable manner and (b) the use of distributed computation among groups of cells.
The plant synthetic signaling circuits that have been implemented to date are mainly limited to a single sensor and actuator, and thus are not truly information processors. As a preliminary approach to engineer a processing module, previously engineered split proteins such as split TALEN (125) can be used as an AND gate in plants. Numerous logic circuits have been engineered in bacteria, yeast, and mammalian cells using repressors (83,99), integrases (147,154), or dCas9 (42,69). Both dCas9- and integrase-based logic circuits should be possible to engineer and deploy in plants. Serine and tyrosine integrases have been used for site-specific integration [PhiC31 (62), Bxb1 (135), and Cre (141)] and more recently with the expressed aim of engineering logic circuits (11). Incorporating more inputs and sensor types (Figure 2) into logic circuits would further extend processing capacity. The decentralized nature of plant life lends itself to the implementation of more complex circuits using distributed computing either with or without cell–cell communication (reviewed in83,154). Distributed processing circumvents several limitations of single-cell designs and has been implemented in cross-species communication (146), in the generation of pulsatile behaviors (9), and in building faithful recording devices of population histories (37).
With multi-input and distributed processing in place, the rational engineering of a range of developmental and environmental responses becomes possible. For example, hormone control over organogenesis could be coupled with synthetic processing to permit the temporal and spatial tracking of individual hormone activity and cell fate using cell-type-specific memory switches. The output of these circuits could be visible outputs (i.e., fluorescent reporters) or new nodes that rewire organ development to produce desirable traits (e.g., modulation of branching, flower number, root density). At larger scales, cell–cell processing could provide augmented defenses against herbivory with sensor circuits that signal during predation to nearby cells and even to neighboring plants in the field. Beyond the practical applications, successes and failures in the synthetic implementation of these types of functions could provide mechanistic insights into how processes like organogenesis or immunity work, and resolve long-standing questions like whether cell or organismal theory best explains plant morphology and evolutionary history (61).
Genetic engineering will likely provide the means to mitigate at least some of the effects of existential challenges like climate change and global food insecurity; however, this potential will remain untapped if scientists cannot convince regulatory bodies, voters, and consumers to use scientific evidence to evaluate safety concerns (28). The current global consumer climate remains staunchly anti-genetically modified organism (GMO), with flagship products such as Golden Rice still not in production (31) and a mosaic of regulatory practices standing between countries [i.e., EU regulation of GMOs (153)]. Honest and open discussion of the potential benefits and pitfalls of synthetic engineering is critical to build bridges between practitioners and stakeholders. Indeed, the best plant synthetic designs will be shaped by input from ecologists, land managers, plant breeders, farmers, and consumers, among others (2). There is also a pressing need to train and empower scientists from countries where synthetic engineering could have the greatest impact, and a need to actively resist a production/distribution path that repeats the historic and ongoing injustices of colonialism. In this aspect as well, “coordination is evidently of absolute survival value” (57, p. 354).


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
Synthetic signaling work in the Nemhauser Lab is supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (2R01-GM107084), the National Science Foundation (IOS-1546873), and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute Faculty Scholars Program. Support for S.G. was provided by EMBO (EMBO ALTF 409-2019), and support for A.R.L. was provided by the Life Sciences Research Foundation and the Simons Foundation. We thank Eric Yang, Dr. Clay Wright, Dr. Orlando de Lange, and Matthew Offenbacher for feedback and discussions.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


