We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Seed dormancy—the absence of seed germination under favorable germination conditions—is a plant trait that evolved to enhance seedling survival by avoiding germination under unsuitable environmental conditions. InArabidopsis, dormancy levels are influenced by the seed coat composition, while the endosperm is essential to repress seed germination of dormant seeds upon their imbibition. Recent research has shown that the mother plant modulates its progeny seed dormancy in response to seasonal temperature changes by changing specific aspects of seed coat and endosperm development. This process involves genomic imprinting by means of epigenetic marks deposited in the seed progeny and regulators previously known to regulate flowering time. This review discusses and summarizes these discoveries and provides an update on our present understanding of the role of DOG1 and abscisic acid, two key contributors to dormancy.
Article metrics loading...
afn1*These authors contributed equally to this article
Seed dormancy—the absence of seed germination under favorable germination conditions—is a plant trait that evolved to enhance seedling survival by avoiding germination under unsuitable environmental conditions. InArabidopsis, dormancy levels are influenced by the seed coat composition, while the endosperm is essential to repress seed germination of dormant seeds upon their imbibition. Recent research has shown that the mother plant modulates its progeny seed dormancy in response to seasonal temperature changes by changing specific aspects of seed coat and endosperm development. This process involves genomic imprinting by means of epigenetic marks deposited in the seed progeny and regulators previously known to regulate flowering time. This review discusses and summarizes these discoveries and provides an update on our present understanding of the role of DOG1 and abscisic acid, two key contributors to dormancy.
Plant terrestrialization, the evolutionary process that produced a phototrophic lineage on land from algal ancestors, started around 540 million years ago (Mya) and changed the Earth's landscape while exerting a profound influence on animal evolution and human history. Seeds, produced bygymnospermsandangiosperms, initiated their evolution ∼350 Mya (Late Devonian). Nevertheless, the full extent of land plants’ colonization and influence on terrestrial animal life would not have been realized without a dramatic step forward during the Cretaceous (∼140 Mya). This was the time when angiosperms spread rapidly around the Earth and underwent an astonishing diversification. It coincided with the appearance in the fossil record of numerous types of seed shapes and sizes (53). There is little doubt that the seed is among the major innovations that drove land colonization by gymnosperms and angiosperms (52,53,79).
Unlike in nonseed plants, the femalegametophyteof seed-bearing plants is physically associated with the mother plant by means of a specialized tissue, the ovule, where it is protected and nourished. Furthermore, the male gametophyte (pollen) protects the male gametes while enabling the fertilization of distant female gametes. Unlike nonseed plants, the pollen tube delivers the male gametes directly to the female gametes, thus avoiding the need for external water for fertilization. Seeds arise from the fertilized ovule, which harbors and protects the developing embryo. Upon completion of embryogenesis, embryos undergo a maturation program in which they enter a highly resistant, metabolically inert, desiccated state. Seed longevity is illustrated by a 2,000-year-old Judean date palm seed, unburied from the palace of Herod the Great in Israel, that sprouted and produced Methuselah, a male palm tree that produces functional pollen (129). Thus, seed-bearing land plants achieved less-hazardous reproduction, expanded the physical range where fertilization could take place, and enclosed their embryos in highly resilient capsules, enabling colonization of new habitats.
Seeds can be dormant, a trait whereby the embryo-to-seedling transition is withheld even under favorable conditions. Dormancy provides seeds with an opportunity to be dispersed away from their mother plant, influencing a given species’ distribution while enabling plants to experiment with a wider variety of environments, thus promoting diversification (36,148). In addition, dormancy is important for seasonal plant behavior and thus influences the environment in which other plant traits are expressed (36).
Different kinds of dormancy have been reported in different seed-bearing plants. On the basis of a classification by Nikolaeva et al. (107), Baskin & Baskin (9) introduced a system of five classes of dormancy: morphological, physiological, morphophysiological (combination of morphological and physiological), physical, and combinational (combination of physiological and physical). Physiological dormancy is the form of dormancy most frequently found in gymnosperm and angiosperm species (9). Nondeep physiological dormancy is the most common physiological dormancy type in which dormancy requires seed integrity (i.e., the seed's covering layers are necessary to prevent embryonic growth upon seed imbibition) (70,112). It also requires the phytohormoneabscisic acid (ABA), which blocks embryonic growth upon seed imbibition (71). Physiological dormancy is highly labile; in other words, final dormancy levels in mature seeds vary according to aspects of the maternal environment during seed development, such as nutrient availability (e.g., nitrate) and physical parameters (e.g., temperature) (48). Nondeep physiological dormancy observed inArabidopsis thaliana, where it is best characterized, is the focus of this review and is hereafter referred to as primary dormancy or simply dormancy.
Dormancy is established during seed development within the mother plant. An individual seed may benefit from germinating in the close environment of its mother, since that environment proved to be beneficial for seed production. Nevertheless, as suggested by theoretical research by Hamilton & May (51), it is expected that the mother plant will promote diversity in the properties of its seed progeny, including in their individual seed dormancy levels, so as to enhance their dispersion potential, enabling them to find new favorable locations while avoiding competition among siblings for local resources (123,141). Seed dormancy is also influenced by the variable environmental conditions experienced by the mother plant, especially temperature changes (137). This review describes recent developments in the maternal and environmental control of seed dormancy.
Once isolated from their mother plants, seeds start losing dormancy in their dry state, a poorly understood process referred to as dry after-ripening, or else lose their dormancy after exposure to certain environmental conditions, such as imbibition under cold temperatures (cold stratification). For a given batch of seeds produced by a given mother plant, the days of seed dry storage required to reach 50% of germination (DSDS50), contingent on the particular environment used for the germination test, define the dormancy of the seed batch (4). Dormancy levels of the seed progeny vary among species and, indeed, amongArabidopsisaccessions, consistent with the adaptive function of seed dormancy. Once seeds lose dormancy, they may be exposed to prolonged unfavorable conditions. Such exposure can induce a state, referred to as secondary dormancy, wherein seeds no longer germinate when exposed to favorable conditions. Secondary dormancy is less studied than dormancy and has recently been reviewed elsewhere (15).
A major difficulty in studying seed dormancy is that dormancy is functionally defined, as there is no test to assess whether a dry seed is dormant or not (i.e., no test predicting whether a seed will germinate under conditions otherwise favorable for germination). One must therefore distinguish the mechanism of after-ripening present in dry seeds (referred to as the dry seed mechanism) from the mechanism that blocks germination, namely the sustained activation of ABA signaling by means of sustained ABA accumulation upon seed imbibition [i.e., ABA-dependent germination arrest program (Figure 1)]. Clearly, the dry seed mechanism must interact with the ABA-dependent germination arrest program upon imbibition (Figure 1a). Over time, the dry seed mechanism loses the capacity to activate the ABA-dependent germination arrest program and becomes inactive (Figure 1a).

Figure 1Click to view


The dry seed mechanism may be an intrinsic part of the ABA-dependent germination arrest program, but it may also be unrelated. The germination behavior of a seed reflects the capacity of the dry seed mechanism to activate the ABA-dependent germination arrest program. Therefore, one cannot ascertain whether changes in such behavior, resulting from mutations or changes in environmental cues, reflects a perturbation of the dry seed mechanism or a perturbation of the ABA-dependent germination arrest program.
InArabidopsis, the unfertilized ovule consists of a seven-celled female gametophyte, of thePolygonumtype present in approximately 70% ofangiosperms, that is completely surrounded by inner and outer integuments except for the micropylar opening (39). The pollen tube enters the micropylar opening and delivers two sperm cells in close proximity to the female gametes: the haploid egg and homodiploid central cells. Gamete fusion, which produces the diploid zygote and the triploid endosperm, initiates seed development by triggering specific developmental programs of the three genetically distinct tissues composing the seed: integuments, endosperm, and embryo (Figure 2). The maternal integuments differentiate and die to produce the seed coat of the mature seed (Figure 2). The endosperm proliferates alongside the embryo and serves as a nourishing tissue for the embryo.Arabidopsisis a nonpersistent endosperm species, and its endosperm is gradually consumed by the embryo after embryogenesis as the embryo enters the maturation phase, where it accumulates nutrients, expands in size, and eventually desiccates (Figure 2). In the mature seed, food is stored mainly in the embryo, whereas the endosperm persists as a single layer of cells surrounding the embryo (Figure 2).

Figure 2Click to view


Seed dormancy is established during maturation, and repression of germination of dormant seeds upon imbibition critically require the endosperm (see Section 2.2). The maternal seed coat plays an important role: The inner integument layer 1 accumulates proanthocyanidins (tannins), a type of flavonoid, andtransparent testa(tt) mutants, deficient in proanthocyanidin synthesis, have low dormancy (33) (Figure 2). Tannins are antioxidants, and their absence in the seed coat likely promotes the release of dormancy by accelerating oxidation in seeds or by increasing seed permeability to oxygen. Accordingly,ttmutant seeds also have low seed viability (32). Furthermore, the inner integument layer 1 produces a cuticle and tannic cell walls tightly associated with the endosperm that limit seed oxidation and promote dormancy (30,35,84) (Figure 2).
The final seed dormancy levels depend on environmental factors during seed development, especially cold temperatures, which increase final seed dormancy levels. Seed development is delayed and is poorly characterized under cold temperatures. Whereas the anatomy of the mother plant can be modified in response to environmental cues, that of the final seed remains mostly unchanged by them. Therefore, cold must act on the functions pertaining to seed dormancy of the seed coat [e.g., itstannincontent (88)] and endosperm or on the capacity of the embryo to respond to these functions, or both. Concrete cases are discussed in Section 4.
InArabidopsis, high ABA levels first appear in seeds at the onset of seed maturation and are largely maternal in origin (63). Maternal ABA is gradually replaced by ABA synthesized by zygotic tissues as maturation progresses, and this zygote-derived ABA is more important for maintenance of primary dormancy before and after imbibition. These conclusions were confirmed by a later study (62). ABA levels fall upon dry seed imbibition irrespective of seed dormancy levels; however, repression of seed germination in imbibed dormant seeds is due to sustained high ABA accumulation over time (3,74) (Figure 1b). ABA accumulation upon imbibition activates ABA signaling to block seed germination and maintain the embryonic state (67). This process includes stimulation of the expression ofABI3andABI5, which encode a B3 transcription factor and a basic leucine-zipper (bZIP) transcription factor, respectively, promoting the seed maturation protective program (82,83). Notably, it also leads to expression ofLEAgenes, which encode osmotolerance proteins, and the blockade of food store consumption in the embryo by blocking triacylglycerol catabolism (83,118). ABA signaling involves the PYR/PYL/RCAR family of ABA receptors, group A type 2C protein phosphatases (PP2Cs), and Snf1-related protein kinases, group 2 (SnRK2s). ABA signals by binding to PYR/PYL/RCAR, enabling the sequestration of PP2Cs by direct interaction with them (87,116). In turn, this sequestration enables SnRK2 activation through autophosphorylation, as SnRK2s are inhibited by PP2C-dependent dephosphorylation in the absence of ABA (139,142). ActivatedSnRK2sphosphorylate downstream targets, such as ABI5, that repress seed germination (121). Detailed reviews of ABA signaling can be found elsewhere (29,125).
ABAsynthesized by both the endosperm and the embryo contribute to repress seed germination. However, in theArabidopsismature seed, the endosperm is essential to enable seed dormancy because its removal triggers the growth of the embryo even in the most dormant accessions (13,74). Upon dormant seed imbibition, the endosperm releases ABA toward the embryo, likely through AtABCG exporters and importers in the endosperm and embryo, respectively (61). The endosperm of dormant seeds releases markedly more ABA than does that of nondormant seeds (74). The induction of ABA synthesis in nondormant seeds and even inttmutants is sufficient to impose dormancy, showing that seed coat integrity ultimately affects dormancy via the ABA status of seeds (89).
Recent research has improved our understanding of how ABA signaling is regulated in seed dormancy, and this review focuses on the dormancy positive regulatorDOG1(see Section 3). However, although ABA signaling is undoubtedly strengthened in dormant seeds, how dormant and nondormant seeds regulate the level of ABA in the first place is virtually unknown. Maintenance of high ABA levels upon dormant seed imbibition is the combined result of initial ABA levels present in dry seeds and the rate of ABA catabolism and de novo synthesis. Numerous reports have provided evidence that, indeed, all these processes influence seed germination and therefore dormancy (e.g.,130).
The hormone gibberellic acid (GA) is usually described as an antagonist of ABA for the control of seed germination (80). Indeed, inhibition ofGAsynthesis in nondormant seeds blocks germination by promoting the accumulation ofDELLAfactors such as RGL2, which among the fiveArabidopsisDELLA factors plays a major role in repressing germination (75). In turn, DELLA factors promote ABA accumulation in seeds, and evidence strongly suggests that endosperms lacking DELLA factors release less ABA (74,121). Mutant seeds lacking DELLA factors are completely nondormant, even when set at cool temperatures (65). However, in highly dormant seeds, exogenous GA fails to downregulate RGL2 protein levels and does not markedly promote seed germination (74), perhaps because ABA can also raise DELLA protein levels independently of GA activity (1,118,121,122). Therefore, dormancy could be a state of defective GA-mediated DELLA factor degradation, which triggers constitutive high ABA accumulation in seeds.
The cytochrome P450 ABA 8′-hydroxylases CYP707A1–CYP707A4 play a predominant role in ABA catabolism and, therefore, in determining ABA levels (72). ABA accumulated during seed maturation is catabolized upon imbibition in proportion to the expression ofCYP707A2, andcyp707a2seeds have high ABA levels and are hyperdormant (95).CYP707A2expression peaks 3–6 h after imbibition in nondormant seeds, but this expression peak is absent in dormant seeds (95,102). This timing is associated with a peak in the expression of morning-expressed geneCCA1in the circadian clock, which is also prevented in dormant seeds (119). Interestingly,CCA1couples nitrate signaling to the clock, and nitrate also strongly inducesCYP707A2expression, suggesting that nitrate-derived signals induce ABA catabolism in nondormant seeds (91). In general, multiple environmental signals that regulate germination or dormancy appear to act by regulatingCYP707A2shortly after imbibition, suggesting thatCYP707A2expression is an early marker of future germination.CYP707A2and circadian responses to nitrate are regulated by a common mechanism via NIN-Like Protein 8 (144,153). BothCYP707A1andCYP707A2were identified as potential candidate genes for primary dormancy quantitative trait loci (QTLs) in a cross between accessions from Northern and Southern Europe (124).CYP707A1andCYP707A3are expressed mainly during the middle stages of seed development, and their expression is stimulated by the histone H3K27me3 demethylase RELATIVE OF EARLY FLOWERING 6 (REF6). Accordingly,ref6mutant seeds have enhanced ABA and dormancy levels (REF6 is discussed further in Section 4.2) (17,131).
Fundamental questions in seed dormancy research are (a) the mechanism that leads to sustained high ABA levels in dormant seeds upon their imbibition and how it is established, (b) how dormancy levels are regulated during seed maturation, and (c) how the dry seed mechanism loses its activity as seeds age, for instance, during dry after-ripening or in response to dormancy-breaking treatments. These questions remain mostly unanswered.
Together with ABA, DOG1 is an important factor promoting seed dormancy inArabidopsis. Numerous publications referring directly or indirectly toDOG1have recently been reviewed elsewhere (42,112,113). In this section, we focus on unresolved questions regarding the potential relationship of DOG1 with the dry seed dormancy mechanism and the ABA-dependent germination arrest program.
DOG1encodes an α-helical protein of unknown function (12,108).DOG1mRNA expression is enriched in seeds, where it is first detected 9 days after pollination (DAP), around the torpedo stage, and peaks during the mature green stage, around 16 DAP, before decreasing during late maturation stages (12,99). Upon seed imbibition,DOG1mRNA levels drop to undetectable levels within 2 days, irrespective of dry seed age (12,101). At the protein level, DOG1 accumulation during seed development follows that ofDOG1mRNA accumulation during the rising phase; however, DOG1 protein levels remain constant beyond 16 DAP up to the dry seed stage, suggesting either thatDOG1mRNA translation is stimulated during late maturation stages or that the protein is very stable (101). Consistent with the latter idea, DOG1 protein levels 48 h after imbibition are similar to those in dry seeds despite the disappearance ofDOG1mRNA levels (101). HowDOG1expression is regulated in seeds remains unclear. The transcription factor bZIP67 activatesDOG1expression during seed maturation (14). In imbibed seeds,DOG1expression is not induced byABA(41), but ABA does induceDOG1in vegetative tissues during drought via inhibition of antisenseDOG1transcription (154). Studies have shown thatDOG1transcript levels in dry seeds are highly dependent on the temperature during seed maturation, leading to the hypothesis that DOG1 is important for temperature-responsive seed dormancy (21,65). Presently, how temperature mediates this change inDOG1mRNA levels is unknown. Bryant et al. (14) provided evidence thatDOG1transcription is upregulated by bZIP67 specifically at low temperatures. However, Chen et al. (20) showed thatDOG1transcript levels peak at approximately the same level at different temperatures but that at cool temperaturesDOG1mRNA is too stable to decay prior to quiescence, leading to higher levels of stored DOG1 in mature dry seeds.
DOG1 interacts with itself (100). The self-binding requires a small, four-amino-acid domain at amino acids 13–16. Three main haplotypes were identified at these amino acids (100). The Col-0 type (D-SY) and Sei-0 type (D-RY) haplotypes have a single amino acid deletion that leads to very weak self-binding, whereas the Ler/Cvi type (ECCY) leads to strong self-binding. Experiments with transgenic plants expressingDOG1with different haplotypes provided evidence that DOG1 self-binding capacity is important for DOG1 promotion of seed dormancy (100).
DOG1 interacts with AHG1 and AHG3, two group A PP2Cs.ahg1andahg3have strong hypersensitive germination arrest responses to ABA; therefore, AHG1 and AHG3 are negative regulators of ABA signaling (105,108,109). Interestingly, PYL/RCARs repress the activity of AHG3 in the presence of ABA but do not, or at least not as efficiently, repress that of AHG1, which lacks a key tryptophane residue involved in the binding of PYR/PYL/RCARs with group A PP2Cs (5,138). AHG1 may therefore be a phosphatase that negatively regulates ABA responses even in the presence of ABA. For this reason, DOG1 has been proposed to promote dormancy by enhancing receptor-dependent ABA signaling (through interaction with AHG3) but also independently of PYR/PYL/RCARs (through interaction with AHG1).
So far, in vitro evidence has offered partial evidence regarding the capacity of DOG1 to inhibit PP2C activity. Indeed, Née et al. (105) did not detect decreased PP2C activity in the presence of DOG1 in vitro, whereas Nishimura et al. (108) reported weak inhibition. Therefore, whether DOG1 inhibits PP2C activity in vivo, perhaps with other factors, remains to be fully investigated. Furthermore, Nishimura et al. found that DOG1 amino acids 13–18 are required for DOG1 binding with AHG1. This domain also contains the amino acids needed for DOG1 self-binding. Nishimura et al. (108) used DOG1 from Col-0, which lacks strong self-binding capacity, whereas Née et al. (105) used DOG1 from Cvi, which has strong self-binding activity but also binds AHG1. Thus, the potential link between the capability of DOG1 to self-bind and its capacity to interact with AHG1 in vivo remains to be understood.
Recombinant DOG1 also binds bacterial heme independently of its interaction with AHG1 (104,108). Strikingly, the DOG1 heme-binding site is essential to promote dormancy in transgenic plants overexpressing DOG1 (108). Heme-binding proteins can function as sensors for oxygen and nitric oxide (77). A prevailing view invokes accumulation of oxidative events in dry seeds as the process releasing dormancy during dry after-ripening (106). Thus, DOG1 could serve as a redox sensor to integrate oxidative events during seed development and/or after-ripening to regulate seed dormancy. Consistent with this notion, DOG1 isoelectric focusing changes during after-ripening (101). However, it remains to be understood how redox sensing by DOG1 is mechanistically integrated with its function to regulate ABA signaling through its interaction with PP2Cs.
It also remains to be understood at what developmental stage DOG1 functions to promote dormancy—that is, whether DOG1 function regulates the manufacture of the dry seed mechanism during seed development, whether it is an intrinsic component of the dry seed mechanism, or whether it is a component of the ABA-dependent germination arrest program activated upon seed imbibition (Figure 3). DOG1 could potentially act in all stages.

Figure 3Click to view


By virtue of its capacity to enhance ABA signaling,DOG1could influence seed maturation, which is heavily regulated by ABA, and therefore the manufacture of the dry seed mechanism, including its initial dormancy levels (Figure 3). Consistent with this possibility, Dekkers et al. (34) showed thatDOG1regulates the expression of hundreds of genes during seed maturation, including that ofABI5, and genetically interacts withABI3to promote seed maturation. DOG1, by virtue of its potential redox-sensing function, could be an intrinsic part of the dry seed mechanism. However, available evidence indicates that DOG1 is not essential to establish dormancy. Indeed,dog1mutant seeds produced under cold temperatures exhibit dormancy, although at lower levels than wild-type seeds (65). Furthermore, available DSDS50 values inArabidopsisaccessions show that accessions with nonfunctionalDOG1(i.e., lacking self-binding ability) can be as dormant as accessions with a functionalDOG1(6,90) (Figure 4).

Figure 4Click to view


Upon imbibition, DOG1 could promote germination arrest by stimulating ABA signaling. However, dormant seeds can repress their germination for weeks upon seed imbibition. This raises a question about the nature of the regulation of DOG1 accumulation and activity over extended periods of time upon seed imbibition. DOG1 protein levels beyond 48 h following imbibition have not been reported, but if secondary dormancy is induced, thenDOG1transcription reinitiates (16), and presumablyDOG1protein levels rise again because DOG1 is necessary for secondary dormancy induction inArabidopsis(44). If DOG1 activity is indeed linked to a redox-sensing function during seed after-ripening, then the DOG1 protein ought to be extremely stable to enable germination arrest for extended periods of time upon seed imbibition, unless an additional unknown mechanism is invoked.
Expression ofDOG1under endosperm-specific promoters such asFIS2orZHOUPIis sufficient to induce primary dormancy indog1mutant seeds (101). Expression ofDOG1in the embryo is less effective but does induce some primary dormancy, so DOG1 appears to act in both compartments during either seed maturation or imbibition. Overexpression ofDOG1inLepidium sativuminhibits endosperm weakening upon imbibition and delays germination (47), suggesting thatDOG1exerts physiological activity if expressed in endosperm tissues. The endosperm is an essential source of ABA that implements dormancy upon seed imbibition, and whether DOG1 promotes the release ofABAby the endosperm is unknown. DOG1 could stimulate ABA signaling in the embryo, while the dry seed mechanism could control release of ABA by the endosperm.
Lastly, the role of DOG1 needs to be understood in a wider phenological, environmental, and populational context. A genome-wide association study determined thatDOG1self-binding haplotypes are associated with seed-chilling responses (i.e., the extent to which a seed from a given accession is able to germinate in response to chilling upon imbibition), rather than DSDS50 (90). This could be because DOG1 has a specific role in low-temperature responses or because chilling just happens to reduce dormancy to the ideal level for separation of accessions with differentDOG1haplotypes. In a study by Martínez-Berdeja et al. (90), seeds were matured at low temperatures (14°C), which increased seed dormancy levels even indog1mutants (65). Kerdaffrec et al. (66) showed that four single-nucleotide polymorphisms in theDOG1region, including one 21 kb upstream of theDOG1gene, are strong predictors of primary dormancy in Swedish accessions, and they identified a putative loss-of-function haplotype ofDOG1common in accessions from northern Sweden. The molecular basis of this loss of function remains unclear. Low-dormancyDOG1haplotypes may be common in northern Sweden because the low growth temperature can generate sufficient primary dormancy, even in the absence of DOG1, to populate the soil seed bank.
In buried seeds,DOG1transcript levels follow an annual cycle, with high expression in winter and low expression during summer (43). But studies of germination timing in a Cvi × Bur-0 recombinant inbred population showed that, while a QTL for primary dormancy mapped toDOG1, QTLs for germination timing mapped elsewhere (45). Therefore, the genes that regulate seasonal germination timing remain to be uncovered.
Multiple environmental signals during seed development, including temperature, photoperiod, light levels, and nutritional status, are known to affectArabidopsisseed dormancy, with temperature being the dominant signal (54,91,133). These signals affect the final levels of ABA in mature dry seeds; for example, low temperatures and drought increase ABA levels (11,65), whereas increasing nitrate supply to the mother plant reduces the ABA content and dormancy levels of its seed progeny (91). It is important to remember that seeds of low-dormancy accessions, such as Col-0, set in warm conditions show dormancy early during seed maturation, but that this primary dormancy is lost prior to shedding (63). In cold temperatures, ABA accumulates in seeds as in warm temperatures, but ABA catabolism is slower relative to synthesis such that more ABA remains at maturity, especially in the endosperm (20). Thus, at lower temperatures seeds do not exit primary dormancy prior to shedding. This effect of temperature is associated with lower expression ofCYP707Agenes during seed maturation (20).CYP707A1andCYP707A3appear to be especially important for determining the ABA level in mature seeds (114).
Arabidopsispopulations show a strong tendency toward the winter-annual habit in the far north of Europe with low primary dormancy (66), while in Southern Europe they have higher dormancy levels and an increased preference for summer-annual behavior (96). The Col-0 accession from Central Europe can grow as a summer or winter annual, with artificial Col-0 soil seed banks showing both autumn and spring germination windows (137). Col-0 seed set from winter annuals in the field in York, United Kingdom, has dormancy levels equivalent to seed set at around 15°C in the laboratory, and modeling shows that 15°C is the favored mean seed set temperature in winter annual Col-0 (137). In contrast, Ler seed set in autumn from summer sowings has stronger primary dormancy than seed set at other times of year (31). Thus, seed dormancy is increased by seed set outside of summer, and genetic control of high dormancy levels is more important in warmer climates, where warm temperatures would otherwise promote too low a level of primary seed dormancy to maintain a soil seed bank.
Maternal inheritance of seed dormancy levels can be observed in F1 hybrid seeds generated by reciprocally crossing someArabidopsisaccessions with different dormancy levels. For example, the low-dormancy accession Col-0 pollinated with the high-dormancy accession Cvi produces hybrid seeds with lower dormancy than do hybrid seeds produced by the reciprocal cross. Similar maternal effects are observed in F1 hybrids arising from reciprocal crosses between Cvi and the low-dormancy accession C24 (120). These maternal effects could result from the maternal seed coat of the hybrid seeds and/or from genomic imprinting taking place in the endosperm.
Genomic imprinting is the preferential expression of a given parental allele over the other. This phenomenon is observed in mammals and seed plants, and in both cases, it occurs in tissues nourishing the embryo, the placenta, and the endosperm (10). InArabidopsis, genomic imprinting had been studied mostly in the endosperm during seed development rather than in mature seeds.
Piskurewicz et al. (120) identified a set of imprinted genes in the endosperm of mature hybrid seeds upon their imbibition. The vast majority of these genes are maternally expressed genes (MEGs). Interestingly, for many MEGs and paternally expressed genes (PEGs), imprinted expression is observed either only in the endosperm of dormant seeds or only in the endosperm of nondormant seeds, indicating that imprinted gene expression programs are adjusted according to the dormancy levels of the seed.
This is the case forALLANTOINASE(ALN), which is a MEG only in dormant seeds.ALNencodes allantoin amidohydrolase, which participates in plant purine metabolism by converting allantoin to allantoate. In addition to its housekeeping function, allantoin plays a role in abiotic stress tolerance via activation of ABA metabolism (145). A mutation inALNincreases ABA levels, andalnmutant seeds are more dormant compared with wild-type seeds (120,145). Furthermore, Piskurewicz et al. (120) showed that endospermicALNexpression from the maternal alleles, but not the paternal allele, regulates dormancy levels in seeds.
These results show that genomic imprinting in the endosperm can implement maternal inheritance of seed dormancy levels. Dozens of MEGs identified in the mature endosperm by Piskurewicz et al. are involved or potentially involved in regulating seed germination. Thus, given that single-nucleotide polymorphisms or other variations in MEG DNA sequences could alter gene function amongArabidopsisaccessions, genomic imprinting might contribute to the maternal inheritance of seed dormancy levels in hybrid seeds arising from crosses between different accessions.
Various hypotheses have been proposed for the evolutionary driving force behind genomic imprinting. Haig's (49) kinship theory, which is the most widely accepted, stipulates that genomic imprinting evolved as a result of a parental conflict, such as over the distribution of food among progeny. In the case of plants, a given mother plant may bear seeds from different fathers. In Haig's view, the interest of the father is to maximize the food resources allocated to its descendants, while that of the mother is to distribute evenly those same food resources (50,69,147). Consistent with this view, some imprinted genes have been found to be involved in the control of seed size or nutrient uptake and allocation (10).
In most plant species, includingArabidopsis, most seeds are dispersed at relatively short distances (149) and are expected to germinate in the mother's close vicinity. If a seed inherits different alleles controlling dormancy, it would be beneficial for both parents to silence the paternal allele so as to confer maternal inheritance of seed dormancy, since most seeds are likely to grow under the local environmental conditions to which the mother plant is adapted, which is a scenario analogous to that invoked in the maternal-offspring coadaptation theory proposed by Wolf & Hager (150). However, it is also possible that imprinting is a random process related with silencing of transposable elements (see below), and imprinted expression of many genes is maintained without any adaptive selection. Further studies are needed to investigate the functions and natural variation of imprinted genes in relation to seed dormancy.
In both mammals and plants, two epigenetic repressive marks are involved in the regulation of genomic imprinting:DNA methylationand H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) (10,127). In plants, DNA methylation occurs at cytosines in all sequence contexts (CG, CHG, and CHH, where H stands for adenine, cytosine, or thymine), in contrast to mammals, where DNA methylation occurs almost exclusively in a CG sequence context. Before fertilization, the DNA glycosylase DEMETER (DME) is active in the central cell and removes methylated cytosines in any sequence context from specific loci through base-excision repair. The resulting hypomethylated central cell genome is inherited in the endosperm after fertilization, resulting in asymmetric DNA methylation between the maternal and paternal genomes (10,24). DME preferentially targets transposable elements in euchromatic regions, leading to imprinted expression of nearby genes (56,151).
Different DNA methyltransferases maintainDNA methylationfor each sequence context. DNA METHYLTRANSFERASE 1 (MET1), CHROMOMETHYLTRANSFERASE3 (CMT3), and CHROMOMETHYLTRANSFERASE2 (CMT2) are responsible for maintenance of CG, CHG, and CHH methylation, respectively. In addition to those methyltransferases, DOMAINS REARRANGED METHYLTRANSFERASE 2 (DRM2) mediates de novo methylation in all contexts through the RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway (40). MET1 is required for imprinting by maintaining paternal allele CG methylation during DNA replication (60). Furthermore,RdDMis required for paternal allele silencing at several loci (143).
Canonical RdDMinvolves the plant-specific RNA polymerases IV and V. Initial transcripts produced by polymerase IV from heterochromatic loci are converted to double-stranded RNAs by RNA-dependent RNA polymerase 2 (RDR2); the resulting double-stranded RNAs are then cleaved by DICER-LIKE 3 (DCL3) into 24-nt siRNAs. siRNAs are loaded into ARGONAUTE 4 (AGO4), forming an AGO4-siRNA complex. Transcripts generated by polymerase V function as a scaffold RNA enabling AGO4-siRNA complex recognition through sequence complementarity. The AGO4-siRNA complex further recruits DRM2, resulting in DNA methylation at the target region transcribed by polymerase V (93). Several alternative RdDM pathways, callednoncanonical RdDM, can direct RdDM but without involving polymerase IV-RDR2-DCL3 (27).
ALNgenomic imprinting involves DNA methylation established by noncanonical RdDM in theALNpromoter region, where the paternal allele has higher levels of CHH methylation compared with the maternal allele (57). The methylated region of theALNpromoter contains a transposable element belonging to theAthPOGON1family, which is known to be targeted by noncanonical RdDM involving RDR6 and AGO6 (RDR6-RdDM) (94). Indeed, CHH methylation of theALNpromoter does not necessitate polymerase IV. CHH methylation levels in the central cell are low in both wild-type anddmemutants, indicating that the asymmetric CHH methylation between maternal and paternalALNalleles is not due to demethylation by DME in the central cell. CHH methylation of theALNpromoter is observed in sperm cells, endosperm, and embryo, but not in seedlings. While canonical RdDM functions ubiquitously, RDR6-RdDM functions in a tissue-specific manner due to the tissue-specific expression ofAGO6.AGO6is expressed in mature pollen and developing seeds, where CHH methylation of theALNpromoter is observed. These results suggest that paternal allele methylation ofALNpromoter is induced in the male germ cell lineage, which is maintained in the mature seed endosperm (Figure 5) (57).

Figure 5Click to view


DOG1-LIKE 4(DOGL4) is one of fiveDOG1-LIKE(DOGL) genes. BothDOG1andDOGL4are expressed in developing and maturing seeds.DOGL4is necessary to induce the expression of numerous genes encoding seed storage proteins (128). In contrast toDOG1, which positively regulates seed dormancy, DOGL4 negatively regulates seed dormancy (157).DOGL4is a partially imprinted gene, which shows preferential expression from the maternal allele. Imprinting ofDOGL4requires DNA methylation of the paternal allele in the −1 kb region of theDOGL4promoter, which is mediated by canonical RdDM. DNA methylation of theDOGL4promoter in both maternal and paternal alleles is not substantially increased indmemutants, suggesting that imprinting ofDOGL4does not require DME activity. In addition toDME, three other DNA glycosylase genes inArabidopsisexist:ROS1,DEMETER-like 2(DML2), andDEMETER-like 3(DML3). WhileDMEis preferentially expressed in the central cell and the pollen vegetative cell,ROS1,DML2, andDML3are ubiquitously expressed (2,24,46,115). Mutations inROS1result in increased DNA methylation in the promoter of theDOGL4paternal allele and in decreasedDOGL4paternal allele expression, suggesting that ROS1 protects the paternal allele from hypermethylation and complete silencing. Mutations inDML2orDML3do not affect the DNA methylation levels in theDOGL4promoter, indicating that only ROS1 is involved in regulatingDOGL4DNA demethylation. ros1mutant seeds have higher dormancy levels than do wild-type seeds, and transgenic lines overexpressingDOG4Linros1mutants show lower dormancy thanros1mutants, suggesting that ROS1 negatively regulates seed dormancy throughDOGL4demethylation (157).
H3K27me3 is another epigenetic repressive mark involved in imprinted gene expression. H3K27me3 imprinting marks are mediated by Fertilization-Independent Seed–Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (FIS-PRC2), consisting of MEDEA (MEA), FERTILIZATION-INDEPENDENT ENDOSPERM (FIE), FIS2, and MULTICOPY SUPPRESSOR OF IRA1 (MSI1), in central cells and are maintained after fertilization (10,127). Studies inArabidopsis, maize, and rice indicate that PEGs tend be more closely associated with H3K27me3 marks than MEGs (10,37,55,68,98,126,127,155). Furthermore, inArabidopsis, significant numbers of PEGs are associated with two additional repressive epigenetic marks, H3K9me2 and CHG methylation (97).
Recently, Sato et al. (131) showed that genes bearing H3K27me3, H3K9me2, and CHG methylation marks have a significant tendency to have their paternal allele preferentially expressed during germination, whereas genes bearing the single H3K27me3 mark have their maternal allele preferentially expressed. The expression of many genes with the single H3K27me3 mark is induced during germination but not in mutants lacking REF6, a Jumonji C (JmjC) domain–containing histone demethylase, while the expression of genes with the triple H3K27me3, H3K9me2, and CHG methylation marks is kept suppressed. This finding led Sato et al. (131) to propose that REF6 is able to activate genes with a single H3K27me3 mark on their maternal allele during germination in the endosperm, but not genes with the triple marks.
Earlier studies had shown thatref6mutants display hypermethylation of H3K27me3 in several hundred genes in seedlings (28,76,85).ref6mutants show divergent developmental phenotypes including enhanced seed dormancy, which is associated with increasedABAcontent in seeds. Chen et al. (17) showed that enhanced seed dormancy and ABA levels inref6mutants are due mainly to the reduced expression of two ABA catabolism genes,CYP707A1andCYP707A3. REF6 directly binds toCYP707A1andCYP707A3, and their H3K27me3 levels inref6mutants are higher than in wild type in developing seeds. This finding suggests that, during seed development, REF6 directly promotes the expression ofCYP707A1andCYP707A3through demethylation of H3K27me3, thus leading to low ABA levels and reduced seed dormancy. Sato et al. (131) showed that REF6 activates the expression of genes involved in ethylene signaling, which is known to release dormancy by counteracting ABA responses. Therefore, REF6 appears to regulate seed dormancy in different developmental stages. Whether genes targeted by REF6 participate in the maternal inheritance of seed dormancy needs to be investigated.
Wild-type seeds produced under cold temperatures have higher final seed dormancy levels. Cold stimulates CHH methylation in theALNpromoter, which is associated with suppression ofALNexpression upon seed imbibition. As forALNimprinting, CHH methylation induced by cold also involves RDR6-RdDM. This might result from increased AGO6 accumulation and, therefore, activity under cold temperatures in developing seeds (57).
Under cold temperatures, transgenic lines overexpressingALNproduced seeds with low dormancy levels relative to wild-type seeds, suggesting that ABA homeostasis regulated by ALN is important for seed dormancy. Mutant seeds lacking RDR6-RdDM, such asdrm2,nrpe1,ago6, andrdr6mutants, in which cold-induced CHH methylation ofALNpromoter is not observed, are less dormant compared with wild type when produced under cold temperatures. Furthermore,drm2 alnseeds produced under cold temperatures have dormancy levels similar to those of wild-type seeds. These observations suggest that cold-induced CHH methylation of theALNpromoter participates in cold-induced seed dormancy (Figure 5). Interestingly, cold-induced CHH methylation overrides genomic imprinting as both parental alleles become hypermethylated.
Cold temperatures increase CHH methylation in seed tissues, endosperm, and embryo but not in other tissues, such as leaves or flowers, probably due to tissue-specific activity of RDR6-RdDM. Higher levels of CHH methylation in the embryo are lost in seedlings after germination as a result of the combination of cell divisions and absence ofAGO6expression in seedlings (57).
In plants, CG methylation patterns are stably maintained throughout mitotic or meiotic cell divisions, except in a few tissues, such as the endosperm and the vegetative cell of the pollen grain (73,92,132). In contrast, CHH methylation patterns are subject to dynamical changes during seed development, including in response to environmental cues such as cold temperatures (38,64,134,135,146). In most cases, CHH methylation changes induced by environmental cues are transient. There are different resetting mechanisms of epigenetic changes induced by environmental cues. It has been proposed that the resetting mechanism enables the next plant generation to adapt to new environmental conditions (23,25,26,58). In the case ofALN, cold-induced CHH methylation would be a mechanism allowing the seed to keep information about past cold temperatures in order to optimize seed germination timing (dormancy); however, this information is not maintained (see above) after germination, allowing optimal gene expression once again in the next generation (57).
The same genetic network that controls winter bud dormancy in plants also facilitates maternal environmental control of seed dormancy. Seeds in a carpel or fruit can be viewed as a specialized bud, with temperature responses in zygotic tissues coordinated with temperature-regulation of the properties of the surrounding seed coat, pericarp, or fruit. Thus, the reduction in seed dormancy caused by warmth is closely mirrored by changes in the fruit, with warm temperatures accelerating fruit development and increasing pod shattering (78). The activity of the maternal pathway has been revealed inArabidopsisby assessing the effect of changes in temperature before fertilization of the seed (7,18). Changes in ambient temperature or vernalization status can modify the expression ofFLOWERING LOCUS C(FLC) in the mother plant. However, any silencing of the paternalFLCallele via H3K27me3 is eliminated during male gamete development (86), while the maternal allele carries a temperature memory at least until the onset of seed maturation.FLCcan affect both proanthocyanidin synthesis in the seed coat and ABA signaling–related gene expression in the seed (18,22). MaternalFLOWERING LOCUS T(FT) also affects seed dormancy, withftmutants showing a dormancy increase that requires the downstream activity of maternalFLC(19). AlthoughFTis highly expressed in fruits, the FT protein does not appear to move to the seed to control dormancy, as was first hypothesized (18), because while maternal FT reduces seed dormancy, direct expression ofFTin seeds increases it (20). Instead,FTexpression in the seed itself likely interferes with the activity of the seed-specific FT homolog MOTHER OF FT AND TFL1 (MFT). MFT increases dormancy in response to low temperature experienced by the seed (103). InterestinglyMFTis regulated by the PIF family transcription factor SPATULA (SPT), which is stabilized at the protein level by cool temperatures (136,140); however, it remains unclear whether SPT mediates the temperature regulation ofMFTinArabidopsisseeds.MFTis expressed in the endosperm, regulates hormone responses in imbibed seeds in response to light signals (8,152), and acts during seed maturation to increase primary dormancy.
The regulation of seed dormancy through distinct posttranslational modifications of histones has been further identified. Additional epigenetic mechanisms regulating seed dormancy have been described. However, whether these epigenetic regulations involve parental or environmental control of seed dormancy is covered elsewhere (110,111) and remains to be elucidated.
Thereduced dormancy4(rdo4) mutant was isolated by a gamma-irradiation mutagenesis screen.rdo4mutants display pleiotropic phenotypes in the adult plants as well as reduced seed dormancy (117). Liu et al. (81) clonedRDO4, which was then renamedHISTONE MONOUBIQUITINATION1(HUB1). Mutations inHUB2, a homolog ofHUB1, also cause reduced seed dormancy.HUB1andHUB2encode RING E3 ligases responsible for histone H2B monoubiquitination, which is generally associated with activation of transcription. The expression of several genes regulating dormancy, such asDOG1,ATS2,NCED9,PER1, andCYP707A2, is significantly decreased in freshly harvestedhub1seeds, suggesting thatHUB1regulates seed dormancy by targeting those genes, either directly or indirectly (81).
Thekryptonite(kyp) mutant was originally isolated as a suppressor of silencing of theSUPERMANlocus.KYP, also known asSUVH4, encodes a histone methyltransferase required for H3K9 methylation, which is generally associated with transcriptional suppression (59).kypmutants show enhanced seed dormancy levels and increased germination sensitivity toABAand paclobutrazol, an inhibitor ofGAbiosynthesis. The expression of several dormancy-related genes, includingDOG1andABI3, is increased inkypmutant seeds.dog1 kypandhub1 kypmutants show reduced dormancy similar to that ofdog1orhub1single mutants, suggesting thatKYP⁄ SUVH4regulates seed dormancy through the same pathway asDOG1andHUB1(156).




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We thank Pedro Rodriguez, Eiji Nambara, Hiroyuki Nonogaki, Wim Soppe, and Noriyuki Nishimura for helpful discussions.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


