We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Our knowledge of plant ion channels was significantly enhanced by the first application of the patch-clamp technique to isolated guard cell protoplasts over 35 years ago. Since then, research has demonstrated the importance of ion channels in the control of gas exchange in guard cells, their role in nutrient uptake in roots, and the participation of calcium-permeable cation channels in the regulation of cell signaling affected by the intracellular concentrations of this second messenger. In recent years, through the employment of reverse genetics, mutant proteins, and heterologous expression systems, research on ion channels has identified mechanisms that modify their activity through protein–protein interactions or that result in activation and/or deactivation of ion channels through posttranslational modifications. Additional and confirmatory information on ion channel functioning has been derived from the crystallization and molecular modeling of plant proteins that, together with functional analyses, have helped to increase our knowledge of the functioning of these important membrane proteins that may eventually help to improve crop yield. Here, an update on the advances obtained in plant ion channel function during the last few years is presented.
Article metrics loading...
Our knowledge of plant ion channels was significantly enhanced by the first application of the patch-clamp technique to isolated guard cell protoplasts over 35 years ago. Since then, research has demonstrated the importance of ion channels in the control of gas exchange in guard cells, their role in nutrient uptake in roots, and the participation of calcium-permeable cation channels in the regulation of cell signaling affected by the intracellular concentrations of this second messenger. In recent years, through the employment of reverse genetics, mutant proteins, and heterologous expression systems, research on ion channels has identified mechanisms that modify their activity through protein–protein interactions or that result in activation and/or deactivation of ion channels through posttranslational modifications. Additional and confirmatory information on ion channel functioning has been derived from the crystallization and molecular modeling of plant proteins that, together with functional analyses, have helped to increase our knowledge of the functioning of these important membrane proteins that may eventually help to improve crop yield. Here, an update on the advances obtained in plant ion channel function during the last few years is presented.
Ion channels are proteins embedded in the membrane lipid bilayer that communicate through structured pores, intra- and extracellular spaces, allowing the passive movement of ions following their electrochemical gradient. Ion channels play important roles in osmoregulation, growth, signaling, movement, nutrient acquisition by the root, and long-distance transport of nutrients from the root to the aerial organs along the stem (Figure 1). The activity of ion channels is regulated by many cytoplasmic factors, such as pH and Ca2+, that have immediate effects, while others that require the posttranslational modification of the channel protein or binding, such as kinases, phosphatases, or calmodulin, need to be activated before modifying channel activity, implying a slower form of regulation. Research on ion channels in plants started with the identification of potassium ion (K+) single-channel activity from isolated guard cells in the pioneering work by Schroeder, Hedrich, & Fernandez (129). In this work, the patch-clamp technique was applied for the first time to plant cells and opened a field that during the last 35 years has helped to characterize many ion channels from a variety of cell types and organelles. In later years, research on ion channels has been assisted by several approaches, including forward and reverse genetics; heterologous expression in yeast,Xenopusoocytes, and animal cells to characterize their transport properties; fluorescent protein fusions to identify their subcellular localization; and bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) to determine their molecular interactions. This information has enabled the assignment of the physiological role of many channels in plant cells. Here, a review of the work done mainly in the last few years is presented to provide an update on the present knowledge of ion channels in plants.

Figure 1Click to view


Potassium is the most abundant element in plants, reaching cytosolic concentrations around 150 mM, causing the osmotic uptake of water with the concomitant swelling of the cell due to the presence of the plant cell wall. K+is also important for enzyme activation, protein synthesis, charge balance for inorganic and organic anions, and negatively charged macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. It is widely accepted that K+uptake is passive through ion channels that follow its electrochemical gradient, mainly accounted for by the highly inside negative membrane potential characteristic of plant cells generated by the activity of the plasma membrane H+-ATPase (Figures 2and3). Starting from the initial identification of ion channels in plant cells (129), K+channels have been studied and characterized in guard and root cells (73,152,153). K+channels inArabidopsis thalianawere grouped into two gene families, Shaker and tandem pore K+(TPK) channels (99,133,137). The Shaker family, recently termed plant voltage-gated K+(VGK) channels (67), was associated early on with cyclic nucleotide-binding domain (CNBD) animal channels, rather than with animal Shakers (58,131). This is mainly due to the presence of the CNBD together with a C-linker domain located between the end of transmembrane domain 6 (TMD6) and the CNBD (67). These two domains interface with the channel core to modulate channel gating (67). Phylogenetic analyses suggest that VGK channels acquire the CNBD from eubacteria through lateral gene transfer (67). Among the VGK channels,KAT1, KAT2,AKT1, AKT5, and AKT6 (SPIK) facilitate K+entry, localize to the plasma membrane, and are activated at more negative (<−150 mV) membrane potentials.SKORandGORK, in contrast, are activated by more positive (>−150 mV) potentials mediating the exit of K+from the cell. AKT2 is a weakly rectifying channel that mediates both the entry and exit of K+to and from the plant cell. KAT3 (KC1) is a peculiar member, as it does not show channel activity (122), but through heterooligomerization with either KAT1 or AKT1, it regulates their activity (Figure 2) (133). Plant inward-rectifying K+channels do not inactivate, ensuring K+accumulation in guard cells, which increases osmotic potential leading to stomatal opening, and in root cells, which are necessary for uptake. Several earlier reviews discuss in detail the work done on K+channels (47,73,99,153).

Figure 2Click to view


Figure 3Click to view


The activity of plant inward-rectifying K+channels is regulated by the calcineurin B-like (CBL) protein–CBL-interacting protein kinase (CIPK) module (CBL–CIPK), which links changes in cytosolic Ca2+caused by exogenous factors, as an adaptive response to withstand environmental challenges (Figure 2) (10,93,167). CBL1 and CBL9 interact with CIPK23 to phosphorylate AKT1 in roots and stimulate its activity under K+deficiency conditions that depend on increases in cytoplasmic Ca2+(Figure 2) (91). AKT1 stimulation requires the presence of both CBL1 or CBL9 and CIPK23, as coexpression of the channel with either of the CBL proteins or CIPK23 alone does not stimulate channel activity (91). In root cell protoplasts from thecblorcipkmutants, inward K+currents are severely diminished, as compared to those from wild-type plants (91). AKT1 is stimulated by several combinations of CBL proteins and CIPKs, with the ankyrin domain from AKT1 and the kinase domain of CIPK23 required for the interaction of the two proteins (87). Downregulation of CBL–CIPK-stimulated activity of AKT1 is under the control of the PP2C phosphatase AIP1 (AKT1-interacting PP2C1), establishing a regulatory module in root cells controlling AKT1 activity by modifying its phosphorylation state (Figure 2) (87). Regulation of AKT2 by the module CBL4/CIPK6, however, is not by phosphorylation, but through the activation of its traffic from the endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane, a process that depends on myristoylation and palmitoylation of CBL4. This trafficking is also Ca2+-dependent through a support function of CIPK6 that does not require its kinase activity (52). Confirming the physiological role of this tripartite interaction is the similar retarded flowering phenotype observed for thecbl4,cikp6, andakt2mutants (52).
GORK and SKOR, the two members of the Shaker family that facilitate the efflux of K+upon depolarization, are expressed in the guard cells and root hairs (Figures 2and3) and in xylem parenchyma cells, respectively (Figure 1). According to these expression patterns, stomatal closing is impaired ingorkplants (59), and a decrease in K+shoot and xylem content is observed inskorplants (33). In both channels, gating is modified by external K+concentration as well as by voltage, causing their activation at voltages positive to EK(33).GORK phosphorylation by the Ca2+-dependent CPK33 kinase stimulates the activity of the outward channel (Figure 3), which is not observed with the inactive CPK33-K102M mutant (14). The interaction between GORK and CKP33 is confirmed by the impaired stomatal closing observed incpk33mutant plants (14). Mimicking phosphorylation (S649E or S722E) or dephosphorylation (S649A or S722A) at the C terminus of GORK generates highly active or inhibited channels, respectively, confirming the regulation of GORK by phosphorylation (14,88). The upregulation of GORK activity is under the control of protein phosphatases from the PP2CA group that inhibits the S649E and S722E mutants, indicating that this effect is a result of the binding ofAtPP2CA to the C terminus of the channel rather than to its dephosphorylation (Figure 3) (88).
An interesting observation for GORK channels is their regulation through the formation of clusters in the membrane induced at low extracellular K+or by channel blockers like Ba2+(26). GORK channel clustering is associated with lower conductance and slower channel gating that may be the result of conformational changes that direct the channel to an inactive state in response to low external K+(26). GORK channel clustering is reversed by high extracellular K+, a response associated with increased channel activity (26).
In rice, OsK5.2 is anoutward-rectifying channelthat is expressed in the stomatal complex, root vasculature, and root cortex, and that upon mutation hinders stomatal closing, leading to higher transpiration rates associated with the loss of outward currents from guard cells (114). Long-distance root-to-shoot K+translocation is also affected in mutant plants, according to expression in the vasculature, evidence indicating that OsK5.2 plays the role of bothSKORandGORKin rice (114).
TPK channels are highly selective for K+, are voltage independent, and possess at their N terminus a 14-3-3 protein-binding site and at the C terminus one or two Ca2+-binding EF hands (24,82,133). The geneAtTPK1codes for the VK channels proposed to participate in the release of K+from the vacuole to the cytoplasm during stomatal closure (Figure 3) (37,65,154).AtTPK1 is activated by cytoplasmic Ca2+and by the 14-3-3 protein GRF6 (37,82). GRF6 binding is stimulated by the phosphorylation of Ser42 in TPK1, but prevented by the mutation S42A (82), which also prevents stimulation by ATP or ATP and GRF6 (Figure 3) (65). The phosphorylation of TPK1 in guard cells is mediated by KIN7, a receptor-like kinase that migrates from the plasma membrane to the tonoplast upon the addition of abscisic acid (ABA) (Figure 3) (65). Interaction between TPK1 and KIN7 is confirmed by the slower stomatal closure observed in the mutantstpk1andkin7in the presence of ABA or high CO2concentrations and by lower phosphorylation of TPK1 in thekin7mutant (65). TPK1 phosphorylation by CPK3 is exclusively induced by high salinity, with the response paralleled by the sensitivity of thetpk1andcpk3plants to high sodium, suggesting that TPK1 is important in maintaining a high K+/Na+cytoplasmic ratio during salt stress (Figure 2) (83). With the exception of TPK4, which locates to the plasma membrane, the other TPK channels also reside at the tonoplast, although their physiological functions remain unknown (82,148). TPK4 has been identified from the plasma membrane of pollen tubes to show instantaneous activation, high K+selectivity and inhibition by cytoplasmic Ca2+and low cytoplasmic pH, and has been proposed to participate in the stabilization of the membrane potential in coordination with theinward rectifierAKT6 channel (4).
Rice TPKa and TPKb are 65% similar, with TPKa located at the lytic central vacuole while TPKb localizes to the protein storage vacuole (63). Both channels are voltage independent, highly K+selective, and insensitive to Ca2+cyt, despite the characteristic EF hand domains at the C terminus (63). Localization of TPKb to the protein storage vacuole depends on the phosphorylation of S313, located between the two EF domains (63).
The slow vacuolar (SV) channel is the ion channel first characterized with the patch-clamp technique in plant cell vacuoles (48,51). Also known as two-pore channel 1 (TPC1), it is built of two Shaker-like domains with two pores betweenTMD5–6and TMD11–12 and two voltage sensors, TMD4 and TMD10, forming a dimer as the functional SV channel (Table 1) (39,40,64,119). Earlier reviews on the SV channel provide insight on the functioning of this ubiquitous plant channel (47,50).
Cation channels in plant cells
aActivation/transport refers to the voltage that activates the channels (hyperpolarization, more negative; depolarization, less negative) and the direction of ion flux (in, towards the cytoplasm; out, to the extracellular space or into organelle lumen).
Abbreviations: NA, not applicable; PM, plasma membrane; TPC, two-pore channel; TPK, tandem pore K+channel; VGK, voltage-gated K+.

Our knowledge of the functioning of the SV channel has been assisted by the elucidation of the crystal structure of K+and Na+channels from animal cells (140,145) and, ultimately, fromAtTPC1, the molecular entity associated with the SV channel fromArabidopsis(39,40). According to the insensitivity of thefou2mutant to luminal Ca2+, E540 and D454 are associated with Ca2+binding, as the mutants E540Q and D454Q activate faster and at lower potentials, indicating a loose interaction of either mutant with Ca2+(16). Due to the proximity of E456 and E457 to TMD10, the second voltage sensor, researchers propose that these interactions stabilize the channel in the closed conformation (16).
One of the main properties of TPC1 is the activation by cytoplasmic Ca2+linked to the presence of two EF motifs facing the cytoplasm, an association that was confirmed by Schulze et al. (132) by mutation analyses (64,119). The mutation D376A at EF2 led to an inactive channel, while D335A within EF1 caused smaller changes, emphasizing EF2 as the domain responsible for the Ca2+dependence of SV channels. The synergistic effect that cytoplasmic Mg2+and cytoplasmic Ca2+have on the activation of SV channels (118) is associated with EF1 acting as an Mg2+-binding site, priming SV channels for their activation by Ca2+at physiological concentrations (132). Employing mutational analyses, researchers demonstrated that the voltage dependence of SV channels resides on the second voltage sensor domain TMD10, where the presence of four positive amino acids agrees with the canonical structure in other voltage-dependent channels (7,66).
Confirmation of the previous observations was provided by crystallization ofAtTPC1 (40). Inhibition by luminal Ca2+, activation by cytoplasmic Ca2+, and the importance of the voltage sensor TMD10 were confirmed (40). Besides D454, it was found that D528 and E240 also participate in the inhibition of SV channels by luminal Ca2+. Although initially doubted by researchers, as the crystal structure did not show Ca2+bound to EF2, functional analyses confirmed that EF2 is the domain responsible for cytoplasmic Ca2+channel activation, with cytoplasmic Mg2+binding to EF1 to prime the SV channel (40). The crystal structure identified the absence of a 310helix in TMD4, a structural conformation characteristic of voltage sensors (7,40,145), together with additional differences in TMD2 and TMD3, confirming that TMD4 is not the voltage sensor (40). Additionally, it was reinforced that TMD10 possesses all the features found in canonical voltage sensors (7,40,145), confirming the results from Jaślan et al. (66).Table 1summarizes the characteristics of the cation channels described in this section.
The high intracellular concentration of K+in plant cells must be balanced by anions to maintain cytoplasmic electroneutrality, which is accounted for mainly by chloride and nitrate, with additional contributions from sulfate and phosphate and organic anions such as malate and citrate. In contrast to the main cations that remain as free ions in solution, some anions, such as sulfate, phosphate, and nitrate, are assimilated by the plant to incorporate sulfur, phosphorus, and nitrogen into macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. Chloride and nitrate can remain as free ions in solution, thus contributing to the establishment of cell turgor. The presence of a negative membrane potential at both the plasma membrane and tonoplast implies that anion transport into the cytoplasm must be mediated by a secondary active transport mechanism, activated by the H+electrochemical potential generated by the H+-ATPases (Figures 2and3). In contrast, anion transport out of the cytoplasm follows the electrochemical potential and occurs through ion channels.
One of the anion channels that has received a thorough analysis is the slowly activating anion channel 1 (SLAC1), initially identified in guard cells by the patch-clamp technique (130) and later genetically characterized by mutants affected in their response to CO2(112) or ozone (144). SLAC1 mediates the efflux of chloride or nitrate that leads to depolarization of the plasma membrane, causing the release of potassium through theGORKchannel, with the consequent loss of water from the guard cells, causing stomatal closure (see49) (Figure 3).
In guard cells, the activity of SLAC1 is under the control of several environmental factors, with CO2and ABA being two of the most studied, but also including high ozone (O3), light/dark cycles, and light wavelength. Researchers proposed that the activation of SLAC1 by high CO2may happen through the concerted action of two parallel pathways, one directly involving the binding of HCO3−(150,156) and the second by phosphorylation mediated by a diverse set of protein kinases (Figure 4) (49). It is suggested that CO2diffuses into the guard cells through aquaporins, to be converted to H++ HCO3−by β-carbonic anhydrases (β-CA1/CA4) (61). HCO3−binds directly to the transmembrane domain of SLAC1 (156), since the N- or C-terminal truncated versions of the channel respond specifically to CO2, but not to ABA (150,156). In a Ca2+-independent pathway during the response to high CO2, the SnRK2 (sucrose nonfermenting 2-related protein kinase) OST1 directly phosphorylates SLAC1, leading to the activation of the channel (Figure 4). This activation, together with the direct binding of and stimulation by HCO3−, leads to a fully active SLAC1 channel with the release of chloride to the extracellular space with the consequent stomatal closure (Figure 3) (34,35,47,49,86). This activity is negatively regulated by the HT1 (high leaf temperature) protein kinase (45) to prevent SLAC1 activation (Figures 3and4) (57).

Figure 4Click to view


The identification of the A109V dominant mutation in HT1 that generates a CO2-insensitive stomata phenotype allowed the detection of MPK4 (mitogen-activated protein kinase 4) and MPK12 as inhibitors of HT1 (Figure 4) but not of the mutant HT1A109V (57). InXenopusoocytes, the coexpression of MPK12, HT1, GHR1 (another kinase acting on SLAC1; see below), and SLAC1 recovered the SLAC1-associated currents but not with the HT1A109V mutant, indicating that the interaction between MPK12 and HT1 prevented the inhibition of GHR1 by HT1, allowing the activation of SLAC1 and stomatal closing (Figures 3and4) (57). MPK4 had similar effects to MPK12, inhibiting phosphorylation of GRH1 by HT1 through a protein–protein interaction, without phosphorylation of HT1 being required (57). GHR1 (guard cell hydrogen peroxide-resistant 1) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLK) identified as anArabidopsismutant affected in stomatal responses to H2O2or ABA (62), although responses to jasmonate, salicylic acid, and flagellin 22 (flg22) were also affected. Similar to OST1, GHR1 phosphorylates the N terminus of SLAC1, stimulating its activity (Figures 3and4) (62).
The Ca2+cyt-dependent protein kinases CPK3, CPK6, CPK11, CPK21, and CPK23 stimulate the SLAC1 channel as evinced by the smaller currents recorded from guard cells of the single, double (34,110), or quadruple mutants, where a further inhibition of SLAC1 is observed on exposure to ABA (Figure 4) (6). In vitro kinase assays demonstrate the direct interaction between CPKs and SLAC1, resulting in the phosphorylation of the N-terminal concurrent with channel activation (5,110). It is proposed that S59 is the residue specifically modified by CPKs, while S120 is phosphorylated by OST1 (6). Complementation ofslac1-1mutant plants is achieved by SLAC1-S59A or SLAC-S120A but not by the double mutant. SLAC1 currents are inhibited when the protein phosphatase ABI1, ABI2, or PP2CA is coexpressed in oocytes, indicating the dephosphorylation of the SLAC1 N terminus, in agreement with in vitro kinase results (Figures 3and4) (5,6,34).
CIPKs are another type of protein kinase that indirectly depend on Ca2+for activation, through direct interaction with the CBL calcium sensors (93). SLAC1 currents are activated by the combined expression of CBL1 or CBL9 with CIPK23, activity that is due to the interaction between CIPK23 and SLAC1 (Figure 4). SLAC1 phosphorylation is inhibited by the inclusion of the phosphatase ABI1 in the assays, and the SLAC1-S120A mutant is activated by CBL1/CIPK23, suggesting the presence of another phosphorylation site in SLAC1, which could correspond to T513, as the mutation T513D resulted in a constitutively active channel (34,95). Another factor regulating SLAC1 activity by the CBL-CIPK module is the modification of CBL proteins by lipids, required for the correct targeting of the proteins to the plasma membrane (Figure 5) (124). SLAC1 currents are recorded with the coexpression of CBL5-CIPK11 but not with the mutants CBL5G2A or CBL5C3S-C5S, which prevent lipid modifications of CBL5 (124). These results indicate that the functioning of the SLAC1 channel and stomatal closing requires the lipidation of CBL5 for the correct targeting of the CBL5-CIPK11-SLAC1 complex to the plasma membrane. Similar results caused by lipid modification were also obtained for the CPK6 kinase (124). It remains to be demonstrated if these protein modifications are part of a signal transduction pathway during stomatal functioning. Although this evidence suggests that SLAC1 is fine-tuned by several kinases and/or phosphatases activated by several environmental factors, such as ABA, CO2,and H2O2, to exert a controlled regulation of stomatal closure, it remains to be demonstrated in planta, as most of these results were derived from studies of heterologous systems.

Figure 5Click to view


The crystallization of TehA fromHaemophilus influenzae, a homolog of theSLAC/SLAHfamily of proteins, led to the identification of F262 as a residue located inside the channel pore that could be blocking the channel, which was confirmed by the mutation F262A, generating a constitutively active channel, and reinforced with the homologous mutations in SLAC1 (9), SLAH2, which maintained its selectivity to NO3−(96), and SLAH3, but not in the silent SLAH1 (15). Mutations in several amino acids close to the extracellular half ofTMD3indicate that this region is important for the correct functioning of the channels, as revealed by the conversion of SLAC1 into a nitrate-selective channel like SLAH2 (96). Recently, it has been identified that a motif in TMD3 formed by the residues IA or IS in monocots confers nitrate sensitivity to SLAC1 channels, in contrast to the nitrate-insensitive VV or IV motif present in dicots (128). Swapping the monocot domain (IA) intoAtSLAC1 conferred nitrate sensitivity to this channel, while the AA mutation in the barley homologHvSLAC1 resulted in an inactive channel that was only functional in the chimeric version containing TMD1–TMD3 fromAtSLAC1 (128).
Molecular modeling based on the structure of TehA identified R256 and R321 as important residues for the interaction of intracellular HCO3−to stimulate SLAC1 anion channel activity (165). The single mutants R256A and R321A expressed in oocytes with OST1 responded as the SLAC1 wild-type channel did; however, stimulation by NaHCO3was lost, as well as in the R256A-R321A double mutant (165). When the SLAC1-R256A channel was transformed into theslac1plant, stomata showed a decreased response to CO2, although maintaining their sensitivity to ABA; this observation was confirmed by the insensitivity of SLAC1-R256A to CsHCO3(165). According to our knowledge of the molecular structure forHiTeaH, the functional unit for the TeaH/SLAC/SLAH family of anion channels is a trimer (9), opening the possibility for the formation of heteromeric channels in cells that express two different homologs. This was confirmed when SLAH1 (an inactive channel) was coexpressed with SLAH3 in oocytes, recording anion currents in the absence of any kinase or NO3−, similar to those recorded when SLAH3 is activated by CPK21 and NO3−(15). Activation of SLAH3 by SLAH1 is specific, in contrast to SLAH2, SLAH4, and SLAC1, which remain inactive upon coexpression with SLAH1. When plants from theslac1-2mutant, which naturally expresses SLAH3, were transformed with SLAH1, the activation of guard cell S-type chloride currents was recorded, corroborating the activation of SLAH3 by SLAH1 and the formation of heteromers (15). Moreover, the expression in the root pericycle of SLAH3 and SLAH1 that is associated with xylem Cl−loading may play a role in salt tolerance as indicated by the downregulation of SLAH1 by salt (15).
SLAC/SLAH channels also participate in the response of guard cells to the peptide flagellin (flg22) fromPseudomonas syringae(42) and during pollen tube growth (Figure 6) (41,106). The mutation ofSLAC1andSLAH3, the two anion channels present in guard cells, orOST1, prevents stomatal closing upon exposure toflg22, with results paralleled by the lack of activation of SLAC1 currents from guard cell protoplasts derived from the corresponding mutant plants, indicating that the module OST1/SLAC1-SLAH3 is required for the sensing of the peptide to close the stomata and prevent pathogen infection (42). In pollen tubes, the pair SLAH3/CPK2 is the module responsible for the NO3−efflux required for tube growth (Figure 6), as demonstrated by the absence of anion currents from mutant protoplasts fromslah3andcpk2-cpk20plants (41). The high cytoplasmic Ca2+typically localized at the tip of the pollen tube activates CPK2, with the concomitant stimulation of SLAH3 by phosphorylation (106), leading to NO3−efflux and tube growth (Figure 6).

Figure 6Click to view


The CLC family of anion channels/transporters inArabidopsiscomprises seven genes with homology to CLC channels from animal cells. Grouped in two subfamilies,AtCLCa–AtCLCd andAtCLCg are more similar to eukaryote channels, whileAtCLCe andAtCLCf are more like prokaryotes (2,98).AtCLCa–AtCLCc locate to the vacuolar membrane and function as NO3−/H+exchangers (2,18).AtCLCd andAtCLCf may function as the short-circuit current required for the activation of the V-ATPase located at the Golgi apparatus (Figure 5) (98,149). In agreement with its relation to prokaryote proteins,AtCLCe is located at the thylakoid membrane (2,98). A more detailed description of the role of CLC proteins fromArabidopsishas been reported in earlier literature (2,19).
AtCLCg localizes to the tonoplast (Figure 5), where it may play a role in Cl−accumulation during NaCl stress (113). In contrast toAtCLCc, which is expressed mainly in guard cells (Figure 3),AtCLCgis found in mesophyll cells, hydathodes, and phloem, and is proposed to participate in Cl−recirculation along the phloem (113). The double mutantatclcc/atclcgis not more sensitive to salt stress, possibly due to the repression that is observed for either channel when the other is mutated (113). According to sequence analysis,AtCLCg may function as an ion channel; however, the electrophysiological properties of this protein remain to be identified.
The location ofAtCLCe to the chloroplast has recently been confirmed, with the mutant plants showing diminished photosynthetic activity, affecting electron transport and chloroplast morphology, although these effects were minor, indicating that additional mechanisms participate in the dissipation of the thylakoid membrane potential during illumination (53). Such a mechanism could be the voltage-dependentAtVCCN1 channel, a bestrophin-like protein that in animal cells functions as a calcium-activated anion channel (Figure 5) (68).AtVCCN1 is a chloride channel permeable also to NO3−, inhibited by the anion channel blockers 4,4′-diisothiocyano-2,2′-stilbenedisulfonic acid and niflumic acid (54). In overexpressingAtVCCN1 plants, the proton motive force across the thylakoid membrane is almost completely due to the pH gradient, indicating thatAtVCCN1 functions to dissipate the membrane potential and suggesting a role in photosynthetic ATP synthesis by maintaining a significant pH gradient across the thylakoid membrane (54).
DTX33 and DTX35, members of the detoxification efflux carrier (DTX)/multidrug and toxic compound extrusion (MATE) family of transporters, function as highly selective and Ca2+-dependent chloride channels located at the tonoplast (Figure 3) (162). Both channels are partially permeable to NO3−but not to organic anions and are expressed in all plant organs, particularly in guard cells. In mutant plants, reduced tonoplast inward currents are recorded from single-mutantdtx33ordtx35plants, but no current was detected fromdtx33/dtx35double-mutant plants. According to the expression in guard cells, water loss from double-mutant plants is slower when compared to single-mutant or wild-type plants, a response associated with smaller stomatal apertures (162). Single or double mutants show shorter root hairs, while pollen tubes are shorter in single-mutantdtx35plants, consistent with the higher expression of this gene in pollen grains (Figures 2and6) (162). This evidence indicates that DTX35 and DTX33 channels participate in the swelling of the vacuole to support cell growth (162).
In plants, the organic anion malate participates in the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of ATP and in the glyoxylate cycle for the β-oxidation of fatty acids and synthesis of NADH; it plays a role in pH regulation and acts as an osmolyte in guard cells. In C4 and crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) plants, malate is stored in the vacuole during the dark period for later assimilation during the light period. Malate also functions as a charge-balancing anion for K+and other cations, and, in some species, its secretion in the roots is stimulated by extracellular aluminum (Al3+). Based on the electrochemical potential for malate across the plasma membrane and the tonoplast, malate transport out of the cytoplasm must be mediated by ion channels.
Plasma membrane malate channels were first identified from wheat root cells, with researchers employing the Al3+-stimulated secretion of malate as a screening method (Figure 2) (74,120,123). Using the patch-clamp technique to root cell protoplasts from wheat plants, researchers recorded malate currents from Al3+-tolerant but not Al3+-sensitive plants. Expression of the wheat geneTaALMT1in oocytes generates inward currents stimulated by micromolar concentrations of Al3+, but citrate transport is not detected (127). Both malate and citrate are organic anions, with malate being a dicarboxylate and citrate a tricarboxylate. It is common to analyze the channel permeability to similar ions to demonstrate their selectivity; moreover, citrate is also secreted by the roots. Transgenic rice expressingTaALMT1exposed to Al3+exudes malate at the roots, a response not observed in wild-type rice roots (127), confirming the malate permeability of the channel. Fourteen homologs are present inArabidopsis, and characterization ofAtALMT1confirmed similar transport properties to those forTaALMT1(55), although a later study did not record any malate current nor the stimulation by Al3+fromAtALMT1 (126). Efforts have been made to identify the amino acids responsible for the stimulation ofTaALMT1 by Al3+through mutational analyses. Expressing the truncated N-terminal version ofTaALMT1 containing six putativeTMDs, and comprising almost half of the native protein, generated malate currents but lost stimulation by Al3+(92). However, another report showed that the truncated channel was nonfunctional (29). In view of these conflicting results, the Al3+binding site as well as channel topology remains to be identified (29,92,126).
AtALMT12 is mainly found in guard cells (Figure 3), but also in pollen tubes and roots, residing at the plasma membrane (103,125). According to the expression in guard cells,atalmt12plants are impaired in their closing responses to darkness, high CO2, and ABA (103,125). Rapid-type currents (130) fromatalmt12guard cell protoplasts exposed to malate were reduced in magnitude when compared to those from wild-type plants (103). Expression ofAtALMT12 in oocytes generates rapidly activated currents, similar to those associated with the R-type channel, which is stimulated by external malate but insensitive to Al3+(103), although conflicting results have also been reported (125). It is proposed that R-type channels are coded byAtALMT12, responsible for guard cell membrane potential depolarization and activation of bothGORKandSLAC1channels leading to stomatal closure (Figure 3) (103).
Vacuolar malate inward currents, which correspond to the movement of malate into the vacuole, were first recorded from sugar beet at physiological cytoplasmic Ca2+(10−7M), a condition that is necessary because millimolar cytoplasmic Ca2+blocks these currents (116). In vacuoles from the CAM plantKalanchoe daigremontiana, malate currents are independent of cytoplasmic Ca2+but inhibited by acidic cytoplasmic pH, and they correspond to the mechanism responsible for the nocturnal accumulation of malate in CAM plants (117). Vacuolar malate channels are present in most plant species and are more permeable to fumarate (77,104). The molecular entity for the malate channel seems to be associated withAtALMT9, which, when heterologously expressed, generates malate inward currents with a Kmfor malate of 27 mM.AtALMT9knockout plants do not show a clear phenotype, although they accumulated less malate (Figure 3) (20,77). The grape berry homologVvALMT9 shows similar properties, with higher permeability to tartrate, explaining the vacuolar accumulation of the two organic anions in grapes (17).AtALMT9 also mediates inward chloride currents stimulated by the presence of low concentrations of cytoplasmic malate, and according to the expression ofAtALMT9 in guard cells,atalmt9plants are more resistant to drought stress as a result of smaller stomatal openings (20). The malate and chloride concentrations found in plant cells, 500 μM and ∼30 mM, respectively, suggest thatAtALMT9 most likely functions as a chloride channel stimulated by cytoplasmic malate involved in the opening of stomata (Figure 3) (20).AtALMT9 is inhibited by cytosolic nucleotides without requiring nucleotide hydrolysis as the nonhydrolyzable AMPPNP inhibits the currents similarly to ATP (164).
Mutational analyses indicate that K93 and E130, located at TMD1 and TMD2, respectively, may establish a salt bridge that is necessary forAtALMT9 function (163). Equally, K193, R200, and R215, in or close to TMD5, confer channel rectification and probably form part of the conducting pore inAtALMT9 (163). It is proposed thatAtALMT9 forms a tetramer (163); however, in the absence of the molecular structure for anyALMTchannel, this conclusion needs to be confirmed.AtALMT6 is a tonoplast malate channel identified in guard cells fromArabidopsis(Figure 3), with similar properties toAtALMT9, although it requires micromolar Ca2+cytfor activation and is regulated by vacuolar pH, with maximal activity at physiologically acidic lumen (104). AlthoughAtALMT6 is localized mainly in guard cells,atalmt6plants do not show any defects in stomatal opening or in responses to drought (104). The characteristics of the anion channels described in this section are summarized inTable 2.
Anion channels in plant cells
aActivation/transport refers to the voltage that activates the channels (hyperpolarization, more negative; depolarization, less negative) and the direction of ion flux (in, towards the cytoplasm; out, to the extracellular space or into organelle lumen).
Abbreviations: ALMT, aluminum-activated malate transporters; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; DTX, detoxification efflux carrier; NA, not applicable; ND, not determined; PM, plasma membrane; SLAC, slowly activating anion channel.

Due to their sessile nature, plants possess many survival mechanisms that allow them to grow and reproduce under biotic and abiotic stress conditions, such as insect and pathogen attack, as well as salinity, drought, flooding, and cold, among many others. One common response to stress is the increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+that serves as a second messenger for the activation of downstream responses. Several molecular mechanisms have been proposed as responsible for the increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+, such as NSCCs (nonselective cation channels), glutamate-like receptor (GLR) channels, and cyclic nucleotide-gated channels (CNGCs), which facilitate its movement from the extracellular medium or from intracellular stores, following its electrochemical gradient.
InArabidopsisthere are 20 genes that code for CNGCs. These channels have a predicted structure similar to that of VGK channels with sixTMDs, followed by a long hydrophilic C terminus where a CNBD and a calmodulin-binding domain (CaMBD) are present, with both N and C termini facing the cytoplasm (23). An IQ domain is a second and well-conserved CaMBD at the C terminus that interacts with allArabidopsisCaM isoforms (22,27). DeFalco et al. (22) discovered that apo-calmodulin (ApoCaM) binds to the IQ domain while Ca2+/CaM binds to the N terminus and the long CaMBD at the C terminus. Mutations at the N-terminal CaMBD induce a programmed cell death response, and mutations at the IQ motif result in an inactive channel, indicating that CaM can stimulate and inhibit the activity of CNGC12 (Table 3) (22).
The closely related paralogs CNGC19 and CNGC20 have a long N terminus and the former localizes to the vacuole and plasma membrane, while the latter is associated with the Golgi apparatus (Figure 5) (78,102,159). Gene expression is also different. CNGC19 is expressed mainly in the vasculature, while CNGC20 is more widely expressed, including in the root cortex, flowers, and guard cells (Figure 1) (159). CNGC19 functions as a Ca2+channel activated by cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and participates in the propagation of Ca2+signals during wounding bySpodoptera lituraalong the vasculature to stimulate downstream defense responses in the plant (102). This was confirmed by the lower accumulation of jasmonic acid and jasmonoyl-isoleucine observed in thecngc19mutant, preventing the activation of jasmonate signaling, as well as lower accumulation of aliphatic glucosinolates, with the concomitant accumulation of their precursor, methionine (Met) (102).
Two other closely related paralogs are CNGC2 and CNGC4, with mutants from both genes (dnd1/dnd2) mimicking a lesion phenotype response, exhibiting constitutive expression of pathogen-related (PR) genes and high levels of salicylic acid. These mutants lack a response to avirulent pathogens, causing the phenotype, defense no death (DND1/DND2), with synergistic effects in the double mutant (69,109). CNGC2 functions as a cyclic nucleotide monophosphate (cNMP)-activated channel permeable to K+and Ca2+(1). Alterations observed in thednd1anddnd2plants are reversed by the repressor of defense no death1 (rdd1) mutant, obtained from a suppressor screen of the knockoutatcngc2plant (12).BiFCassays demonstrated the heterooligomerization of CNGC2 and CNGC4 that, together with the effects caused byrdd1, suggests that the functioning of both channels overlaps in the same signaling pathway to control the immune response as well as flowering (12).
Peptide signaling is recognized as an important mechanism in cell-to-cell communication in plants, and the participation of CNGC in this response has been investigated. Searching for the mechanisms that stimulate growth by the binding of phytosulfokine to its receptor PSKR1, an LRR-RLK (100), Ladwig et al. (79) identified the coexpression of CNGC17 and PSKR1 inArabidopsisand demonstrated that phytosulfokine and cGMP do not stimulate cell growth in thecngc17mutant. PSKR1 and CNGC17 interact with the BRI1-associated receptor kinase 1 (BAK1), a module that is proposed to result in the activation of CNGC17 by cGMP synthetized by the guanylate cyclase activity of PSKR1 upon phytosulfokine binding (79). Supporting this view is the stimulation of cell growth by phytosulfokine, which is absent in thebak1mutant. Moreover, cell growth is stimulated by cGMP in thebak1mutant, indicating that CNGC17 is activated and that this response is downstream of PSKR1 and BAK1 (79). However, the properties of CNGC17 are unknown.
CNGC14 channels are Ca2+selective and also permeable to Mg2+but not to Na+, K+, or Ba2+in the oocyte system (166); their expression is limited to roots (Figure 1), mainly to the root epidermis, with thecngc14mutants showing deformed branched root hair cells that lose the cytoplasmic Ca2+oscillations associated with cell growth (134,166). Mutantcngc14roots show intact amyloplasts, columella, and root growth but are agravitropic as a result of losing the changes in cytoplasmic Ca2+, extracellular alkalinization, and rapid suppression of cell expansion in the elongation zone on exposure to auxin, directly involving CNGC14 in the gravitropic response (134).
Functional CNGCs are also present in guard cells, where CNGC1, 2, 5, 6, 15, and 20 are highly expressed (Figure 1) (151). cGMP-activated Mg2+currents from guard cells are significantly reduced incngc5andcngc6single mutants, and completely abolished in the double mutant, but not in thecngc1,2, and20single mutants (151). CNGC5 and 6 localize to the plasma membrane and are permeable to Ba2+and inhibited by Gd3+and La3+but are unmodified by ABA (151). ABA-activated Ca2+currents remain intact in thecngc5/cngc6double mutant, as do stomatal responses to darkness and changes in CO2concentrations (151). Some questions that remain open are as follows: (a) What is the role of these channels in guard cells? (b) To what stimulus do they respond? (c) What is the stimulus that increases intracellular cGMP?
The participation of CNGC in the symbioses between legumes andRhizobiahas been identified, where the Ca2+-permeable CNGC15 channel fromMedicago truncatulais associated with the nuclear-located DMI1 (does not make infections 1) channel (8) to generate the Ca2+oscillations required for the establishment of the symbioses (Figure 5) (8). InLotus japonicus, thebrushmutant phenotype is associated with the mutation G134E at a conserved domain in the N terminus of the CNGC.IVA1 channel, transforming the protein into a constitutively active Ca2+channel that disrupts signals coded into the Ca2+oscillations required for the correct development of the infection thread and root nodule (11).
Several CNGCs are expressed in pollen or pollen tubes (Figure 6), with mutations in CNGC7, 8, and 18 generating sterile pollen, as pollen tubes burst at different stages of development. These channels are permeable to Ca2+and localize to the plasma membrane, at the tip or the shank of the pollen tube, maintaining intracellular Ca2+homeostasis (28,31,32,142). Domain analyses in CNGC18 demonstrated that theTMDis central for pollen tube guidance, and mutations at the CNBD (R491Q or R578K) lose the stimulation by cGMP (32). CNGC18 is additionally activated by CPK32, leading to cell swelling and increasing the intracellular Ca2+necessary for proper pollen tube development (Figure 6) (168). CNGC6 and CNGC16 localize to the plasma membrane, are permeable to Ca2+, are activated by cNMP, and have been associated with heat stress adaptation. Thecngc6plants orcngc16pollen exhibit decreased expression of several heat shock proteins or transcription factors, suggesting a role for these channels in plant heat tolerance (30,143).
Ionotropic glutamate receptors are animal ligand-gated cation channels involved in neurotransmission. The identification of homologous genes in plants (80), bacteria, and archaea (36) indicates that in these organisms glutamate-like receptors (GLRs) might be involved in signaling by amino acids (13,141). Plant GLRs possess an N-terminal and two extracellular ligand-binding domains, S1–S2, two transmembrane domains (TMD1–TMD2) separated by the pore region (P), and a third TMD3 that leads to the C terminus on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane (21). Similar to animal cells, plant GLRs seem to homo- or heterotetramerize (121). Several plant GLRs do not respond to glutamic acid (Glu), although they do to other amino acids (141), and some others are active in the absence of a ligand, like those present in pollen tubes (105,155) or in the mossPhyscomitrella patens(Table 3) (115).
Ligand-activated channels in plant cells
aActivation/transport refers to the voltage that activates the channels (hyperpolarization, more negative; depolarization, less negative) and the direction of ion flux (in, towards the cytoplasm; out, to the extracellular space or into organelle lumen).
Abbreviations: cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; CNGC, cyclic nucleotide-gated channel; cNMP, cyclic nucleotide monophosphate; GLR, glutamate-like receptor; ND, not determined; PM, plasma membrane.

Root development is under the control ofAtGLR3.2 and 3.4 (Figure 2), with the single or double mutants inducing the formation of many arrested lateral root primordia, without modifying root architecture (147). Asparagine (Asn) activates Ca2+currents withAtGLR3.2–AtGLR3.4 heteromers orAtGLR3.4 homomers (147).AtGLR3.6 modulates root development as well. Theatglr3.6mutant exhibits shorter primary roots with fewer lateral roots, and smaller cytoplasmic Ca2+changes upon exposure to Glu, as well as lower auxin levels. The opposite phenotypes were observed in overexpressing lines (136).AtGLR3.6 localizes to the primary root apex. The reduction in lateral roots is likely associated with the increased expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor KRP4, causing an early exit from mitotic activities (136). Expression of KRP4 is reduced by exogenous auxin or CaCl2as well as by overexpressingAtGLR3.6, treatments that stimulate root growth (136).
Guard cells are also under the control of GLRs, as demonstrated by stomatal closure in response to external Met (Figure 3) (75) or Glu (157), a response that is diminished inatglr3.5oratglr3.5–3.1(75) oratglr3.5–3.7(157) plants and is associated with lower increases in cytoplasmic Ca2+caused by the exogenous amino acids. Met-induced changes in intracellular Ca2+are independent of and smaller than those generated by ABA/reactive oxygen species (ROS), indicating that GLRs are different than the channels activated by ROS in guard cells (Figure 3) (75). ROS production and stomatal closure induced by Met are smaller in the NADPH oxidase double mutantatrbohD-atrbohF, implying that the activation of GLR-mediated Ca2+currents by Met stimulates the activity of NADPH oxidases, the increase in ROS, and a feedforward increase in Ca2+to close stomata (Figure 3) (75). Seed germination is delayed inAtGLR3.5-RNA interference (RNAi) lines but accelerated in overexpressing lines, responses associated with lower and higher levels of cytoplasmic Ca2+, respectively (76). The inhibition of germination by ABA is exacerbated in theAtGLR3.5-RNAi lines, together with the induction ofABI4, a gene related to the repression of lipid breakdown in seeds. The increase inABI4is prevented by external Ca2+but enhanced by ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid, strengthening the relationship betweenAtGLR3.5 and increases in intracellular Ca2+, which allow lipid breakdown and seed germination (76).
It is well established that pollen tube growth is a Ca2+-dependent process, where cytoplasmic Ca2+oscillations lead to oscillatory growth (32,105). D-serine and Gly stimulate pollen tube growth by increasing cytoplasmic Ca2+, suggesting the participation of GLRs (105).Mutations of the pollen-expressedGLR3.3andGLR1.4cause tube branching, the generation of a new cytoplasmic Ca2+gradient, and reduction in both Ca2+influx and tube growth (155). Patch-clamp recordings from pollen tube protoplasts or from heterologously expressed GLRs demonstrate their permeability to several cations, including Ca2+, activity that is inhibited by the GLR-specific inhibitors CNQX, DQNX, and AP-5, suggesting that Ca2+pollen tube currents are partially carried by GLR channels (105,155).AtGLR2.1 is localized to the vacuole, whileAtGLR3.3 is at the sperm cell plasma membrane (Figure 6), indicating that Ca2+cytoscillations in pollen tubes are an interplay of Ca2+fluxes across several membranes within these cells (155).
In the mossP. patenstwo homologs, GLR1 and GLR2, are present; GLR1 is Ca2+permeable and inhibited by the specific blockers CNQX and DQNX, observing few phenotypic changes for single or double mutants (115). The clearest change is a reduced number of sporophytes, an effect assigned to the male gamete, where a decrease in cytoplasmic Ca2+causes accelerated and straighter swimming of the sperm cells, diminishing the probability to fertilize archegonia and, therefore, the number of sporophytes (115).
GLRs also participate in responses to pathogen attack or wounding. The transmission of surface action potentials in response to wounding is hampered in theglr3.3andglr3.6single-mutant plants, or even eliminated in theglr3.3/3.6double-mutant plants, paralleled by the lower expression of jasmonate-related genes that are activated by the action potential in wild-type plants, linking the electrical transmission to the activation of systemic defense-associated genes (111). GLR3.3 is also linked to the innate immunity response, asatglr3.3single-mutant plants are more susceptible to infection byP. syringae, and do not activate salicylic acid–dependent defense responses (90). Similarly, localized increases in cytoplasmic Ca2+caused by aphid feeding are eliminated in theglr3.3/3.6double mutant suggesting the activation of the channels by the defense coreceptor BAK1 (146).
A characteristic of cell-walled organisms is the presence of turgor, which in plants plays roles in cell growth, organ and cell movements, and support. Turgid cells are constantly experiencing tension that affects the transport mechanisms embedded inside their membranes and may transduce turgor changes into cell responses according to the needs of the plant and/or cell. One such mechanism is the mechanosensitive ion (MscS) channels that are present in prokaryotes, some protists, and all plants that have been analyzed so far (Table 4) (44).Arabidopsishas tenMscSgenes in its genome, and few have been characterized [previous reviews on MscS-like (MSL) channels in higher plants can be found in References3and44].
Mechanosensitive channels in plant cells
Abbreviations: ATP, adenosine triphosphate; MSL, MscS-like; ND, not determined; PM, plasma membrane; TPK, tandem pore K+channel.

MSL1 localizes to the mitochondria (Figure 5), with the null mutant showing no phenotype; it functions as a nonselective ion channel, without the need to apply any tension for activation, particularly at very negative membrane potentials (84). MSL1 can neither rescue the osmotic-sensitiveEscherichia colimutant nor provide protection to mitochondria from hypoosmotic shock (84). In mitochondria, mutation of MSL1 causes membrane hyperpolarization when the ATP synthase is inhibited, indicating that it functions as the short-circuit current for the electron respiratory chain, helping to establish the required pH gradient for ATP synthesis (Figure 5) (84).
MSL2 and MSL3 channels localize to the inner plastid membrane (Figure 5), andmsl2single mutants andmsl2/msl3double mutants are shorter and show crumpled leaves, thicker lamina, and leaf variegation (44,46,85). In triple-mutantmsl1/msl2/msl3plants, ROS production is diminished, observing the normal development of the roots, in contrast to the double-mutantmsl2/msl3plants that show shorter and fewer lateral roots. Stronger phenotypes are observed in the leaves (85). It is proposed that an exchange of signals between the plastids and the mitochondria is responsible for these results (85). However, the nature of these signals and the relation between the channels and the phenotypes shown by the mutants remain to be investigated.
The pollen-specific MSL8 channel localizes to the plasma membrane and endomembranes in the grain and in the plasma membrane of the pollen tube; it is weakly selective for chloride when expressed in oocytes (Figure 6) (43). Mutantmsl8pollen tubes burst more frequently, indicating the participation of MSL8 in the maintenance of cell osmolarity, in agreement with the observed efflux of Cl−during pollen tube growth (43,106).
OSCA1 andAtCSC1 are two non-MSL channels activated by membrane tension that belong to the same family, with 15 members inArabidopsisand present in all eukaryotes (Figures 2and3) (60,158). OSCA1 andAtCSC1 show 85% identity, are nonselective channels permeable to Ca2+, show no rectification, reside in the plasma membrane, and possess 11TMDs, according to the crystal structure from a rice homolog (60,97,158). High extracellular osmolarity induces an increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+, with heterologously expressed channels fromArabidopsis, yeast, and human (60); however, this was not observed for theOsOSCA1.2 homolog from rice (97). Inosca1-1(reduced hyperosmolality-induced Ca2+cytincrease 1) plants, the osmotically induced cytoplasmic Ca2+increase is diminished in guard cells and roots, without affecting their response to ABA or the rise in cytoplasmic Ca2+caused by H2O2, indicating that OSCA1 acts upstream of ABA (158). A transfer DNA mutant,osca1-2, shows similar responses, supporting the role of OSCA1 in osmotically induced intracellular Ca2+changes.OSCA1is expressed in most plant organs, particularly in guard cells (Figures 2and3) (158). OSCA1 andAtCSC1 may participate as initiators of signal transduction pathways to allow plant adaptation to changes in membrane tension caused by environmental factors.
The tonoplast-locatedAtTPK1 channel, associated with the K+vacuolar channels (VK currents), and homologs from rice and barley respond to changes in membrane tension or osmotic shock by increasing single-channel open probability (94). TPK1 channel activity is stimulated upon exposure to picric acid but decreased when exposed to chlorpromazine, chemicals that increase and decrease membrane curvature, respectively, as a result of their asymmetrical insertion into the membrane, confirming the sensitivity of TPK1 channels to changes in membrane deformation (94). Protoplasts expressing any of the TPK1 channels release more ions and are more resistant to bursting on exposure to a hypotonic solution, in comparison toAttpk1protoplasts, indicating their role in the control of cellular osmolarity (94).TPKchannels seem to be well fitted to function as osmosensors, allowing fast adaptation to osmotic changes across the tonoplast, as they selectively move K+in and out of the vacuole, following its electrochemical gradient.
Ion channels are regulated by a diversity of cytoplasmic factors that can modify their activity with different time frames. Cytoplasmic factors like pH and Ca2+have an immediate effect, while others, like protein kinases and protein phosphatases, require their activation before modifying channel function, implying a slower form of regulation. Another regulatory process is the control of channel abundance at the membranes; requiring trafficking between different intracellular compartments is the slowest form of control. In this section, I review how the anterograde vesicle traffic mediated by the COPII system, in combination with channel domains or cargo receptors, controls channel exit from the ER and corrects membrane localization.
The trafficking of some ion channels in plant cells from the ER to the plasma membrane depends on the presence of diacidic domains in the channel. Mutation of the domain DAE to AAA at the C terminus ofKAT1 causes the retention of the mutant channel at the ER, resulting in a decrease in the inward K+current in the plasma membrane (107). The importance of the diacidic motif in the control of the membrane proteins’ exit from the ER is linked to its association with Sec24, a component of the COPII system (Figure 5) (108). Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) analysis demonstrated that the interaction between KAT1–CFP and YFP–Sec24 occurs around the nucleus of guard cells, indicating their association at the perinuclear ER. This interaction and its delivery to the plasma membrane are prevented by the mutation of the diacidic motif DAE of KAT1 (135). Trafficking of theAtGLR3.3 channel to the plasma membrane of the sperm cell in the pollen tube depends on its interaction with the cargo receptorAtCNIH4 of the COPII system (155). The association of these two proteins is required to maintain Ca2+homeostasis during pollen tube development (Figure 5) (155). An additional pathway controlling membrane protein targeting is composed of the clathrin-associated, heterotetrameric adaptor protein (AP) complexes, AP-1, AP-2, AP-3, and AP-4 (101). These complexes recognize the signal (D/E)XXXL(L/I; dileucine domain) in the cytosolic domains of transmembrane proteins for their sorting to the lysosome (101). Mutations in a dileucine domain at the N terminus ofTPC1(L5AI6A) prevent the correct localization of the channel to the tonoplast (81), confirming the importance of the dileucine domain in the trafficking of ion channels in plants, similar to what is observed in animal cells.
In guard cells, KAT1 channel abundance is under the control of exogenous ABA, as demonstrated by the decrease in fluorescence at the plasma membrane of the KAT1-GFP protein and a change in the distribution of the channel towards endomembrane fractions (138). This response is specific since the abundance of the plasma membrane H+-ATPase, PMA2-GFP, was unchanged in response to the ABA treatment and by its recovery mostly from the plasma membrane fraction (138). The reincorporation of KAT1 channels to the plasma membrane upon the removal of the stimulus depends on the Q-SNARE syntaxin of plants (SYP121) (25,139). These results highlight the dual regulation that ABA exerts upon KAT1 channels, acting within two time frames: an immediate response regulating channel gating and a long-term response controlling channel abundance at the plasma membrane through the stimulation of channel endocytosis (Figure 5).
It has been reported that the secretion of theAKT1channel depends on its association with KC1, occurring only when the latter is in the open conformation but not while in the closed state (38). Moreover, the interaction of SYP121 with KC1 is required for the activation of AKT1 at more positive potentials, as the KC1/AKT1 channel is only active at potentials more negative than −200 mV (56). Activation at physiological membrane potentials ensures the role of these channels in K+uptake in root and guard cells (38,89). Confirmation that SYP121 activates the KC1/AKT1 channel is provided by the reduced growth and smaller inward currents observed insyp121,kc1, andakt1mutant plants. These results indicate that secretory traffic becomes voltage-dependent by the binding of KC1 to SYP121 to stimulate K+uptake via the channel and membrane expansion through SYP121-mediated vesicle traffic (Figure 5) (38,71). Interestingly, the R-SNARE VAMP721 that associates with SYP121 to form SNARE complexes for fusion and secretion at the plasma membrane (70,160,161) also binds to KC1, KAT1, and AKT1, shifting the activation potential of the channels to more negative values and also reducing channel conductance, practically having the opposite effect of SYP121 (160). The alternative binding between the channel and SYP121 or VAMP721 results in the activation-inactivation of KC1/KAT1 to regulate K+fluxes with the consequent vesicle fusion to the plasma membrane (Figure 5).
Although substantial knowledge has been obtained on plant ion channels in the last few years, there are still many unanswered questions. From the pioneering and leading work on K+channels in guard cells, and additional evidence from other channels and plant cells, it is evident that channel oligomerization is a common feature of these proteins. This, together with the presence of channel protein families with many members, opens the possibility for the formation of a great number of heteromers, which combined with different regulatory mechanisms, such as those working onSLAC1, may bestow the plasticity required for plants to respond to biotic and abiotic stresses. Our knowledge ofCNGCsandGLRshas largely improved, helping to link their activity to specific cell responses; however, with the diverse number of paralogs in both families, the possibility of structuring heteromers with different transport properties is open, as is the study of many of the uncharacterized paralogs. Protein crystallization and X-ray analyses have assisted in confirming many of the properties previously identified in TPCs and SLACs. Cryogenic electron microscopy is becoming a useful approach for the elucidation of the molecular structure of additional plant ion channels that it is expected to increase in the near future.


The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
The work in the lab of Omar Pantoja has been funded by DGAPA/UNAM grant IN203817. I would like to thank Daniel Pantoja for the figure design. I am grateful to the anonymous reviewers who through their revisions and suggestions helped me to improve the manuscript. Any remaining mistakes, errors, or omissions are solely my responsibility.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


