We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Developmental and environmental signals converge on cell cycle machinery to achieve proper and flexible organogenesis under changing environments. Studies on the plant cell cycle began 30 years ago, and accumulated research has revealed many links between internal and external factors and the cell cycle. In this review, we focus on how phytohormones and environmental signals regulate the cell cycle to enable plants to cope with a fluctuating environment. After introducing key cell cycle regulators, we first discuss how phytohormones and their synergy are important for regulating cell cycle progression and how environmental factors positively and negatively affect cell division. We then focus on the well-studied example of stress-induced G2 arrest and view the current model from an evolutionary perspective. Finally, we discuss the mechanisms controlling the transition from the mitotic cycle to the endocycle, which greatly contributes to cell enlargement and resultant organ growth in plants.
Article metrics loading...
afn1*These authors contributed equally to this article
Developmental and environmental signals converge on cell cycle machinery to achieve proper and flexible organogenesis under changing environments. Studies on the plant cell cycle began 30 years ago, and accumulated research has revealed many links between internal and external factors and the cell cycle. In this review, we focus on how phytohormones and environmental signals regulate the cell cycle to enable plants to cope with a fluctuating environment. After introducing key cell cycle regulators, we first discuss how phytohormones and their synergy are important for regulating cell cycle progression and how environmental factors positively and negatively affect cell division. We then focus on the well-studied example of stress-induced G2 arrest and view the current model from an evolutionary perspective. Finally, we discuss the mechanisms controlling the transition from the mitotic cycle to the endocycle, which greatly contributes to cell enlargement and resultant organ growth in plants.
The cell cycle is the pivotal machinery that propagates cells in all eukaryotes. For multicellular organisms, including humans, cell cycle control is indispensable to ensure proper growth and organ development as well as reproduction. The cell cycle is composed of DNA synthesis (S) and mitosis (M) phases, which are preceded by Gap 1 (G1) and Gap 2 (G2) phases, respectively. Each phase progression is strictly controlled by the activities ofcyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)andcyclincomplexes, and the next phase can start only after the previous phase is completed (41,58,87). In unicellular yeasts, a single CDK (Cdc2 inSchizosaccharomyces pombeand Cdc28p inSaccharomyces cerevisiae) interacts with cyclins and regulates both G1/S and G2/M transitions (47). The mammalian cell cycle involves a more complex system than yeasts: CDK1 interacts with cyclin A and cyclin B and controls M-phase entry and progression, while two animal-specific CDKs (CDK4 and CDK6) and CDK2 interact with cyclin D and cyclin E, respectively, and sequentially function in the G1/S transition (34) (Figure 1).

Figure 1Click to view


In 1991, twoCDKgenes,cdc2aAtandcdc2bAt, were isolated fromArabidopsis thalianaas the first CDK orthologs in plants (46,64); to date, more than 70 core cell cycle regulators have been identified inArabidopsis(8,139) (Supplemental Table 1), and at least some of them are conserved in other plant species. Although the function of many regulators still remains uncharacterized, plants share the core cell cycle machineries with yeast and animals but also show distinct features from other kingdoms. For instance, many core regulators, such as CDKs and cyclins, form subgroups, each of which is encoded by multiple genes and participates in cell cycle control at distinct phases and in different tissues (Supplemental Table 1), suggesting the possibility that some of them have acquired functional divergence through evolution. Indeed, plants display extraordinary developmental plasticity, as they produce organs postembryonically and modulate their architecture depending on environmental cues and hormonal signals. In this review, we introduce current research on the plant cell cycle with particular focus on the crosstalk between hormonal and environmental signals. We discuss the similarities to and differences from yeast and animal systems that facilitate our understanding of how hormonal and environmental signals converge on plant cell cycle machineries and how plants utilize sophisticated regulatory systems for their survival under changing environments.
In plants, CDK family members are classified into eight groups [CDKA–CDKG and CDK-like kinase (CKL)], among which the canonical A-type CDK (CDKA) and the plant-specific B-type CDK (CDKB) play a central role in cell cycle regulation (139) (Supplemental Table 1). CDKA harbors the conserved cyclin-binding motif PSTAIRE, as do yeast and mammalian CDKs, and CDKA transcripts accumulate continuously throughout the cell cycle, whereas the kinase activity peaks at the G1/S and G2/M transitions (54,66). In contrast, CDKB possesses altered PSTAIRE motifs [PPTALRE or P(P/S)TTLRE] and is further classified into two subgroups, CDKB1 and CDKB2, each of which is encoded by two genes (CDKB1;1andCDKB1;2, andCDKB2;1andCDKB2;2, respectively) inArabidopsis.CDKBs display cell cycle–dependent expression patterns:CDKB1transcripts accumulate from late S to M phase, andCDKB2is expressed during G2 to M phase (66).CDKBs failed to complement the yeastcdc2orcdc28knockout phenotypes and were thus defined as plant-specific CDKs (104)Indeed,CDKB1andCDKB2are known to regulate plant-specific developmental processes, such as stomata formation and stem cell niche organization in theshoot apical meristem (SAM)(3,145). Both CDKA and CDKB are phosphorylated and activated by CDK-activating kinase, which is composed of CDKD and cyclin H (Supplemental Table 1). CDK activity is suppressed by interaction with CDK inhibitors (CKIs) (66,125). In plants, two types of CKIs have been identified; one is the interactor/inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase/Kip-related protein (ICK/KRP) family, which has amino acid sequence similarities to mammalian Cip/Kip family CKIs in several restricted domains, and the other is the plant-specific Siamese (SIM) and Siamese-related (SMR) proteins (78).Arabidopsispossesses 7KRPgenes (KRP1–KRP7) and 17SIM/SMRgenes (SIMandSMR1–SMR16) (Supplemental Table 1). Such multilevel regulation of CDK activities and their combinatorial capacities are involved in cell cycle control in response to internal and external signals as described later.
Arabidopsishas more than 50 genes encoding cyclins (CYCs) (Supplemental Table 1). Why have plants evolved to possess such a large number of cyclins? The numerous possible combinations of CDK and cyclin enable the phosphorylation of distinct substrates at particular cell cycle stages, which is ideal for a sessile organism to exhibit developmental plasticity in a spatiotemporal manner in response to variable environmental cues. Therefore, such a combinatorial coding system may allow plants to modulate their growth under challenging conditions. The major cyclins that directly control the cell cycle are type-A (CYCA), type-B (CYCB), and type-D (CYCD). CYCA and CYCB are mitotic cyclins, most of which are expressed during G2 to M phase and promote G2/M transition (Figure 1). However,Arabidopsis CYCA3;1andCYCA3;2are highly expressed from late G1 to mid M phase; thus, some CYCA3 members likely function at G1/S as well as at G2/M. CYCDs respond to internal and external signals and regulate G1/S progression, thereby playing a crucial role in plant development (Figure 1). InArabidopsis, the 10 CYCDs are classified into seven subgroups (CYCD1–CYCD7), among which CYCD3 and CYCD4 are encoded by more than one gene (Supplemental Table 1). TheRETINOBLASTOMA-RELATED (RBR)protein-binding LxCxE motif (97) is part of 8 of the 10ArabidopsisCYCDs. Phosphorylation of RBR protein by the CYCD-CDKA complex liberates E2F transcription factors from RBR, thereby allowing expression of E2F target genes and entry into S phase (4,13,29,39,102) (Figure 1). In theroot apical meristem (RAM),CYCD6;1, which is a direct target ofSCARECROW (SCR)–SHORTROOT (SHR), is specifically expressed in the cortex/endodermis initial daughter cells and controls their asymmetric cell division by interacting with CDKB1;1 (27). Interestingly, CYCD6;1 is also involved in RBR phosphorylation that regulates a single round of formative cell division, implying another role for CYCD6;1 by interacting with CDKA;1 (27,128). CYCD7;1 acts as aguard mother cell (GMC)-specific CYCD inArabidopsisleaves; CYCD7;1-CDKA;1 phosphorylates RBR protein to regulate G1/S progression, which is tightly coupled with a single round of symmetric GMC division (144). Recently,CYCD5;1was shown to be a direct target of MUTE, a potent inducer of stomatal differentiation, and to trigger a single round of GMC division (56). These observations suggest that at least some CYCDs regulate cell division in a cell type–specific manner, although it remains unknown whether the specificity is derived from a distinct expression pattern or a unique function of each CYCD. It is noteworthy that, unlike yeast and animals, plant CYCD functions are more complicated in that several CYCDs, such as CYCD1;1, CYCD3;1, CYCD3;2, and CYCD4;1, have dual roles in controlling the G1/S and G2/M transitions (14,29,32,69,74,75,102,122,138) (Figure 1).
One of the most striking differences between plants and yeasts/animals is that WEE1 and Cdc25 in plants appear to have dissimilar roles in regulating the cell cycle. In mammals, WEE1 and Cdc25 phosphorylate and dephosphorylate the ATP-binding domain of CDKs, thereby inhibiting and stimulating CDK activities, respectively (26,57). However, inArabidopsis, neitherwee1orcdc25knockout mutants norCdc25-overexpressing lines displayed altered rates of cell cycle progression under normal growth conditions (57,129). Moreover, acdka;1mutant carryingCDKA;1with nonphosphorylatable substitutions at the WEE1 phosphorylation sites did not show any obvious phenotype (57). Instead, thewee1null mutant is hypersensitive to DNA replication inhibitors, such as hydroxyurea and aphidicolin, andWEE1expression is upregulated in S phase (30). These results suggest thatArabidopsisWEE1 is involved in delaying S-phase progression to ensure DNA repair under replication stress, although the key substrate(s) of WEE1 that control S-phase progression remain unknown. Note that a few reports proposed thatArabidopsisand rice Cdc25 function as arsenate reductases; therefore, the identity of plant Cdc25 is still under debate (37,80,101).
Entry into M phase requires the highest level ofCDKactivity during the cell cycle (25,130). In yeast and animals, Cdc25 plays an essential role in mitotic CDK activation and G2/M progression, but, as described above, a functional ortholog of Cdc25 seems to be missing in plants. How then do plants dramatically elevate mitotic CDK activities to allow G2/M transition? In plants, G2/M-specific genes, such asCDKB2andCYCB, possess the conserved mitosis-specific activator (MSA) element in their promoter regions, which is recognized by R1R2R3-type MYB (MYB3R) transcription factors (21).Arabidopsishas fiveMYB3Rgenes; MYB3R4 acts as an activator (Act-MYB), while MYB3R3 and MYB3R5 bind to the same MSA element but function as repressors (Rep-MYB). MYB3R1 has dual roles in up- and downregulating G2/M-specific genes (71,137) (Supplemental Table 1). Act-MYBs are known to be phosphorylated and activated by CDKs, whereupon they induce expression of mitoticcyclins, thereby generating a positive feedback loop between Act-MYB and CYC-CDK that contributes to a dramatic increase in mitotic CDK activity before entry into M phase (21) (Figure 1). Interestingly, MYB3Rs associate withRBRprotein and E2Fs and form a huge protein complex named theDREAM/dREAM-like complex, which is conserved across species, from humans to flies. Act- and Rep-MYBs are components of distinct DREAM complexes and play opposite roles in controlling proliferative and quiescent states (93,137).
Plants utilize phytohormones to regulate growth and development under changing environmental conditions. Although four phytohormones [auxin, cytokinin, gibberellin (GA), and brassinosteroid (BR)] act as major growth regulators, other phytohormones, such as abscisic acid (ABA), jasmonic acid (JA), and ethylene, also control organ growth in response to environmental changes and are thus designated as environmental (biotic and abiotic) stress hormones. Accumulated research has gradually disclosed that phytohormones are multilaterally integrated into cell cycle regulation during organ formation, organ size control, and dedifferentiation. Auxin, originating from the Greek wordauxein(meaning to grow), is the cardinal phytohormone that controls plant development and architecture. Auxin starvation of plant cell suspension cultures causes cell cycle arrest at G1, whereas a decrease in auxin concentration increases the cell population arrested at G2, and reapplication of auxin permits the resumption of cell cycle progression (73,103). Previous studies indicate that auxin targets a wide range of cell cycle regulators. For instance, auxin response factors (ARFs), plant-specific transcription factors that control the auxin response, bind to the auxin responsive elements inCYCDpromoters and induce their expression (Figure 2). Auxin also elevatesCDKA;1expression, thereby increasing the abundance of CYCD-CDKA complexes inArabidopsis(34), and upregulatesCDKB1;1,CDKB2;1, andCYCB1;1to promote G2/M progression inArabidopsisandMedicago sativa(62,106,152a) (Figure 2). Auxin has a priming effect on lateral root formation by modulating the expression of cell cycle genes: It reduces the transcript levels ofKRP1andKRP2and induces expression ofCDKA;1,CDKBs,CYCA2;1, andCYCDs, elevating CDK activities and allowing differentiated pericycle cells to enter the cell cycle (62,63,119) (Figure 2). BothKRP1andKRP2are highly expressed in the presence of the auxin transport inhibitor naphthylphthalamic acid (62,63), andKRP2overexpression decreases the number of lateral root primordia, suggesting that suppression ofKRPexpression by auxin is crucial to trigger reentry into the cell cycle (62,63,140).

Figure 2Click to view


Auxin is also associated with reproductive organ development. AnArabidopsismutant ofARF2, encoding an ARF member that negatively regulates gene expression in response to auxin, produces larger ovules with increased cell number and enlarged seeds and embryos as well as improperly sized vegetative organs due to extra cell divisions caused by prolonged expression ofCYCD3;1(124). InArabidopsis, three E2F transcription factors (E2Fa, E2Fb, and E2Fc) are classified into two types with positive (E2Fa and E2Fb) and negative (E2Fc) functions in transcriptional regulation, requiring the dimerization partners (DPs) DPa and DPb, respectively, for DNA binding. Magyar et al. (94) reported that auxin stabilizes the E2Fb–DPa protein complex and promotes G1/S progression in tobacco cultured cells andArabidopsisplants (Figure 1). It is also known that auxin controls the Skp1-Cullin 1–F-box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex; specifically, the F-box protein, S-phase kinase-associated protein 2A (SKP2A), binds to auxin and interacts with E2Fc and DPb, leading to their degradation through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and elevating S-phase gene expression (33) (Figure 1). These observations suggest that auxin controls a wide range of cell cycle regulators through both activation and repression of E2F-DP complexes.
Cytokinins are also classically referred to as essential phytohormones for cell division, promoting both G1/S and G2/M transitions, based on physiological studies. Endogenous cytokinin levels peak starting at the end of S through to M phase, and cytokinin biosynthesis is essential for entry into mitosis in a variety of cultured cells and calli as well as in planta (66). One of the prominent roles of cytokinins is the induction ofCYCD3(66,114) (Figure 2). InArabidopsis,CYCD3;1, a rate-limiting cyclin for G1/S progression, is positively regulated not only by nutrients but also by auxin, cytokinin, and BR (66) (Figure 2). In a triple knockout mutant ofCYCD3;1/2/3, most organs are normal in size, butSAMhomeostasis is distorted, resulting in a delay in flowering and axillary shoot formation; importantly, thesecycd3mutations impede cytokinin responses, suggesting a crucial role forCYCD3in cytokinin-triggered cell proliferation (66). Cytokinin signaling coregulatesCYCD3;1andAINTEGMENTA, which are synergistically required for secondary thickening ofArabidopsisand poplar roots (111,112). As noted above, cytokinin action on cell division has been principally investigated from the aspect of CYCD3, and it is conceivable that many other cell cycle regulators are also under the control of cytokinin signaling. Moreover,CYCD3s are not directly controlled by B-type response regulators, transcription factors that are phosphorylated and activated by cytokinin signaling and trigger downstream events (136). Therefore, identifying the key factor(s) that transmit cytokinin signals to the cell cycle will be indispensable to understanding the role of cytokinins in promoting cell proliferation.
When deepwater rice is submerged under water,CDKA;2,CYCB2;1,CYCB2;2, andCDKD;1are specifically induced by GA, and cell cycle progression is accelerated in the intercalary meristem (42,43,121) (Figure 2). The GA-deficient mutantga1-3shows pleiotropic defects in plant development due to a failure to degrade DELLA proteins, which are negative regulators of GA signaling (1). DELLA proteins restrain cell proliferation by enhancing the expression ofCKIs,KRPs andSIM/SMRs, while GA application reduces their expression, suggesting that GA signaling controls the cell cycle by suppressingCKIexpression (1,86) (Figure 2).
Another phytohormone, the BRs, a class of polyhydroxysteroids, comprises more than 70 variants in plants. BRs positively regulate cell cycle–related genes, such asCDKBs,CYCA,CYCB1;1,CYCD3;1, andCYCD3;2, in concert with other hormones to fine-tuneCDKactivities in the meristem and during fruit development (48,53) (Figure 2). BRs controlRAMsize by promotingCYCBexpression (53). Mutations inBES1, encoding a key transcription factor of BR signaling, result in aberrant cell cycle progression and a reduction in RAM size (53,55). InArabidopsisroots, the R2R3-MYB-type transcription factor BRASSINOSTEROIDS at VASCULAR and ORGANIZING CENTER (BRAVO) is specifically expressed in thequiescent center (QC)and vascular initial cells. BRAVO represses QC cell division, while its expression is suppressed by BES1 (141); indeed, exogenous BR application promotes QC cell division (85,91,141). When root stem cells are damaged, BRs induce the ethylene-responsive transcription factorERF115in a BES1-dependent manner, thereby triggering QC cell division and contributing to stem cell niche replenishment (60). However, how ERF115 activates the cell cycle remains an open question.
As described above, phytohormones orchestrate many cell cycle players and control not only the rate of cell division but also the duration of each cell cycle stage. Besides their individual function in regulating core cell cycle events, phytohormone synergy and signaling interdependency are likely important for modulating cell cycle progression in a developmental context and in response to environmental factors; therefore, detailed analysis of the spatial distribution of phytohormone transporters, receptors, and signaling components, and mathematical analyses of interrelated crosstalk, should provide a complete picture of the integration of phytohormones into the cell cycle circuitry.
Nutrients are fundamental sources of energy in all organisms. In yeasts and animals, nutrient availability is a determinant of entry into S phase through theSTART(in yeasts) or the restriction point (in animals) (58,108). If nutrients are insufficient for cell growth and/or division, the signaling pathway governed by Snf1/AMPK (in yeasts) or mTOR/AMPK (in animals) suppresses the expression of G1cyclingenes, with the result that the cells stay at the quiescent G0 phase until nutrient resupply (36). In plants, sucrose, which is produced by photosynthesis, is a major nutrient that modulates cell division. Indeed, the expression of core cell cycle regulators, such asCDKA,CYCA,CYCD;2, andCYCD;3, is positively regulated by sucrose (113,115). On the other hand, light irradiation, which is known to increase the auxin level, regulates cell cycle progression by controlling E2F transcription factors with opposing functions (Figure 3a). Whereas the E2Fb-DPa protein complex is stable irrespective of light conditions, E2Fc-DPb, which represses S-phase genes, is degraded upon short-term light irradiation through the auxin-dependent SCFSKP2Aubiquitin-proteasome pathway; as a result, the ratio of E2Fb to E2Fc increases, promoting G1/S progression (10,33,79,90,94) (Figure 3a). Nutrient and light signals converge on the conserved key regulator, target of rapamycin (TOR). Glucose, another energy source for plants, is known to activate TOR, which then directly phosphorylates and activates E2Fa in vivo as well as E2Fb in vitro and induces S-phase genes (89,146); moreover, light signaling activates TOR through enhancing auxin biosynthesis in shoots (89) (Figure 3a). These findings indicate that both glucose and light inputs are converted to TOR signaling to fine-tune progression through the cell cycle.

Figure 3Click to view


As mentioned above, when deepwater rice is submerged,CDKAandCYCBgenes are promptly induced by GA, leading to cell cycle activation in the intercalary meristem and enabling rapid elongation of internodes. However, this is an exceptional case in which an environmental stress promotes cell division for plant survival; harmful stresses usually actively inhibit cell division. For example, expression of the cell cycle inhibitorKRPis induced by ABA under stressful conditions, thereby inhibiting G1/S transition in rice plants (96) (Figure 2). Pathogen infection is also known to inhibit cell division, while this process is mediated by JA and GA crosstalk. On the one hand, in the absence of biotic stress, GA promotes the destruction ofDELLA proteins, thereby suppressingKRPs andSIM/SMRs; on the other hand, biotic stresses such as pathogen infection increase the JA level, which rapidly interferes with GA signaling by inducing DELLA proteins as well as by delaying GA-mediated DELLA protein degradation, resulting in the induction of CDK inhibitor genes and causing cell cycle retardation and cell death in severe cases (1,22) (Figure 3b).
Recently, Zhou et al. (153) revealed an opposite role of JA in controlling the cell cycle; namely, resection or nematode infection of roots enhances JA biosynthesis and inducesERF115and its homologERF109that encode the key transcription factors for stem cell replenishment in roots (Figure 3b). ERF109 upregulates auxin biosynthesis and transport, and ERF115 sensitizes cells to auxin by elevatingARF5/MONOPTEROUSexpression (17,153); this combinatorial response gradually generates an auxin maximum, thereby inducingCYCD6;1, which is also upregulated by ERF109, and probably other cell cycle–related genes and eventually promoting cell division and tissue regeneration (Figure 3b). Note that ERF115 is also involved in cell cycle activation, although the underlying mechanism remains elusive. An increase in auxin level and signaling disrupts JA homeostasis through the auxin-responsive GRETCHEN-HAGEN-3-dependent pathway, suggesting that JA and auxin signals work cooperatively on cell cycle activation and tissue regeneration (17,60,147,153). In this way, a particular kind of phytohormone can act as both an activator and a repressor of the cell cycle depending on the context of cellular events caused by environmental stresses. Environmental stresses also cause G2 phase retardation and trigger endoreplication, which we describe later.
As in other organisms, DNA replication errors and failures of replication fork progression generate DNA lesions in plants. Furthermore, accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) under stressful conditions and irradiation with ultraviolet (UV) rays, X-rays, or gamma rays trigger DNA single-strand breaks (SSBs) and/or double-strand breaks (DSBs) (7). Excessive boron or aluminum in soil and pathogen infection also cause DNA damage (116,117,127). Interestingly, DNA damage accumulates in seeds during the desiccation process, followed by an active DNA damage response during germination (143). To maintain genome integrity, plant cells need to properly respond to DNA damage signals and arrest the cell cycle to secure sufficient time for DNA repair.
In mammals, DNA damage is sensed by two kinases, ATAXIA TELANGIECTASIA MUTATED (ATM) and ATM AND RAD3-RELATED (ATR); ATM is activated by DSBs, whereas ATR primarily senses single-stranded DNA and stalled replication forks (12). DNA damage signals are then transmitted to Checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) and CHK2, and ATM, ATR, and CHK1/2 phosphorylate and stabilize the tumor suppressor protein p53, a transcription factor governing DNA damage response (Figure 4). In contrast, plants possess ATM and ATR, but lack functional orthologs of CHK1/2 and p53. Instead, a plant-specificNAM-ATAF1/2-CUC2 (NAC) transcription factor, SUPPRESSOR OF GAMMA RESPONSE 1 (SOG1), is phosphorylated and activated by ATM and ATR and induces the expression of hundreds of genes involved in DNA repair and cell cycle arrest (16,105,150) (Figure 4). Although the amino acid sequences of SOG1 and p53 are not related to each other, Yoshiyama (149) has indicated that there are functional similarities between them, such as being phosphorylated by ATM and ATR and involved in DNA repair, cell cycle control, and cell death. However, they are quite different in terms of protein-level regulation and target genes. p53, which is controlled by ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation, is phosphorylated and stabilized under DNA stress, thereby enabling its transcriptional activity (83). On the other hand, the amount of SOG1 protein does not change in response to DNA damage, and phosphorylation is the sole regulatory system for SOG1 function (151). Moreover, only a few orthologs overlap among the target genes of p53 and SOG1, and many plant-specific genes that are engaged in transcription, hormone signaling, and defense responses are included in the SOG1 targets (16,105). Therefore, it appears that the functions of p53 and SOG1 have diverged considerably during evolution to exert distinct DNA damage responses.

Figure 4Click to view


In mammals, DNA damage causes cell cycle arrest at G1, G1/S, S, or G2, thereby triggeringDNA damage checkpoints(118) (Figure 4). In contrast, previous studies inArabidopsisshowed that the cell cycle is arrested exclusively at G2 in response to DNA damage (2,21). SOG1 directly induces the genes for three CKIs, KRP6, SMR5, and SMR7 (105,148), and indirectly suppresses the expression ofMYB3R4, which encodes an Act-MYB, thereby downregulating mitoticCDKactivities (21) (Figure 4). However, such transcriptional responses are not sufficient to cause G2 arrest because themyb3r3andmyb3r5mutants with defects in Rep-MYBs display similar transcriptional responses but are defective in DNA damage–induced G2 arrest (21). This indicates that Rep-MYBs have a major role in the DNA damage checkpoint. Interestingly, Rep-MYB proteins accumulate from S to G2 phase and repress G2/M-specific genes under DNA stress, while their accumulation is restricted to S phase under normal growth conditions (21), suggesting that extension of the Rep-MYB accumulation period in the cell cycle is a key to induce the G2 checkpoint.
Rep-MYBs are substrates of CDKs, and this phosphorylation triggers Rep-MYB degradation (21). However, downregulation of mitotic CDK activities is not a major factor but plays a subsidiary role in Rep-MYB stabilization. In that case, how is Rep-MYB accumulation controlled under DNA stress? This issue has recently been resolved by analyzing the transcription factors ANAC044 and ANAC085, the closest NAC family members to SOG1.ANAC044andANAC085are direct targets of SOG1, and theanac044andanac085knockout mutants are defective in root growth inhibition under DNA stress, suggesting thatANAC044andANAC085are responsible for SOG1-dependent cell cycle arrest (134). An important finding was that ANAC044 and ANAC085 are involved in Rep-MYB stabilization (134), implying that the SOG1-ANAC044/ANAC085 pathway is crucial for promoting Rep-MYB accumulation in G2 and inducing the G2 checkpoint (Figure 4). Open questions are how ANAC044 and ANAC085 regulate the protein stability of Rep-MYBs, and whether they also control other subunits of theDREAM/dREAM-like complex, in which Rep-MYBs function as a repressive subunit (71).
SOG1 is phosphorylated and activated in response to DNA damage but not to other stresses. In contrast,ANAC044andANAC085are induced not only by DNA damage but also by heat, cold, and salinity stresses (134). Heat stress, which triggers G2 arrest, increases the protein level of Rep-MYBs in an ANAC044/ANAC085-dependent manner, but this response does not require SOG1, suggesting that heat stress inducesANAC044andANAC085through a SOG1-independent pathway (134). This implies that ANAC044 and ANAC085 function as a hub that perceives various stress signals and triggers G2 arrest by stabilizing Rep-MYBs, thereby enabling the plant to cope with multiple stresses. An interesting question is when plants acquired the ANAC044/ANAC085-Rep-MYB module during evolution.
Feng et al. (44) conducted a phylogenetic analysis of MYB3R proteins and revealed that they are widespread from aquatic plants to land plants: green algae, bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms, and angiosperms. MYB3Rs have three MYB-repeat domains in the N-terminal region, which are essential for binding to the MSA element in the promoters of G2/M-specific genes. The three MYB-repeat domains are highly conserved among MYB3Rs of various plant species including green algae, suggesting that controlling G2/M-specific genes is the fundamental function of plant MYB3Rs. On the other hand, BLAST searches easily identify genes similar toANAC044andANAC085in angiosperms, such as rice (Oryza sativa), tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), and poplar (Populus trichocarpa), as well as in bryophytes, such asPhyscomitrium(Physcomitrella)patensandMarchantia polymorpha. However, sequences similar toANAC044andANAC085are not easily identifiable in charophyte algae (Coleochaete orbicularis), which is the closest hydrophyte to bryophytes, nor in filamentous charophyte algae (Spirogyra pratensis). Therefore, we hypothesize thatANAC044/ANAC085orthologs emerged when plants colonized land. Transcriptome data show that the rice orthologs are induced by low temperature, drought stress, and fungus infection (77) and that the expression of the poplar ortholog is elevated in response to heat and drought stresses (51). Moreover, Massa et al. (95) reported that theSolanum tuberosumgene was upregulated by heat stress. Although there are no data about the transcriptional response of putative bryophyte orthologs, it is probable that they also function in cell cycle arrest in response to diverse stresses. If this is the case, land plants acquired theANAC044/ANAC085orthologs and evolved the ANAC044/ANAC085-Rep-MYB module to adapt to a new environment. The growth environment is relatively stable underwater, while land plants are exposed to a variety of stresses, such as drought, UV, and temperature stresses. Therefore, deployment of the ANAC044/ANAC085-Rep-MYB module was probably advantageous for plants to continuously grow and reproduce in terrestrial environments.
The endocycle is an alternative type of cell cycle in which DNA replication is repeated without mitosis or cytokinesis. Cells undergo endoreplication (also called endoreduplication) by driving the endocycle after cessation of cell division. In animals, endoreplication is observed in particular tissues, such asDrosophilafollicle and nurse cells and intestinal cells ofDrosophilaandCaenorhabditis elegans, and during tissue regeneration after stress (84). By contrast, many land plants promote cell expansion and organ growth by inducing endoreplication in many tissues. Endoreplication increases the DNA content to as much as 32C inArabidopsis(49), and leads to high DNA ploidy in cereal endosperm, cotton fibers, and tomato pericarp and jelly-like locular tissues (31). A recent study showed that endocycle onset was accompanied by the induction of cell wall–modifying genes, suggesting that endoreplication changes cell wall formation as a prerequisite for rapid cell expansion driven by turgor pressure (11).
In flowering plants, cells alter their DNA ploidy level by controlling endoreplication in response to environmental factors. InArabidopsisand cabbage (Brassica oleracea), hypocotyl cells rapidly elongate by inducing endoreplication under dark conditions (50,76). Nitric acid in soil promotes endoreplication inArabidopsiscotyledons and leaves, and salinity-induced endoreplication was reported inMesembryanthemum crystallinumleaves (6,100). Moreover, DNA damage is known to accelerate the onset of endoreplication (2,110). Biotic factors also affect endoreplication; for instance, endoreplication is promoted at pathogen infection sites and during nodule formation in symbiosis (20,142), and herbivory leads to endoreplication inArabidopsis(98,123). These observations suggest that environmental factors usually increase the DNA ploidy level by upregulating the endocycle. However, under severe stress conditions such as water deficiency or high temperature, endoreplication is inhibited (5,40,72), probably due to impairment of the endocycle machinery. AnArabidopsismutant ofUV-B-insensitive 4(UVI4), which encodes an inhibitor of the E3 ubiquitin ligase,anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), and suppresses endoreplication, exhibits a higher DNA ploidy level and resistance to UV-B (59,61). InSorghum bicolor, salinity stress promotes endoreplication and increases salt tolerance (19). These data suggest that endoreplication elevates abiotic stress tolerance, although the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. As mentioned above, endoreplication promotes cell wall biosynthesis, and it also upregulates the expression of metabolic genes in response to environmental changes; therefore, providing a necessary cell volume for toxin sequestration and enhancing growth rate may be associated with stress tolerance (11,81).
To start the endocycle, cells need to escape from the mitotic cycle. This is achieved, in both animals and plants, by reducingCDKactivity. In animals, Notch signaling is known to induce endoreplication (84); it represses the expression ofCdc25, which is involved in CDK activation, and inducesCdh1, which encodes an activator of APC/C, thereby suppressing mitotic CDK activities. Previous work inArabidopsisalso showed that the endocycle starts when mitotic CDK activities are reduced to below the level that permits the transition from the G2 to M phase (31,137). However, plants possess neither Notch signaling nor Cdc25, even though endoreplication occurs more frequently in plants than in animals (84), suggesting distinct mechanisms to induce endoreplication. Here we introduce three known mechanisms underlying endocycle onset and their response to environmental changes.
The first is transcriptional repression of CDKs andcyclins(see mechanism ❶ inFigure 5). The timing of downregulation of CDK and mitotic cyclin genes coincides with that of endocycle onset duringArabidopsisleaf development, suggesting an important role for transcriptional control of mitotic regulators (9). As noted above, the Rep-MYB transcription factors are stabilized in response to heat and DNA stress and repress G2/M-specific genes such as mitotic cyclin genes, thereby triggering G2 arrest (21). Under stress conditions, roots of therep-mybmutantsmyb3r3andmyb3r5display not only faster cell division but also later onset of endoreplication as compared to wild-type. This indicates that transcriptional repression of G2/M-specific genes is crucial for cell cycle arrest but is also involved in promoting the transition from cell division to endoreplication. Heat and DNA stress induceANAC044andANAC085, which are involved in Rep-MYB stabilization (134); therefore, it is likely that the ANAC044/ANAC085-Rep-MYB module perceives various stress signals and accelerates endocycle onset by repressing mitotic genes.

Figure 5Click to view


In addition to transcriptional regulation, endocycle onset requires proteasomal degradation of mitotic cyclins, which is mediated by the E3 ubiquitin ligase APC/C (see mechanism ❷ inFigure 5). Among the components of APC/C, the substrate-specific activator CCS52A plays a critical role in controlling endoreplication; knockdown/knockout or overexpression ofCCS52Adecreases or increases the DNA ploidy level, respectively, inArabidopsisandMedicago truncatula(18,68,82). CCS52A1, one of the two CCS52As inArabidopsis, is known to decrease CYCA2;3 protein stability, thereby suppressing the activity of the interacting partner CDKB1;1 and promoting endoreplication (15,65).CCS52Ais highly expressed at nematode feeding sites and at the later stage of nodule formation inM. truncatula, both of which are characterized by endoreplication, further supporting the idea that CCS52A has a major role in endocycle onset (28,142). In theArabidopsisroot tip, the cytokinin-activated B-type response regulator ARR2 directly inducesCCS52A1and promotes the transition from cell division to endoreplication (133). Interestingly, Takahashi et al. (132) recently found that DNA damage induces the expression of cytokinin biosynthesis genes, leading to higher cytokinin accumulation in the root tip. This, in turn, upregulatesCCS52A1expression and promotes endoreplication, suggesting that hormonal control ofCCS52A1is crucial for the stress-induced acceleration of endocycle onset (see mechanism ❷ inFigure 5). A role for cytokinins in nodule formation has also been demonstrated (45), and Tan et al. (135) recently reported that MtRRB3, one of the transcription factors involved in cytokinin signaling, inducesCCS52Ain nodules. Taking these observations together, cytokinin-dependent upregulation ofCCS52Ais likely a common strategy to promote endoreplication in response to external cues.
The third mechanism is suppression of CDK activities by CDK inhibitors (see mechanism ❸ inFigure 5). There are many reports describing transcriptional induction of the CDK inhibitor genesSIM/SMRs in response to environmental factors.SIM/SMRwas originally identified in rice plants as an early response gene to the biotic elicitor N-acetylchitoheptaose (99). InArabidopsis, nitrate upregulates the transcription ofSMR1and promotes endoreplication, increasing cell size in cotyledons and leaves (100). Moderate drought stress upregulatesSMR1expression, and DNA damage inducesSMR5andSMR7, thereby inhibiting cell division (38,105,148).Arabidopsisand maizeSIM/SMRs are also induced by low and high temperatures and by salinity and osmotic stresses, and their overexpression enhances endoreplication (23,88,109,148). These observations indicate thatSIM/SMRs perceive environmental signals through transcriptional regulation and inhibit cell division and promote endoreplication by suppressing CDK activities.
Cell cycle progression is retarded or arrested at different stages depending on external factors. For example, high or low temperature and DNA damage trigger G2 arrest in maize andArabidopsis(2,134,152), and osmotic stress and heavy metals cause G1 arrest and S-phase retardation, respectively, in maize (152). SIM/SMRs inhibit both G1/S-phase and mitotic CDK activities (78,109), and can thus mediate various environmental signals to inhibit cell cycle progression at multiple stages (Figure 5). On the other hand, ANAC044/ANAC085-Rep-MYB and CCS52A are exclusively involved in G2 arrest because they downregulate mitotic regulators but do not inhibit G1/S-phase CDK activities; therefore, it is likely that they mainly function in controlling endocycle onset. From this point of view, increasing the transcript levels ofANAC044,ANAC085andCCS52Awill be a key to inducing endoreplication in response to environmental signals.
Suppression of mitoticCDKactivities causes G2 arrest but is not sufficient to induce endoreplication, in which cells undergo DNA rereplication. The core question is therefore the identity of the other essential factors for endocycle onset. It is probable that such factors also respond to external signals and control endoreplication under changing environments. In animals, chromatin structure dynamically changes during the cell cycle (92); for instance, transient chromatin decondensation enables DNA replication in S phase, and chromatin is dramatically condensed and forms mitotic chromosomes in M phase. Since similar observations have also been described in plants (35), it is likely that changes in chromatin structure are associated with the transition from G2 to G1/S at the onset of endoreplication. To date, severalArabidopsismutants defective intopoisomerase VIsubunits have been shown to exhibit lower DNA ploidy levels than wild-type (31). Although the mechanism by which topoisomerase VI regulates endoreplication has not yet been uncovered, it has been hypothesized that topoisomerase VI resolves DNA entanglement that is generated during DNA rereplication. However, it remains open to debate whether topoisomerase VI is involved in endocycle onset and whether its function is limited to endocycle (not mitotic cycle) progression.
In both animals and plants, chromatin restoration occurs in late S phase through loading of the histone H3 variant H3.1 by a histone chaperone, chromatin assembly factor 1 (CAF-1) (126,131). InArabidopsis, H3.1 is monomethylated at lysine 27 (H3K27me1) by the methyltransferases ARABIDOPSIS TRITHORAX-RELATED PROTEIN 5 (ATXR5) and ATXR6, thereby promoting heterochromatin formation (67). In contrast, histone H3.3, which is not a substrate of ATXR5/6, is deposited by another histone chaperone, the HIRA complex, primarily during transcription and acts as a replacement histone. Althoughcaf-1mutations are lethal in animals,Arabidopsismutants ofFAS1, which encodes a CAF-1 subunit, can survive and they exhibit enhanced endoreplication (70). Moreover, theatxr5 axtr6double mutant, in whichatxr6is a knockdown allele, displays over-replication of heterochromatic DNA (67). These observations suggest that the heterochromatic mark of H3K27me1 is required for G2/M progression and inhibits endocycle onset. This idea coincides with the observation that the H3.3:H3.1 ratio is lower in the meristematic region than in the transition zone, where endoreplication occurs, in theArabidopsisroot tip (107).
What, therefore, is the role of H3K27me1 in cell cycle regulation? One possibility is that it affects epigenetic modifications at DNA replication origins, thereby prohibiting rereplication in the mitotic cycle. A genome-wide map of DNA replication origins forArabidopsiscultured cells revealed a positive correlation with euchromatic histone modifications, such as H3K4me2/3, H3ac, and H4ac (24), suggesting the possibility that such euchromatic marks are decreased by H3K27me1. Another possibility is that H3K27me1 attracts particular proteins to centromeric heterochromatin and facilitates chromosome segregation during mitosis. It is well known that epigenetic marks in animals play an important role in the formation of specific protein complexes assembled at the centromere (52). Therefore, it is possible that a reduction in H3K27me1 level alters the composition of such protein complexes and renders the centromere suitable for endoreplication, in which sister chromatids are always attached to each other. Sas-Nowosielska & Bernas (120) reported that chromatin density rises as genome copy number increases inArabidopsis, suggesting the necessity to change the composition of centromere proteins and tie together amplified chromosomes during endoreplication. Analysis of epigenetic modifications in G2 phase of the last mitotic cycle will be of great interest to understand how DNA rereplication is licensed and whether environmental signals regulate the machineries of histone modification and/or loading to trigger endoreplication.




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We apologize to colleagues whose original work could not be cited in this review due to space limitations. This work was supported by MEXT KAKENHI grant 20H04882 to A.S. and grants 17H06470 and 17H06477 to M.U., as well as JSPS KAKENHI grants 19K05943 to A.S., 20K15770 to S.S.A., and 19K06708 to N.T.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...

DownloadSupplemental Table 1(PDF).

Literature Cited


