We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
The discovery of C3-C4intermediate species nearly 50 years ago opened up a new avenue for studying the evolution of photosynthetic pathways. Intermediate species exhibit anatomical, biochemical, and physiological traits that range from C3to C4. A key feature of C3-C4intermediates that utilize C2photosynthesis is the improvement in photosynthetic efficiency compared with C3species. Although the recruitment of some core enzymes is shared across lineages, there is significant variability in gene expression patterns, consistent with models that suggest numerous evolutionary paths from C3to C4photosynthesis. Despite the many evolutionary trajectories, the recruitment of glycine decarboxylase for C2photosynthesis is likely required. As technologies enable high-throughput genotyping and phenotyping, the discovery of new C3-C4intermediates species will enrich comparisons between evolutionary lineages. The investigation of C3-C4intermediate species will enhance our understanding of photosynthetic mechanisms and evolutionary processes and will potentially aid in crop improvement.
Article metrics loading...
The discovery of C3-C4intermediate species nearly 50 years ago opened up a new avenue for studying the evolution of photosynthetic pathways. Intermediate species exhibit anatomical, biochemical, and physiological traits that range from C3to C4. A key feature of C3-C4intermediates that utilize C2photosynthesis is the improvement in photosynthetic efficiency compared with C3species. Although the recruitment of some core enzymes is shared across lineages, there is significant variability in gene expression patterns, consistent with models that suggest numerous evolutionary paths from C3to C4photosynthesis. Despite the many evolutionary trajectories, the recruitment of glycine decarboxylase for C2photosynthesis is likely required. As technologies enable high-throughput genotyping and phenotyping, the discovery of new C3-C4intermediates species will enrich comparisons between evolutionary lineages. The investigation of C3-C4intermediate species will enhance our understanding of photosynthetic mechanisms and evolutionary processes and will potentially aid in crop improvement.
During photosynthesis, CO2is fixed by the enzyme ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase (Rubisco), whose products are three-carbon compounds. Therefore, the pathway is called C3photosynthesis. Plants that utilize the C3pathway fix CO2inmesophyll cells, where Rubisco is the initial carboxylating enzyme. In land plants, Rubisco's oxygenation reaction leads to a significant amount of photorespiration. To minimize the negative impact of photorespiration, some plants have evolved carbon-concentrating mechanisms that shuttle intermediate carbon compounds to the spatially isolatedbundle sheath cells, where they are subsequently decarboxylated in physical proximity to Rubisco. The resulting high CO2concentration reduces Rubisco's oxygenation reaction and increases photosynthetic efficiency (101). Thus, while all pathways result in a CO2fixation reaction by Rubisco, some plants have distinct assimilation pathways with corresponding energetic costs and associated anatomy. The C2pathway recycles photorespired CO2by shuttling the two-carbon molecule glycine to bundle sheath cells, where it is fixed by Rubisco. The more advanced C4pathway, which has a specialized cell arrangement known asKranz anatomy, essentially eliminates photorespiration by incorporating an initial reaction by phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) carboxylase (PEPC) in mesophyll cells that produces a four-carbon molecule from PEP and CO2. The four-carbon molecule is transported from the mesophyll to the bundle sheath cells, the site of all CO2fixation in C4species (Table 1). We use the terms C2and C4photosynthesis to refer to these specialized assimilation pathways, recognizing that CO2fixation through the C3Calvin-Benson pathway is ubiquitous across plant species. From an evolutionary and mechanistic standpoint, there is great interest in understanding the events that led to numerous independent lineages developing specialized assimilation pathways.
Physiological differences among C3, C3-C4intermediate, and C4plants
Abbreviations: BS, bundle sheath; PEPC, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase; PS, photosynthesis.

The term C3-C4intermediate broadly describes plants exhibiting characteristics between the ancestral C3and evolved C4photosynthetic pathways (100). The first intermediate species recorded in the literature, nearly 50 years ago, wasMollugo verticillata(53). This discovery opened the door to studying the evolution of C4photosynthesis using C3-C4intermediates, leading to the identification of more than 50 monocot and eudicot intermediate species with and without close C4relatives (69,100). One of the earliest observations pertaining to C3-C4intermediates was a reduced rate of photorespiration. SomeC3-C4intermediate speciesmaintain a lowerCO2compensation pointwith increasing O2concentration compared with their close C3relatives, as elegantly shown in the genusFlaveria, which contains species representing a complete gradient from C3to C4(58). Increases in photosynthetic efficiency observed in C3-C4intermediates are due to the presence of a photorespiratory glycine shuttle, termedC2photosynthesisafter the two-carbon molecule glycine, which is used to concentrate CO2in bundle sheath cells (80). Recycling CO2lost to photorespiration gives intermediates that utilize the C2photosynthetic pathway a distinct advantage over C3species under a range of environmental conditions (107). A limited number of intermediate species also have a functional C4pathway. Many anatomical traits of C3-C4intermediates are also phenotypically in between those of C3and C4relatives. For example, C3-C4intermediates have enlarged bundle sheath cells with centripetally arranged organelles (28,80).
Although C3-C4intermediate species have anatomical, biochemical, and physiological traits spanning the full spectrum of diversity from C3to C4, most C3-C4intermediates have dry matter carbon isotope ratios (δ13C) similar to those of C3plants (−25‰ to −30‰) (28,87). Even C3-C4intermediates with 50% of their carbon assimilated through the C4pathway retain a C3signature (83,113). However, when more than 50% of the carbon is assimilated through the C4pathway, theδ13Csignature changes rapidly. For example, a δ13C of −17.4‰ was observed in plants that have 65% of their carbon assimilated through the C4pathway (83).This result underscores the difficulty of identifying C3-C4intermediate species. Dry matter δ13C analysis is a high-throughput screening method for classifying C3and C4species, but only intermediates with high levels of C4assimilation can be distinguished from C3species. Thus, it is currently necessary to rely on low-throughput gas exchange measurements coupled with anatomical analysis or online isotope discrimination (4) to definitively identify new C3-C4species.
Recent advances in genomic technologies have enabled more detailed phylogenetic, genomic, and metabolomic studies of C3-C4intermediates and their close C3and C4relatives (24,65,72,88,103). Several studies have modeled the evolution of photosynthetic pathways using C3-C4intermediate traits as reference points in the evolutionary trajectory and have estimated the advantage of C2photosynthesis in response to various environmental conditions (9,12,44,125). This review discusses the diversity and evolutionary significance of C3-C4intermediates. We also review what is currently known from studies of C3-C4intermediates and how advances in technologies can be leveraged to answer questions about the genomic basis of photosynthetic pathway evolution using these intermediates. Finally, we discuss recent research that highlights the potential of engineering C2photosynthesis into C3crops for increased climate resilience and food security.
Sage et al. (100) proposed three different photosynthetic classes of C3-C4intermediates on the basis of traits observed in species ofAlternanthera,Flaveria,Mollugo,Moricandia,Neurachne, andSteinchisma. The first class of C3-C4intermediates is termedproto-Kranz. Species in this class of intermediates exhibit anatomical differences from typical C3plants, including an increase in bundle sheath size as well as mitochondria placement in the inner bundle sheath cells. However, proto-Kranz species assimilate carbon only through the C3pathway. The second class is the C2type, which employs the photorespiratory glycine shuttle. The C2type can be further divided intotype Ispecies, which either lack or have a minimal C4cycle, andtype IIspecies, which have an active C4cycle. The third intermediate class is theC4-like, which has a strong C4cycle but retains the glycine shuttle. These designations, later referred to as the Monson family of C4evolutionary models, provide a useful framework for classifying C3-C4intermediate species (82,88) (Figure 1). Interestingly, because the evolution of the different C4subtypes is thought to result from differences in the order of evolved leaf traits rather than a biochemical predisposition (125), species with a C2photosynthetic pathway can transition into any of the three C4pathways.

Figure 1Click to view


The number of independent lineages and the complex nature of C4photosynthesis make it a striking example of convergent evolution (45). An interesting and frequently noted point is the nonuniform distribution of these independent origins across angiosperms (99). Similarly, C3-C4intermediates share this nonrandom distribution and are usually found in clades with close C3and C4relatives, suggesting a potential evolutionary connection (81). The genusFlaveriais one of the most-studied lineages in terms of photosynthetic evolution. Phylogenetic studies have shown that C3-C4intermediateFlaveriaspecies separate into two distinct clades, indicating that the transition from C3to C4occurred twice independently in this genus (76). However, the absence of C4relatives in other lineages leads to questions about the origin and evolutionary state of C3-C4intermediates. For example,MoricandiaC3-C4intermediate speciesrange from proto-Kranz totype I C2photosynthesis but have no known close C4relatives (71,100,103). The genusAlloteropsiscontains one of the most unique species for which to study the evolution of photosynthesis. Subspecies ofAlloteropsis semialatarange from C3to C3-C4intermediate to C4(29,70,118). The inconsistent phylogenetic relationship between C3-C4intermediates and C4species across independent lineages leaves open the question of how C3-C4intermediates fit into the evolutionary path to C4.
One way to understand how C4photosynthesis evolved is through the integration of biochemical and mathematical models. These models can be used to predict the steps that happened during the evolutionary transitions from C3to C4and to determine the relative fitness advantages of these steps. Several different types of models have been used, and their results have been compared with phenotypes of C3, C3-C4, and C4species. Despite minor differences, the various models agree in many areas and show that extant C3-C4intermediate species from multiple lineages fit into specific points in the predicted evolutionary trajectories to C4photosynthesis (44,125). Importantly, both statistical and mechanistic models indicate that the path to C4photosynthesis is flexible (44,125). Although the conceptual framework presented by Sage et al. (101) depicts the evolution of C4photosynthesis as consisting of ordered steps, modeling shows that the series of events is not rigid and can vary between species (44,125). Specifically, whileC2photosynthesisis frequently established early in the evolutionary trajectory, it is not necessarily a required first step (44). The flexibility of the evolutionary path to C4photosynthesis could therefore contribute to the number of independent origins of this complex trait. Although statistical and mechanistic models clearly show the advantages of the establishment of C2photosynthesis, they do not indicate an increased likelihood of evolving C4photosynthesis when compared with C3species (44,125). However, this apparent discrepancy is resolved with leaf metabolic models, which indicate that the nitrogen shuttle that operates as part of C2photosynthesis increases the likelihood of C4evolution (73). A flux balance model was used to identify alternative nitrogen shuttle metabolites that could balance the ammonia produced inbundle sheath cellsduring C2photosynthesis. Three pathways were identified: (a) aspartate/malate, (b) alanine/pyruvate, and (c) glutamate/2-oxoglutarate (73). Interestingly, the first two shuttles utilize metabolites that are part of the C4pathway, which could ultimately facilitate its establishment following an increase in PEPC activity.
Studies modeling the photosynthetic fitness landscape indicate a smooth path from C3to C4photosynthesis rather than a landscape with local optima (44). Therefore, each mutation along the evolutionary trajectory drives the intermediate closer to establishment of the C4cycle. This result suggests that C3-C4species do not represent evolutionary dead ends but rather true intermediates on the path to a complete C4pathway. More recently, Blätke & Bräutigam (12) used a constraint-based model to look at how selective pressures alter the evolutionary paths toward C4photosynthesis. They found that not only reduced photorespiration but also nutrient limitation drives C4evolution. Specifically, nitrogen limitation could act as an additional selection pressure that promotes the emergence of C4photosynthesis. Light may also contribute to the evolution of C4(12). These additional resource limitations may explain why C4species sometimes evolve in wet habitats. These hypotheses could also explain whyMoricandiaC3-C4intermediate species have no close C4relatives. The absence of C4species in the Brassicaceae family is potentially due to the lack of environmental pressure that favors the C4phenotype. IntermediateMoricandiaspecies usually grow in colder areas, significantly limiting the need to reduce photorespiration beyond the implementation of the glycine shuttle (103).
Although comparisons of modeling results with extant C3-C4intermediate species support their placement in the evolutionary transition to C4photosynthesis, the origin of C3-C4intermediates has been called into question. Specifically, C3-C4intermediate species might be hybrids rather than true evolutionary intermediates (51). Similarities between experimentally generated interspecific hybrids and naturally occurring C3-C4intermediates suggest the possibility that C3-C4intermediates could be hybrid in origin. Indeed, interspecific C3× C4hybrids have traits similar to those of the various C3-C4intermediates studied over the past 40 years (51). If C3-C4intermediates are found to be hybrids, their significance for understanding evolutionary processes could be called into question. Such hybrids would represent evolutionary leaps created from C3and C4endpoints rather than progressive steps along an evolutionary path (51). Further studies need to be done to determine whether C3-C4intermediates represent natural evolutionary steps or products of hybridization.
The literature also suggests that known C3-C4intermediate species do not support modeling conclusions that the transition from C2-like intermediates to C4photosynthesis was gradual (113). The lack of extanttype IIintermediate species could represent evidence supporting a quick transition once a modest C4cycle is functional (113). However, it is important to acknowledge that the limited number of known type II species may be due to the relatively small sample of C3-C4intermediates identified to date. Indeed, known C3-C4intermediates provide only a snapshot of the 1019possible paths from C3to C4(44). The so-called greedy path, with incremental gains in fitness, represents one of billions of possible evolutionary trajectories (44). Thus, current C3-C4intermediate study systems may be underpowered to definitively determine the speed at which species transition through the various stages. Without question, the transition would also be faster or slower depending on the intensity of the environmental selective pressures. As phylogenies are refined with genomic data, it may become possible to identify additional type II intermediates near C4species. Additionally, some species may need to be reclassified from one photosynthetic type to another, as in the case ofColeataenia prionitis, which was previously thought to be a C4plant but was recently found to be aC4-likegrass (116). Similarly, the genusChenopodium, which was previously thought to include only C3species, has been found to have C3,proto-Kranz, and C2-type species (129). Given that some C3-C4intermediates do not have close C4sister taxa, it will be important to investigate clades without C4lineages to avoid sampling bias.
A major driver for the evolution of C4photosynthesis is photorespiration (15,73,101). The decline in atmospheric CO2∼35 million years ago introduced a selection pressure that ultimately led to the evolution of new photosynthetic types (21,119). There are certain conditions that have been labeled enablers of the evolution of C4photosynthesis (20). Researchers hypothesize that environments with abiotic stresses such as aridity, salinity, high temperature and light, and nitrogen deficiency may have facilitated the transition away from C3photosynthesis (27,71,101). Thus, it was not a single selective pressure that drove C4evolution but rather many conditions that likely varied depending on the lineage. The ecological niche occupied by C3-C4intermediates cannot be described with a single variable, given their presence across a vast geographical range (71). Ultimately, the benefit of C2photosynthesis under a wide variety of conditions may best explain its broad distribution. For example, geographic regions with greater temperature changes (seasonality) are more populated by C3-C4intermediates than either C3or C4species (Figure 2). The fine-scale geographic and climatic distribution ofC3-C4intermediate speciesmay provide additional context to understand the extent to which environmental conditions drive selection of C2photosynthesis and the transition to a fully functioning C4pathway. However, without close C3and C4relatives in each intermediate lineage, establishing causation may be difficult. In addition, these insights may not be broadly applicable, and the variability in conditions may contribute to the order in which traits are recruited during the transition.

Figure 2Click to view


Anatomical enablers include enlargedbundle sheath cellsand an increased number of organelles in bundle sheath cells (20,43,100). Reduced vein density is also prevalent in lineages that evolved C4photosynthesis (101). Tighter vein spacing can evolve in response to water stress in dry climates but is also necessary for efficient exchange of metabolites between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells in C2and C4species (101). Interestingly, a comparative analysis of 25 grass species found that bundle sheath size and vein spacing per se do not significantly differ between C3and C4species; instead, defining features of C4species include greater bundle sheath surface area, fewermesophyll cellsbetween veins, and increased plasmodesmata between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells (32). Once these anatomical traits are established, the rate of C4photosynthetic evolution can be increased through the establishment of the photorespiratory glycine shuttle (44). Scientists have speculated thatC2photosynthesisenables the transition to C4because of the nitrogen imbalance between mesophyll cells and bundle sheath cells, which can be overcome by the C4cycle (26,73). Interestingly, low-nitrogen conditions decrease theCO2compensation pointof the C3-C4intermediateChenopodium albumbecause resources are preferentially allocated to bundle sheath rather than mesophyll cells (91). Further study of C3-C4intermediates is needed to elucidate the genetic changes that led to the evolution of C2and C4photosynthesis, but genome duplications followed by subfunctionalization of gene function might serve as a genetic enabler of complex trait evolution (43,79).
A functional C2photosynthetic pathway requires coordinated changes in gene expression level and gene expression patterns in a cell type–specific manner (100). Comparative studies using C3-C4intermediate species offer an opportunity to determine the genetic changes underlying key traits that were targets of selection. Aside from the major enzymes that drive the C4cycle, the gene encoding glycine decarboxylase (GDC) is one of the most studied in relation to photosynthetic pathway evolution (106). GDC is an enzyme complex composed of four subunits (P, H, T, and L) that catalyzes the oxidative decarboxylation of glycine, a by-product of the breakdown of phosphoglycolate (Figure 3b). In C3species, GDC is found in both mesophyll and bundle sheath mitochondria (30). However,GDCactivity is restricted to bundle sheath mitochondria in C3-C4intermediates that utilize the C2photosynthetic pathway (50). In C2photosynthesis, glycine produced by photorespiration in mesophyll cells is shuttled into bundle sheath cells, where two molecules of glycine are converted to serine, CO2, and ammonia. Serine is transported back to the mesophyll to be used in the Calvin-Benson cycle, while the released CO2can be recycled for photosynthesis in the bundle sheath cells (80). The rebalancing of nitrogen between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells can be achieved using several metabolite shuttles (described above).

Figure 3Click to view


The genetic mechanisms that led to the cell type–specific expression of GDC have been uncovered in several C3-C4intermediate species. Most studies on GDC focus on the P subunit (GDC-P); there have been mutation and overexpression experiments in model species likeArabidopsis thalianaas well as in nonmodel genera with different photosynthetic types likeFlaveriaandMoricandia(8,106). A duplication of the gene encoding GDC-P is present in multiple C3lineages, but the mechanism by which gene expression is restricted to bundle sheath cells varies. Studies inMoricandiaspecies showed that, during the evolution from C3to C2photosynthesis, one copy of the gene encoding GDC-P was lost. The remaining gene copy became bundle sheath specific through the deletion of a promoter element that confers mesophyll expression (termed the M-box) (2,3). Interestingly, although the GDC-P subunit is restricted primarily to bundle sheath cells inMoricandia arvensisC3-C4intermediates, the remaining GDC subunits are abundant in both mesophyll and bundle sheath cells (84). This was not observed forFlaveriaandSteinchismaspecies, which show strong bundle sheath enrichment for all of the GDC subunits (101). However, a small amount of GDC activity is present, and likely required, in mesophyll cells of both C3-C4intermediates and C4species (106).
In contrast toMoricandia, the genusFlaveriaretains two gene copies that encode GDC-P, but one of the genes is not active (30). The functional gene copy that encodes GDC-P utilizes a promoter with minimal mesophyll expression and a strong alternate promoter that confers bundle sheath–specific expression (105). The range of C3, C3-C4, and C4species found inFlaveriawas used to develop a model for the evolutionary transition of GDC-P expression and localization (105,106). The study of these various classes has led to the hypothesis that bundle sheath–specific expression of a single gene encoding GDC-P occurred early. The bundle sheath–specific copy was increased in expression as the constitutively expressed copy was gradually downregulated. This event was followed by minimal activation of the bundle sheath–specific gene copy in mesophyll cells. Finally, the constitutively expressed gene encoding the GDC-P copy was completely silenced (105,106). BecauseFlaveriais a relatively young C4lineage (101), it is speculated that the silenced gene copy will eventually be lost (106). WhileOryza sativahas two copies of the gene encoding GDC-P, genomes from evolutionarily advanced C4grass species likeZea mays,Sorghum bicolor, andSetaria italicahave only a single copy, indicating that the inactivated copy of the gene encoding GDC-P may be lost in the genome over time (105).
Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) is an enzyme that works hand in hand with GDC in the photorespiratory shuttle (Figure 3). The function of SHMT in mitochondria is to synthesize serine and recycle 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate for reuse in the GDC reaction (8). While the gene encoding SHMT is not as well studied as those encoding GDC, mutants ofshmt1inA. thalianawere not able to metabolize photorespiratory glycine, resulting in impaired CO2fixation under normal atmospheric conditions (110). The function of SHMT was confirmed through the disruption of a key phosphorylation site in SHMT1, which resulted in a reduction in CO2assimilation that later contributed to a decrease in plant growth (66). In C3plants like wheat (Triticum aestivum), SHMT activity is observed in mesophyll cells (36). However, a more recent study inO. sativashowed that one gene copy of SHMT (SHMT1) is expressed in the mesophyll cells but that the other gene copy (SHMT4) is highly expressed in thebundle sheath cells(49). InZ.mays,Panicum miliaceum, andPanicum maximum, which are all C4species, SHMT is localized in the bundle sheath cells (89). However, inC3-C4intermediate species, it is still unclear whether localization of SHMT to bundle sheath cells is a requirement for efficientC2photosynthesis. Unlike the GDC-P subunit, in the C3-C4intermediateM. arvensis, SHMT is abundant in both mesophyll and bundle sheath cells (84). SHMT is also found in both mesophyll and bundle sheath cells in the C3-C4intermediateAlternanthera tenella. However, the activity level of this enzyme is sixfold higher in the bundle sheath cells (23). Similarly,FlaveriaandSteinchismaspecies have strong bundle sheath enrichment for SHMT activity (84). With limited information about SHMT in C3-C4intermediate species, it would be interesting to look into this enzyme in a cell type–specific way across diverse intermediate species to determine its requirement in C2photosynthesis. Comparisons between gene expression level and enzyme activity would also help clarify the mechanism by which SHMT is regulated.
Aside from photorespiratory and photosynthetic traits, many studies have been performed to investigate the mechanisms that underpin anatomical differences between C3and C4species. Candidate genes identified through comparative studies can then be investigated in C3-C4intermediates for additional supporting evidence. For example, the presence of chloroplasts in bundle sheath cells is an important step in the evolutionary transition to C4photosynthesis. A family of Golden2 (G2) and GOLDEN2-LIKE1 (GLK) transcription factors are known to affect chloroplast biogenesis and have been implicated in C4evolution (123). A mutant analysis inZ.maysidentified G2 (42), and a later study determined that, while theZmG2gene is expressed in bundle sheath cells,ZmGlk1is expressed in mesophyll cells (98). Given their roles in these critical functions, G2 and GLK have been high-priority targets for engineering both C4and C2photosynthesis (52,69). Overexpression of theO. sativaorthologOsGLKresulted in light-dependent chloroplast development (86). Constitutive expression of eitherZmGLK1orZmG2driven by the ubiquitin promoter inO. sativaincreased the volume of functional chloroplasts in both bundle sheath cells and mestome sheath cells (124). However, while the transgene resulted in aproto-Kranz-like anatomy, the increase observed in the transgenic lines expressing bothZmGLK1andZmG2did not reach the level observed in C2species, and there were no significant differences in photosynthetic measurements compared with wild-type plants (124). In a more recent study, whenZmGLK1andZmG2were constitutively expressed in a differentO. sativacultivar under field conditions, a significant increase in stomatal conductance, intercellular CO2concentration, and CO2assimilation was observed (60). Despite indications that GLK plays a major role in the evolution of anatomical traits, evidence in C3-C4intermediates is not as clear. In a transcriptomic study across the gradient of photosynthetic classes inFlaveria, expression of GLK-encoding genes was upregulated only in the late stages of C4development (41). In addition, the expression of genes encoding GLK in C3-C4intermediateMoricandiaspecies showed no increase in expression compared with C3relatives (62). Further exploration of orthologs in different C3-C4intermediates would be useful for identifying any role for GLK-related proteins early in C4evolution. Furthermore, if GLK does not contribute to early anatomical changes during the transition from C3to C4, comparative studies that can identify early regulators of chloroplast biogenesis will be very important.
The gene family encoding FtsZ proteins has also been implicated in chloroplast development. These genes code for the components that are responsible for the formation of the inner FtsZ ring and are important for plastid division. In plants, it is necessary to have at least two FtsZ variants:FtsZ1andFtsZ2(93). Knocking down the expression ofFtsZ1andFtsZ2inA. thalianaresulted in a reduction in chloroplast number but an increase in chloroplast size (93). In contrast, overexpression ofFtsZ1andFtsZ2increases chloroplast cell division inA. thaliana(114). In the intermediateMoricandiaspecies, expression ofFtsZ1andFtsZ2increased along a developmental gradient, which correlated with chloroplast abundance in bundle sheath cells (62). Both genes were also upregulated compared with a close C3comparator (62). In contrast, expression levels ofFtsZ1andFtsZ2are higher in C3Atriplex prostratathan in C4Atriplex rosea(115). A similar pattern was observed in theFlaveriagenus, showing that C4cycle strength is negatively related to the abundance of bothFtsZ1andFtsZ2transcripts (112). Because current transcriptome analyses show variation inFtsZgene expression between species, further studies of the involvement of FtsZ in C3-C4intermediate species would help clarify its role in photosynthetic evolution.
Whole-leaf transcriptome analyses represent the combined expression from mesophyll and bundle sheath cells. The expectation is that genes encoding FtsZ would decrease in expression in mesophyll cells (resulting in fewer larger chloroplasts) but increase in expression in bundle sheath cells (increasing the number of chloroplasts), which may not be captured in the transcriptome of leaf tissue. The timing of gene expression during leaf development may be a further complicating factor. As RNA sequencing becomes cheaper and more routine, these sampling parameters can be taken into consideration to gain fine-scale resolution of gene expression related to anatomical traits.
The generation of hybrids and the study of segregating populations are powerful methods for studying complex trait evolution. In the case of C4pathway evolution, segregating populations can be achieved by crossing species from different photosynthetic classes. Ironically, the first study to generate interspecific hybrids for this purpose was published prior to the discovery of naturally occurring C3-C4intermediates (11). The first hybrid was made by crossingAtriplex patula(C3) andAtriplex rosea(C4). The F1plants showed leaf anatomy that was intermediate between the C3and C4parents. Another significant observation was the increased density of chloroplasts around the vascular bundles of the hybrids compared with those ofA. patula(C3). At low O2concentration, the rate of photosynthesis was within the average range of the two parents. However, photosynthetic rates of the hybrids were lower than both parents at 21% O2levels (11).Rubiscoactivity in the hybrid was intermediate between the two parents, but only a slight increase in PEPC activity was observed (11). This first successful attempt at producing an interspecific hybrid from parents with different photosynthetic pathways showed that traits associated with photosynthesis are controlled by genes encoded in the nucleus, and thus not maternally inherited, and that these traits can be transferred to the offspring through intercrossing.
Following the study inAtriplex, a series of interspecific and intergeneric crosses between species with photosynthetic types was performed in other lineages. In theFlaveriagenus, crosses were made betweenF. cronquistii(C3) andF. brownii(C4) (5,7). The F1hybrids showed anatomical and photosynthetic traits intermediate between the parents. Reciprocal hybrids exhibitKranz-like anatomywith fewer chloroplast numbers compared with the C4parent (7). Some enzymes (e.g., PEPC and alanine aminotransferase) involved in the C4pathway showed low activity in the hybrids, but very high NADP-ME (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate–malic enzyme) and NADP-MDH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate–malate dehydrogenase) activity was observed. Theδ13Csignatures were still similar to those of the C3parent, indicating that the reciprocal hybrids assimilate CO2primarily through the C3pathway despite the presence of C4enzymes (7). The results from these reciprocal crosses also show that the direction of the cross, or the sex of the parent with a specific photosynthetic type, does not affect the expression of photosynthetic traits (7). Similar results were obtained from a cross betweenF. cronquistii(C3) andF. palmeri(C4) (6). Interestingly, the authors of this study also backcrossed the hybrid to the C4parent, which resulted in a shift toward C4values forCO2compensation point, enzyme activity, and anatomical traits. However, the δ13C signatures remained C3-like (6).
In addition to crosses between C3× C4species, several interspecific crosses have been made between C3-C4intermediates and C3or C4species.Steinchisma hians(C3-C4) andSteinchisma laxum(C3) were crossed to generate a triploid hybrid (16). The resulting F1hybrid showed intermediacy between the parents in terms of both anatomical traits and CO2compensation point (16). Chromosome doubling of the F1hybrids generated a hexaploid, which led to subsequent F2-F5generations. The segregating F5progeny showed compensation points and photorespiration rates closer to those of the C3parent (14). None of the segregants showed lower compensation points, a characteristic of the C3-C4intermediate parent (14). The lack of a C3-C4intermediate type in the segregating progeny was likely due to the relatively small sample size, given the hexaploid nature of the hybrid. A higher frequency of parental types would be observed in either diploid or tetraploid organisms.
Interspecific hybrids have been made betweenF. trinervia(C4) andF. linearis(C3-C4) as well as betweenF. brownii(C4-like) andF. linearis(C3-C4) (18). The authors of this study also made crosses between the interspecific hybrids. Results showed that the photosynthetic activity and δ13C values of the hybrids are dependent on the photosynthetic type of the parents. For example, the δ13C values of theF. trinervia(C4) ×F. linearis(C3-C4) hybrids were moreC4-likecompared with those ofF. brownii(C4-like) ×F. linearis(C3-C4) hybrids (18). Moreover, the δ13C values were closely correlated to NADP-ME activity and were not correlated with PEPC activity. While these early hybridization experiments provided evidence that photosynthetic traits are heritable, their limitations included the sterility of the F1hybrids and the difficulty of generating advanced populations due to abnormal chromosome pairing. Furthermore, the technologies necessary for in-depth genomic studies had not yet been developed, so the genes contributing to the observed phenotypes in the F1could not be identified.
Advances in genomic technologies and analyses have prompted efforts to recreate interspecific hybrids with the hope of gaining additional insight into the genetic mechanisms underlying photosynthetic evolution. Recreation of the first interspecific crosses betweenA. prostrataandA. roseaproduced phenotypes similar to those observed previously (88). Three major C4cycle enzymes [PEPC, NAD-ME, and pyruvate phosphate dikinase (PPDK)] were detected in the hybrids, although the values were low and comparable to those of the C3parent. However, Rubisco activity was lower in the F1and F2plants compared with the C3parent. The observed intermediate CO2compensation point was thought to be due to a modest C4cycle or the presence of the photorespiratory glycine shuttle (88).
In addition to the revival of theAtriplexhybrids, C3-C4× C3intermediate crosses have been made betweenMoricandia arvensis(C3-C4) andMoricandia moricandioides(C3) (65). The F1plants from these crosses showed anatomical traits intermediate between those of the parents. The bundle sheath chloroplast number and arrangement varied among the hybrids, likely because of the heterozygosity of the parents used in the crosses. Net photosynthesis in the F1hybrids betweenM. arvensis(C3-C4) andM. moricandioides(C3) have CO2compensation points that range from 39 to 55 ppm, values that are between those of the two parents but closer to those ofM. moricandioides(C3) (65). These observations suggest that genes responsible for photosynthesis have additive effects.
Additional crosses have recently been made between accessions ofA. semialataand varying photosynthetic pathways. The δ13C and leaf anatomy traits of the hybrids between C4and a range of non-C4parents showed values intermediate between those of the parents. Gene expression analysis also showed that the expression of genes encoding C4genes has an additive effect, demonstrated by higher transcript abundance in C3-C4× C4crosses compared with C3× C4crosses. However, despite the hybrids having many intermediate phenotypes, the photosynthetic rates of the C3× C4hybrids were significantly lower than the parents at increasing CO2levels. This result indicates that enabling factors, such as those discussed above, need to be present to have a functional C4pathway (10).
Interspecific hybrids offer a unique opportunity to study gene expression and transcriptional network rewiring. The use of transcriptomics to investigate allele-specific expression is particularly interesting when comparing the contribution of parental alleles with gene expression in hybrid plants. Allele-specific expression enablescisandtranscontrol of gene expression to be distinguished and ultimately could identify candidate genes related to the evolution of photosynthetic pathways.Cis-regulatory elements are regions of DNA that are involved in transcriptional regulation, whereastransregulation refers to transcription factors or RNA that would uniformly affect each allele (127). Use of allele-specific expression in interspecific hybrids from bothAtriplexandMoricandiaindicated a significant contribution ofcisversustransregulation (65,115). The expression patterns in the hybrids also displayed significantcis-regulatory divergence in photosynthesis and photorespiratory genes. In addition,Moricandiahybrids showed preferential expression toward the C3-C4intermediate alleles, which was prevalent for anatomical, morphogenetic, and transmembrane transport–related traits (65). In contrast, in C3× C4Atriplexhybrids, there was no preference between parental alleles (115).
As more interspecies hybrids are generated, comparisons across lineages can be made and gene lists can be refined. To date, F2populations have not been investigated using this approach. Although an F2population was generated fromAtriplexinterspecific hybrids (115),MoricandiaF1produced very little F2seed (62). Aneuploidy has prevented the creation of populations beyond the F2generation; however, a large F2population could be screened to map the genomic regions that control phenotypes related to photosynthesis.
As biologists break away from reductionist thinking, the contribution of gene networks to complex traits is coming into focus. Molecular techniques have enabled the investigation of single genes known to play a role in photosynthesis. Advancements in technologies that facilitate -omics approaches have provided an unprecedented ability to comprehensively survey all potential genes and pathways. Only recently have these technologies been applied in nonmodel species. Several of theC3-C4intermediate specieshave undergone transcriptomic analysis. However, -omics techniques have not been pursued withNeurachneorSteinchismaspecies. Given the diversity of photosynthetic types inNeurachne, there is a great opportunity for future study (54). Likewise,SteinchismaC3-C4intermediates present an opportunity in the grasses for comparative analysis.Steinchismahasproto-Kranzand C3-C4intermediate species, and its sister generaOtachyrium(C3),Hymenachne(C3), andAnthaenantia(C4) can serve as close comparators (1).
De novo transcriptome assemblies have been generated inFlaveria,Moricandia,Salsola, andAlloteropsisspecies (24,59,73,104). However, de novo transcriptomes are complicated to interpret, given the large number of transcripts generated and the subsequent filtering and summing of redundant or paralogous transcripts necessary for cross-species comparisons. In addition, comparing C3-C4intermediates with C3and C4species often involves different ploidy levels, adding another layer of complexity. Transcriptome studies that map sequencing reads to high-quality reference genomes have shown mixed results. ForFlaveriaspecies, only ∼50% of the reads map to theA. thalianagenome (73). However, becauseMoricandiaspecies andA. thalianaare members of the Brassicaceae family, the percentage of mapped reads is high (>80%) (104). Thus, high-quality reference genomes of nonmodel plants near C3-C4intermediate lineages should improve our ability to detect alterations in gene expression related to the transition from C3to C4photosynthesis.
A reference assembly ofM. moricandioides(C3) has been generated through the use of both short- and long-read sequencing technologies (63). The genome ofM. arvensishas also been sequenced but is a lower-quality assembly. Use of theM. moricandioidesreference genome allowed 94% of reads fromM. moricandioidesand 66% of reads fromM. arvensisto be mapped (63). Thus, although the mapping percentages increased forM. moricandioides, theA. thalianareference provided a higher mapping frequency forM. arvensis. A reference genome was also generated for a C4accession ofA. semialata, which has enabled studies exploring inter- and intraspecies relationships (24,25). This assembly was constructed using short- and long-read sequencing technologies as well as commercial scaffolding technologies to produce a chromosome-level assembly (25). Surprisingly, only 54–69% of reads from other accessions ofA. semialatamapped to the reference genome (24). Despite being a chromosome-level assembly, the Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs (BUSCO) scores of theA. semialatagenome were lower than those forM. moricandioides, which could explain the lower mapping percentages (25,63). However, whether the low mappability is due to an incomplete genome annotation, divergence of the subspecies, or polyploidy is unclear. These issues represent the frontier of genomics in nonmodel systems. Whole-genome sequencing and assembly have become more routine, but vast improvements are still needed to address the annotation of heterozygous polyploid nonmodel species (77,102).
Across C3-C4intermediates species in different lineages, surprisingly few genes are uniformly expressed relative to C3and C4comparators. For example,FlaveriaandSalsolaC3-C4intermediate species showed higher expression of photorespiratory genes compared with C3species (41,59,73), but changes in transcript abundance were not observed inMoricandiaorAlloteropsisspecies (24,104). Even the expression level of genes encoding core C4enzymes is variable across species. InFlaveria, increased expression of NADP-ME and alanine aminotransferase was observed early in the C4transition, with a gradual increase in PEPC and PPDK expression as species transition to C4(73). However, no genes encoding enzymes in the C4pathway were upregulated inMoricandiaintermediates (104). A comparison between gene expression of C3accessions and of C3-C4and C4accession ofA. semialataidentified genes encoding PEPC, PCK, and aspartate aminotransferase as being differentially expressed (24). The only consistent difference betweenA. semialataC3-C4intermediates with a strong C4cycle andA. semialataC4accessions was an upregulation in the gene encoding PPDK (24). Taken together, these results are consistent with modeling results that suggest multiple paths to C4(43). It is interesting to speculate as to whether these discrepancies are due to differences in evolutionary paths between lineages or possibly alignment issues, the lack of granularity to distinguish between cell type–specific expression, or posttranscriptional regulation.
Results from side-by-side transcriptomic and metabolomic samples ofMoricandiashowed a stronger signature of photosynthetic class on metabolite composition than expression pattern (104). Although assaying metabolomic samples does not provide the same level of throughput as gene expression analysis, metabolite analyses are not dependent on reference assemblies and can provide more direct cross-species comparisons. Metabolomics approaches have been used, and even combined with transcriptomics, to identify the changes in metabolism during the transition from C3to C4(41,104). Importantly, combining gene expression and metabolite approaches can facilitate the identification of posttranscriptional modifications, which would not be detected by expression analysis alone.
Genome sequencing coupled with fine-scale physiological characterization deployed in populations of intermediates would provide an accounting of the spectrum of C3-C4biochemistry and physiology along with relationships between individuals of a population and the possible selection pressures that drive C3-C4intermediates to a C4state. Such studies would be especially interesting in cases where different photosynthetic types are collocated, leading to the possibility of admixture (90). Improvements in methods for integrating multiple data layers, such as transcriptomics and metabolomics data, will enhance our ability to elucidate the impact of genetic changes on photosynthetic pathways (74). Furthermore, with improvements in genome sequencing and assembly, the examination of noncoding sequences can be combined with allele-specific expression to enhance our understanding of the regulatory motifs that underlie photosynthetic evolution.
The current human population trend necessitates a doubling of agriculture production by 2050 to provide enough food for the world (35). Thus, dramatic increases in yield are needed in staple crops likeZ. mays,O. sativa,T. aestivum, andGlycine max(97). These major crops have already reached near-theoretical yield maxima, on the basis of calculations of light interception and yield potential through modifications in biomass partitioning and canopy architecture (92). However, the yields of these major crops could be further increased by improving photosynthesis (68,108,109). Scientists have begun studying the potential of optimizing and engineering photosynthesis to increase crop yields (33,56,111) but are only beginning to implement these strategies in field-grown staple crops.
To this end, one of the largest engineering efforts to date has focused on inserting a fully functional C4pathway intoO. sativa(C3) (46). It has long been hypothesized that changing the photosynthetic machinery operating inO. sativawould reduce photorespiration, increase water and nitrogen use efficiency, and double yield (78). A partial C4photosynthetic pathway was established inO. sativathrough the use of both multiple constructs and a single multigene construct (31,61). Photosynthesis at 21% O2was significantly reduced when GDC-H was knocked down, but recovery was possible at lower O2concentrations. In the single-construct insertion of multiple biochemical genes, no significant difference in net CO2assimilation was observed in the transgenic lines, despite the presence of the genes encoding enzymes in the C4pathway (31). The results from engineering five biochemical genes demonstrated that it is possible to have functional C4proteins in specific cell types that mimic the C4pathway but that further genetic modifications are needed to establish a complete C4cycle in C3crops. Aside from the core C4enzymes, there are likely many genes that still need to be elucidated to establish C4photosynthesis, particularly genes involved in anatomical and transmembrane transport–related modifications (31,61).
There have also been attempts to engineerRubiscoin order to improve its activity and substrate specificity (22,64,126). However, studies have suggested that while Rubisco may be slow and inefficient, the enzyme is actually optimized almost to perfection (117). Another method of engineering photosynthesis is through insertion of a cyanobacterial carbon-concentrating mechanism (CCM) as a strategy to improve C3crops (75,96). Excitingly, a structurally intact carboxysome has been established in the chloroplast of C3tobacco, demonstrating the potential of engineering a cyanobacterial CCM in C3plants. In particular, carboxysomes are capable of concentrating Rubisco and functioning as working chloroplastic CCMs. Despite this significant progress in engineering, the transformants showed significantly lower CO2fixation rates (67).
The possibility of engineeringC2photosynthesisin C3crops is attracting increasing interest. Using a comparably simple biochemical pathway, C3-C4intermediates species can reduce photorespiration rates compared with rates in C3species (69). The benefits of C2photosynthesis in warm environments were assessed in a modeling study more than 30 years ago (107). Compared with engineering a full C4pathway into a C3crop, the steps required to engineer a C2crop would require fewer genetic modifications. The distribution of C2photosynthesis in different areas around the world, in a wider range of climatic conditions (71), suggests that these plants have the potential to adapt and thrive in diverse growing environments. The adaptive ability of C2plants may also enable them to thrive in challenging environments brought about by climate change. A simulation experiment was performed to quantify the potential of converting C3photosynthesis inO. sativato C2, C2+ C4, or C4. After weighing all the trade-offs, the researchers concluded that the C2pathway seemed to be the best strategy forO. sativa(9). Given the urgent need to increase crop production in response to an increasing population and the impacts of climate change, establishing a C2pathway in C3crops presents an attractive solution that is manageable from an engineering perspective.
The wide range of C3-C4intermediate phenotypes can be used to study the repeated evolution of C4photosynthesis. Although much is known about C3-C4intermediates, there remains a wealth of information to unlock. To date, we understand only a select fewC3-C4intermediate speciesat a deep level. Expanding cross-disciplinary methods and new technologies to a wide range of species will strengthen our knowledge of evolutionary mechanisms and increase the power of comparative studies between lineages. Furthermore, opportunities for comparative studies will increase with the discovery of additional C3-C4intermediates species. Improved phylogenies will aid in the identification and placement of new C3-C4intermediate species. However, phylogenomic efforts will need to be combined with high-throughput detection of intermediate phenotypes. Given the substantial amount of carbon assimilation through the C4pathway required to influenceδ13C, most C3-C4intermediates have C3-like δ13C signatures and are missed by carbon isotope surveys. Thus, new methods will need to be developed to rapidly detect C3-C4intermediate traits in order to facilitate comprehensive sampling across diverse plant lineages. Interspecies hybrids between different photosynthetic classes offer an alternate means of investigating intermediate states. The resurgence of research in this area will allow past results to be reanalyzed through the lens of molecular genomic technologies. With the advent of genotyping-by-sequencing methods, quantitative genetic studies can now use advanced generation segregating populations to identify causative sequence changes related to photosynthetic transitions.
Both modeling and experimental analyses of C3-C4intermediates indicate that diverse trajectories are viable along the path to C4photosynthesis. Further study of the genes related to anatomical traits would help resolve the current disconnect between the gene targets identified in model C3and C4species and the expression patterns observed in C3-C4intermediates. It is likely that cell type–specific transcriptomics in C3-C4intermediates would add significantly to the resolution of expression analyses. This level of resolution is particularly important because differential expression between cell types is known to underlie the transition between photosynthetic classes. Even though there is still more to learn about GDC recruitment for C2photosynthesis, the comprehensive study of GDC inFlaveriaandMoricandialineages has provided a template for how C3-C4intermediates can be used to further characterize genes involved in C4evolution.
Finally, improvements in sequencing and transformation of nonmodel systems will enable further hypothesis generation and testing. Testing candidate genes using transgenic or gene editing approaches in nonmodel C3-C4intermediate species could help us gain a mechanistic understanding of photosynthetic pathway evolution. Recently, the use of genomic data sets in C3-C4intermediate species has increased. The integration of genomic methods with biochemical and metabolomic studies will resolve questions about carbon/nitrogen balance during the evolutionary transition from C3to C4. Newer gene network models are capable of combining transcriptomic, metabolomic, and even physiological data. High-quality reference genomes will also pave the way toward investigations of epigenetic changes and their contribution to adaptation and complex trait evolution, an unexplored area in C3-C4intermediate species.
The future study of C3-C4intermediates is promising, given the wide range of new technologies that enable investigation and accurate measurement at a diversity of scales. An abundance of knowledge awaits us in the species that occupy the evolutionary middle ground, and the predicted variability of future environments may make meeting in the middle the best way forward.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
The writing of this review was supported by the University of Illinois.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...

DownloadSupplemental Table 1(XLSX).

Literature Cited


