We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
The colonization of land by plants generated opportunities for the rise of new heterotrophic life forms, including humankind. A unique event underpinned this massive change to earth ecosystems—the advent of eukaryotic green algae. Today, an abundant marine green algal group, the prasinophytes, alongside prasinodermophytes and nonmarine chlorophyte algae, is facilitating insights into plant developments. Genome-level data allow identification of conserved proteins and protein families with extensive modifications, losses, or gains and expansion patterns that connect to niche specialization and diversification. Here, we contextualize attributes according to Viridiplantae evolutionary relationships, starting with orthologous protein families, and then focusing on key elements with marked differentiation, resulting in patchy distributions across green algae and plants. We place attention on peptidoglycan biosynthesis, important for plastid division and walls; phytochrome photosensors that are master regulators in plants; and carbohydrate-active enzymes, essential to all manner of carbohydratebiotransformations. Together with advances in algal model systems, these areas are ripe for discovering molecular roles and innovations within and across plant and algal lineages.
Article metrics loading...
The colonization of land by plants generated opportunities for the rise of new heterotrophic life forms, including humankind. A unique event underpinned this massive change to earth ecosystems—the advent of eukaryotic green algae. Today, an abundant marine green algal group, the prasinophytes, alongside prasinodermophytes and nonmarine chlorophyte algae, is facilitating insights into plant developments. Genome-level data allow identification of conserved proteins and protein families with extensive modifications, losses, or gains and expansion patterns that connect to niche specialization and diversification. Here, we contextualize attributes according to Viridiplantae evolutionary relationships, starting with orthologous protein families, and then focusing on key elements with marked differentiation, resulting in patchy distributions across green algae and plants. We place attention on peptidoglycan biosynthesis, important for plastid division and walls; phytochrome photosensors that are master regulators in plants; and carbohydrate-active enzymes, essential to all manner of carbohydratebiotransformations. Together with advances in algal model systems, these areas are ripe for discovering molecular roles and innovations within and across plant and algal lineages.
Major advances in plant biology have come in part from our recognition of the need for food security:Heterotrophicorganisms, such as humans, are inherently dependent on the productivity of the photosynthetic world. The evolutionary story of plants is rooted in the realm of marine microbes. It was theprimary endosymbiosis event, wherein a cyanobacterium was engulfed by a unicellular eukaryote and incorporated as an organelle, that gave rise to the first eukaryotic alga (1,109). One such marine green alga, perhaps long extinct, is widely accepted as having been the progenitor of all terrestrial plant life (97,175). Phylogenetic relationships within theViridiplantae, which collectively houses marine and nonmarine green algae as well as multicellular land plants, continue to be resolved as genome and transcriptome projects tackle sequencing the breadth of streptophyte diversity alongside prasinodermophyte, chlorophyte, and prasinophyte algal diversity (Figure 1). This work has illuminated retained features that span much but not all of Viridiplantae diversity, some that lead back to the algal progenitor of plants and others that support green algal growth in modern-day ocean environments.

Figure 1Click to view


A key difference between terrestrial and aquatic environments is that the latter are subject to the physical influence of fluid mixing throughout a three-dimensional space. This mixing can be to both the benefit and detriment of single-celled algae, and transport between regions that have very different environmental profiles (e.g., temperature, nutrient availability) certainly impacts the evolution of these organisms. In terrestrial environments, extreme environmental conditions include desiccation or varied water availability, as well as extended exposure to direct unfiltered sunlight, which causes photooxidative and ultraviolet (UV) radiation damage (79). The effects of excessive light exposure are also relevant to aquatic green algae, but some mitigation occurs via rapid attenuation by water. Light itself is clearly critical both on land and in the water—and varied, whether by cloud cover or shading. The latter can occur due to mixing to darker depths in the water column or to the proximity of other photosynthetic organisms that block light under dense bloom conditions or, for land plants, light blockage by other plants, and cloud cover is clearly relevant in both environments. Mechanisms and sensors present in green algae are now known to have been co-opted and/or expanded as plants adapted to life on land, and new functions evolved to allow survival under differing stressors (129,141).
As on land, food availability in the oceans is directly connected to photosynthetic productivity—in this case by eukaryotic algae and cyanobacteria. Marine primary productivity not only is important to ocean-dwelling organisms but also underpins fisheries and their harvests worldwide (17,78,174). Theprasinophytes, for which several genomes (30,127,134,175) and many transcriptomes (82) have been sequenced, are of particular interest, as they are globally distributed in marine environments. They are the dominant green algae in the oceans, remarkable not just for being importantprimary producers(9,101,104,176) and potential sentinels for ocean change (29,175) but also, from a cell-biological perspective, for being the tiniest plants yet discovered (21,176). The most abundant members are as tiny as ≤2 μm in cell diameter, the size of a typical bacterium! Their diminutive size is important because nutrient availability (e.g., nitrogen, phosphorus, iron) is often low in the open ocean, hence higher cell surface area to cell volume ratios result in a competitive advantage over larger photosynthetic cells in such environments (20). The chloroplast itself generally occupies approximately half of the cell. Most prasinophytes have scales (seeBathycoccusimage,Figure 1a) and most are motile, having a motile cilium, or often two motile cilia (see the sidebar titled Motility in Green Algae Relies on Cilia, a.k.a. Flagella), whose structure is conserved within all eukaryotes (36,51,156). Beyond food security, the photosynthetic activities of algae (including cyanobacteria) in the oceans and plants on land are each responsible for about half of the annual uptake of CO2from the atmosphere (42). Moreover, oceans have served as a long-term sink for this CO2: Its continuance as a reservoir is intimately connected to environmental conditions such as temperature (34,55).
MOTILITY IN GREEN ALGAE RELIES ON CILIA, A.K.A. FLAGELLA
Until recently, the term flagellum was used for the cilium in prasinophytes and most motile algae and protists. Recognition that this organelle is conserved across all eukaryotes but is different than the flagellum of bacteria has led to a shift to the usage of cilium for the eukaryotic organelle. The term flagellum signifies a motile cilium in contrast to the primary, a.k.a. nonmotile, cilia that have sensory functions in mammalian cells. The word flagellum is still widely used for the eukaryotic organelle in oceanographic and ecological literature, and typically refers to longer cilia that occur in numbers of one or two per cell in unicellular organisms.

What can a tiny prasinophyte alga tell us about a giant redwood tree? Many key functions of photosynthetic cells appear to be conserved across the entire Viridiplantae. Some conserved proteins have altered in function as algal and plant lineages diverged, and some proteins have patchy distributions across the individual Viridiplantae lineages sequenced to date. A great deal can be learned by comparing protein families and their functions in land plant and algal groups. Prasinophytes are excellent model organisms since they have tiny genomes relative to plants (Figure 1b), low gene family expansion, few repeat regions, and fast division times (30,127,134,175,178). Nascent approaches for genetic manipulation are also available for several (40), includingMicromonas—a widespread, motile, scaleless genus. Furthermore, they can easily be synchronized to adiel light cycle, such that cells move through the same cell cycle phase together, sharpening transcriptional profiles and statistical analyses.
The idea that green algae can contribute fundamental insights into the evolution of plants as a whole is not new. Decades ago, the unicellular chlorophyte freshwater algaChlamydomonas reinhardtii(120), with simple cultivation requirements and available methods for genetic manipulation, was already being used to facilitate the understanding of basic pathways and cell wall construction in land plants (54,128).Chlamydomonasis capable of purelyheterotrophicgrowth via the uptake of organic carbon compounds, and therefore does not require light for growth, allowing the isolation of mutants blocked in photosynthesis. This is unlike prasinophytes (120,161) and the newly sequenced prasinodermophytes (100), at least based on knowledge to date. Comparative studies across these green algal lineages and multicellular plants hence provide a window into the characteristics of the progenitor of the Viridiplantae and illustrate expansion of certain protein families, accompanied by functional modifications and losses, that were essential to the evolution and diversification of plants (131).
As we face major changes to land and sea environments, a cell-biological understanding of different plant and algal species rooted in evolutionary knowledge is essential to more accurately predict potential future transitions in the Viridiplantae communities responsible for the majority of global photosynthesis. Here, we review the latest understanding of relationships between plant and green algal groups and the corresponding presence/absence patterns of orthologous groups of proteins. Note that becausechlorophytes(e.g.,Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) have been extensively examined (see, e.g.,8,161) and are not among the more abundant marine green algae, we allot more attention to comparing prasinophytes and prasinodermophytes to streptophytes. We focus on advances in knowledge of three specific features shared between these algae and plants:phytochromes,peptidoglycanbiosynthesis, andcarbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes). All three are important in plant biology but with differing levels of significance between lineages, as illustrated by studies on function as well as evolutionary patterns of retention, expansion, and loss. These events and their variations between lineages underpin the long-term success of the Viridiplantae.
TheViridiplantae, informally called the green lineage, is a well-established monophyletic group of eukaryotic organisms comprising green algae and land plants (93,97). It is one of the richest eukaryotic groups with an estimated half a million land plant species (24,136) to which an estimated ∼20,000 algal species can be added (58). The plastids of the Viridiplantae originated in an ancestor of extantArchaeplastida(which also includes the Rhodophyta, i.e., red algae, and Glaucophyta) by the engulfment of a cyanobacterium and was a pivotal event in the history of life—the emergence of photosynthetic eukaryotes (1,118). Members of the green lineage are characterized by the presence of chloroplasts (plastids) with a double-membrane envelope, thylakoids grouped in lamellae and containing chlorophyllsaandb, and intraplastidial starch (92). That said, the Viridiplantae are morphologically extremely diverse, and they have colonized almost all habitats on Earth's surface, both aquatic and terrestrial. Within Viridiplantae, analysis of the current genomic data indicates three early-diverging groups: theStreptophyta; the Chlorophyta (131,170); and the recently recognizedPrasinodermophyta(100), which appears, based on very limited taxonomic sampling, to have diverged before the split of the Chlorophyta and Streptophyta.
Within the Streptophyta, basal clades are freshwater algae, and their evolution occurred alongside adaptation to life on land (26,27). Phylogenetic analyses recoveredMesostigma,Chlorokybus, andSpirotaeniain a clade that is sister to the remainder of streptophyte algae (131,170). Successive divergence then gave rise to the vast diversity of land plants comprising bryophytes, lycophytes, ferns (polypodiophytes), and seed plants (which include both gymnosperms and flowering plants) (Figure 1a).
The Chlorophyta group includes the monophyletic core chlorophytes and the paraphyletic prasinophytes, which each harbor considerable diversity. In phylogenomic analyses, the prasinophyte marine algal classes Mamiellophyceae and Pyramimonadophyceae tend to group as a sister clade to the core clade of chlorophytes made up of Trebouxiophyceae, Ulvophyceae, and Chlorophyceae (Figure 1b), but this result is dependent on the taxonomic sampling (96,100). Phylogenetic reconstructions based on 18S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequences allow for more comprehensive taxonomic sampling because this gene is recovered in polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based studies of both lab-cultured algae and algae in their native habitats. 18S rRNA analyses with expanded taxonomic sampling typically do not conclusively resolveprasinophytesand chlorophytes as two overarching clades within Chlorophyta. Rather, the prasinophytes are often recovered as multiple polyphyletic lineages in basal positions to the core chlorophytes (Figure 1c). Thus, the name prasinophyte refers to early classifications describing single-celled algae covered with scales (114) and is still used to informally designate nine clades (among which two are still uncultured) (159), but it does not refer to a phylogenetically resolved lineage. Phylogenomic analyses with improved sampling based on transcriptomic or genomic data from marine algae, cultured or not, are needed to shed light on the branching of the numerous lineages in the Chlorophyta phylum. Note that in this review, we (disputably, but for simplicity) consider the Chloropicophyceae (represented by the genome ofChloropicon primus) and the Picocystophyceae (represented by the genome ofPicocystissp. ML1) as additional members of the core chlorophytes (Figure 1c), while the Mamiellophyceae (represented by genomes ofBathycoccus prasinos,Ostreococcus tauri,Ostreococcus lucimarinus,Ostreococcussp. RCC809,Micromonas pusilla, andMicromonas commoda) and the Pyramimonadophyceae are considered as prasinophytes. However, multiple clades within this region of the tree have no genome-sequenced members, and node support is not retained along the backbone of the tree (Figure 1c); thus, relationships and groupings should be reconsidered after analyses that achieve improved taxonomic sampling. In fact, it seems likely that the Chloropicophyceae, Picocystophyceae, Pycnococcaceae, and Nephroselmidophyceae will prove to be something other than either chlorophytes or prasinophytes, and that the Chlorophyta as a whole will undergo revisions.
While plants have held a tremendous place in science, literature, culture, and art, even millennia before the conception of Persephone's trials and the sorrow of Demeter, it was significantly after the 1933 discovery of green microalgae and their role as a food source for bivalves (48) that they were recognized as important in the global oceans. Published studies then emerged describing the marine picophytoplankton, specifically a tiny prasinophyte alga now termedMicromonas(15). Thus, Mamiellophyceae were among the earliest marine green algae discovered, and their high abundances were first reported in 1951 (84). Today a plethora of oceanographic studies have pursued the prasinophyte distributions (104,126,160), activities (3,110,176), and diversity, initially with environmental clone libraries (57,173), and later with amplicon sequencing (e.g.,9,60,126,159). Many of these algae are ciliated and thus have the ability to take back some control of their own destiny, at least at the microscale (keeping in mind that viscous forces dominate over inertial forces for small cells in water), responding to local gradients in the chemical and physical environments (2,56). The tiny size of these algae, and the fact that they cannot be distinguished using epifluorescence microscopy, likely led to the early focus on larger algae (such as the secondary plastid-bearing diatoms or dinoflagellates). With improved methodology and spatiotemporal sampling of the oceans, the influence of prasinophytes under multiple environmental scenarios has been increasingly recognized (9,29,133) and has contributed to the delineation of species (4,22,28,150,151). By analyzing available sequence data from survey studies, we can see that just three picoplanktonic Mamiellophyceae genera comprise a significant fraction of data from all eukaryotes captured by filtering seawater, withMicromonasandBathycoccusranging from the tropics to poles andOstreococcusfrom tropical to temperate settings (Figure 2a). Moreover, it was recently discovered thatO. lucimarinusandMicromonasspp. are dominant algae in the annual phytoplankton bloom in the North Atlantic (9), which is important to many fisheries and has classically been attributed to diatoms.

Figure 2Click to view


Until 2021, members of a third Viridiplantae phylum, thePrasinodermophyta, were considered prasinophytes (i.e., the Prasinococcales), despite the fact that they often branched deep within the Chlorophyta based on 18S rRNA gene (35) and plastidial gene analyses (94). Prasinodermophytes are now divided into two orders, the Palmophyllales and Prasinococcales (represented herein by the genome ofPrasinoderma coloniale) (100). Prasinococcales have been noted in coastal ecosystems by molecular methods, but at low read numbers (160), and so far are characterized as typically being small (2.2–5.5μm) coccoid cells lacking scales (63,123). By contrast, the Palmophyllales are thalloid algae seemingly adapted to dimly lit environments (down to 200 m depth), raising fascinating questions about the nature of the green plant ancestor (95). Based on environmental PCR-based surveys, prasinodermophytes are globally distributed but much less abundant than prasinophytes (Figure 2).
As noted above, all of the relationships in the early-branching regions of the Viridiplantae tree are influenced by uneven taxon sampling (81,82), especially prasinophytes, prasinodermophytes, and lineages basal to the corechlorophytes. Each harbors groups that are still uncultured and lack sequenced genomes. From an environmental perspective, improved sampling is important because some of these uncultured groups are reported frequently in the ocean, e.g., the so-called prasinophyte clades VIII (168) and IX (148). Even some that are cultured have yet to have their genomes sequenced, such asPrasinococcusandPyramimonasspecies (Prasinodermophyta and Pyramimonadophyceae, respectively;Figure 1c). Moreover, even within the genusMicromonas, which has multiple cultured isolates from some clades, other clades have long been known that remain uncultured (149,173), and, reportedly, new uncultured clades exist as well (151). Transcriptome sequencing of existing cultures has expanded in the last several years (82,131). Nevertheless, the incompleteness of taxonomic sampling, and possible extinctions over the millennia, still hinder resolution of the Viridiplantae tree and affect studies of molecular attributes underpinning physiological and niche differences.
The plant–algal progenitor can be at least partially reconstructed by drawing upon existing genome- and transcriptome-level data collections (e.g.,52,53). These can be used to identify conserved proteins that may have been lost (more difficult with transcriptomes) in some lineages but retained in others. With sufficient depth or careful taxonomic sampling of specific lineages, the appearance of gain can be differentiated from loss. Such discoveries do not ensure that functions have remained the same since divergence; indeed, we know that in many cases functions have also diverged.
Collectively, processes such as gain, loss, co-option, and expansion underlie diversification in theViridiplantae. If one zooms out from the images shown inFigure 1a, the overall structure of multicellular green organisms—ranging from chlorophyte algae such asUlvato more familiar taxa such as ferns,Nymphaea(water lilies), andMammillaria(cacti)—is tremendously varied. From an intracellular perspective, some similarities persist. For example, in all Viridiplantae, plastids are derived as described above, but the numbers present in each cell vary between lineages and can be influenced by multiple factors (47). Just among the cells from the four selected taxa shown inFigure 3, we see variations in plastid numbers. Reported numbers also vary within individual leaf mesophyll cells, such as in theArabidopsis thalianaColumbia ecotype, where published numbers range from 30 to 100 (47). Differences are also seen in the number of cilia.Chlamydomonashas two cilia, while some prasinophytes have none (Ostreococcus), one (Micromonas), or two or more (other genera), and prasinodermophytes appear to have none.Arabidopsisalso has no cilium, but zoospores from streptophyte algae such asMesostigma virideandChlorokybus atmophyticuseach have two cilia, and some multicellular plants have ciliated sperm cells, such as the bryophyteMarchantia polymorpha(71) and fernPteris vittata(87).

Figure 3Click to view


One way to identify proteins that are potentially important to differentiation processes, regardless of whether or not their function is known, is to compare orthologous protein groups. This is often done when comparing closely related species and is most accurate when excellent gene models are available, such that the sequence of the protein encoded is complete. Problems arise if small domains are present at the N or C terminus that have significant consequences for function but are too small to disrupt overlap criteria andorthogroupformation. For the prasinophytes, specifically the Mamiellophyceae, several studies have classified orthogroups (127,134,175). In the twoMicromonasspecies with complete genome sequences (175),Micromonas pusillaandMicromonas commoda, 8,000 of approximately 10,000 genes in each genome appear to be contained in shared orthogroups (162). These two algae have unexpectedly different gene and genome structures (149,162,175). Additionally,Micromonas pusillahas no classically recognizable transposable elements (TEs), whileMicromonas commoda, other Mamiellophyceae, and (to our knowledge) all other sequenced plants do have TEs. While differences in gene content identified between the two species provide a springboard for deeper investigation of differentiation and evolutionary processes that extend to plant biology (117,162), the fact that someMicromonasclades lack cultured representatives signifies that there is much more to learn about diversification and growth requirements of other members of this diverse genus.
From a phylogenomic perspective, orthologous groups have been inferred in many studies with the hope to identify features that contribute more broadly to diversification or core attributes. Orthogroups have been made available from photosynthetic eukaryotes using predicted proteomes considered to be good quality, with attention to conserved proteins involved in photosynthesis and its regulation (54,162,163). Other studies highlight findings more relevant to understanding diversification processes in the Viridiplantae. Orthogroup analysis of the fernCeratopteris richardiialongside predicted proteomes from 38 other Viridiplantae led to identification of a GRAS domain protein (an important superfamily of regulatory proteins) that is specific toCeratopteris richardii(50). Analyses using transitional Viridiplantae lineages that possess both ancestral and derived plant traits, such as liverworts, mosses, and ferns, provide a step toward understanding broader plant diversification (11,89,98). Moreover, orthology inferences have been used to examine evolutionary processes in crops, such as a heat shock transcription factor gene family shown to be expanded in 13 cotton species by comparing cotton andA. thaliana(102).
To improve our understanding of Viridiplantae evolution and developmental processes as a whole, past studies on plant and algal orthologous protein families can be expanded upon by comparing shared presence/absence patterns between the different major groups of green algae and streptophytes. From a total of 28,494 orthogroups comprised of proteins from streptophytes, chlorophytes, prasinophytes, and prasinodermophytes identified for this review, 13% were found that had at least one protein from an organism in each of the four major groupings. Given the low genome availability for prasinodermophytes, we also analyzed these numbers with prasinodermophytes included with prasinophytes, leading to an increase from 13% to 19% being shared across the major groupings. Streptophytes alone (includingChlorokybus atmophyticus) formed 36% of orthogroups, while algae alone (excludingChlorokybus) formed 38%. Although theChlorokybus atmophyticusgenome size (74 MB) and protein number (9,300;Figure 4a) are the smallest among streptophytes, its genome size is larger than those of the picoprasinophytes (Figure 1b), and the protein number is similar. Across orthogroups, it had fewer proteins (1.3 on average) in each than occurred in other streptophytes (3.9 on average) and chlorophytes (1.5) but more than in prasinophytes (1.2 on average).

Figure 4Click to view


Protein distribution comparisons revealed thatorthogroupsrepresenting expanded families where multiple orthologs were present from an individual organism increased disproportionately in multicellular streptophytes (Figure 4a). This did not occur for the multicellular algaeUlva mutabilisand colony-formingVolvox carteri, both of which had low numbers of proteins in expanded families, even when compared to other chlorophytes. Additionally, no orthogroups were detected that were shared only between multicellular chlorophytes and multicellular streptophytes, illustrating the multiple possible evolutionary routes to multicellularity (120,161). Finally, some orthogroups appear to be purely algal—even some of those that are shared across the four primary organismal groupings compared herein. For example, the streptophyte algaChlorokybusshares distinct orthogroups with chlorophytes, and others with prasinophytes, that are not present in sequenced multicellular streptophytes (Figure 4b,c). Presumably, these findings will provide insights into distinct factors required for life as an alga, present in the green algal progenitor but subsequently lost from land plants and, in some cases, differentially lost from chlorophytes or prasinophytes.
Other orthogroups shared across the organismal groupings highlight factors that have been differentially lost from one or more major groups but were presumably present in the Viridiplantae progenitor. With respect to prasinodermophytes, just 51 orthogroups were identified that were exclusively shared with streptophytes, most of which lack clear functional classifications. Chlorophytes and streptophytes share 1,331 orthogroups, based only on the genomes analyzed herein (Figure 4b). Those shared exclusively between prasinodermophytes, prasinophytes, and streptophytes number 343 and include the photosensor phytochrome, a master regulator in extant land plants (Figure 4c).
Plants and algae—and even other nonphotosynthetic eukaryotes—use photosensory proteins as switches that convert light information into biological signals.Phytochromesare among these and comprise a photosensory module (PCM) at the N-terminal region of the protein and a histidine kinase output module (OPM) at the C terminus (Figure 5). Phytochrome activities impact many light-dependent aspects of streptophyte development, including germination, seedling photomorphogenesis, flowering time, and shade avoidance (13,19,32,35). In most streptophytes, phytochrome has undergone considerable gene family expansion but, again, with a generally conserved architecture where the number of OPMs can occasionally vary (19). The PCM contains PAS, GAF, andPHYdomains, and this is where covalent interaction with a heme-derived bilin chromophore occurs (Figure 5). Light perception by phytochromes relies on this chromophore and in streptophytes function via red/far-red wavelengths: In the dark-adapted state, phytochromes absorb red light and, in the light, a photoisomerization reaction leads to far-red absorption. In this manner, plants are able to detect the light environment, and downstream cascades lead to the regulation of different processes and, ultimately, essential responses such as shade avoidance.

Figure 5Click to view


The first green algae to be sequenced, the chlorophyteChlamydomonasand the prasinophyteOstreococcus(30,120), lacked phytochromes altogether (35). Thus, phytochromes might have been thought to be a later-stage invention or the result of the co-option of a horizontally transferred cyanobacterial phytochrome-like protein at the time streptophytes diverged. They have tremendously important, well-studied roles in plants. However, earlier presence of phytochromes in theViridiplantaewas discovered upon analysis of the genome-sequenced prasinophyteMicromonas pusillaalongside transcriptome sequencing of otherprasinophytesandglaucophytes(35). Our analysis of thePrasinoderma colonialegenome data (100) confirmed the structure of the prasinodermophyte phytochrome (Figure 5) deduced from earlier transcriptomic data (35). These results collectively indicate that phytochrome was already present in the green algal progenitor of land plants. The domain structure observed in major model land plants, such asArabidopsisandPhyscomitrella(moss), has since been found to be conserved in liverworts, hornworts and charophyte algae (99). Like plant phytochromes, non-streptophyte Archaeplastida algal phytochromes contain core light input and signaling output architecture (Figure 5). However, given architectural similarities between glaucophyte, prasinophyte, and prasinodermophyte phytochromes, the structure inArchaeplastidaas a whole prior to the divergence of these lineages appears to have included one or more C-terminal response regulator receiver (REC) domains, subsequently lost from canonical streptophyte OPMs (35,143).
Phytochromes actually span diverse eukaryotic lineages, extending beyond the Viridiplantae into othereukaryotic supergroups, including algal members of theHeterokontaandCryptophyta, as well as fungi (35,41,99). With respect to loss, patterns within the Viridiplantae are striking. Most prasinophytes have phytochromes, which we know from analysis of transcriptome data (35), but some diminutive genera whose genomes have been sequenced, especiallyOstreococcusandBathycoccus, and even oneMicromonasspecies,Micromonas commoda, have lost them (Figure 5). Moreover, all corechlorophyteshave lost phytochromes (35), a pattern upheld in analyses of genomes that have lately become available.
The function and roles of the different phytochrome proteins in plant development have been studied since their discovery (18,19,80,143). Bilin photoisomerization, as described above, initiates downstream signaling events associated with translocation into the nucleus and interactions with transcription factors, specifically PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTORS (PIFs) (91). PIFs belong to the helix–loop–helix family of transcription factors and bind to the light-activated protein after translocation to the nucleus, where they are known to regulate many target promoters to repress light responses in the dark in plants. The inhibition or degradation of PIFs by phytochromes alters the expression of many genes to induce a range of responses to light (75). Homologs of PIFs are now known in mosses, ferns, bryophytes, and streptophyte algae, where their functions and phytochrome interactions are just beginning to be elucidated (137,177). With respect to phytochrome proteins themselves in plants, they are abundant, which has complicated functional studies. For example, inArabidopsis, five different phytochrome genes have been identified (19,143), and the functions of Phytochrome A (PHYA) and PHYC are the best understood. These functional studies extend to many other agriculturally important plants; for example, recent proteomic analysis of the PHYA homolog in tomato indicates that it has a key role in establishing the mature seed proteome (157). Roles of PHYB in mitigating thermal and light stress have now been demonstrated for a variety of streptophytes (19), alongside variations in response levels dependent on the latitude to which a particular plant was adapted (70).
Relatively little is known about the role of phytochrome in unicellular algae. Some roles observed in plants are not relevant for algae due to inherent differences between organismal morphologies as well as environments inhabited. For example, light transmission differs in water and air, in that far-red light penetrates well through air but is rapidly attenuated in the first few meters of seawater. Thus, wavelength detection in prasinophytes is generally blue-shifted relative to the red/far-red sensing in streptophytes, such that inMicromonas pusillait has an orange/far-red photocycle (35). Other prasinophytes and the prasinodermophytePrasinoderma colonialealso have blue-shifted photocycles, with the latter responding to yellow/far-red light (113,142). Interestingly, though, a recent study of a phytochrome protein in diatoms, a widespread algal group within the Heterokonta, shows that they have a red/far-red responsive phytochrome, which is more similar to those of streptophytes. The authors postulated that chlorophyll fluorescence andRaman scatteringdeeper into the water column could generate red/far-red photons below the surface (46). Importantly, inArabidopsis, different biophysical properties of PHYA and PHYB have been demonstrated (13) that presumably extend further to other members of this family and, by extension, likely exist in algal versions. A major challenge ahead is to characterize not only their global function in unicellular marine green algae, and the transcription factors with which they interact, but also modulation of their activation and downstream signaling under the massive range of light and temperature conditions experienced in the marine environment.
While the wavelengths perceived by algal phytochromes have been characterized (35,142), the role(s) of phytochrome in algae are still mysterious. In prasinophytes, phytochrome proteins have been shown to localize to the nucleus, but the transcription factors with which they presumably interact have not been identified. Secondly, over a sampling of diel time points, researchers have shown that the gene exhibits the highest relative expression in the morning just before light appears, but protein localization to the nucleus occurs as the cell begins to replicate, later in the light period (35). Recombinant expression of phytochrome from another prasinophyte enabled production of proteins with light-regulated autophosphorylation activity, which was induced by the C-terminal histidine kinase modules (Figure 5), demonstrating that this alga has light-activated histidine kinases, similar to land plants (179). Notably, many studies examining plant phytochromes highlight their roles in triggering cascading responses to light and thermal stress and the interaction of these stressors (19,32,38,70,91,138) and even a role for PHYB in promoting iron uptake (59). In the ocean, light and temperature can fluctuate rapidly, particularly in mixing scenarios, fronts, and other aspects of fluid environments, and iron is known to be a limiting growth factor in open ocean waters. Together with hypotheses that can be developed from plant phytochrome functions, advances in prasinophyte model systems for genetic manipulation (40) provide a springboard for establishing key phytochrome roles in marine taxa, possibly reflecting back to ancestral functions.
The transcriptional and protein dynamics of phytochrome observed forMicromonas pusillain laboratory experiments (35) provide first steps toward targeting downstream interactions and cellular responses. However, the role of phytochromes in regulation and ecology most likely will not be fully understood until they are studied in natural marine habitats. This is likely the case not just for phytochrome but also for other algal photoreceptors, and the firstmetatranscriptomicfield studies are only now becoming available. A caveat is that metatranscriptomic responses can be difficult to interpret without genomes from organisms present at the respective time and site, with the slow rate of sample collection and processing (such that expression might change), and with limits to the depth of sequencing (given that transcripts from many different organisms are present in each sample). Pronounced diel differential expression alongside extensive phylogenetic diversity has been documented for another class of photoreceptors, light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domain–containing proteins (62), in a time-resolved study using robotic sampling in the eastern North Pacific Ocean (85). A follow-up study has confirmed similar patterns in a broader expanse of the Pacific Ocean (23). Nevertheless, the ultimate role of these proteins, as well as that of PHY, remains unclear in marine algae from both the green lineage and other eukaryotic supergroups.
The most prominent feature retained from the cyanobacterial endosymbiont is, of course, the machinery for photosynthesis. Some of the genes involved are encoded by the chloroplast genome, and others have been relocated to the nucleus in a process termed endosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT) (1). Proteins encoded by such transferred genes must transit across the chloroplast envelope after translation in order to be integrated into their respective photosystems. The envelope presumably derives from the primary endosymbiont's cell wall, which (in cyanobacteria) has apeptidoglycanlayer between the inner and outer membrane. However, the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway central to the cell wall of both cyanobacteria and other bacteria was long thought to have been lost during the evolution of plastids in many plant lineages.
Peptidoglycan biosynthesis by bacteria is well characterized, in part due to it being the specific target of many medical therapies (antibiotics) against bacterial pathogens of animals, such as the long-known penicillin (6). A core of 11 enzymes is involved in peptidoglycan biosynthesis in bacteria, including cyanobacteria. Seven core enzymes (MurA–MurF and MraY) are responsible for converting UDP-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) to acetylmuramyl-pentapeptide-pyrophosphoryl-undecaprenol or lipid I (37) (Figure 6a). Lipid II (GlcNAc-N-acetylmuramyl-pentapeptide-pyrophosphoryl-undecaprenol) is then formed by the elongation of lipid I's carbohydrate unit with one GlcNAc by MurG, which is a glycosyltransferase belonging to CAZy family GT28. The integral membrane protein MurJ has been identified as the lipid flippase inEscherichia coliand appears to be essential for peptidoglycan synthesis (139,144). The nascent peptidoglycan chain is polymerized by amurein polymerase/transpeptidasecomprising a CAZy family GT51 sugar polymerase domain and a penicillin-binding protein (PBP) domain, which cross-links the polysaccharide chains using peptides into the three-dimensional structure of the cell wall central layer (145) that appears as an electron-dense structure that is ∼10-nm thick in cyanobacteria (103).

Figure 6Click to view


Among eukaryotes, glaucophyte algae, which belong to theArchaeplastidasupergroup that also containsViridiplantae, have long been known to maintain a visible peptidoglycan layer in their chloroplast wall (83). Evidence for peptidoglycan retention was lacking for the Viridiplantae for many years, and in early analyses of theChlamydomonas reinhardtii(120) andO. tauri(30), genes for this pathway were not reported, possibly because it had not been observed inArabidopsisand was assumed to no longer be relevant or present. Thus, until more recent studies, the mechanisms for plastid division or wall formation in the Viridiplantae previously appeared to have been dramatically changed from those ofglaucophytesand cyanobacteria (83).
The view that peptidoglycan was absent from plants changed dramatically when the pathway was detected in the genomes of the bryophytePhyscomitrella patens(68,111), the lycophyteSelaginella moellendorffii(155), and prasinophyte algaMicromonas pusilla(162). Comparative genomics revealed that these organisms have the canonical or nearly complete peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway that is observed in cyanobacteria (Figure 6b). Treatment with antibiotics that act on various components of this pathway modified plastid characteristics in bothMicromonasand the mossPhyscomitrella(66,162). However, until the elegant studies of Hirano et al. (66), who manipulatedPhyscomitrella, peptidoglycan had not been visualized in any plant. So far, it is still visually unobserved inprasinophytesand the prasinodermophytes wherein the complete pathway was also recently reported (100).
In many other Viridiplantae, the peptidoglycan pathway is very much reduced (Figure 6b), including all sequenced members of thechlorophytes, except the multicellularU. mutabilis. It is also highly reduced in most flowering plants (155). Unfortunately, our understanding of loss patterns of peptidoglycan in plant lineages is muddy due to publications involving inaccurate gene searches or literature reviews, such that its absence in algae was overstated and/or incorrect.
The current status of knowledge on peptidoglycan biosynthesis in green organisms indicates that members of several prasinophyte groups, as well as the prasinodermophytePrasinoderma coloniale, alongside twoMicromonasspecies represent a more ancestral viridiplant state than do the most reduced Mamiellophyceae (i.e.,OstreococcusandBathycoccus) and chlorophyte algae such asChlamydomonas reinhardtii(120,162) (Figure 6b). With respect to streptophytes, retention levels are varied. Like some prasinophytes and the sequenced prasinodermophyte, the streptophyte algaChlorokybus atmophyticus, bryophytes, and lycophytes all have the complete pathway—but with a twist (highlighted below). Perhaps more exciting, the canonical pathway was also recently reported in another streptophyte seed lineage, the gymnosperms (105), specificallyPicea abiesandPinus taeda. Moreover, some members of the ANA grade, asterids, and core rosids have retained nearly all proteins in this pathway, typically lacking just one enzyme, MurF or MurJ, and also lacking the PBP transpeptidase domain in the murein polymerase/transpeptidase. For others, retention involves just four proteins that appear to have been conserved throughout streptophyte evolution and possibly operate in non-peptidoglycan-forming pathways.A. thalianais a typical example of these taxa, with retention of MurE, MraY, MurG, and Ddl enzymes (111). Strikingly, selective losses of other components have occurred in multiple independent events within the flowering plants (Figure 6b).
Given the conserved nature of these losses, with the same enzymes being lost in independent events, it is important that we reconceptualize the concepts of loss and reduction and consider possible redirections and modifications of function. One of the most exciting developments in understanding how functions may have changed follows from results of knockout studies. Knockout ofMUREinPhyscomitrellawas shown to disrupt plastid division, resulting in a macrochloroplast. However, inArabidopsisit inhibited chloroplast development, resulting in a white seedling phenotype; moreover, expression ofAtMUREinPhyscomitrellacould not rescue the macrochloroplast phenotype, suggesting functional divergence of moss andArabidopsisMurE (49). Cross-species complementation assays used theMUREgene from a gymnosperm with an otherwise uncharacterized peptidoglycan pathway,Larix gmelinii(larch), which occupies an intermediate but still early streptophyte divergence position (Figure 1a), and resulted in complete rescue ofArabidopsis MUREmutants but, again, did not rescue the moss macrochloroplast phenotype. These results were taken to suggest that in seed plants MurE has the same function but functions differently in earlier branching streptophytes (105). Further research would help us understand and identify the functional differences in the retention of the full and almost full peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway, as well as those with lineages that have only the four conserved genes. Remarkably, this variation level exists even between two members of the same prasinophyte genus,Micromonas pusillaandMicromonas commoda(Figure 6b).
For flowering plants retaining the full peptidoglycan pathway, one of the final steps, the transpeptidase function encoded in PBP, has seemingly been lost; only the glycosyltransferase domain is detected (Figure 6b). This raises the possibility that a new PBP-like enzyme class exists that lacks transpeptidation activity, meaning that the cross-linkage of glycan chains either does not take place or is realized by another protein. Interestingly, in bacteria, one of the final steps is binding ofpeptidoglycanby a LysM domain. In plants, LysM domain–containing proteins are generally thought to be involved in sensing bacterial peptidoglycan (171) and chitin (7) by recognizingN-acetylglucosamine moieties (12,147). In streptophytes with a complete or nearly complete peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway (Figure 6b), a protein has been found that contains a C-terminal LysM domain (Pfam 01476) and is absent from streptophytes with a reduced peptidoglycan pathway (as well as from chlorophytes and prasinophytes, regardless of the reduction or completeness of the pathway) (162). This peptidoglycan pathway–associated streptophyte protein (PPASP) is predicted to form an α-helical transmembrane region with the LysM domain on the outside and typically has a conserved hydrophobic N-terminal 21-amino-acid domain. Our analysis of newer genome data shows thatChlorokybus atmophyticus, bryophytes, and lycophytes have both themurein polymerase/transpeptidaseand PPASP. Presence/absence patterns of the murein polymerase/transpeptidase and PPASP across the broader Viridiplantae suggest that PPASP evolved or was acquired around the time that streptophytes diverged from the ancestor shared with prasinodermophyte, chlorophyte, and prasinophyte algae (Figure 6). PPASP would then have been differentially lost in multiple streptophyte lineages, along with other peptidoglycan pathway components. Functional characterization of PPASP will be important for testing the hypothesis (162) that it has a role in peptidoglycan formation or binding. The surprise here is that despite the tremendous wealth of information on functions within the chloroplast (such as the function of photosystem components), there are still questions regarding the functional implications and potential co-option that has occurred for Viridiplantae members with highly reduced peptidoglycan pathways as well as those with nearly but not quite complete pathways. This lack of understanding extends across extant plants, prasinophytes, chlorophytes, and prasinodermophytes, despite the fundamental role that peptidoglycan has in bacterial, and presumably plastidial, division and cell wall structure.
Plant-derived carbohydrates serve as one of the main sources of energy for manyheterotrophiclife forms and are exceptionally diverse. Unlike the peptide bonds that linearly link the 20 amino acids, carbohydrates have more monomer diversity (over 70 monosaccharides are known) and can be linked together via many of their constitutive hydroxyl groups. They can also be attached to different noncarbohydrate molecules, generating a large diversity of structures that can be synthesized and broken down selectively (88,90). Each single glycosidic bond—synthesized or degraded—requires its own specialized enzyme. Thus, the diversity ofCAZymesin the Viridiplantae parallels that of their carbohydrate substrates and includes enzymes such as those required for the synthesis of polysaccharides like cellulose (in some) and starch.
Sequence-based classification of CAZymes was initiated in 1991, starting with the class of glycoside hydrolases (GHs) (64) and recognized families that correlated with the structure of the enzymes; the classification had predictive power because the catalytic mechanism and orientation of the glycosidic bond undergoing catalysis could be extrapolated reliably. After the initial work on GHs, the family classification was extended to GTs (16), polysaccharide lyases (106), and carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs) (10). Grouping enzymes into families based on the substrates they act upon has helped reveal the evolution of CAZyme specificities and honed attention to functional diversification.
The genome ofA. thalianais the first to have been formally searched for encoded CAZymes (65). The general conclusions of this study remain correct today—specifically, that for several reasons (25), land plants generally encode more CAZymes than other eukaryotes, an idea upheld through inspection of prasinodermophytes, prasinophytes, and chlorophytes (Figure 7). That said, since then a number of novel activities and families have been found. The CAZy database has a section of sequences in the nonclassified section that are only distantly related to bona fide GH or GT families. Despite considerable progress in the 20 years since completion of theA. thalianagenome, examination of the CAZy nonclassified section suggests that there are still manyA. thalianaCAZymes to discover, particularly GTs. This is true not just forArabidopsisbut also for the genomes of other well-studied plants (e.g.,BrassicaandVigna), prasinophytes (e.g.,Bathycoccus,Micromonas, andOstreococcus), and prasinodermophytes (i.e.,Prasinoderma coloniale). The CAZy database has been updated, analyzed, and made available with 10 new organisms spanning green algae to basal streptophytes in the process of performing this review (Figure 7). As of June 2021, the CAZy database (http://www.cazy.org) has provided open access to the CAZyme profile of 18 analyzed Viridiplantae genomes, released as finished entries by GenBank, and to updated analysis ofMicromonas pusilla, using a finished genome assembly and model set (162).

Figure 7Click to view


The importance of GTs in plant metabolism is reflected by the presence of starch in the Viridiplantae plastids (14) (e.g.,Figure 3d) and the ubiquitous presence of starch-related CAZymes (GH13, GH14, GH31, GT5, GT35, CBM48; seeFigure 7). Studies ofChlamydomonas reinhardtiihave helped identify aspects of starch synthesis (e.g.,158), and analysis of the pathway inprasinophytesrevealed similar complexity to that of vascular plants, establishing its presence in the green algal progenitor (31,140). Linked to starch metabolism are the metabolites sucrose and trehalose, which act as signaling molecules, osmoprotectants, or carbon shuttle molecules (43). Their importance is reflected by the omnipresence of the required synthase enzymes (GT4 and GT20, respectively) across the Viridiplantae (Figure 7). ForO. tauri, trehalose has been proposed to serve as an energy and carbon buffer molecule linked to starch degradation, or potentially to signaling during the dark period, based on a metabolomics study of growth under adiel light cycle(67). In contrast, starch content inA. thalianahas been shown to be independent of circadian cycles, although the transcription of genes encoding the enzymes involved in synthesis and degradation depends on the presence or absence of light (152), suggesting dissimilar mechanisms of starch metabolism regulation in algae and vascular plants.
Perhaps more surprising is that the GT2 family, comprising cellulose and chitin synthases, is also found across the Viridiplantae, based on the taxonomic sampling herein (Figure 7). Of course, cellulose is an important component of land plant cell walls, giving stability and enabling vertical growth (146,153), but its presence in unicellular algae is more variable. Cellulose is a cell wall component in many core chlorophyte and streptophyte algae, but not inChlamydomonas. Most recently, cellulose was proposed to fulfill similar functions in streptophyte algae as in vascular plants, based on a transcriptomic study of the streptophyte algaZygnema circumcarinatumunder osmotic stress (45). However, cellulose has not been observed in prasinophyte cell walls (33); cell wall composition of prasinodermophytes is not yet known. Moreover,MicromonasandOstreococcusare so-called naked prasinophytes, lacking even the scales that are found on other prasinophytes. Thus, the presence of GT2 genes in their genomes (72,121,122) suggests either a more ancestral role or a different functional role than in extant chlorophytes and streptophytes.
Thus, among the already-classified CAZymes there is still much to learn about how they manifest in the cell, and there are still many CAZyme functions yet to be discovered. Other examples include enrichment of sialic acid–related CAZymes in the prasinophytesBathycoccus prasinosandChloropicon primus, specifically GH33 (sialidases/neuraminidases) and GT29 (sialyltransferases; seeFigure 7), compared to other Viridiplantae (96,127,162). ForBathycoccus prasinos, it was speculated that these enzymes are putative participants in scale biosynthesis (127), based on the chemical structure scales in the chlorophyteScherffelia dubiabeing similar to sialic acids (119). However, scales have not been observed in the three-layer cell wall ofChloropicon primus(108), and its GH33 and GT29 genes appear to be silent or expressed at very low levels under the growth conditions tested (96). Thus, it remains unclear whether scales are produced at some as-yet-unknown life stage inChloropicon primus, as is seen forChlorokybus atmophyticuszoospores during asexual reproduction (169), or used for another function, or if the proposed role in scale formation might be erroneous. Deciphering the functions of orthologous GH33 and GT29 genes in streptophytes should help simplify studies of the plethora of such genes inBathycoccus prasinosandChloropicon primus.
TheBathycoccus prasinosgenome also has an expansion of GT10 genes (galactoside/glycoprotein α-l-fucosyltransferases) compared to all other Viridiplantae, which is remarkable given that the land plants have much bigger genomes (Figure 1b) but contain fewer GT10 genes thanBathycoccus(Figure 7). Such genes appear to be present inStreptophytaand prasinophytes (exceptMicromonas pusilla), but they are almost completely lacking in prasinodermophytes and chlorophytes, with just one detected in genomes of chlorophytesChlorella variabilisandChlamydomonas reinhardtii. These results suggest that an as-yet-unknown fucosylated structure exists inBathycoccus(162), or potentially complex undiscovered protein glycosylations, as reported for someArabidopsisGT10 genes (5,172).
GT49 and GT47 exemplify the differential distributions of various CAZy families in the Viridiplantae. The complexN-glycan structures inChlamydomonas(116,164) likely explain the almost exclusive presence of GT49 genes (β-N-acetyl glucosaminyltransferases) inChlamydomonasandVolvox(Figure 7), and their virtual absence from prasinodermophytes, prasinophytes, and streptophytes. By contrast, GT47 profiles exhibit similar numbers inChlamydomonas,Volvoxand streptophytes, whereas fewer or none are found in other chlorophytes, prasinophytes, and prasinodermophytes (Figure 7). InArabidopsis, 4 of 39 predicted GT47 enzymes have been characterized and are either linked to pectin (61,74) or xyloglucan (73,112) biosynthesis, the latter being thought to have evolved after the divergence of chlorophyte and streptophyte algae (72,121,122). GT47 function inChlamydomonasandVolvoxtherefore remains elusive but could be connected to glycosylation of the hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins (HRGPs), constituents ofChlamydomonasand plant cell walls (124). At least oneArabidopsisGT47 was shown to be active on extensins, a family of streptophyte cell wall HRGPs (125). Additionally, GT77 and GT95 genes are connected to HRGP/extensin glycosylation in land plants (130,165,166), and the GT77 are abundant in the genome (175). Given these differential patterns, it should be possible to identify appropriate algal workhorses for heterologous expression of proteins and enzymes (which exist in multiple copies in plants) for functional studies that have proved challenging in other model systems (44).
The CAZyme profiles treated in a phylogenetic context reveal 24 families that are largely exclusive to land plants, 9 others that appear to be absent from prasinophytes sequenced to date, and 21 that are present across all Viridiplantae but enriched in land plants. Expansins, although technically not CAZymes, are included in the latter group. These proteins are important in cell wall turnover, where they contribute to its loosening (115). Nevertheless, expansins are found even in naked prasinophytes, albeit few, pointing again to the importance of addressing both evolutionary patterns and functional diversification. Most of the other families are linked to hemicellulose (xylan, xyloglucan, pectin) synthesis and modification, which is no surprise since these are almost exclusively a feature of land plant cell walls and some streptophyte algae (33).
TheViridiplantaeare truly remarkable for persisting as importantprimary producersin the ocean since the advent of photosynthetic eukaryotes and for bringing photosynthesis to freshwater and land. Collectively, Viridiplantae today are responsible for much more than half of global CO2uptake from the atmosphere, taking the contributions of aquatic and terrestrial greens together. These organisms have survived major environmental perturbations, including warming and cooling events, likely using molecular mechanisms that are conserved across the lineage even today. It is clear that a major push is required to delineate factors that allow unicellular algae to thrive in the oceans, as well as those key toniche partitioning. These studies are now possible given the emerging model systems for several prasinophyte algae—including widespread species that have small genomes with low gene redundancy (40). Over the past decades, model streptophyte plants such asPhyscomitrella patensandArabidopsis thaliana, both of which are quite derived among the Viridiplantae as a whole, have shed light on many biological processes. By extending the scope of comparisons to include early-diverging Viridiplantae, such asprasinophytes, alongside prasinodermophytes andchlorophytes, functional roles of proteins that may be retained in other plant lineages can be identified and contribute to our understanding of processes that are essential to the long-term evolution and survival of plants on land and in the sea.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding or financial holdings that could affect the objectivity of this review.
We thank Danielle M. Jorgens and Reena Zalpuri at the Berkeley Electron Microscope Lab and Lisa Sudek for working with us on high-pressure freezing transmission electron microscopy (TEM) ofMicromonas. We are grateful to Ursula Goodenough and Manny Ares for comments on the manuscript (as well as to an anonymous reviewer). Thanks to Scott Joly for the photograph ofE. californica, Pierre de Portzamparc for facilitating access to plants photographed forFigure 1, and to Helena Gausling-Worden for providing otherFigure 1photographs. F.W. was supported by BIOSCOPE and M.H. was supported by National Science Foundation (NSF) DEB-1639033, both to A.Z.W., and this work was additionally supported by outcomes of DOE-DE-SC0004765, by Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation Marine Investigator Award grant 3788, and by the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Research at Harvard University.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


