We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
In contrast to most autotrophic plants, which produce carbohydrates from carbon dioxide using photosynthesis, parasitic plants obtain water and nutrients by parasitizing host plants. Many important crop plants are infested by these heterotrophic plants, leading to severe agricultural loss and reduced food security. Understanding how host plants perceive and resist parasitic plants provides insight into underlying defense mechanisms and the potential for agricultural applications. In this review, we offer a comprehensive overview of the current understanding of host perception of parasitic plants and the pre-attachment and post-attachment defense responses mounted by the host. Since most current research overlooks the role of organ specificity in resistance responses, we also summarize the current understanding and cases of cross-organ parasitism, which indicates nonconventional haustorial connections on other host organs, for example, when stem parasitic plants form haustoria on their host roots. Understanding how different tissue types respond to parasitic plants could provide the potential for developing a universal resistance mechanism in crops against both root and stem parasitic plants.
Article metrics loading...
In contrast to most autotrophic plants, which produce carbohydrates from carbon dioxide using photosynthesis, parasitic plants obtain water and nutrients by parasitizing host plants. Many important crop plants are infested by these heterotrophic plants, leading to severe agricultural loss and reduced food security. Understanding how host plants perceive and resist parasitic plants provides insight into underlying defense mechanisms and the potential for agricultural applications. In this review, we offer a comprehensive overview of the current understanding of host perception of parasitic plants and the pre-attachment and post-attachment defense responses mounted by the host. Since most current research overlooks the role of organ specificity in resistance responses, we also summarize the current understanding and cases of cross-organ parasitism, which indicates nonconventional haustorial connections on other host organs, for example, when stem parasitic plants form haustoria on their host roots. Understanding how different tissue types respond to parasitic plants could provide the potential for developing a universal resistance mechanism in crops against both root and stem parasitic plants.
Most land plants are autotrophic: They conduct photosynthesis to convert inorganic carbon into carbohydrates, using captured light as energy. However, some plants have evolved a heterotrophic (hetero meaning other, trophic meaning feeding) lifestyle and are known asparasitic plants. Using a specialized organ known as ahaustoriumto attach to, invade, and form vascular connections with their hosts, these plants parasitize other plants to obtain water and nutrients (114). The evolution, development and function of the haustorium in both stem and root parasitic plants have been extensively reviewed (114).
Parasitic weeds have a major negative impact on agricultural crops, and invasive parasitic plant species negatively affect forests and the dynamics of ecological systems (2,8,29,68,83). It has been estimated that about 4,500 angiosperms belonging to 28 families have adopted heterotrophy, to different extents, and can attach to and invade other plants to extract nutrients and water for their own use. Based on the invaded host tissue, parasitic weeds can be classified as stem or root parasites and, based on host-dependence, can be described as obligate hemiparasitic, facultative hemiparasitic, or holoparasitic (2). Holoparasitic plants rely completely on their hosts for nutrients and water because they are nonphotosynthetic and lack chlorophyll (77). Therefore, to complete their life cycle, all holoparasites require a host. On the other hand, hemiparasitic plants can rely partially on their hosts to obtain water and mineral nutrients as they are photosynthetic and contain chlorophyll in their mature stage (77). Among hemiparasites, some still require host signals for their maturation and/or to complete their life cycle and are known as obligate hemiparasites (77). However, some hemiparasites, even though they have the ability to parasitize other hosts, can also complete their life cycle independently without relying on their host. These hemiparasites are known as facultative hemiparasites (77). Many parasitic plants are listed as noxious weeds and parasitize major crop plants, severely reducing yield and affecting food security. However, because of the tight physiological connection between host and parasites, most traditional herbicides and control methods, such as hand weeding, are ineffective, too expensive, or too labor-intensive to regulate parasitic plant infestations. Most parasitic plants produce numerous small seeds that remain viable while dormant for many years and germinate only upon receiving host signals. This makes it difficult to detect whether the soil is contaminated by parasitic plant seeds before parasitism is established.
Reducing the impact and spread of parasitic weeds requires knowledge of the molecular machinery that underlies interactions between the parasite and the host. This knowledge will enable us to deploy modern directed strategies of classical or advanced molecular breeding to make crops resistant to these weeds. However, this approach is currently limited by our incomplete understanding of the genetic and biochemical mechanisms underlying the interactions between host plants and parasitic weeds, which in many cases derived from multiple plant clades. Most research focuses on root parasites in the order Lamiales, including the hemiparasiticStriga, and factors needed for their germination, host recognition, andhaustoriuminduction (18,65,99,113). Previous studies have focused on investigating host responses in major crops and defense mechanisms in specific cultivars, mutants, or species that display full or partial resistance against parasitic plants, often revealing the underlying multifaceted resistance mechanisms or pathways that will aid in developing parasitic plant–resistant crops. The availability of next-generation sequencing has made the whole-genome sequences and transcriptomes of several parasitic plants available for further genetic research, which has also facilitated research on these host–parasite interactions, and several genes involved in resistance responses have been identified. Several excellent review articles were recently published and have focused on different specific aspects of parasitic plant and host interactions (3,21,30,43,70,96). However, although different plant organs have various transcriptional, biochemical, anatomical, and morphological characteristics, the role of organ specificity in resistance responses against parasitic plants has not been systematically reviewed.
Here, we provide a comprehensive review of how different hosts perceive stem and root parasitic plants and utilize diverse defense responses to resist parasitism. Depending on whether defense mechanisms function before or after haustorial attachment, defense responses can be classified into two categories: pre-attachment and post-attachment. Interestingly, while reviewing the current knowledge of post-attachment defense responses, we noticed that several resistance mechanisms, such as lignin accumulation, had been reported with respect to both root and stem parasitic plants but with distinct anatomical distribution and deposition patterns in different tissue types in aboveground and belowground organs. These observations indicated that some defense mechanisms might be organ-specific or tissue-specific. Traditionally, parasitic plants have been categorized as root or stem parasitic plants based on the position of their haustorial attachment on the host (77). Recently, however, unconventional haustorial connections have been reported, for example, stem parasitic plants forming haustoria on their host leaves (52), but lack clear definition and systematic review. Therefore, we definecross-organ parasitismand summarize recent observations and our understanding of it. This also raises the question of whether our current mechanistic understanding of resistance applies to cross-organ parasitism. Finally, we discuss critical future research directions on resistance mechanisms to both major organ parasitism and cross-organ parasitism.
Host plants attacked byparasitic plantsinduce defense response pathways that can lead toparasite resistance(prevention or limitation of attachment and growth) ortolerance(the ability to maintain biomass and yield despite the infestation) (67,81). A recently published review nicely summarizes the theory and experimental evidence for tolerance responses to parasitic plants and pathogens (81). In this review, we focus on the mechanisms underpinning resistance responses. Based on whether the resistance mechanism functions before or after parasitic plants attach to their hosts, resistance responses can be classified aspre-attachmentorpost-attachment resistance.
Some host plants trigger defense responses only after sensing parasitic plants, but other resistant host plants take a more preventive strategy by making themselves invisible to parasitic plants. For example, being able to perceive hosts prior to seed germination and grow toward the host immediately after germination are critical steps in the root parasitic plant life cycle. The group of important compounds in host root exudates that stimulate root parasitic plant germination, strigolactones (SL), have been identified (17,110). Previous studies showed that disrupting the SL biosynthesis pathway, via a carotenoid cleavage dioxygenase 8 (ccd8) mutation, leads to SL deficiency. Therefore,Orobancheseeds exposed toccd8pea plant root exudates have a lower germination rate compared with seeds exposed to wild-type pea plant exudates. This indicates thatccd8mutant plants are not able to produce sufficient SLs in their root exudates to serve as host signals that can be recognized byOrobanche.
Furthermore, based on previous studies, a mutation in theLOW GERMINATION STIMULANT 1(LGSI) gene leads to reduction inStrigagermination stimulant activity (Figure 1). This low-stimulant phenotype is commonly found inSorghumplants that are resistant to the root parasitic plant,Strigaspp. (35,106). Gobena et al. (32) discovered that theLGS1gene codes for a sulfotransferase. Loss-of-function of the gene changes the relative abundance of different types of SLs inSorghumroot exudates. Originally, the dominant SL in root exudates is 5-deoxystrigol, which is a highly activeStrigagermination stimulant (Figure 1). On the other hand, an SL with the opposite stereochemistry to 5-deoxystrigol is orobanchol, which does not stimulate germination ofStriga(Figure 1). The mutation atLGS1changes the dominant SL inSorghumroot exudates from 5-deoxystrigol to orobanchol and leads to lowStrigagermination rates, which makes these hosts less likely to be parasitized by these root parasitic plants (32).

Figure 1Click to view


Other than simply avoiding the induction of parasite seed germination, some hosts have evolved to secrete toxic compounds to prevent seed germination or seedling development (27,98). For example, the germination rate ofOrobanche cernuaseeds in the presence of resistant sunflower plants was 50% lower than that in the presence of susceptible sunflowers (Figure 2). Moreover, the germinatedO. cernuaseeds next to resistant sunflower had browning symptoms and stunted growth or died (98). Serghini and coworkers (98) discovered that the resistant sunflower varieties produced 7‐hydroxylated simple coumarins, which are defensive secondary metabolites, and created a toxic environment forO. cernua(Figure 2).

Figure 2Click to view


Besides reducing germination, reducinghaustoriuminitiation is another approach seen inpre-attachment resistance. Many studies indicate that haustorium initiation requires the induction of host-derived haustorium-inducing factors (HIFs) in root parasitic plants (5,14,93). An excellent review on HIFs that induce prehaustorium formation in the Orobanchaceae family was recently published (36). Therefore, here we focus on reviewing the reports on pre-attachment resistance mechanisms that interfere with the function of HIFs.
Reducing haustorium induction has been observed as oneStriga-resistance mechanism. Some wild accessions of sorghums (Sorghum bicolor) have a relatively low capacity to induceStriga asiaticahaustorium initiation (92). The detailed mechanism(s) of resistance are currently unknown, but a possibility has been proposed that host roots exude inhibitors of haustorial induction, like auxins, to suppress haustorium initiation (55). Furthermore, several studies indicated that using various synthetic inhibitors to interfere with reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation, ethylene signaling (19), auxin efflux and activity (46), and Ca2+signaling (59) reduced the number of haustoria. These results indicate that HIF-triggered signaling pathways within the host are vital during the haustorium initiation process, and repressing these signaling pathways can reduce haustoria formation. Whether the host plant can also deploy this strategy and secrete similar inhibitors as an approach for pre-attachment resistance remains to be elucidated.
Most plants are vulnerable to parasitic plant attacks because they lack adequate defense mechanisms. However, some plants evolved resistance responses to protect themselves from parasitic weed infestation. One fundamental hypothesis states that the ability to perceive parasitic plants is an essential first step for host plants to trigger post-attachment defensive responses. Recent discoveries in crop plants provide evidence that, similar to the systems recognizing bacterial and fungal pathogens, host plants can identify stem and root parasitic plants by utilizing receptor-based signal perception mechanisms. Therefore, before diving intopost-attachment resistanceresponses, this section first reviews the mechanism of how host plants sense stem and root parasitic plants.
Cuscutaspecies (dodders) are well-known stem holoparasitic plants and parasitize many important vegetable and fruit crops, including domesticated tomatoes (Solanum lycopersicum). The recently discovered perception mechanism in domesticated tomatoes that activates the response toCuscutaspp. provides valuable support for the hypothesis that host plants can sense parasitic plants (38,39). Hegenauer et al. (38) found that theCUSCUTA RECEPTOR 1(CuRe1) encodes a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like protein (LRR-RLP). This cell surface receptor–like protein has been identified as a necessary element for the perception of the molecular pattern associated with parasitic plants (Figure 3). However, other related species in Solanaceae that are susceptible toCuscuta reflexa, such as cultivated tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum),Nicotiana benthamiana, potato (Solanum tuberosum), the wild tomato speciesSolanum pennellii, and pepper (Capsicum annuum), lack a fully functionalCuRe1and therefore are not able to induce defense responses (38).CuRe1-like sequences with about 70% amino acid sequence similarity are found in these species in Solanaceae, but they were not sufficient to trigger host responses to theCuscutafactor. Hegenauer et al. (38) also reported that the plant species that are outside the Solanaceae family do not haveCuRe1-like genes or sequences.

Figure 3Click to view


Subsequent research further described the molecular patterns associated withparasitic plants,Cuscutafactors, which serve as ligands of CuRe1 (39). One 11-kDaCuscutafactor was purified fromC. reflexaextracts and classified as a glycine-rich protein (GRP). Both GRP and its minimal peptide epitope Crip21 are ligands of CuRe1 and can trigger CuRe1-dependent resistance responses, including hypersensitive responses (HRs), releasing ROS in leaves, and increased ethylene synthesis (39) (Figure 3). This result not only indicates that host plants perceive parasitic plants in a method analogous to the recognition of microbial pathogens via sensing pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) but also suggests that host plants’ ability to perceive the molecular patterns transmitted by parasitic plants is the first step to generate resistance responses, such as PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI).
In addition to PTI, studies report that host plants might have evolved a second layer of immunity, effector-triggered immunity (ETI), to resist stem parasitic plants. ETI usually starts with intracellular nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat (LRR)-containing (NLR) receptors that are encoded by resistance (R) genes. These NLR receptors detect effectors and then trigger downstream ETI resistance responses to counteract the influence of effectors. As an example,Cuscuta R-gene for lignin-based resistance 1(CuRLR1), encodes an N-terminal coiled-coil nucleotide-binding site LRR protein (CC-NBS-LRR) in the resistant Heinz tomato cultivar (Figure 3). CuRLR1 may be engaged in sensing signaling pathways or function as a receptor for perceivingCuscuta campestrissignals or effectors. Activation of CuRLR1 then induces lignin accumulation in the tomato stem cortex region, creating a physical boundary to prevent haustorium penetration (Figure 3).
TheCuscutasignals or effectors that trigger this lignin-based defense response appear to be large heat-sensitive proteins ranging from 30 kDa to 100 kDa and therefore distinct from the previously identified 11-kDaCuscutaGRP factor or its minimal peptide epitope Crip21 that CuRe1 recognizes (38,39). More detailed characterization of these unknownCuscutasignals or effectors and their functions would be worthy of future investigation.
Interestingly, perceiving parasites from the same genus does not always lead to activation of the same defense mechanisms. For example, perception ofC. reflexaleads to an HR composed of ethylene synthesis, ROS production, and cell wall modifications that form suberin-like wound tissue at the penetration site that blocks parasite growth in tomatoes (4,51,53). However, while perception ofC. campestristriggers ethylene production in tomato, suberin accumulation is not observed, andC. campestriscan still overcome the ethylene-mediated defense response and parasitize most tomato cultivars and many of their wild relatives. These results indicate that perception mechanisms and resistance responses have species specificity. This also suggests that some parasitic plants might have evolved to dodge host perception systems or to release effectors to suppress the resistance responses triggered by the sensing mechanisms.
Similar perception mechanisms play an important role in the perception of root parasitic plants. Duriez et al. (26) discovered thatHelianthus annuus Orobanche resistance 7(HaOr7) encodes a membrane-bound LRR receptor-like kinase (Figure 4a). The fully functional HAOR7 protein is only present in sunflower lines resistant to sunflower broomrapeOrobanche cumana(26). In susceptible sunflower lines, a truncated HAOR7 protein, lacking transmembrane and kinase domains, is found. Thus, a fully functional HAOR7 protein appears to be necessary for host plants to display resistance againstO. cumanaduring the early stages of interaction.

Figure 4Click to view


The fully functional HAOR7 protein recognizes an avirulence protein (AVROR7) fromO. cumanausing the LRR domain (26). Perception of AVROR7 likely enables signal transduction through the kinase domain of the HAOR7 protein and prevents haustorial connection ofO. cumanato the sunflower root vascular system (Figure 4a). This incompatible attachment leads to resistance in these specific sunflower lines. Determining the main elements of the signaling pathways triggered by HAOR7 protein and how resistance responses lead to incompatible attachments are questions waiting to be elucidated. The discovery of HAOR7 further confirms that the ability to perceive parasite molecular patterns is the crucial first step to trigger a signal transduction cascade and to generate the subsequent resistance response during parasitic plant invasion.
In addition to PTI, ETI has also been reported as a mechanism that leads to root parasitic plant resistance. Li & Timko (62) identified an R gene,RSG3-301, that leads to resistance toStriga gesnerioidesrace 3 and 4 in the resistant cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) cultivar B301 (62).RSG3-301encodes a CC-NBS-LRR protein, which triggers an HR and necrosis uponS. gesnerioidesinfestation (Figure 4b).Knocking-downRSG3-301with virus-induced gene silencing makes resistant cowpea B301 susceptible toS. gesnerioides(62).
Intriguingly, theS. gesnerioidesrace 4z, whose presence is localized to Zakpota in south-western Benin, can parasitize the resistant cultivar B301. Race 4z overcomes RSG3-301-mediated resistance by secreting a small effector, Suppressor of host resistance 4z (SHR4z) (100) (Figure 4b). Based on phylogenetic analyses, the LRR domain of SHR4z is similar to that seen in proteins in theSOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE(SERK) gene family. When SHR4z enters the host cell, it can interact with a BTB-BACK domain–containing ubiquitin E3 ligase (VuPOB1) and cause ubiquitination and degradation of VuPOB1 (Figure 4b). Since VuPOB1 is a positive regulator of HR in cowpea, the SHR4z-triggered VuPOB1 degradation leads to a reduced HR and makes the resistant cultivar B301 susceptible toS. gesnerioidesrace 4z (100). This discovery indicates the ongoing arms race between parasitic plants and their hosts in the coevolution process, which is similar to the arms race between plant and microbial pathogens.
Similar topre-attachment resistance, many studies have been conducted onpost-attachment resistanceto parasitic plants as well. As mentioned in Section 2.2.2, many of them indicate similarity to plant defense mechanisms against pathogens, which are triggered after perception of the invaders. These resistance mechanisms include HRs, hormone signaling, cell wall reinforcement, and defensive secondary metabolite accumulation. Below, we summarize the latest research on different aspects of post-attachment resistance.
The HR, which leads to localized cell death and necrosis at the infection site, is a common mechanism that is used to defend against pathogens and prevent infection from spreading (7). Similar phenomena and mechanisms have also been observed in host resistance responses that interfere with thehaustoriumpenetration process of both stem and root parasites (95,101).
For stem parasitic plants, several studies have shown that hosts deploy the HR in response toCuscutaspecies. For example, as mentioned in Section 2.2.1, cultivated tomato (S. lycopersicum) is resistant toC. reflexavia CuRe1-mediated HR (38,39) (Figure 3). Several previous reports also indicate that the HR in tomato is elicited uponCuscuta pentagona(94) andC. campestris(47) infestations. TheseCuscuta-induced HRs are located explicitly at the haustorial attachment site and interfere with the establishment of successful host–parasite vascular connections.
Similarly, HRs specifically located at the haustorial attachment site are also triggered by various root parasitic plant infestations in different host systems. For example, cowpea with RSG3-301 is resistant toS. gesnerioidesraces 3 and 4 (62). Upon perceiving an unknown parasite signal or avirulence (Avr) proteins, RSG-301 then triggers downstream signaling cascades and activates VuPOB1, which is a positive regulator of the HR (100) (Figure 4b). A similar case is reported in sunflower–O. cumanainteractions. Sunflower recognizes AVROR7 fromO. cumanavia HAOR7, which then activates signaling cascades and induces a following HR (26) (Figure 4a). Additionally, a rice cultivar, Nipponbare, shows strong post-attachment resistance toStriga hermonthica. HR-related genes, includingOs07g34280, an HR protein homolog (2-hydroxyisoflavanone dehydratase), andOs01g40580, a gene that encodes a putative hypersensitive-induced response protein, were upregulated in Nipponbare uponS. hermonthicaattack, indicating that the HR also plays a role in this defense mechanism (101). In summary, in the host–parasitic plant coevolution process, some hosts have evolved the ability to detect parasitic plant–specific signals or effectors using a range of receptors. Perceiving the attack from parasites initiates signal transduction cascades and often leads to an HR.
Phytohormone signaling pathways, especially jasmonic acid (JA) and salicylic acid (SA) signaling, play an important role in resistance responses againstparasitic plants. Genes that are involved in JA biosynthesis are induced in the early stage of parasitic plant infestation. For example, infestation byO. cumanainduced the expression of a gene that encodes a lipoxygenase (LOX), an enzyme that oxidizes linolenic acid and produces a potential precursor of JA, in sunflower roots (42,61). Similarly, the infestation byOrobanche crenatainduced the JA pathway inMedicago truncatularoots (24), and infestation byS. hermonthicaalso induced the expression of JA biosynthesis genesALLENE OXIDE CYCLASE(OsAOC) andALLENE OXIDE SYNTHASE2(OsAOS2) in rice (71). Similar phenomena have also been observed in the interaction between host and stem parasitic plants. For instance, the total amount of JA increased dramatically in tomatoes 24–36 h afterC. pentagonahaustorium attachment (95). JA-insensitive tomato plantsjasmonic acid-insensitive1(jai1), which have a loss-of-function mutation inCORONATINE-INSENSITIVE1causing severely reduced expression of JA-responsive genes and compromised resistance to herbivores (63), seem to be more vulnerable toC. pentagona, and parasitic plants grown with thejai1mutant had more biomass than those grown on wild-type tomato (95). Furthermore, JA is involved in cell wall damage–induced lignin biosynthesis in general (22). JA is also involved in a hypersensitive-like response in tomato uponC. pentagonaattack (95). Mutant rice plants with a JA biosynthesis deficiency have severeS. hermonthicasusceptibility, and the application of JA can recover their resistance ability (71). All of these results indicate that JA plays a vital role in host resistance responses against parasitic plants.
SA is another key phytohormone that is required for plant innate immunity against many pathogens and biotic stresses (23). Based on several previous studies, induction of the SA pathway has been detected after JA pathway activation (61,71,95), and this induction might also be an essential component of defense responses toward parasitic plants. For example, Runyon et al. (95) observed that the maximum induction of JA in tomatoes is 36 h afterC. pentagonahaustorium attachment, followed by the maximum total amount of SA at 48 h post-attachment. SA-deficient transgenic tomato plants (NahG) cannot accumulate SA in response toC. pentagonainfestation due to its immediate conversion of SA to inactive catechol. As a result,NahGtomato plants cannot trigger the HR and are more susceptible toC. pentagonaparasitism (95).
However, SA and JA signaling do not always act together; they also act antagonistically in several plant species. The antagonistic relationship between SA and JA signaling has been reported inArabidopsis thalianaresistance responses to specific pathogens (90). Similar antagonistic interactions between SA and JA signaling have also been reported in the resistance responses against parasitic plants. For example, SA-deficientNahGrice plants were more resistant toS. hermonthica(71). Therefore, Mutuku et al. (71) reasoned that antagonism between SA and JA signaling pathways may explain this observation of reduced SA accumulation resulting in enhanced resistance in rice (90). These results not only show that the balance between JA and SA signaling pathways plays a vital role in the resistance mechanism but also indicate that different host plants might deploy divergent strategies to defend against parasitic plants.
Besides JA and SA, abscisic acid (ABA) is also known to be an important phytohormone in the regulation of stress responses. Many studies on model organisms have reported that the ABA signaling pathway has crosstalk with the JA and SA signaling pathways to control the balance between biotic and abiotic stress responses (9,57). Interestingly, several reports indicate that the ABA biosynthesis pathway is involved in the host–parasitic plant interaction, suggesting that ABA might play a role in host resistance against parasitic plants. For example, the infestation of the root parasitic plantPhelipanche ramosa(also known asOrobanche ramosa), branched broomrape, induced increases in ABA levels in both leaves and roots of their tomato host plants (16). The infestation of the root parasitic plant witchweed (S. hermonthica) causes a dramatic increase in ABA concentrations in maize leaves (103). Similar responses were also observed in the interaction between tomato and the stem parasitic plantC. pentagona. The induction of ABA started 36 h afterC. pentagonainfestation and continued to accumulate through 120 h (95). ABA-responsive genes also have increased expression levels during the early stage ofP. ramosainfestation (105). With proteomic approaches, the increased production of ABA-responsive proteins was detected only in the resistant, and not the susceptible, pea (Pisum sativum) cultivar in response to crenate broomrape (O. crenata), which indicates the potential key role of ABA signaling on post-attachment resistance (6).
In all these cases, the most likely hypothesis to explain this phenomenon is that activation of the ABA signaling pathway is in response to the loss of water experienced by the host due to parasitic plant attachment (16,103). Host plants might use the ABA pathway as a defense strategy to prevent further water loss (6,16). However, some parasitic plants have evolved to overcome this host response and can continue to obtain water from their hosts. Several studies indicate that parasitic plants accumulate an extremely high level of ABA, even higher than the elevated level in their hosts (45,50,103). For example, the root hemiparasitic plantRhinanthus minorincreased ABA biosynthesis dramatically upon attaching to its hosts (50). Several species in the Orobanchaceae family, includingOrobanche hederae(ivy broomrape),Lathraea squamaria(common toothwort), andMelampyrum pratense(common cow-wheat), also accumulated a high amount of ABA in their sink tissues (45). The exact function of high ABA levels in parasites remains unknown. These phenomena might be a side effect of extremely negative osmotic potential in parasitic plants. Many parasitic plants are found to produce and accumulate large amounts of mannitol (49) in order to generate very low water potential in the xylem sap and force water to flow continuously from the hosts to the parasites.
Ethylene is also known to play a vital role in activating plant defenses against various biotic stress and regulating local and systemic immune responses (1,11,64,104). Many previous studies also indicate that ethylene has complex crosstalk with other hormone pathways, including JA, SA, and ABA (66,107,116). In the interaction between host and parasitic plants, the production of ethylene has been observed, which suggests that ethylene may also play a role in host defense responses. For example, infestation byOrobanche ramosaseedlings induced the expression of theACC2gene inA. thalianaroots, which encodes for aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) synthase (25), suggesting that ethylene biosynthesis was activated. Furthermore, an ethylene-responsive element-binding factor, theAtERF6gene, was also upregulated inA. thalianauponO. ramosainfestation (108). Since AtERF has GCC box (AGCCGCC) binding activity (31) and theACC2gene was also induced uponO. ramosainfestation, Vieira Dos Santos and coworkers (108) suggested that induced AtERF6 might modulate expression of other ethylene-responsive genes, likeACC2. Similarly, infestation byC. reflexainduced the emission of ethylene inNicotiana benthamianaandS. lycopersicum(38,39). This ethylene induction is CuRe1-dependent and is an indicator that the defense response was successfully triggered (38,39).
Intriguingly, parasitic plants seem to have evolved to also use ethylene as a signal forhaustoriumpenetration and host recognition. Cui et al. (19) found that ethylene signaling is required for the haustorium penetration process in the root parasitic plantPhtheirospermum japonicum, and the disruption of host ethylene production can interfere withP. japonicuminvasion. Goldwasser et al. (34) also reported that perturbed ethylene pathways inArabidopsisinterfere with haustorium formation in the root parasitic plantTriphysaria versicolor(56). All of these examples indicate that parasitic plants utilize this common stress-triggered defense hormone to help with the parasitism process.
Modifying cell wall composition to reinforce the physical boundary is a resistance mechanism against parasitic plants reported in many host species. Among different types of cell wall modifications, lignin deposition is one of the most common methods deployed by many resistant host species (44,69,87–89,112). Previous reports used anatomical observations to show lignified endodermal cells in resistant vetch (Viciaspp.) and faba bean (Vicia faba) in response to attack by the root parasite, bean broomrape (O.crenata) (87,89). Notably, based on observations with phloroglucinol–HCl staining, lignin accumulation was distributed locally and only in the endodermal cells that were in contact with a haustorium. This physical boundary blocksO. crenatapenetration and leads to aborted haustorial connections (87,89). This result indicates that lignin-based resistance is precisely regulated and locally expressed.
Similarly, increased lignin content was measured in resistant cultivars of sunflower (H. annuus) after sunflower broomrape (O. cumana) inoculation. Yang et al. (112) also showed that the enzymes involved in lignin biosynthesis, including cinnamoyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD), ferulate‐5‐hydroxylase (F5H), and peroxidases, were highly accumulated in these resistant sunflower cultivars. Likewise, with biochemical approaches, a higher amount of bound phenolics and lignin and higher peroxidase activity were detected in resistant vetches (Vicia atropurpurea) uponOrobanche aegyptiacaattack (33). With genetic analysis, induced lignin biosynthetic enzyme gene expression levels were also observed inStriga-resistant rice (Oryza sativa) cultivars uponS. hermonthicainfection andStriga-resistant cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) cultivars uponStriga gesnerioidesinfection (44). With pyrolysis–gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (pyrolysis-GCMS), Mutuku et al. (69) further quantified the composition of p-hydroxyphenyl (H)-, guaiacyl (G)-, and syringyl (S)-types of monolignols in accumulated lignin. Changing the balance and percentage of these lignin monomers by regulating key enzyme-encoding genes makes resistant cultivars susceptible toS. hermonthicainfection (69). Their results indicate that specific lignin composition plays a role in cell wall structural integrity and influences host plant defense responses.
Similar resistance responses also have been observed in the interaction between the stem parasiteC. campestrisand tomato. Although cultivated tomatoes are generally susceptible toC. campestris, some specific Heinz tomato cultivars are resistant (40,47,111). These resistant tomatoes accumulate a large amount of lignin at the stem cortex, forming a physical barrier that prevents haustorium penetration (47). The expression of genes that are involved in lignin biosynthesis was upregulated in these resistant tomato cultivars uponC. campestrisinfestation, including 4-coumarate CoA ligase (4CL), caffeoyl-CoAO-methyltransferase (CCoAOMT), cinnamoyl-CoA reductase (CCR), and laccases (LACs) (47). In summary, these tomato cultivars block the penetration ofC. campestrishaustoria by strengthening their cell walls within specific tissues.
Some of the upstream regulators of this lignin-based resistance response in tomatoes have also been identified. As previously described,CuRLR1is a crucial factor that might function in perceiving the signal fromC. campestrisand conferring host resistance by regulating lignification (47) (Figure 3).Lignin induction factor 1(LIF1, anAP2-like transcription factor) andSlMYB55are found to be critical positive regulators of lignin biosynthesis (Figure 3). However,SlWRKY16acts as a negative regulator of the lignin-based resistance response and counteractsLIF1(47) (Figure 3). In addition,SlWRKY16also has a similar gene expression pattern asCuRe1, which encodes the receptor-triggered HR upon sensingCuscutafactors (39,47) (Figure 3). This suggests a potential regulatory connection between different defense mechanisms. Multilayered defense mechanisms againstparasitic plantswould be of interest for future studies.
Besides lignification, cell wall structural protein cross-linking, callose deposition, and suberization are also reported as defense mechanisms (27,85,87). Pérez-de-Luque et al. (85) discovered that resistant pea (P. sativum) plants increased H2O2and peroxidase activity to catalyze oxidative cross-linking of structural proteins. The cross-linking of cell wall structural proteins in the host cortex halted the penetration ofO. crenataintrusive cells (85), which are specialized cells that differentiate from haustorial epidermal cells and grow toward the host vascular tissues (78). In both resistant faba bean and pea plants, callose accumulation to reinforce cell walls and hamperO. crenatapenetration was also observed (85,87). Cross-linked cell wall proteins were also detected in resistant sunflower plants in response to sunflower broomrape (O. cumana) (27). Furthermore, in these resistant sunflower cultivars, the cell wall in contact withO. cumanawas additionally thickened by depositing suberin, which prevents haustorium penetration and can stop the parasite from reaching the endodermis (27). These findings inform us that resistant host plants often deploy various combinations of cell wall reinforcement strategies to establish multilayer defense mechanisms and ensure adequate protection.
The accumulation of defensive secondary metabolites is an effective plant defense and competition strategy for deterring herbivores (80) and fungal pathogens (13,91) and for allelopathy, a process by which plants produce biochemicals that positively or negatively influence other plants or microbes that surround them (15,41). Previous studies also show that resistant host plants deploy toxic metabolites to defend against the infestation of parasitic weeds (27,86,98). For example, a higher amount of free phenolics is also detected in resistant vetches uponO. aegyptiacaattack (33). The infestation of broomrape (O. cernua) also induced the content of total soluble phenolic compounds in some pea (Pisumspp.) genotypes (86). These soluble phenolics could serve as precursors of lignin biosynthesis and be phytoalexins, the latter of which are toxic to penetratinghaustoria(86).
Similarly, excreting and locally accumulating toxic compounds, 7‐hydroxylated simple coumarins, including scopoletin and ayapin, were observed in resistant cultivars of sunflower (H. annuus) in response toO. cernuaparasitism (Figure 2). These sunflower coumarins not only function as allelochemicals, which are the plant-produced secondary metabolites that affect the physiology, development, or survival of their surrounding organisms (15), by avertingO. cernuaseed germination or killing germinated seedlings (pre-attachment resistance), but they also act as phytoalexins by preventing haustorial penetration and the formation of vascular connection (post-attachment resistance) (98) (Figure 2). Furthermore, Echevarría-Zomeño et al. (27) found that the penetration ofO. cumanahaustoria is followed by the local excretion of sunflower phytoalexins into the apoplast. This response is triggered explicitly at attachment sites, especially in the host cells that are immediately surrounding parasitic plant intrusive cells to halt the penetration process (Figure 2).
Other than developing different pre-attachment and post-attachment mechanisms to defend against parasitic plants, some host plants seem to be simply incompatible with parasites. This incompatibility is also known asnonhost resistance (NHR), a species-level resistance between hosts and parasites or pathogens (37,60,97). NHR is defined as the resistance response of an entire plant species against all isolates of a particular species of parasite or pathogen (37,60,97). In host and parasitic plant interaction, NHR might result from parasitic plants not having adapted to specific host plants. For example, whileC. campestrisis native to the US and has likely coevolved with various crop and noncrop hosts,C. reflexais native to Asia (84) and not usually seen in fields in the United States. Among the 39 previously listed host plant species ofC. reflexa(10),S. lycopersicum(domesticated tomato) was not considered a host ofC. reflexa. Therefore, domesticated tomatoes may have NHR toC. reflexa.
Similar examples have also been observed in the interaction between hosts and root parasitic plants.S. gesnerioidescan parasitize many eudicots, butS. hermonthicaandS. asiaticaare unable to parasitize dicots (79).Arabidopsisis resistant toS. hermonthica, which is also a likely example of NHR. Interesting instances of attachment and penetration but failure to successfully parasitize are seen in the interaction betweenS. hermonthicaandArabidopsisand betweenOrobanche minorandLotus japonicus(58).
While holding a lot of promise for the development of durable resistance, NHR mechanisms are yet to be fully elucidated (60). Notably, some studies suggest that NHR is a phenomenological rather than a mechanical concept, and that NHR is a complicated multilayer resistance composed of both constitutive and induced defense mechanisms (60,82). NHR interactions between the hemiparasiticR. minorand two forb species,Leucanthemum vulgareandPlantago lanceolata, showed encapsulation, forming a protective layer that the parasite is unable to penetrate at the interface between host and parasites and lignification at the interface between the parasite and host (12). A similar encapsulation reaction is reported in the interaction between the holoparasiteO. ramosaand its nonhost, maize (115). It is likely that this encapsulation barrier prevents the parasite from accessing the host vascular system. Research on the detailed mechanisms underlying nonhost interactions is of interest for future innovations. Understanding the molecular basis for these nonhost interactions could lead to better parasitic plant control strategies.
Interestingly, in the process of reviewing the current knowledge of post-attachment defense responses, we noticed that several similar mechanisms, like HR and cell wall modification, have been observed in both roots and stems and utilized in resistance against root and stem parasitic plants, respectively. However, the exact details of the mechanisms, such as genes, pathways, cell wall components, and deposition patterns utilized, are not exactly the same between the aboveground and belowground organs in host plants. These observations indicate that some defense mechanisms might be organ- or tissue-specific and might arise due to biochemical, morphological, and anatomical differences, including different gene expression profiles, secondary metabolite production, and cell types between the various host plant organs.
Descriptions of parasitic plants traditionally have been based on where the haustorial connections are formed on the host and divided parasitic plants into stem or root parasites. However, more nonconventional haustorial connections have been reported but not systematically reviewed. For example, several previous studies and our recent observations indicate that stem parasites, likeCuscutaspp., can attach to not only stems but also other organs, like petioles and leaves, of their host plants and form successful vascular connections (20,52,109). Here, we name these nonconventional haustorial connections ascross-organ parasitism. Cross-organ parasitism has not been well investigated, but these discoveries might bring a new aspect to parasitic plant classification and control strategies.
Cuscutaspp. are generally categorized as stem parasitic plants (Figure 5a). However, several previous reports showed thatC. campestriscould form attachments on carrot leaf petioles andA. thalianarosette leaves (52). Notably, vascular connections between the host and the parasite were clearly shown on haustorium transverse sections in both reported cases. We also have observed thatC. campestrishaustoria can attach onto and penetrate the petiole of a wild tomatoSolanum galapagense(Figure 5b). Surprisingly, we also discovered thatC. campestriscan form haustorial connections with tomato seedling roots in our in vitro haustorium system (48), and the vascular connections were readily visible (Figure 5c,d). This discovery shows thatCuscutaspp. have the ability to parasitize different organs of their hosts, likely due to their ability to adjust their parasitism strategies depending on what host tissue types they encounter during the haustorium penetration process.C. campestrisandC. japonicacan also form haustorium-like structures on their stems in the absence of a host and in response to far-red light or blue light and physical contact (48,52,102). Therefore,Cuscutamay represent a more permissive system for haustorium formation and thus readily allow cross-organ parasitism.

Figure 5Click to view


The discovery of cross-organ parasitism also raises the question of whether our current understanding of parasitic plant resistance mechanisms can also be applied to these nonconventional examples of cross-organ parasitism. Intriguingly, based on our in vitro system, Heinz 9553 tomato cultivars that are resistant toC. campestrisattacks on their stems are susceptible toC. campestrisin their root systems (Figure 6). The infestation ofC. campestristriggers the cell-wall-modification type ofpost-attachment resistanceresponse in the stem of H9553 tomato. A thick layer of lignin accumulated at the stem cortex region to serve as a physical boundary, preventingC. campestrishaustorium penetration (Figure 6a). However, this post-attachment resistance response was not triggered in the root of H9553 tomato. Therefore,C. campestrishaustoria were able to penetrate successfully and establish vascular connections with host roots (Figure 6b). Most studies on parasitic plant resistance have not investigated whether the described resistance mechanisms also occur in other host plant organs. Understanding if similar defense responses have been utilized in both aboveground and underground plant organs could provide a novel perspective on host defense responses and generate new strategies to develop crops resistant to both stem and root parasites.

Figure 6Click to view


With the world population growing to eight billion, food security has become a top concern worldwide, intensifying the urgency to radically innovate methods to reduce agricultural loss due to biotic stresses, especially diseases or parasites that are hard to eliminate using traditional methods. Currently, crop growth is hampered by parasitic plant infestations in many countries that already face food shortages. For example, based on previous reports,Strigaspecies infected more than 66% of Africa's 73 million hectares of cereal and legume farms, severely threatening food security and influencing the survival of more than 100 million people in 25 countries (28,54). Investigating the mechanisms by which the host and parasite perceive each other and existing mechanisms mounted by hosts to resistparasitic plantswill aid in developing parasitic plant–resistant crops and should be one of the top priorities in setting parasitic plant future research directions. In addition, understanding whether similar defense responses have been utilized by some host plants to resist both major organ parasitism and cross-organ parasitism could provide new insights into host–parasite interactions. This knowledge might create new potential strategies to develop crops that are resistant to both stem and root parasites and provide a new path forward to introduce resistance into important crops, leading to more sustainable crop production and global food security.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
The authors acknowledge support from the US Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture award 2014-67013-21700, Hatch award CA-D-PLB-7412-H, and National Science Foundation grant IOS-185674 (to N.R.S.) and from the UC Davis Graduate Research Award and Loomis, Robert S. and Lois Ann, Graduate Award in Agronomy (to M-Y.J.).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


