We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich repeat receptors (NLRs) play important roles in the innate immune systems of both plants and animals. Recent breakthroughs in NLR biochemistry and biophysics have revolutionized our understanding of how NLR proteins function in plant immunity. In this review, we summarize the latest findings in plant NLR biology and draw direct comparisons to NLRs of animals. We discuss different mechanisms by which NLRs recognize their ligands in plants and animals. The discovery of plant NLR resistosomes that assemble in a comparable way to animal inflammasomes reinforces the striking similarities between the formation of plant and animal NLR complexes. Furthermore, we discuss the mechanisms by which plant NLRs mediate immune responses and draw comparisons to similar mechanisms identified in animals. Finally, we summarize the current knowledge of the complex genetic architecture formed by NLRs in plants and animals and the roles of NLRs beyond pathogen detection.
Article metrics loading...
Nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich repeat receptors (NLRs) play important roles in the innate immune systems of both plants and animals. Recent breakthroughs in NLR biochemistry and biophysics have revolutionized our understanding of how NLR proteins function in plant immunity. In this review, we summarize the latest findings in plant NLR biology and draw direct comparisons to NLRs of animals. We discuss different mechanisms by which NLRs recognize their ligands in plants and animals. The discovery of plant NLR resistosomes that assemble in a comparable way to animal inflammasomes reinforces the striking similarities between the formation of plant and animal NLR complexes. Furthermore, we discuss the mechanisms by which plant NLRs mediate immune responses and draw comparisons to similar mechanisms identified in animals. Finally, we summarize the current knowledge of the complex genetic architecture formed by NLRs in plants and animals and the roles of NLRs beyond pathogen detection.
The sophisticated innate immune system of plants prevents infection from diverse pathogens. Cell surface immune receptors, often termed pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), perceive conserved microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs), pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), or host-derived damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). Upon ligand perception, PRRs activate immune responses that suppress the proliferation of nonadapted pathogens. These immune responses include the rapid production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), creating an oxidative burst, and the initiation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades (42,89,177). Pathogens use several mechanisms to facilitate infection, the foremost of these being the secretion of effector proteins that perturb the function of host PRR proteins and other immunity-related processes. To counteract the perturbations caused by effectors and stop disease progression, plants have evolved intracellular nucleotide-binding domain (NBD) leucine-rich repeat (LRR) receptors (NLRs) to perceive pathogen effectors and subsequently initiate robust immune responses (52,89). NLR-mediated immune responses show molecular signatures that are both distinct from and similar to PRR-mediated responses, and they are often accompanied by a cell death phenomenon termed the hypersensitive response (HR) (134,206). These molecular surveillance systems confer resistance to plant diseases, including those caused by many devastating pathogens on major crops.
The innate immune system of animals similarly utilizes NLRs as intracellular immune receptors (57,89). Different from plant NLRs, animal NLRs can detect both PAMPs and pathogen-secreted effector proteins (123). Several animal NLRs have been biochemically and biophysically characterized, some of which form multimeric complexes, named inflammasomes, once their cognate ligands are perceived. In this review, we summarize the latest insights into plant NLR biology and draw comparisons to animal NLR biology. In particular, we discuss the recent discovery of inflammasome-like complexes in plants and the striking similarity between the mechanisms of plant and animal NLR function. Furthermore, we summarize the current knowledge of the complex genetic architecture formed by NLRs in plants and animals. New horizons are appearing for NLR research, and we highlight these by discussing the role of NLRs beyond pathogen perception and drawing out enduring unanswered questions.
The architecture of plant and animal NLRs is remarkably similar, with three core domains that have seemingly conserved functions: an N-terminal domain, a central NBD, and an LRR domain (Figure 1). The NBD of NLRs is in the signal transduction ATPases with numerous domains (STAND) AAA+ ATPase superfamily. Plant NLRs have an NB-ARC nucleotide-binding adaptor shared by apoptotic protease activating factor-1 (Apaf-1), resistance (R)-protein, and cell death abnormal (CED) family NBDs (109). Plant NB-ARC domains can be further divided into three conserved subdomains: the NB, ARC1, and ARC2 subdomains (164,176) (Figure 1a). The NB subdomain contains the conserved P-loop (or Walker A) motif required for nucleotide binding, and the Walker B motif required for Mg2+coordination and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis (81,144,181). The ARC2 subdomain contains the methionine-histidine-aspartate (MHD) motif, which also binds nucleotides. The NBD in animal NLRs was found conserved in neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP), class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) transactivator (CIITA), heterokaryon incompatibility loci E (HET-E), and telomerase protein component 1 (TP1), and is thus called the NACHT domain. The NACHT domain can similarly be divided into an NB domain, helical domain 1 (HD1, equivalent to ARC1), winged helical domain (WHD, equivalent to ARC2), and helical domain 2 (HD2 or ARC3) (107) (Figure 1b). Although the NBDs in plant and animal NLRs display striking similarity, plant NB-ARCs lack an ARC3 and instead have a short linker connecting them to the LRR (Figure 1b).

Figure 1Click to view


The LRR domain often functions as an autoinhibitory unit that regulates the activity of both plant and animal NLRs. For example, the plant NLRs Resistance toPseudomonas syringae5 (RPS5) and Recognition ofPeronospora parasitica1A (RPP1A) both become constitutively active when their LRR domains are deleted (137,189). Similarly, in animals, the LRR ofNLRC4blocks its oligomerization interface when inactive, and truncated Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 (NOD2) mutants that lack their LRR are autoactive (81,168). Furthermore, the LRR domain can also participate in direct binding of ligands during pathogen perception; for example, the LRR of RPP1 is necessary and sufficient to immunoprecipitate its cognate effector ATR1 (98). Two recent cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) studies showed that the LRR of Recognition of XopQ 1 (Roq1), a TIR-domain-containing NLR protein (TNL) identified inNicotiana benthamiana, and the LRR of RPP1 fromArabidopsis thalianadirectly interact with the corresponding effector proteins XopQ and ATR1, respectively (119,128). These observations suggest that the LRR may play multiple roles in ligand perception and activity regulation.
NLRs can be classified into different groups based on their N-terminal domains. Plant NLRs are often grouped into three classes containing N-terminal Toll/interleukin-1 receptor/R protein (TIR), coiled-coil (CC), and resistance to powdery mildew 8 (RPW8)-like domains (Figure 1a). In many cases, expressing truncated NLRs that contain only the N-terminal domain gives constitutive immune activation, such asHRcell death (41,64,98,122,163,189). These truncated domains often homo- and heterooligomerize, and mutations that disrupt oligomerization can suppress HR. For example, activation of the CC-NLR (CNL) MLA10 requires homodimerization via homophilic CC interactions (9). These observations indicate that downstream signaling is dependent on correct oligomerization and that other domains have a role in suppressing autoactivation in the full-length protein.
Similarly, TIR domains are found in the mammalian Toll-like receptors (TLRs), interleukin-1 receptors, and their downstream components such as MyD88 (47,198). TLRs interact with MyD88 through homotypic TIR interactions, suggesting a mechanism by which plant NLRs may also signal. Further insights into plant NLR function were provided by the discovery that mammalian TIR-containing protein SARM1 has intrinsic nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nucleosidase (NADase)activity (see Section 5.3).
The CC domain of plant NLRs can be further divided into two clades: Clades I and II are defined by the absence or presence of a conserved EDVID amino acid sequence, respectively. RPW8-like N-terminal domains are present in helper NLRs Activated disease resistance 1 (ADR1) and N requirement gene 1 (NRG1) (see Section 6.3) (16). Some other plant NLRs contain N-terminal domains that are unrelated to the above classes (97). For example, the Boundary element-associated factor (BEAF) and DNA replication-related element (DRE)-binding factor (DREF)-NLRs (BED-NLRs) were found to confer resistance to different pathogens, includingXanthomonas oryzaepv.oryzaeand yellow rust, in poplar and several monocots (6,44,68,73,126,204,212). Another example is NLR Tan spot necrosis 1 (Tsn1) found in wheat, which contains an N-terminal serine/threonine protein kinase (S/TPK) domain and confers susceptibility to several fungal wheat pathogens, includingStagonospora nodorumandPyrenophora tritici-repentis(60). However, it is not clear how BED or S/TPK domains signal downstream.
Animal NLRs can be classified into four groups: NLRA, containing a caspase activation and recruitment domain (CARD) and an acidic transactivation domain (ATD) or CIITA (94); NLRB, containing three N-terminal tandem baculovirus inhibitors of apoptosis repeat (BIR) domains; NLRC, containing an N-terminal CARD; and NLRP, containing a pyrin domain (PYD) (Figure 1b). The best understood of these domains are the CARD and PYD, both of which establish multimeric interactions to recruit downstream molecules.
In the plant kingdom,NLRgenes can be found in green algae, suggesting that plants employedNLRgenes in their innate immune system prior to land colonization (67). In the animal kingdom,NLRgenes are found in basal metazoans, such as in Cnidaria and Porifera, indicating that animalNLRsmay originate from a common ancestor of metazoans (102,175). AlthoughNLRgenes may have been lost in some metazoan lineages, such as inDrosophilaorCaenorhabditis, the number ofNLRgenes has massively expanded in other lineages, such as in the sponge (Amphimedon queenslandica) and zebrafish (Danio rerio) (74,77,209). Unfortunately, functional studies ofNLRsin basal metazoans and teleost fish are still missing, and hence the contribution ofNLRsin the innate immune systems of these organisms is yet to be determined. Similar to what has been observed in the plant kingdom, theNLRgene family in animals displays striking lineage-specific expansion patterns, reflecting that the constant but diverse selection pressures on the immune system have driven the expansion and diversification of theNLRgene family across eukaryotic kingdoms (154,175,209).
Researchers have speculated that plant and animalNLRgenes originated from the same common ancestor (85,171). The NBD is highly conserved across taxa and likely has prokaryotic origins. Interestingly, instead of a fusion of anLRR(e.g., NLRs), the C termini of NBDs in proteins in prokaryotes, fungi, and many examined nonmetazoan and nonplant eukaryotes are more often associated with tryptophan-aspartic-acid 40 (WD40, or β-transducin) repeats, tetratricopeptide repeats (TPR), or ankyrin (ANK) repeats (175). Furthermore, phylogenetic analysis of the NBD suggests that plant and metazoan NLR NBDs are not monophyletic, indicating that the architecture of NBD fusion to LRRs was acquired independently in the evolution of metazoans and plants (175). It is yet to be determined how both lineages converge in proteins with the same domain architecture as important players in innate immunity.
The simplest and most intuitive mechanism by which NLRs perceive effectors is through direct interaction (Figure 1c). An emblematic example of direct recognition is the perception of variants of the flax rust fungus (Melampsora lini) effector AvrL567 by the flax (Linum usitatissimum)Llocus-encoded TNLs L5, L6, and L7 (51). Recognition through direct interaction perhaps drove the diversifying selection on theAvrL567locus that has resulted in 12 variants, 5 of which have amino acid polymorphisms that evade binding and thwart recognition (51). This coevolutionary arms race also drove the diversification of the flaxLlocus, which contains 13 alleles of the same gene, including 3 NLRs that recognize variants of a single effector. Individual L TNLs can confer perception to multiple AvrL567 alleles. Specificity is probably provided by the LRR because substitution of 11 amino acids in the L6 LRR reduces the recognition spectrum from multiple effectors to one (51,140). By better understanding how specificity is conferred in NLR allele series, new NLRs with novel specificities may be engineered. The allelic NLR series Pik in rice confers perception to multiple AVR-Pik effectors inMagnaporthe oryzaethrough direct binding. Pikm can recognize three AVR-Pik effectors, while Pikp can recognize only one. By studying the interactions between Pik and AVR-Pik proteins, researchers were able to use structure-guided engineering to create a novel Pik allele that bound a previously unrecognized AVR-Pik (46). Intriguingly, the Mildew-resistance locus A (Mla) CNLs of barley have evolved allelic variants that directly recognize sequence-unrelated effectors of powdery mildew fungi (148). Additional examples of plant NLRs detecting the presence of their cognate effectors through direct interaction includeArabidopsisTNL RPP1 binding to the effector ATR1 fromHyaloperonospora arabidopsidisand the rice CNL Pi-ta and its cognate fungal effector AVR-Pita from rice blast (87,98). Two more sophisticated observations of direct recognition were reported in the recent cryo-EM structure of Roq1-XopQ and RPP1-ATR1 complexes, in which several side chains exposed on the surface of the LRR and an elongated linker between two LRRs bind effectors directly (119,128).
Several mammalian NLRs also detect bacterial PAMPs through direct binding (Figure 1c). NOD1/NLRC1 and NOD2/NLRC2 are mammalian NLRs in the NLRC class that confer recognition to bacterial cell wall components that are shed by bacteria during infection. NOD1 binds γ-d-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelic acid, which is present in the cell walls of gram-negative bacteria, while NOD2 confers broad bacterial recognition through the recognition of muramyl dipeptide, which is a component of most bacterial cell walls (70,104,131). Ligand specificity is conferred by the LRR of both NOD1 and NOD2, although other domains could have a role in binding, for example, theNACHTdomain of NOD2 (70,104,105,131).
In mice,NAIPparalogs confer specificity to PAMP recognition by theNLRC4/NAIPinflammasomedirectly binding to PAMPs: NAIP1 and NAIP2 bind needle and inner rod components, respectively, and NAIP5 and NAIP6 bind flagellin, the protein subunit of the flagellum (72,95,200,201,214). Remarkably, the ligand specificity of NAIP2 and NAIP5/6 can be switched by substituting their NACHT domains in chimeras (170). The ability of the closely related NAIP paralogs to recognize different ligands is in part due to the structural similarity between the C-terminal portion of flagellin, rod, and needle proteins (213). Cryo-EM structural studies have revealed that flagellin forms intimate associations with the HD1 and HD2 of the NAIP5 NACHT, with other domains supporting these interactions, including the LRR and BIR1 (169,203). Structure-guided mutagenesis and truncation confirmed the importance of the NAIP5 LRR for flagellin binding, but found that the NAIP2 LRR was dispensable for inner rod binding (169,200).
Unlike mice, which have multipleNAIPgenes that confer specificity to bacterial ligands, humans have a singleNAIPgene. Initial studies reported that human NAIP confers recognition to type three secretion system (T3SS) needle proteins, but subsequent research uncovered that human NAIP is also a receptor for flagellin and T3SS rod proteins (96,141,143,201,214). Although mice have different NAIPs to confer recognition to different bacterial PAMPs, a synthetic NAIP2/5 chimera is able to confer dual recognition of T3SS rod protein and flagellin (170). Further investigations of the recognition specificity of different mammalian NAIPs may reveal how human and mice NAIPs adopted different strategies to perceive multiple PAMPs.
Many plant NLRs do not directly interact with the effectors to which they confer recognition (Figure 1c). The guard hypothesis describes a model of effector recognition via indirect ligand-receptor interactions (43). Guard NLRs monitor the integrity of the molecular targets of effectors, or guardees, and activate an immune response upon the perception of a perturbation to the function of guardees. InArabidopsis, RPM1-interacting protein 4 (RIN4) is a guardee that directly interacts with the guard NLRs Resistance toP. syringae2 (RPS2) and Resistance toP. syringaepv.maculicola1 (RPM1). Multiple effectors target RIN4, including the secreted protease AvrRpt2 fromP. syringaevia its T3SS, which cleaves RIN4, triggering RPS2-dependent immunity (8,121). In addition, theP. syringaeeffector AvrRpm1 induces RIN4 adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosylation, which in turn leads to RIN4 phosphorylation by host kinases, triggering immunity mediated by RPM1 (40,115,142). Another well-studied example of a guard NLR is RPS5, which monitors the protein kinase PBS1. The cleavage of PBS1 by the effector protease AvrPphB activates RPS5-mediated immunity (5,153).
The decoy hypothesis, a derivation of the guard hypothesis, describes the scenario when guardee-like proteins are targeted by effectors and guarded by NLRs but have no discernible physiological role in immunity apart from being a decoy in effector recognition (178). A classical decoy is the pseudokinase HopZ1 ETI deficient 1 (ZED1), which is required for the activation of theCNLHopZ-activated resistance 1 (ZAR1). ZAR1 confers indirect recognition to multiple effectors, includingXanthomonas campestrispv.campestriseffector AvrAC andP. syringaeeffector HopZ1a (101,111,150,151,184). AvrAC uridylylates and HopZ1a acetylates target receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases (RLCK) to confer virulence (62,111). AvrAC uridylylates the RLCK PBL2 (resulting in PBL2UMP), which subsequently interacts with the RLCK RKS1, which is in a preformed complex with ZAR1 (184). The ZAR1-RKS1-PBL2UMPheterotrimer then assembles into a pentameric wheel-like structure called a resistosome, composed of five ZAR1-RKS1-PBL2UMPprotomers (186,187). HopZ1a acetylates the pseudokinase ZED1, which is in a preformed complex with ZAR1, to trigger the assembly of a higher-order complex in planta presumed to be equivalent to a ZAR1-RKS1-PBL2UMPresistosome (79,111). Other RLCKs are targeted by HopZ1a and recognized by the ZAR1-ZED1 complex, where ZED1 performs an adaptor function reminiscent of RKS1 (14). Uridylation of PBL2 does not enhance AvrAC-mediated virulence, and ZED1 has no kinase activity; hence, these host proteins are considered decoys, not guardees (111,184).
The guard hypothesis has been invoked in animals when researchers describe the non-NLR pyrin inflammasome that recruits the same downstream signaling partners as NLR inflammasomes (199). Pyrin confers recognition to effectors that perturb the function of Rho GTPases, yet it does not directly interact with Rho GTPases or these effectors (197). The Rho GTPase RhoA promotes the activity of the protein kinases PKN1 and PKN2. PKN1 and PKN2 phosphorylate Pyrin, which promotes the recruitment of 14-3-3 proteins that inhibit inflammasome formation (136). Upon abrogation of the function of RhoA by an effector, PKN1/2 activity decreases and nonphosphorylated pyrin dissociates from the inhibitory 14-3-3 proteins (66), forming an inflammasome and activating immunity. In this way, pyrin inflammasome assembly occurs when effectors target RhoA, providing an indirect mechanism by which pyrin guards RhoA.
SomeNLRscontain noncanonical domains, called integrated domains (IDs), which provide recognition to corresponding pathogenic effectors (Figure 1c). To confer effector perception, some IDs directly interact with their cognate effectors and are even enzymatically modified by the effectors. In these cases, the relationship between an ID and an NLR is reminiscent of a guardee being guarded by a corresponding NLR. Indeed, the genetic linkage resulting from the fusion of an ID to an NLR confers benefits; i.e., the shuffling of alleles that would result in a loss of compatibility between a guard and guardee is much less likely to happen in an integrated NLR-ID. The fusion of NLRs and IDs may have occurred via retrotransposition or ectopic recombination (10). The fusion of different NLRs to diverse noncanonical domains has occurred many times in divergent clades (10,165).
The common mechanism by which several NLR-IDs recognize their cognate effectors has been revealed. One of the best-studied NLR-ID examples is Resistance toRalstonia solanacearum1 (RRS1), which contains a C-terminal WRKY as the ID (106,147). WRKY domains bind DNA and many WRKY-containing transcription factors were found to regulate immune responses (135). The effector PopP2 fromR. solanacearumis an acetyltransferase that binds and acetylates WRKY transcription factors, disrupting DNA binding and promoting virulence (106,147). However, during the infection of plants expressing RRS1, the WRKY domain in RRS1 is acetylated by PopP2, and for resistance alleles of RRS1, WRKY acetylation is sufficient to activate an immune response in cooperation with its paired NLR Resistance toP. syringae4 (RPS4) (106,147). RRS1 confers recognition to other effectors, including theP. syringaeeffector AvrRps4, which also binds the RRS1 WRKY domain (147). Other well-studied plant NLR-IDs include the rice NLRs RGA5 and Pik-1, which contain integrated heavy metal–associated (HMA) domains (31).
The animal NLR NLRP1b appears to employ a similar integrated decoy strategy to confer pathogen perception. It has an atypical NLR architecture, with aCARDat the C terminus, connected to the LRR via a function-to-find domain (FIIND) (100,196). The FIIND is constitutively autoproteolytic and cleaves itself to generate two NLRP1b peptides that remain noncovalently associated. NLRP1b confers recognition ofBacillus anthracis, the bacterium that causes anthrax. The infection strategy ofB. anthracisincludes the secretion of anthrax Lethal Toxin (LT) into cells, a multiprotein toxin that includes the endoprotease Lethal Factor (LF). LF cleaves the N terminus of host mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases (MAPKKs), inhibiting them and abrogating immunity (38,55). LF also cleaves the N terminus of NLRP1b (34,35), triggering the proteasomal degradation of the N-terminal fragment of NLRP1b and releasing the C-terminal fragment. The liberated fragment contains the CARD, which homooligomerizes and recruits downstream signaling molecules, including caspases, to form aninflammasomeand activate immunity (39,146). NLRP1b shares the RRS1 trait of recognizing multiple effectors. In addition to LF, NLRP1b confers recognition to theShigella flexnerieffector IpaH7.8, an E3 ubiquitin ligase. IpaH7.8 ubiquitinates the N-terminal fragment of NLRP1b, designating it for proteasomal degradation and triggering inflammasome formation (146). Clearly, the diversity of effectors and their modes of action have given rise to diverse modes of effector perception, but the conservation of the underlying principles of direct and indirect recognition reveals their success.
The NBDs of plant and animal NLRs bind ADP and ATP, and the exchange of these nucleotides is associated with a switch on and off from the activation state of the NLRs (Figure 2a). Many studies support the hypothesis that ADP-bound NLRs are in an inactive state, and ATP-bound NLRs are in an active state (11,93,122,127,138,166,167,191). Indeed, mutations in the MHD motif in plant NLRs, or in the equivalent histidine (H) residue inNLRC4that interacts with ADP, result in constitutively active NLRs bound to ATP (15,78,82,159,179,185,191,202,210). Although many NLRs require intact P-loops to bind nucleotides and transduce immune responses, some helper NLRs, which are required for downstream signaling of sensor NLRs (see Section 6.3), do not require functional P-loops to execute their signaling roles. For example, mutations in the P-loops ofArabidopsishelper NLRs AtADR1-L2, AtNRG1.1, and AtNRG1.2 do not abrogate their competence in immune signal transduction (90). In NLR pairs, sensor NLRs and their executor partner NLRs (see Section 6.2) may have distinct requirements for their P-loops. TheArabidopsissensor NLR RRS1 and the rice sensor NLR RGA5 have dispensable P-loops, but their corresponding executors, RPS4 and RGA4, require P-loops to mediate immunity (31,120). NLRP1b P-loop mutants are autoactive (114), but a P-loop mutation impairs downstream signaling of NLRP3, NOD1, NOD2, and NLRP1 in humans (56,61,133,168). Although an NLRC4 P-loop mutant still induces normal immune signaling, P-loop mutation greatly reduces signaling activity induced by anLRR-truncated variant of NLRC4 that is constitutively active with no inflammasome formation (95). However, controversy has been reported, and P-loop mutation may affect the protein stability of NLRC4 (117). Thus, the contribution of the P-loop in NLRC4 function is still yet to be determined.

Figure 2Click to view


The recent elucidation of the cryo-EM structure of inactiveZAR1reveals that ADP is buried in a binding pocket in the ZAR1-RKS1 complex and stabilizes ZAR1 in an inactive state. Recognition of uridylated PBL2 leads to a conformational change in the ZAR1-RKS1 complex that releases ADP and promotes the binding of ATP. ATP enters the binding pocket, further inducing and stabilizing conformational changes to an active state (187). Similarly, inactive NLRC4 is bound to ADP (81). However, ATP does not seem to be essential for NLRC4 inflammasome assembly (72), but, instead, flagellin can stabilize the NLRC4/NAIP5 inflammasome (169,200). In general, ADP is associated with inactive NLRs and ATP with active NLRs, but the full requirement for ADP/ATP in each plant NLR remains to be elucidated.
The NBD can hydrolyze ATP to ADP (61,81,166,174,216), and this has been hypothesized as a mechanism of deactivating an ATP-bound NLR engaged in immune signaling (17,22,118,215). Indeed, some Walker B mutations, which can impair ATP hydrolysis, impair NOD2 function, while others lead to autoactivation (216). ATP hydrolysis is required for NLRP1 and NOD1 function (56,61,216), whereas Walker B mutations with impaired ATP hydrolysis activity in tomato I-2 andArabidopsisRPS5 confer autoactivity (5,167). However, the requirement for ATP hydrolysis has not been clearly defined in a unifying model. It is possible that the status of direct binding to either ATP or ADP is more critical than the ATP hydrolysis activity. An equilibrium switch model, derived from observations of the flax NLRs L6 and L7, hypothesizes that NLRs exist in an equilibrium between an ADP-bound inactive state and an ATP-bound active state (17) (Figure 2a). In the absence of pathogens, the equilibrium favors the inactive state. Effector perception pushes the equilibrium toward the active state, perhaps through stabilization of the ATP-bound protein. This is supported by observations that autoactive NLRs can trigger stronger immune responses in the presence of effectors.
Several immune receptors form higher-order complexes during activation after the perception of pathogen-derived molecules. An iconic example is the inflammasome, a signaling platform assembled from NLR subunits (Figure 2b). The structure of the NLRC4-NAIPinflammasomes has been resolved using cryo-EM. NAIP2 and NAIP5 undergo conformational changes upon binding of the inner rod protein from a bacterial T3SS or flagellin, respectively (48,72,82,169,203,210). These changes release the autoinhibition of theNACHTdomain by intramolecular interactions and reveal the donor surface of NAIPs, an oligomerization interface that recruits NLRC4. This induces conformational changes in NLRC4 that reveal a donor surface that recruits another NLRC4, which, in turn, recruits subsequent NLRC4 proteins perhaps in a stepwise manner, resulting in a wheel-like complex containing a ligand-bound NAIP and 9 to 11 NLRC4 subunits (82,210). In this inflammasome, the N-terminalCARDsare at the center and the C-terminal LRRs are on the outside (82,210). The CARDs form a high local density that induces the recruitment of downstream signaling proteins. Other animal NLRs form inflammasomes, including NLRP1 and NLRP3, but the platform they create and the downstream signaling adaptors differ from the NLRC4/NAIP inflammasome (88,107,155) (Figure 2b). NOD1 and NOD2 both homooligomerize upon ligand perception via their NACHT and CARD domains and recruit downstream signaling proteins via CARD interactions (27,132,216), but the structure of these NLR complexes has not been resolved. The formation of these higher-order complexes enables NLRs to form signaling platforms to recruit downstream signaling proteins.
Until recently, the structure of activated plant NLRs has been mostly inferred from studies on structurally similar animal NLR-like proteins. The cryo-EM structure of the ZAR1-RKS1-PBL2UMPresistosomecomplex has provided insights into the assembly of higher-order complexes during plant NLR immune signaling (186) (Figure 2b). Upon pathogen perception, theTNLRoq1 oligomerizes into a tetrameric resistosome complex with a twofold symmetric dimer of dimers, providing an interesting contrast to the ZAR1 pentameric resistosome complex (Figures 2band3d) (128). Another TNL RPP1 assembles a very similar tetrameric resistosome upon effector perception. In addition to the cryo-EM structure of the active form of RPP1-ATR1, the authors were able to define a C-terminal jelly roll/Ig-like domain (C-JID) that follows the canonical LRR domain in the protein organization, and the C-JID is specific for effector recognition (Figure 3d) (119). Though the primary sequences of C-JID from different TNLs are not shown in any consensus, structural prediction based on a hidden Markov model indicates that the sequence-diversified C-JIDs are perhaps shared by many TNLs in dicotyledonous plant species (119). Other plant NLRs also require oligomerization for immune signaling; for example, MLA, SNC1, and L6 homooligomerize, and RRS1 and RPS4, as well as RGA4 and RGA5, heterooligomerize (see Section 6.2) (18,28,31,84,122,190,211). Some plant NLRs assemble higher-order structures during activation. For example, the TNL protein N forms a ligand-dependent oligomer (130). The NLRs Dangerous mix 1 (DM1) and DM2d heterooligomerize to form complexes of approximately 500 kDa, suggestive of a high-order complex similar to the NLR resistosome in innate immunity (173). The paired NLRs RPS4 and RRS1 form a protein complex via direct interactions between RPS4 and RRS1, and a similar mechanism has also been reported with RGA4 and RGA5; however, it remains unclear whether they can form higher-order complexes with the corresponding pathogenic ligands (31,83). Conformational changes that release autoinhibitory binding, allowing the N-terminal signaling domains of the NLRs in the complex to come into close proximity, are one of the possible mechanisms for why these paired NLRs do not rely on inducible complex formation for signaling activation. Further studies to resolve the structures of homo- and heterocomplexes of paired NLRs are required to understand the mechanism of activation after effector perception.

Figure 3Click to view


The assembly of largeNLRcomplexes following pathogen perception facilitates downstream signaling. In the case ofinflammasomes, the N-terminal domains (i.e., the CARD or PYD) are brought together into the center of the wheel-like structure in a high local density (Figure 2b). This induced proximity of signaling domains is sufficient to recruit downstream signaling proteins. NLRP-type NLRs that lack CARDs interact via homotypic PYD association with an adaptor protein called ASC, which contains a PYD and CARD. ASC subsequently recruits caspase-1 via homotypic CARD interactions. NLRsNLRC4and NLRP1b, which contain CARDs, can directly interact with the protease caspase-1 without an adaptor. Caspase-1 is activated by autoproteolysis upon being brought into induced proximity when recruited to the inflammasome (36).
There is strong evidence supporting the induced proximity model of signaling activation in plant NLRs. Inflammasomes can be reconstituted in plants by transiently coexpressing NLRC4 with NAIPs and their cognate ligands inN. benthamiana(58). NLRC4 with the RPS4TIRdomain fused to its N terminus triggers cell death when induced to form an inflammasome in planta, indicating that induced proximity of TIR domains is sufficient to activate immunity and that TNLs employ induced proximity to mediate downstream immune signaling. Indeed, assembly of the ZAR1-RKS1-PBL2UMPresistosome resembles inflammasome formation, and this may be because induced proximity of ZAR1 N-terminalCCdomains is required for downstream signaling (186). The fungal NLR-like protein NACHT and WD repeat domain-containing 2 (NWD2) also employs induced proximity of N-terminal signaling proteins to mediate downstream signaling. NWD2 contains an N-terminal heterokaryon incompatibility protein s (Het-s)-like prion-forming domain (PFD), a NACHT domain, and a C-terminal WD40 repeat domain and signals via the oligomerization of PFDs with HET-S protein (26). An NLRP3 chimera containing the NWD2 HET-S-like domain instead of a PYD maintained inflammasome signaling via a chimeric ASC that similarly had a Het-s prion-forming domain instead of a PYD (26). This observation demonstrated that, similar to the induced proximity of NLRP3 PYD during inflammasome formation, NWD2 employs induced proximity to initiate downstream signaling (26).
The signaling mechanism leading to cell death after induced proximity of NLRs has been a major research topic in NLR biology. One of the most promising mechanisms is via perturbing cell membranes, which leads to the formation of pores, allowing signaling molecules to move across the lipid bilayer. In the case of animal inflammasomes, mature caspase-1 cleaves the proinflammatory cytokines prointerleukin (pro-IL)-1b and pro-IL-18 and pore-forming gasdermin D (GSDMD) (91,124,156). The mature N-terminal fragment of GSDMD oligomerizes, disrupts the plasma membrane, and releases IL-1b and IL-18 to drive pyroptosis (116,149,156) (Figure 3a).
The wheel-like ZAR1-RKS1-PBL2UMPresistosome assembles into a funnel-shaped structure through its center formed from the CC domains and NBD. Because the α1-helix of the CC domain flips out during ZAR1 resistosome assembly, forming a protrusion that could perturb the integrity of a plasma membrane, researchers have hypothesized that it acts as a channel to activate immunity, perhaps by allowing the influx of calcium into the cell (25,186) (Figure 3b). In fact, theCNLRPM1 triggers Ca2+influx when activated (69), lending some preliminary support to this hypothesis. In addition to the comparison with pore-forming GSDMD, parallels can be made with other systems: NWD2 induces HET-S to form a pore in the plasma membrane that causes cell death (152). Identifying the mechanism by which the resistosome mediates immunity is a leading priority in plant NLR research.
As most reportedTNLsin plants localize or function in the nucleus, it is unlikely that TIR domains adopt the same mechanism as CC domains to induce cell death. Studies of animal sterile alpha and TIR motif-containing 1 (SARM1), a TIR-containing protein that plays a role in axonal degeneration after the injury of the neuron, led to a breakthrough in the understanding of plant TNL function. Investigations to understand the mechanism by which SARM1 drives degradation discovered that the TIR domain in SARM1 has oligomerization-dependentNADaseenzymatic activity, and purified SARM1 TIR domain (SARM1TIR) in in vitro biochemical assays cleaves NAD+to ADP ribose (ADPR), cyclic ADPR (cADPR), and nicotinamide (Figure 3c) (59).
The crystal structure of SARM1TIRresembles plant TIRs more than other animal TIRs, and plant TIRs also contain this conserved glutamate residue, leading to the landmark discoveries that several plant TNLs exhibit NADase activity, albeit with lower activity than SARM1 exhibits (Figure 3d) (76,182). Substitution of the conserved glutamate in the TIR domain from plant NLRs abolished NADase activity, as well as TIR-activated cell death, indicating that either NAD+depletion or the products of NADase activity are important for downstream immunity (76,182). The fusion of SARM1TIRwith sterile alpha motif (SAM) domains (the oligomerization domains of SARM1) (SARM1TIR-SARM1SAM) also causes cell death in plants. However, this cell death does not require the essential plant TNL signaling protein EDS1, suggesting that SARM1-induced plant cell death is distinct from plant TNL-mediated immunity (76,182). Unlike SARM1TIR-SARM1SAM, the SARM1TIRfused with the NLRC4 inflammasome (SARM1TIR-NLRC4) does not trigger cell death in plants (58). NAD+degradation and NADase products were detected in SARM1TIR-NLRC4 upon ligand binding and in an inflammasome formation in planta. Therefore, NAD+degradation by NADase is not sufficient to induce cell death in plants, suggesting that cell death activated by TIRs in plants requires more than the products of NAD+cleavage (58).
Although the direct evidence is still missing, the products of NADase activity could play universal roles as direct links between plant TNLs and their downstream signaling components. Indeed, in theresistosomecomplexes of Roq1 and RPP1, the TIR domains were brought into proximity and the NADase active site was exposed, potentially allowing the cleavage of NAD+to take place (119,128).
Our conceptual understanding of plant disease resistance (R) gene function began with the gene-for-gene model proposed by Harold Henry Flor (63,92). Studies over the last few decades revealed that mostRgenes in plants encode NLR proteins. Indeed, many NLRs function as single genetic determinants governing disease resistance to their corresponding pathogens. With increasing knowledge and depth of investigation in plant genetics and functional genomics, different levels of NLR networks, as well as PRR networks, have been recently revealed in different plant species (157,194). Recent studies showed that some NLRs have evolved to function together, forming various degrees of genetic or biochemical complexes, leading to new understanding that NLRs can work as functional pairs and networks in addition to as a singleton. Here, we discuss how these concepts apply to NLRs in both plants and animals.
Functional singleton NLRs can detect pathogen effectors directly or indirectly and initiate downstream responses without relying on an additional NLR (Figure 4). One of their key features is that they can induce immune responses when heterologously expressed together with the corresponding effectors in a distantly related species (4). The best-understood example of a plant singleton NLR isZAR1, which detects effectors such as AvrAC through its RLCK partners RKS1 and PBL2 (184). As previously discussed, ZAR1 forms a pentamer resistosome complex, and the N-terminal CC domain likely involves membrane perturbation to trigger cell death responses (186). Roq1 and RPP1 resistosomes also function as singletons that directly detect the effector XopQ1 and ATR1, respectively, and form a tetrameric resistosome complex (119,128). Many other plant NLRs, such as MLA, Sr50, RPP13, RPS5, and L6, were shown to induce cell death when expressed heterologously inNicotianaspp., suggesting that these NLR proteins are likely to function as singletons (5,17,37,110,137,140,148). Human NLRP1 and its mouse ortholog NLRP1b also behave as functional singletons.

Figure 4Click to view


Many NLR proteins are known to function in pairs. These NLR pairs are distinguished by their head-to-head arrangement on chromosomes, which suggests that the twoNLRgenes are coregulated to optimize their functions in conferring disease resistance. Based on their activities, the two NLRs in an NLR pair are classified into sensor and executor/helper (4) (Figure 4). The sensor NLRs in NLR pairs often contain anIDthat is believed to have originated from the targets of effectors (see Section 3.3) (30,71). Two of the most-studied examples of NLR pairs are RPS4/RRS1 ofArabidopsisand RGA4/RGA5 (also known as Pia-1 and Pia-2) of rice. In the case of RPS4/RRS1, overexpressed RPS4 is constitutively autoactive and can be suppressed by coexpression with RRS1. The perception of effectors AvrRps4 and PopP2 by the WRKY domain of RRS1 initiates an immune response that requires direct interaction between RRS1 and RPS4 (106,120,147). Hence, RRS1 functions as a sensor NLR that suppresses the autoactivity of the executor RPS4 in the absence of effectors and activates RPS4 in the presence of effector proteins. The RGA4 and RGA5 NLR pair also detects two sequence-unrelated effector proteins, AVR-Pia and AVR1-CO39 from the rice blast fungus. Both effectors bind to the HMA domain integrated into RGA5 and then activate immune responses through RGA4 (31,32). Similar domain integration was found in another rice NLR pair, Pik-1/Pik-2, in which the HMA domain integrated into Pik-1 and was able to bind effector protein AVR-Pik. Detection of AVR-Pik alleles by Pik-1 activates immune responses through the paired executor Pik-2 (7,125). Interestingly, a recent study revealed that 20% of the NLRs in the Tetep rice genome are paired (188), suggesting that the paired NLR system may have a significant contribution to the disease resistance in some rice cultivars.
Some NLRs in plants and animals have evolved more complex connections, which link multiple sensor NLRs in the same immune-signaling network (Figure 4). In this review, we define this scenario as NLR networks by which more than two NLRs are connected genetically, or, in some cases, biochemically, in an immunity pathway. The complexity of the NLR networks varies, depending on each case and hypothesis that have been tested thus far. Here, we summarize the major examples of NLR networks in both plants and animals.
TheNLR-required for cell death (NRC) proteins areCNLproteins with typical domain architectures identified in solanaceous plants. They function as helper NLRs that mediate the immune responses of diverse sensor NLRs, which detect various pathogen effectors. InN. benthamiana, three NRCs (NRC2, NRC3, and NRC4) have been functionally characterized (192). These paralogous NRCs show degrees of genetic redundancy that increase the complexity and robustness of this NLR network. Interestingly, all reported NRC-dependent sensor NLRs fall into a phylogenetic superclade with the NRCs, indicating that the NRCs and their matched sensor NLRs are evolutionarily related. The NRC network perhaps originated from a gene cluster that predates the divergence of asterids and caryophyllenes. This ancestral NRC helper-sensor cluster greatly expanded and rearranged in the genome of asterid plants, constituting up to half of the NLRs in some species (192). It is not clear whether NRCs form heterocomplexes with the sensor NLRs that are similar to theNLRC4/NAIP inflammasomeor form homocomplexes that are similar to the ZAR1resistosome.It is also not clear whether NRCs function genetically downstream of other sensor NLRs, similar to the roles of RPW8-type CC-domain-containing NLRs (RNLs), such as ADR1 and NRG1. Interestingly, a recent report showed that the N terminus of NRC4 contains a MADA-motif that is conserved among NRCs, ZAR1, and several other singleton NLRs. This motif has degenerated in the NRC-dependent sensor NLRs, which may represent an important step during the evolution and diversification of the NRC-helper/sensor NLRs from their singleton ancestor. These results also suggest that NRC, ZAR1, and other singleton NLRs may share a conserved mechanism in inducing cell death (3). Some studies suggested that, in addition to participating in the NLR network described above, NRCs may, at least partially, contribute to immune responses mediated by PRRs, such as Cf-4 and LeEIX (65,108,193). Further studies may reveal how cell surface immune receptors mount responses to intracellular helper NLRs to achieve robust immunity.
TheTNLprotein SNC1 was identified in a suppressor screen ofnpr1-1, in which the identified allelesnc1displayed a curly-leaved, dwarf autoimmune phenotype (113). In a recent reverse genetic screen, three additional TNLs, named SIKICs, were identified as components involved in SNC1-mediated immune responses (53). The three SIKICs are genetically redundant in the growth defects caused bysnc1, suggesting that SNC1 and SIKICs together form an NLR network composed of TNLs. Interestingly, SIKICs are in a gene cluster together with SNC1 and have high similarity (65%–72%) to SNC1, suggesting that this TNL network originated from a cluster that has been duplicated recently. The autoimmunity induced bysnc1requires at least one SIKIC (53). However, whether immune responses induced by either one of the SIKICs require SNC1 is yet to be tested.
Both ADR1 and NRG1 belong to the RNL clade, which is a class of ancient CNL with an N terminus similar toRPW8. Compared to the CNL and TNL clades that are extensively expanded in different plant lineages, the ADR1 and NRG1 families are relatively small (154). ADR1 family members are functionally redundant for some tested CNLs and TNLs, including the NLR pair RPS4/RRS1, whereas NRG1 family members act downstream of EDS1 to regulate the TNL signaling pathway (23,29,139,195). Interestingly, the NRG1 family was lost in monocots and several dicot lineages. This phenomenon coincides with the loss of TNL gene families, reflecting the functional connection between TNLs and the NRG1 family (41,154). Two recent studies using the helperless mutant (sextupleadr1 nrg1mutant) validated that ADR1 and NRG1 subfamilies contribute to plant basal defense and TNL-triggered immunity in a fully or unequally redundant manner; however, ADR1 and NRG1 subfamilies also have independent and nonredundant functions in immunity triggered by some NLRs, depending on the TNLs or CNLs tested (145,195). Thus far, there is no evidence that ADR1 or NRG1 paralogs physically associate with sensor NLRs, and it is generally accepted that the ADR1 and NRG1 families are genetically downstream. The mechanisms by which an immune signal transduces from the sensor NLRs to ADR1/NRG1 and how they synergistically contribute to immunity are not clear.
The only NLR pair/network example that has been clearly characterized in mammals thus far is the NAIP/NLRC4inflammasome. Different NAIP sensor NLRs recognize bacterial protein ligands through direct binding and then recruit NLRC4 to form inflammasome complexes (180) (Section 3.1). NLRC4 does not bind to the ligand but functions as the helper/executor NLR that activates caspase-1 to launch inflammasome signaling. Whether or not plants have a resistosome heterocomplex similar to the inflammasomes that contain both a sensor and multiple executor/helper NLRs is yet to be determined.
Some studies suggest that NLRs and NLR-like proteins (NBD fusing to other domains instead of theLRRdomain) participate in biological processes beyond pathogen detection. Here, we summarize related discoveries from different organisms.
Apoptosis is controlled by the perception of cytochrome c, released from the mitochondria, by the NLR-like protein Apaf-1. In addition to an N-terminalCARDand a centralNB-ARC, Apaf-1 contains two C-terminal WD40 domains. Upon binding cytochrome c, Apaf-1 assembles into a heptameric apoptosome that induces the proximity of its CARDs, which in turn recruits caspase-9 via homotypic interactions (54,207). Before the structure of inflammasomes was resolved, the wheel-like structure of the Apaf-1/cytochrome c apoptosome had been well-studied and guided hypotheses of inflammasome structure and function (2,205,208). For example, apoptosome formation requires ATP or deoxyadenosine triphosphate (dATP) binding but was also possible with nonhydrolyzable ATP, indicating that hydrolysis was not required for assembly, the WD40 sterically blocks oligomerization, and Apaf-1 with deleted WD40 domains is constitutively active (80,144,158).
The mammalian NLR NLRP3 is involved in an enormous range of surveillance activities. Activation of NLRP3 usually requires two steps: priming, which is mediated by a variety of convergent signaling pathways often mediated by PAMP perception by TLRs or NOD2, and activation, which can be in response to a staggering list of PAMPs and DAMPs (161,162). It has been hypothesized that NLRP3 is a universal sensor of cellular stress, but it remains to be validated if there is a universal ligand downstream of each stress elicitor sensed by NLRP3.
Although NLRs are well-known in their roles in innate immunity, studies have suggested that several phylogenetically related mammalian NLRPs are involved in reproduction-related processes. NLRP5, also known as MATER, is an oocyte-specific gene that is essential for embryonic development beyond the two-cell stage (172). NLRP2 functions as a critical regulator of oocyte quality and perhaps contributes to age-dependent fertility loss in humans (99). NLRP7, an ortholog of NLRP2, is often found to be mutated in human patients with abnormal pregnancies (129). NLRP14 is also involved in egg development, as knocking downNLRP14arrests the embryo between the one-cell and eight-cell developmental stages (1). Orthologs of theNLRP4andNLRP9genes were also found to be specifically expressed in oocytes or testes, yet the functions of these two NLRPs are not clear (170a). Although NLRs have not been extensively studied outside of plants and mammals, these findings reveal that NLRs may have evolved to participate in different biological processes other than innate immunity.
Plant hybrid necrosis occurs when two incompatible parental plants are crossed, leading to inappropriate immune activation that causes deleterious effects in the progeny. Studies withArabidopsishave found that many of these scenarios are caused by the activation of NLR genes (20,33). For example, as mentioned previously, an NLR from theDM1locus interacts with NLRs fromDM2, and, in progeny of an incompatible cross, this results in the formation of a resistosome-like complex and constitutive autoimmunity (33,173). Furthermore, the oligomerization of the CNL RPP7 is induced when an incompatible allele of RPW8/HRis introduced into the same genetic background (13,112). The TNL geneDM10, which perhaps has recently relocated from a larger NLR gene cluster, induces hybrid necrosis in combination withDM11, causing massive transcriptional changes overrepresented in immune signaling (12). The occurrence of hybrid incompatibility caused by NLR genes can be viewed as a by-product of the adaptive evolution of plant immunity, which then limits the combinations of NLRs that can be found in the same individual plant. Since hybrid incompatibility occurs in the progeny of some crosses, it may also indirectly affect the gene flow among plant populations, leading to the establishment or maintenance of species barriers. Thus, although the major function of plant NLRs lies in immunity, the incompatibility among NLRs or between NLRs and other genes in the genome may affect how a plant species evolves over time (19,21,183).
NLR-like proteins in fungi can determine allorecognition outcomes by mediating cell death during a process called heterokaryon incompatibility. A recent example illustrates this with an NLR-like protein that employs many of the previously discussed mechanisms of plant and animal NLR function. Patatin-like phospholipase-1 (PLP-1) has a tripartite architecture similar to NLRs, including an N-terminal PLP domain, a central NB-ARC, and a C-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat domain (75). PLP-1 interacts with and guards the SNARE protein SEC-9. Theplp-1andsec-9genes are highly polymorphic and are under balancing selection. Heterokaryon incompatibility is triggered in an incompatible cross between the distantly related fungiNeurospora crassaandPodospora anserineby the detection of SEC-9 polymorphisms by PLP-1 (75). NWD2, described in Section 5, responds to an as-yet-unknown ligand to mediate downstream signaling via amyloid templating of HET-S (45). These diverse signaling approaches by related NLR-like proteins demonstrate the utility of NLR-like proteins in fungi.
In this review, we discussed major advances and landmark discoveries related to NLR-mediated plant immunity, including comparisons with NLRs or NLR-like proteins from other species to provide insights to better understand the characteristics of plant NLR proteins. However, due to space limitations, we are not able to cover many other interesting aspects of NLRs, for instance, transcriptional and translational machinery that regulate NLR homeostasis (160), as well as the degree to which the downstream signaling components, such as EDS1 family proteins and others, are conserved for various NLRs across different species (103).
The recent discoveries of the plant NLRZAR1, Roq1, and RPP1resistosomesand the helper NLRs NRG1/ADR1 as calcium channels have inspired many new questions. For instance, do otherCNLsorTNLsform similar structures to those of the ZAR1, Roq1, or RPP1 resistosomes? Can paired NLRs (e.g., RRS1/RPS4) or NLRs forming networks (e.g., sensor NLRs with NRCs) also form structures like resistosomes or inflammasomes for activation? Can other helper NLRs (e.g., NRCs) form ADR1/NRG1-like calcium channels to mediate cell death and other downstream signaling? Or perhaps there are some other overlooked mechanisms involved. It appears thatNADaseactivity requires TNL orTIRoligomerization, but whether TNL oligomerization also requires NADase activity is not known. How does TNL NADase activity link to downstream signaling, such as activation of transcription or activation of helper NLRs (e.g., ADR1/NRG1)? More broadly, is the complex from activated TNL or CNL homogeneous, or do they form complexes with different partner proteins even when only one specific pathogen-derived ligand has been recognized?
Activation of TNLs and CNLs can lead to similar transcriptional reprogramming (49,86,145), but the molecular pathways that converge to give similar transcriptional programs are not clear. Recently, a TNL-mediated gene regulatory network has been proposed (50), and whether this gene network is shared by all NLRs or the regulatory patterns are conserved across plant species remains to be discovered.
Another conceptual breakthrough was reported recently: NLR-mediated disease resistance is dependent on PRRs, and in turn, NLR activation potentiates and enhances PRR-mediated immune responses (134,206). Future research will elucidate the general mechanism of immune responses mediated between cell surface and intracellular immune receptors. All of these recent discoveries provide important novel knowledge and insights on NLR-mediated immunity in plants, which will improve the breeding and engineering of novel and robust resistance of crops against diseases.




NADase activities of TIR domains are conserved across different kingdoms. Interestingly, in the Thoeris (Ths) bacterial antiphage immune system, TIR domains from ThsB are enzymatic, and they catalyze the production of a cADPR isomer or variant (v-cADPR) signaling molecule akin to the plant TIR domain (134a). In bacteria, this signal activates a downstream NADase, ThsA, that leads to NAD depletion and abortive infection, while in plants the exact role of the TIR enzymatic activity is not yet fully understood.
NLRs may function as ion channels upon activation. A recent study indicates that the N-terminal signaling domains of ADR1/NRG1 resemble the cation channel structures similar to those of ZAR1 and the animal Mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) protein (86a), and the autoactive alleles of ADR1/NRG1 can mediate Ca2+influx and cell death in both plants and human HeLa cells (86a). However, it is still not clear whether this mechanism applies to the native conditions when the full-length ADR1/NRG1 are activated by the sensor NLRs upon recognition of effectors.
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We sincerely apologize to colleagues whose work we were unable to cover in this review due to the word and page limits. We thank Dr. Sophien Kamoun (The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich) and Dr. Feng Shao (National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing) for feedback on an earlier draft of this article. P.D. acknowledges support from a Future Leader Fellowship funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BB/R012172/1).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


