We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
GATA factors are evolutionarily conserved transcription factors that are found in animals, fungi, and plants. Compared to that of animals, the size of the plant GATA family is increased. In angiosperms, four main GATA classes and seven structural subfamilies can be defined. In recent years, knowledge about the biological role and regulation of plant GATAs has substantially improved. Individual family members have been implicated in the regulation of photomorphogenic growth, chlorophyll biosynthesis, chloroplast development, photosynthesis, and stomata formation, as well as root, leaf, and flower development. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge of plant GATA factors. Using phylogenomic analysis, we trace the evolutionary origin of the GATA classes in the green lineage and examine their relationship to animal and fungal GATAs. Finally, we speculate about a possible conservation of GATA-regulated functions across the animal, fungal, and plant kingdoms.
Article metrics loading...
GATA factors are evolutionarily conserved transcription factors that are found in animals, fungi, and plants. Compared to that of animals, the size of the plant GATA family is increased. In angiosperms, four main GATA classes and seven structural subfamilies can be defined. In recent years, knowledge about the biological role and regulation of plant GATAs has substantially improved. Individual family members have been implicated in the regulation of photomorphogenic growth, chlorophyll biosynthesis, chloroplast development, photosynthesis, and stomata formation, as well as root, leaf, and flower development. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge of plant GATA factors. Using phylogenomic analysis, we trace the evolutionary origin of the GATA classes in the green lineage and examine their relationship to animal and fungal GATAs. Finally, we speculate about a possible conservation of GATA-regulated functions across the animal, fungal, and plant kingdoms.
GATAfactors are transcriptional regulators present in animals, plants, and fungi, which recognize the DNA sequence W-G-A-T-A-R through a single type IVzinc finger(79,88). The GATA families from animals and yeasts are comparatively small. Six GATA transcription factors can be identified in human (60), five inDrosophila melanogaster(31), and ten inSaccharomyces cerevisiae(78). Human GATAs are required for essential developmental processes such as the differentiation of the haematopoietic and central nervous systems (HsGATA-1–HsGATA-3) or of embryonic stem cells and cardiovascular embryogenesis (HsGATA-4–HsGATA-6) (12,54). Some vertebrate GATAs have two zinc fingers, and only the C-terminal zinc finger is involved in DNA binding while the N-terminal zinc finger modulates DNA-binding specificity or mediates the interaction with other proteins (104). Biological functions and the molecular mode of action of GATAs are surprisingly conserved between humans andDrosophila(16). Fungal GATAs, in contrast, have distinct functions in the regulation of nitrogen and carbon metabolism andsiderophorebiosynthesis as well as in light-regulated growth (5,18,92,107).
In the green lineage, angiosperm genomes encode multiple proteins containing GATA-type zinc fingers that can be subdivided based on the zinc finger domain into four main classes, class A–class D, and into seven subfamilies based on the presence of additional domains (32,88) (Figure 1). Generally, plant GATAs contain one zinc finger with two CX2C motifs interspaced by a 17–20-amino-acid-long loop (CX2CX17–20CX2C) that is followed by a highly basic region (88) (Figure 1). Structurally, the GATA domain is composed of two antiparallel β-sheets followed by an α-helix and a nonstructured basic tail (Figure 1). All domains, including the GATA domain itself, may potentially engage in protein–protein interactions, but such interactions have not been described for plant GATAs.

Figure 1Click to view


The understanding of the biological function of plant GATAs has greatly improved over the past decade. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge on the four classes of angiosperm GATA factors. We further use presently available genomic data for aphylogenomicanalysis of GATA evolution in the green lineage. On this basis, we finally discuss the evolution of GATA-regulated biological processes in plants, animals, and fungi in a comparative manner.
Angiosperm GATA factors can be subdivided into four classes based on their zinc finger domain (32,88) (Figures 1and2). TheArabidopsis thalianagenome encodes 30 GATA factors that divide into 2 larger classes, A (14 members) and B (11 members), and 2 smaller classes, C (3 members) and D (2 members) (32,88). Although the number of GATA factors varies between individual species, the relative size of each of the 4 classes appears to remain fairly constant; e.g., the rice genome contains 11 class A, 8 class B, 6 class C, and 1 class D GATAs (Figures 1and2). While analyses of some vascular plant species have yielded in part larger and in part smaller GATA families, it cannot be excluded that the quality and completeness of the genome assembly or structural annotations limited the analysis, particularly in the cases where the GATA family was found to be comparatively small (48,88).

Figure 2Click to view


The 14A. thalianaclass A-GATAs have a single zinc finger with 18 amino acids in the zinc finger loop, which is N-terminally flanked by a highly acidic conserved patch as well as a basic patch of unknown biological function (Figures 1and2a). The rice family comprises 12 members and includes 3 GATAs with multiple zinc fingers (Figure 2a).
The most comprehensive studies are ofAtGATA2, a key regulator of the crosstalk between brassinosteroid (BR) signaling and photomorphogenesis, two processes controlling hypocotyl elongation and skotomorphogenic development inA. thalianaseedlings (62) (Figure 2b).AtGATA2expression is reduced after BR treatment and elevated in BR biosynthesis and signaling mutants (62).AtGATA2overexpression induced photomorphogenic growth in the dark, andAtGATA2suppression reduced hypocotyl elongation in seedlings grown in the light (62).AtGATA2overexpression resulted in the activation and repression of close to 3,000 genes (62). These transcriptome changes could be correlated with photomorphogenic growth or BR signaling. A few direct target genes of AtGATA2 were identified bychromatin immunoprecipitation followed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (ChIP-qPCR)(62). Overexpression of the closely relatedAtGATA4produced similar, albeit weaker, phenotypes (62).AtGATA2thus promotes photomorphogenic seedling development, andAtGATA4may play a similar, but less prominent, role (62). The levels of AtGATA2 protein increase after light treatment whileAtGATA2transcript levels are reduced, suggesting a direct feedback regulation of AtGATA2 on its own transcription, which is supported by ChIP-qPCR results.
The ubiquitin pathway is also involved in the regulation of GATA2 levels. In the dark, degradation of AtGATA2 is likely mediated by the photomorphogenesis regulator and E3 ligase CONSTITUTIVELY MORPHOGENIC1 (COP1), which can ubiquitinate GATA2 in vitro (62) (Figure 2b). BRs repressAtGATA2transcription by the BR-activated response regulator BRASSINAZOLE RESISTANT1 (BZR1) (62). Knockdown and knockout of the putative rice orthologOsGATA7in japonica rice result in decreased height and leaf inclination and reduced primary branch height, as well as reduced grain number and weight (117). In line with the observations made inArabidopsis, the plant architecture of these lines resembles weak BR-deficient or BR-insensitive mutants (117).
In the root,AtGATA2is specifically expressed in the transition domain between the meristematic proliferation domain and the elongation zone (46) (Figure 2b).AtGATA2expression in the transition domain is increased after auxin treatment and dependent on functional auxin transport (46).AtGATA2overexpression strongly disturbs root meristem development and, among single and double mutants ofAtGATA2,AtGATA4, orAtGATA12(AT5G25830),gata2 gata12double mutants have a significantly shorter root with smaller proliferation and transition domains (46).AtGATA12andAtGATA5can also regulate the expression ofVASCULAR RELATED NAC DOMAIN7(VND7), a transcription factor required for xylem vessel formation (24) (Figure 2b). Expression analyses revealed their transcription in differentiating protoxylem vessel elements and in putative precursors of metaxylem vessel elements located between two protoxylem vessels (24). Concomitant with the proposed role of these GATAs upstream ofVND7, overexpression ofAtGATA12, but not ofAtGATA5, induced the ectopic formation of lignified xylem vessel–like cells with thickened secondary cell walls, albeit with a comparatively low frequency (24).AtGATA2andAtGATA12are thus important regulators of root development and differentiation.
TransgenicArabidopsislines overexpressing fusions between AtGATA4 and the SUPERMAN repression domain X (SRDX) have increased shoot biomass under two different nitrogen growth regimes, which was attributed to an improved nitrogen use efficiency (97).AtGATA4expression is enhanced after ammonium treatment in the root (97), andAtGATA4-SRDXoverexpression mainly affected root morphology in that the roots were shorter and had a reduced number of lateral roots than the wild type (97).
AtGATA12has also been implicated in dormancy control (Figure 2b).AtGATA12expression is differentially regulated by gibberellin (GA), which likely acts through the GA pathway-regulatory DELLA protein RGA-LIKE2 (RGL2) and the transcription factor DNA BINDING ONE ZINC FINGER6 (DOF6) (86).AtGATA12is highly expressed in pollen grains, but its expression is diminished in germinating pollen and pollen tubes (57). In this context,AtGATA12was described as a pollen-specific GATA factor that, together with BZR1, may regulate the expression of hydroxyproline-rich protein genes (57).
A further link to dormancy control comes throughAtGATA8, designatedBLUE MICROPYLAR END3(BME3), which accumulates in the embryonic axis of cold-treated seeds, as suggested by the expression of the β-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter in an enhancer trap line (58). Abme3loss-of-function mutant has increased dormancy and delayed germination after cold treatment (58). A decrease in the expression ofGA3 OXIDASEandGA20 OXIDASEgenes in thebme3mutant, together with the expression of these genes following the cold-induction ofBME3, suggests a role for BME3 in GA biosynthesis regulation (58). BME3 is also a predicted regulator of the auxin-BR–blue light interplay since it shows increased expression after auxin or BR treatments and reduced expression in light-grown seedlings (17).bme3mutants display altered expression of marker genes for the three signaling pathways, and dark-grown seedlings have a slightly reduced hypocotyl when compared to the wild type (17).
In tomato, class A GATASlGATA17is upregulated after drought stress.SlGATA17overexpression lines were subsequently found to be more drought tolerant than the wild type, which correlated with increased activity of the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway (118).
Among all fourGATAfamilies, class B GATA (B-GATA) factors from vascular plants are presently the best-studied GATAs. TheArabidopsisand rice genomes encode 11 and 8 B-GATAs, respectively. B-GATAs contain a singlezinc fingerwith 18 amino acids in the zinc finger loop and, inangiosperms, class B can be subdivided intoHAN-domain- orLLM-domain-containing B-GATAs (Figure 1). The HAN domain is located N-terminally to the zinc finger and named after its occurrence in the floral development regulator HANABA TARANU (AtHAN) (119). The LLM domain has its name from the conservation of leucine-leucine-methionine at the proteins’ C termini (90). The HAN and LLM domains are specific to plant B-GATA factors, do not occur in any other proteins, and have no known biochemical function.
TheArabidopsisgenome encodes three, presumably functionally redundant, HAN-domain B-GATAs: AtHAN (AtGATA18), AtHANL1 (HAN-LIKE1; AtGATA20), and AtHANL2 (AtGATA19) (73,119). Transcriptomics data suggest that AtHAN negatively regulates its own expression, as well as the expression ofAtHAN-LIKE2and the LLM-domain B-GATAsAtGNC(GATA,NITRATE-INDUCIBLE CARBON METABOLISM INVOLVED; AtGATA21) andAtGNL/CGA1(GNC-LIKE/CYTOKININ-RESPONSIVE GATA FACTOR1; AtGATA22) (116) (Figure 2c). Similar negative feedback loops have also been reported among theArabidopsisLLM-domain B-GATA genes (84). The initial finding that HAN- and LLM-domain B-GATAs physically interact could not be reproduced (84,116).
Arabidopsis hanmutants were independently identified as mutants with altered floral organ identity, altered embryo patterning, and narrow leaf morphology (41,73,119). In the shoot,hanmutants have small, flat shoot meristems; reduced floral organ numbers across all four whorls; and fused sepals (119).AtHANis expressed in the boundary between the shoot meristem and newly initiated organs and in the boundaries between different floral organ whorls (119). The meristem regulatorsCLAVATA1(CLV1),CLV2, andCLV3have strong genetic interactions withAtHAN, and, conversely,AtHANis ectopically expressed inclvmutants (119).AtHANmay controlWUSCHEL(WUS) expression, which regulates meristem size by restricting the expression of CLV3, the ligand for the CLV1 and CLV2 receptors. During floral development, AtHAN activates the expression ofPINHEAD(PNH) and interacts with PNH protein (Figure 2c). Together, AtHAN and PNH activate the expression ofJAGGED(JAG) andBLADE-ON-PETIOLE(BOP) (21) (Figure 2c). AtHAN further modulates cytokinin (CK) homeostasis in the boundary region by stimulating the expression of theCYTOKININ OXIDASE3(CKX3) (21) (Figure 2c). SinceAtHANis also expressed early in provascular cells, thehanmutant may, alternatively or additionally, be defective in the transport of nutrients or signals, which may prevent meristem growth and floral organ development (119). InPetunia hybrida, the downregulation of the HAN-like genePhGATA19resulted in reduced fusion of the petals in this sympetalous species (83) (Figure 2c).AtHANoverexpression alters cell division patterns and causes loss of meristem activity (119).AtHANmay thus act as a growth repressor at the boundaries in shoots and flowers (119).
A growth-repressive function is also observed in cotyledons where the loss ofAtHANfunction together with the transcriptional coactivatorANGUSTIFOLIA3/GRF-INTERACTING FACTOR1(AN3/GIF1) leads to ectopic root formation on cotyledons in the double mutant (47) (Figure 2c). Further, loss of two HAN orthologous genes from the legumeMedicago truncatularesults in increased nodule formation (113) (Figure 2c). In mutants of the orthologous HAN-domain GATAsTASSEL SHEATH1(TSH1) from maize,NECK LEAF1(NL1, OsGATA15) from rice, andTHIRD OUTER GLUME(TRD) from barley,bract leavesoccur (111). In the reference strain of each of these species, bract leaf formation is suppressed by the respectiveGATAgene, which should be the result of a grass-specific duplication andneofunctionalizationofHAN(111). A HAN-domain mutation in one of thetsh1alleles indicates that the HAN domain is essential for the functionality of this GATA class (111). At least for the ricenl1mutant, delayed flowering, reduced panicle size with bracts, and abnormal upper internodes were reported as additional phenotypes (110). An independently isolated mutant ofOsGATA15,short and narrow flag leaf 1, was characterized as a mutant with excessive vegetative growth with overgrown culms from internodes (37).
In theArabidopsisembryo,AtHANis required for the proper positioning of the proembryo boundary (73).hanmutant embryos have vacuolated cells in the lower tier of the embryo and fewer suspensor cells (73). The expression domains of suspensor and lower-tier markers are shifted apically in globular-stagehanembryos, and the presumed change in cell fate correlates, in the case of the suspensor marker–positive cells, with the cellular phenotype of the respective cells (73). Indicative of defects in proembryo boundary positioning, auxin distribution is shifted inhanmutant embryos, which aligns with impaired embryonic root formation and is due to the inability to undergo an essential cell division of the hypophysis to form the quiescent center (QC) (73).hanmutants are also defective in cotyledon initiation and growth; e.g., they initiate up to four cotyledons (119).
Thehanembryo phenotype may, at least in part, be explained by changes in auxin distribution due to altered PIN-FORMED (PIN) distribution. Auxin is transported within the plant by auxin transporters, including the auxin efflux carriers PIN1 and PIN7 (25). In wild-type embryos, auxin initially accumulates in the apical part of the embryo and then shifts to the suspensor preceding specification of the hypophysis. This shift in auxin distribution correlates with a shift in PIN7 polarity in the suspensor, as well as a shift of PIN1 distribution in the provascular cells of the proembryo (25). Both of the expression domains ofPIN1andPIN7are shifted apically inhanmutants (73). HAN-domain-containing B-GATAs may thus have a growth-repressive function, which may require the regulation of proper auxin distribution.
A. thalianaencodes sixLLM-domainGATAs with an AAXLLMXLSXG signature motif, of whichAtGNCandAtGNL/CGA1are the most prominent members (9,84,90) (Figures 1and2).AtGNCwas initially identified as a nitrate-regulated transcript and the paralogousAtGNLas a sucrose- and CK-regulated gene, hence its alternative nameA. thaliana CYTOKININ-RESPONSIVE GATA FACTOR1(AtCGA1) (11,72,76,93) (Figure 2c). AtGNC and AtGNL have long N termini and thereby differ from the other, shorter family members AtGATA15, AtGATA16, AtGATA17, and AtGATA17-LIKE (AtGATA17L). Mutant and overexpression analyses suggest that all six family members have redundant biochemical and biological functions (9,84) (Figures 1and2).
The LLM domain, like the HAN domain, has no known biochemical function. However, complementation and overexpression lines with a mutation of the LLM domain display different phenotypes when compared to the respective lines overexpressing the wild-type gene (9). While lines expressing B-GATAs with or without the LLM domain have similar greening and germination phenotypes, overexpressors of the LLM-domain-mutated variants display changes in leaf shape and petiole length, and, most importantly, they have a strongly reduced number of differentially regulated genes when compared to overexpressors of the wild-type gene, suggesting that they may be functionally impaired (9). AtGATA23 is a B-GATA with a degenerate LLM domain that has been implicated in the initiation of lateral root formation (20).AtGATA23is specifically expressed in xylem pole pericycle cells before the first asymmetric division and controls lateral root founder cell identity downstream of an auxin-responsive module (20) (Figure 2d).
Arabidopsis AtGNCoriginally attracted attention based on the light-green phenotype of thegncmutant (11). While the loss of multiple LLM-domain B-GATA genes results in a greater decrease in greening,LLM-domain B-GATAoverexpression induces enhanced greening throughout the plant, very prominently at the base of light-grown seedling hypocotyls (9,84,90) (Figure 2d). Remarkably, there is a clear correlation betweenLLM-domain B-GATAgene dosage or gene expression, in the mutants and in the overexpression lines, and the extent of the greening phenotype and also of other quantitative phenotypes, such as lateral shoot angle, flowering time, and phyllotaxy (9,84,90) (Figure 2d). The effects ofGATAexpression on the greening response are cell autonomous because grafting a dark-green overexpressor hypocotyl onto a wild-type hypocotyl does not promote greening in the latter (49).AtGNLoverexpression can also lead tochlorophyllaccumulation in the root, and primary root length, as well as lateral root numbers, is altered inAtGNLoverexpressors andgncmutants (28,52). The regulation and role of LLM-domain B-GATAs are conserved in rice where RNA interference (RNAi) suppression and overexpression of riceCGA1(Os02g12790;OsGATA11) antagonistically regulate greening and chloroplast biogenesis but also starch production and plant architecture (42). Furthermore, overexpression of a poplarAtGNCortholog,PdGATA19/PdGNC, enhanced chlorophyll content and photosynthesis (2). The loss-of-function mutant showed retarded growth and enhanced secondary xylem differentiation (2).
In flowers,AtGNCandAtGNLexpression is negatively regulated by the floral development regulators PISTILLATA (PI) and APETALA3 (AP3), which directly bind the promoters of the twoGATAgenes (66) (Figure 2d). Negative regulation of these GATAs and, consequently, greening may be part of the mechanism leading to colorless floral organs.
The prominent greening defect of LLM-domain B-GATA mutants has been explained by defects of the GATAs in the activation of chlorophyll biosynthesis genes, chloroplast sigma factors, and chloroplast development (8,120). Transcriptomics analyses in combination withChIP-qPCRsuggested a prominent role for GATAs in the regulation of many genes in the chlorophyll and thehemebiosynthesis pathways (8). Genetic interaction analysis revealed thatAtGNLoverexpression was sufficient to suppress the greening defect of the Mg2+-chelatase subunit gene mutantsgenome uncoupled5(gun5) andchli(8) (Figure 2d). Overexpression of 3,8-divinyl protochlorophyllide a 8-vinyl reductase (DVR) suppressed thegnc gnlgreening defect, indicating thatDVRlevels are critically low in this background (8). An interesting physiological ramification of the LLM-domain B-GATA-dependent regulation of the chlorophyll pathway is the apparent diversion of metabolites from the heme branch of the tetrapyrrole pathway and consequently reduced phytochromobilin synthesis, resulting in decreased phytochrome function (8). The latter can explain the occurrence of a longer hypocotyl inAtGNLoverexpression lines, which should be due to a partial light insensitivity of the overexpressor seedlings (8).
Chloroplast development in the root, repressed by auxin signaling in intact wild-type plants, is induced in a CK-dependent manner when the shoot is removed (51). This CK response is mediated by the type-B ARABIDOPSIS RESPONSE REGULATORS ARR11 and ARR12 that promote the expression ofAtGNL(51). In turn,AtGNLexpression in the root is negatively regulated by auxin, such that positive and negative regulation ofAtGNLmay be causal for the differential greening of roots in intact and decapitated plants (51).
In the control of greening, AtGNC and AtGNL act together with theArabidopsisGOLDEN-LIKE transcription factors GLK1 and GLK2. At least with regard to the regulation of a number of genes from the tetrapyrrole biosynthesis pathway, as well as two importantSIGMAfactor genes, the transcription defects detected in thegnc gnlandglk1 glk2loss-of-function mutants are affected in a largely additive manner in thegnc gnl glk1 glk2quadruple mutant, indicating that the two types of transcription regulators act additively and thus, most likely, independently of each other (8,120).
LLM-domainB-GATAs can also induce stomata formation, most strongly in hypocotyls but also inArabidopsisseedling cotyledons (49) (Figure 2d). The effects of the LLM-domain B-GATAs on stomata formation are light dependent but can be induced by red, far-red, and blue light treatments and also in the dark in a quadruple mutant deficient in the function of the PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTORSPIF1,PIF3,PIF4, andPIF5(49).
Two independent studies have approached the genome-wide identification of AtGNC and AtGNL downstream genes at the genome level (114,120). In a first study, AtGNC and AtGNL were categorized as transcriptional activators and found to have 1,475 and 638 target genes, respectively (114). Interestingly, the overlap between these two gene sets was comparatively small, leading to the surprising conclusion that these twoGATAsmay not share the functional redundancy suggested by the ample genetic evidence (114). In the second study and using protein-binding microarrays, several biologically relevant genes were identified as AtGNC repression targets, namelyPIF, BR biosynthesis, and BR signaling genes, as well as genes for the development of stomatal regulators (120). The latter findings are interesting since they are in line with the known biological functions and regulation of the GATAs but await genetic validation.
In contrast toHAN-domainB-GATAs, where essentially nothing is known about upstream regulatory pathways, multiple phytohormones have been implicated in the regulation ofLLM-domain B-GATAgene expression (Figure 2d). Common to allArabidopsisLLM-domain B-GATAs is regulation by CK, initially reported forAtGNCandAtGNL(Figure 2d) (84). However, the strong light-dependent regulation reported forAtGNLis not shared by any of the other family members (72,84). The expression ofAtGNCandAtGNLis also induced by GA and mediated by PIFs that are repressed by the GA-labile DELLA proteins (90) (Figure 2d).
AtGNCandAtGNLare important regulators downstream of the GA pathway since their loss-of-function mutations partially suppress the severe GA-deficiency phenotype of aga1mutant, e.g., its late-flowering phenotype (90). This observation has motivated investigations into the role of the LLM-domain B-GATAs in flowering-time control (Figure 2d). In long-day conditions, loss-of-function mutants and overexpression lines flower earlier and later, respectively, than the wild type (84,90). AtGNC and AtGNL directly repress the transcription ofSUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CONSTANS1(SOC1) (Figure 2d). Inversely, SOC1 represses the transcription ofAtGNCandAtGNLto control greening and cold tolerance, two physiological responses, besides flowering, mediated by SOC1 (89) (Figure 2d).AtGNCandAtGNLoverexpressors share a number of phenotypes with mutants of theAUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR2(ARF2). The genetic suppression ofarf2greening and late-flowering-time phenotypes in thearf2 gnc gnlmutant indicated thatAtGNCandAtGNLmay be direct targets of ARF2, which was then confirmed by ChIP-qPCR experiments (91) (Figure 2d). Similarly, a regulation ofAtGNCandAtGNLdownstream from ARF7 and its negative auxin/indole-3-acetic acid (AUX/IAA) regulator SOLITARY ROOT (SLR) could be demonstrated (91) (Figure 2d). LLM-domain B-GATAs are thus subject to regulation by a number of hormonal inputs and are well connected in the plant signaling transduction landscape.
Arabidopsisclass C GATA factors (C-GATAs) contain 20 amino acids in thezinc fingerloop and are characterized by the presence of a TIFY and a CCT motif, located on the N terminus of the GATA domain (Figure 1). The TIFY motif is named after the conserved amino acid sequence, threonine-isoleucine-phenylalanine-tyrosine, found in TIFY-motif-containing proteins (106). The TIFY-corresponding sequence in GATA factors is, however, comparatively more divergent. The approximately 45-amino-acid CCT domain gets its name from three important plant regulatory proteins, the flowering-time regulators CONSTANS and CONSTANS-LIKE, as well as the circadian clock regulator TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION1 (TOC1) (Figure 2d). The function of the CCT motif is unknown, but many proteins with a CCT motif have a role in integrating day length and rhythmicity. In this regard, it is striking that a grass-specific clade of the C-GATAs lacks the CCT motif but contains a FAR-RED IMPAIRED RESPONSE1 (FAR1)/FAR-RED ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL3 (FHY3) protein domain, which also signals environmental light cues to the plant (59,109).
Biological information about C-GATAs is scarce. InA. thaliana, overexpression ofZINC FINGER PROTEIN EXPRESSED IN THE INFLORESCENCE MERISTEM(AtZIM) results in seedlings with elongated hypocotyls and petioles (75,96,106). A mutant of theBrassica napus ZML1ortholog,BnA5.ZML, has reduced self-incompatibility, suggesting that the gene plays a role in this process (22). C-GATAs thus require deeper investigations, particularly since they have an important role in integrating light information.
Class D GATA factors (D-GATAs) have an 18-amino-acid zinc finger loop, and their N-terminally located GATA domain is flanked, in the case of the twoArabidopsisfamily members, by an ADDITIONAL SEX COMBS homology (ASXH; PF13919) domain (Figure 1). Characteristic of the α-helical ASXH domain is an LLXXL motif, which is present in diverse transcription factors, coactivators, and repressors, where it supposedly mediates interactions among them (82). The rice D-GATA does not have a recognizable ASXH domain but shares another motif with theArabidopsisD-GATAs (Figure 1). There is no information about the biological or biochemical role of the GATAs from this small GATA class, but it is noteworthy that one of the twoArabidopsisfamily members has a degenerated zinc finger domain (Figure 1). Further, after modeling ofArabidopsisor rice D-GATAs, none of the models predicted a typical zinc finger consisting of an α-helix and an antiparallel β-sheet for these proteins (Figure 1). D-GATAs may thus have evolved a new structure and possibly a new function.
The availability of numerous land plant and algal genomes has enabled a broad analysis of the GATA family throughout the photosynthetic lineages (105) (Figure 3). Searching for proteins containing the GATA zinc finger domain as defined by thePfamdatabase (PF00320) results in the identification of numerous GATA-type zinc fingers encoded in the genomes of vascular and nonvascular plants, streptophyte algae, chlorophyte algae, red algae, the glaucophyte algaCyanophora paradoxa, and three algae with complex plastids (70) (Figure 3). The presence of comparatively large, expanded GATA gene families is not unique to land plants. The green algaChlamydomonas reinhardtii, for example, contains 20 uncharacterized GATA-type zinc finger proteins. On the other hand, the red algae and the only sequenced glaucophyte alga have few GATA zinc finger–containing proteins. For instance, only one GATA factor is found in the genome of the seaweedPyropia yezoensis, while six GATA factors are detected in the genome of the unicellular red algaCyanidioschyzon merolae. As noted previously, GATA factors are absent from diatoms, and only a few sequenced algae from the protist lineages contain GATA factors (87).

Figure 3Click to view


Large-scale phylogenetic analyses confirm that the four classes of land plant GATA-type zinc fingers have ancient origins (88) (Figure 3). Clades representing each class share a common ancestor with distinct green algal homologs and, in some cases, at least one red algal homolog (Figure 3). This pattern suggests that separate ancestral proteins for each GATA class likely existed in a common ancestor of the green and red lineages, with multiple gene duplications occurring at different times and in different lineages during evolution (Figure 3). Each land plant genome analyzed, including genomes from ferns and mosses, contains homologs from each class. Each class also contains at least one streptophyte algal homolog, but only the genome of the streptophyte algaKlebsormidium nitenscontains homologs from all classes, which could be because the other streptophyte algal genomes are incomplete. The class A–D GATA factors from streptophyte algae often resemble land plant GATA factors, with motifs and domains originally described for theArabidopsisGATAs (Figures 1and3). By contrast, most of the chlorophyte and red algal zinc finger sequences are not easily defined to one class or the other based onphylogeny. Some algal clades have low branch support, some algal sequences branch early in the tree, and other algal proteins are more similar to human and fungal GATA domains than to those of land plants (Figure 3). In the latter case, it is possible that red and green algae have retained GATA factors from the last common eukaryotic ancestor, which were lost during land plant evolution. However, GATA factors appear to evolve viamodular evolution, involving domain fusion and shuffling. As a result, apart from the zinc finger, there is low to zero sequence similarity between subfamilies, and resolving deep phylogenetic relationships based on the zinc finger sequence is difficult.
As inArabidopsisand rice, class A is the largest of the fourGATAclasses in most land plant genomes (Figure 3). Based on relatedness to A-GATAs from the ferns, at least three gene duplications likely occurred early in the evolution of vascular plants (Figure 3). When using the zinc finger sequence identified with PF00320 to build the phylogenetic tree, the previously class A–classified zinc fingers of AtGATA14, OsGATA24, OsGATA27, and OsGATA28, as well as the C-terminal zinc finger from OsGATA26 and orthologous zinc finger sequences, are not found in the class A clade (Figure 3). This is in part due to the absence of a lysine at amino acid position 15 after the first CXXC in the zinc finger, which is conserved in all other A-GATAs in the tree. Although these proteins contain divergent zinc finger sequences, the presence of the highly conserved C-terminal extension of the class A zinc finger, EYRPX3PX6HX3H, confirms that the proteins are phylogenetically related to A-GATAs (Figure 1).
Class B is the second largest GATA class in most land plant genomes, where it can be subdivided into LLM- and HAN-domain-containing subclasses based on phylogeny and sequence motif conservation (Figures 1–3). The HAN subclass contains a VDCTLSL signature motif near the N terminus (Figure 1) with a couple of variants, such as MNCTLSL in one of fourPhyscomitrium(Physcomitrella)patensparalogs or IDCTLSL in one of two paralogs inHordeum vulgare(Supplemental Table 1). Most proteins in the LLM subclass from vascular plants contain the AAXLLMXLSXG signature motif near the C terminus with degenerate sequences found in AtGATA23, AtGATA29, and closely related proteins (9) (Figure 1). Variants of the canonical motif, such as GAXLLMXLFXG from the streptophyte algaChara braunii, are also present in both algae and land plants (Supplemental Table 1).
By analyzing B-GATAs from vascular plants, nonvascular plants, and green algae, instances ofneofunctionalizationand possiblesubfunctionalizationevents can be traced that likely occurred very early during the evolution of streptophytes (Figure 3b). B-GATAs from the fernsSalvinia cucullataandAzolla filiculoides; the spikemossSelaginella moellendorffii; the streptophyte algaeC. brauniiandK. nitens; and the chlorophyte algaeBathycoccus prasinos,Ostreococcus lucimarinus,Micromonas pusilla, andMicromonassp. RCC299 contain LLM-like motifs (Figure 3;Supplemental Table 1). The GATA factors from the mossesP. patens,S. cucullata, andS. moellendorffiiand the liverwortMarchantia polymorphacontain both the LLM and HAN motifs, while GATA factors fromS. moellendorffiiandA. filiculoidesonly contain the HAN motif. In the case ofA. filiculoides, the HAN motif has a serine-to-histidine substitution. The presence of the LLM motif in green algae suggests that it may have arisen first in a green alga ancestor followed by the early evolution of the HAN motif in land plants (Figure 3). In this context, theLLM-domainB-GATAs from land plants, such as AtGNC and AtGNL, have been attributed with mainly physiological functions that are already present in algae, notably inchlorophyllbiosynthesis and chloroplast division, whileHAN-domainB-GATAs may have acquired functions as regulators of morphology and differentiation in land plants (8,10,11,15,21,47,73,84,95,111,116,119,120). It is interesting to speculate that the homologs with HAN and LLM domains found inP. patens,S. cucullata,S. moellendorffii, andM. polymorphamay resemble an ancestral state in land plant B-GATAs before the subfunctionalization event that led to separate LLM- and HAN-type class B-GATA lineages.
The majority of C-GATAs as found in land plants and streptophyte algae contain both the TIFY (PF06200) and CCT (PF06203) domains (Figure 3). OsGATA22 and OsGATA23 are the founding members of a small grass-specific subfamily within class C, which, instead of a TIFY-CCT-GATA architecture, contain a FAR1/FHY3 (PF03101) domain located C-terminally of thezinc finger(88) (Figure 1). The transcription factor FHY3 and its paralog FAR1 regulate light-inducedCIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1(CCA1) gene expression inArabidopsis(59). The presence of the FHY3/FAR1 domain in these GATAs may also suggest a role in the integration of environmental light signals. The zinc finger sequences from plant C-GATAs share a clade with animal and fungal zinc finger sequences (Figure 3). There are also distinct clades representing alga and plant proteins [such asAquilegia coerulea(Aqcoe5G389300) andKalanchoe fedtschenkoi(Kaladp0024s0676)], which show affinity to the C-class clade. These proteins often contain bromodomains or bromodomain extraterminal (BET) domains (Figure 3). Bromodomain-related sequences mediate protein–protein interactions in proteins involved in transcription and chromatin remodeling (94). Chromatin remodeling could thus be a biochemical function associated with C-GATAs.
Class D is the smallest family of GATA factors found in land plant genomes, suggesting selective pressure to maintain these proteins at a relatively low copy number (Figure 3). When multiple class D homologs are present in the same genome, the paralogs tend to be structurally different. For instance, inArabidopsis, there are two class D GATA factors (D-GATAs), AtGATA26 and AtGATA27, but AtGATA26 is missing the first two cysteines of the zinc finger sequence. InM. truncatula, there are six D-GATAs, and all but one are missing the first two cysteines of the zinc finger sequence. Class D is also the only family that has a large number of closely related sequences from the chlorophytes, several of which contain a detectable ASXH domain that is found in most, but not all, D-GATAs. The ASXH mediates protein–protein interactions among transcription regulators (82). Human ASXL interacts with the tumor suppressor protein and ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase (UCH) BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) through the ASXH domain, and the interaction is required for BAP1 functionality (3,80). In humans, ASXH domains are not associated with GATA factors, but their occurrence in plant GATAs is an indication that UCH hydrolases may act together with plant D-GATAs. InA. thaliana, UCH1, UCH2, and UCH3 are closely related to BAP1, which could function together with ASXH-domain-containing GATAs (36,115).
Algal proteins containing GATA-type zinc fingers often contain regions similar to characterized histone readers, including the bromodomain, the plant homeodomain (PHD), the bromo-adjacent homology (BAH) domain, the proline-tryptophan-tryptophan-proline (PWWP) domain, and the Tudor domain (94) (Figure 3). The BAH domain is also found in the GATA-domain-containing proteins EGL27 fromCaenorhabditis elegansand MTA1 from human, which can function as transcriptional corepressor and coactivator and is part of a histone deacetylase multiprotein complex (69,74,98). In line with a direct role for GATAs in histone modification, some green algal GATA factors contain a class I histone deacetylase domain (PF00850) (Figure 3). The bromodomain, which recognizes acetylated lysine residues on the N-terminal tails of histones, was commonly found to be associated with GATA domains in green and red algae, sometimes in combination with other domains, such as the Su(var)3-9, Enhancer of zeste, and Trithorax (SET) domain, a domain with methyltransferase activity, and the Tudor-like Agenet domain, a domain of unknown function (67,68). Taken together with the presence of the ASXH domain in D-GATAs from land plants and two green algae, members of these GATA families have conserved roles or interactions with chromatin readers and remodelers.
Although the zinc finger domain and the structural organization differ betweenGATAsfrom the three kingdoms, the evolutionary conservation of GATAs invites the hypothesis that there may be conserved, ancient functions under GATA control. In the following sections, we highlight a few cases where such conserved biological functions can be found. In many cases, the underlying similarities are vague, and the knowledge is often still very fragmentary, but our comparative overview may allow the formulation of a new hypothesis for future research and lead to a better understanding of GATA evolution.
One commonality between GATAs from animals, plants, and yeasts is their role in the synthesis of metal-binding complexes (Figure 4a). Due to their capacity for electron transport, metal-binding complexes are essential mediators of biological redox processes, such as nitrogen fixation, photosynthesis, and mitochondrial respiration (35).Porphyrinsare heterocyclic organic tetrapyrroles with different side chain substituents that often form metalloporphyrin complexes with metal ions such as iron(Fe)(II/III), magnesium(Mg)(II), copper(II), and zinc(II) (13,100). Porphyrins appear colored because they absorb light in the visible range of the spectrum.Chlorophylls, the Mg(II) complexes of protoporphyrin IX, andhemes, the Fe(II) complexes of protoporphyrin IX, are two important groups of metalloporphyrins. The formation of 5-aminolevulinate (5ALA) is divergent between animals, fungi, and plants, but the enzymatic reactions from 5ALA to protoporphyrin IX, the precursor of chlorophyll and heme, are identical, even though the reactions take place in different intracellular compartments between the kingdoms (50).

Figure 4Click to view


Heme is an indispensable constituent of hemoglobin, the metalloprotein that enables oxygen transport via the erythrocytes of most vertebrates, but it has a variety of other functions in animals, e.g., as a cofactor in enzyme catalysis and electron transfer. Human HsGATA-1 is the master regulator of heme biosynthesis and erythropoiesis in bone marrow and liver (12,26,54) (Figure 4a). HsGATA-1 activates heme biosynthesis by activating 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase-2 (ALAS2) through binding ofALAS2intronicciselements. ALAS2 is a rate-limiting factor for heme biosynthesis as it catalyzes the first step of heme biosynthesis, the reaction of glycine and succinyl-CoA forming 5-aminolevulinate (81).
Chlorophylls are the major pigments involved in photosynthesis in plants. The abundant chlorophyll a and b are structurally very similar. Analogous to the role of animal GATAs in heme biosynthesis, B-GATAs promote chlorophyll biosynthesis inA. thaliana(8,84,90) (Figure 4a). Transcriptomic analyses revealed the regulation of almost all genes of the chlorophyll biosynthesis pathway inAtGNCandAtGNLmutants or overexpressors, suggesting that these B-GATAs are central regulators of the pathway (8). AtGNC and AtGNL directly regulate genes encoding enzymes of the chlorophyll biosynthesis pathway, like the Mg-chelatase complex andDVR(8). At the same time, they regulate the nucleus-encodedSIGMAfactor genes, which are general transcription regulators in chloroplasts, and act upstream of and in concert with theGOLDEN2-LIKEtranscription factors, another class of important chlorophyll biosynthesis regulators (8,120).
Fungal GATAs have a role in the synthesis of metal-binding complexes through their function in the biosynthesis ofsiderophores, cyclic or linear metal-binding complexes (Figure 4a). Siderophores are structurally and chemically distinct from porphyrins but similar in their capacity for Fe(III) binding and uptake from the environment (39). Fungi mainly use hydroxamate-type siderophores, which are derived from the nonproteinogenic amino acid ornithine (103). GATA factors from a number of different fungal species regulate siderophore biosynthesis, e.g., Urbs-1 from the basidiomyceteUstilago maydis(107), SreP from the ascomycetePenicillium chrysogenum(33), and SreA from the ascomyceteAspergillus nidulans(34).A. nidulansSreA represses siderophore biosynthesis through its negative regulation of L-ornithine-N5-oxygenase, which catalyzes the first step in the biosynthesis of hydroxamate siderophores (34,55). Similar observations were made inU. maydisand inBlastomyces dermatitidiswhere the GATA factor SreB represses genes involved in the biosynthesis and uptake of siderophores, as well as transport of ornithine from the mitochondria into the cytosol (29,55). In summary, the synthesis of metal-binding complexes is a common function of GATAs from all three eukaryotic kingdoms.
The regulation of nitrogen metabolism is a common theme between GATAs from fungi and plants (Figure 4b). Early discoveries related to plant GATA functions in nitrate metabolism were motivated, and may potentially have been biased, by the discovery that several fungal GATAs regulate nitrogen responses. TheA. nidulansGATA AreA functions in nitrogen metabolite repression, which controls the transcription of genes involved in nitrogen uptake and catabolism (5,18). During the transition from nitrogen-starving to nitrogen-rich conditions, nitrogen metabolite repression prevents the synthesis of enzymes and permeases for the utilization of inferior nitrogen sources like proline, allantoin, and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) when superior nitrogen sources like glutamine and asparagine are present (14,30,40). AreA acts directly upstream of nitrogen catabolic enzymes and ammonium permeases (14,71). TheA. nidulansGATA AreB is also involved in nitrogen metabolite repression by repressing the formamidasefmdSunder nitrogen-limiting conditions as well as the arginine catabolism genes arginase aminotransferase (agaA) and ornithine aminotransferase (otaA) in the presence of ammonium (18). Similarly, 4 of the 10 GATA factors, Gln3, Nil1, Nil2, and Dal80, regulate nitrogen metabolite repression inS. cerevisiae(30). In this context, Gln3 and Nil1 activate, while Nil2 and Dal80 repress Gln3 and Nil1 targets (19,40,64). The absence of obvious additional domains and the low sequence similarity between the different fungal GATAs outside thezinc fingerregion may suggest that the GATA domain itself has a role in these regulatory processes.
ArabidopsisB-GATAs were initially identified based on their induction by nitrate (11,93) (Figure 4b).Arabidopsisseedlings transferred from medium containing glutamine as a nitrogen source to medium containing nitrate increaseAtGNCexpression twofold after 2 h (11). Additionally, GATA motifs are present in the promoters of nitrate reductase (NIA), nitrite reductase (NiR), and glutamine synthetase genes. Footprinting experiments suggested that theNeurospora crassaGATA NIT2 can bind to these GATA elements in the promoter of spinachNiR(85). Furthermore, NIT2 can bind promoter fragments of tomatoNIAin vitro (45). Although the expression of theNIAandNiRgenes was not altered in thegncmutant (11), the link between plant GATAs and nitrogen metabolism deserves investigation at a deeper level.
Fungal and plantGATAsplay a role in carbon metabolism (Figure 4c). Through the negative transcriptional regulation ofagaAandotaAby the GATAs AreA and AreB,A. nidulanscan utilize arginine as a source of nitrogen and carbon under nitrogen-repressing conditions (63). The effects of AreA and AreB depend on their primary carbon source. While AreA acts as a transcriptional repressor in the presence of glucose, AreB represses its target genes in the presence of fructose. The activity of AreA is regulated by several posttranscriptional and posttranslational mechanisms. One of these is the physical interaction of the negative transcriptional regulator NmrA with AreA (53). Similarly,N. crassaNmr1 interacts with the AreA ortholog NIT2 (112).
TheArabidopsisB-GATA AtGNC gets its name from its proposed role in carbon metabolism (11) (Figure 4c). Thegncmutant is hypersensitive to glucose, and many genes misregulated in thegncmutant are connected to carbon metabolism, such as genes encoding sugar transporters and genes encoding galactosidases (disaccharide metabolism), cellulose synthases (polysaccharide metabolism), chitinases, glucanases, and glycosyltransferases (glycosyl transfer) (11).
Starch plays an important role in both plants and fungi (Figure 4d). Fungi, with their parasitic or necrotrophic behavior, degrade starch from plants, while plants use starch to store glucose generated through photosynthesis. In both kingdoms, starch accumulation and degradation, respectively, are regulated by GATA factors. The GATA NsdD fromPenicillium oxalicumregulates major genes involved in starch, cellulose, and hemicellulose degradation, namely the glucoamylase genePOX01356/AMY15A, the α-amylase genePOX09352/AMY13A, and their transcriptional activator POX03890/AMYR (38) (Figure 4d). TheΔPoxNsdDmutant shows a strong decrease in starch-degrading enzyme activity. Concomitantly,ArabidopsisAtGNC and AtGNL influence the number of chloroplasts, which are the organelles for starch synthesis, as well as the amount of starch itself in proportion to their transcript levels. The same effect on starch biosynthesis was observed in rice and poplar (1,42,43). Taken together, these findings confirm, or at least suggest, a conserved role of GATAs in carbon metabolism.
Light controls specific developmental programs, photosynthesis, circadian rhythms, and tropic growth responses in fungi and plants. In fungi, blue light signaling depends on the White Collar photoreceptor GATA factors WC-1 and WC-2, originally described inN. crassa(7) (Figure 4e). The light-sensory WC-1 interacts with WC-2 in the White Collar Complex (WCC) where WC-2 confers the signal to downstream genes through binding of the promoters of its targets, such as Frequency (FRQ), the major regulator of the circadian clock (27,108). Within the WCC, FRQ acts in a negative feedback loop together with its partner FRQ-INTERACTING RNA HELICASE (FRH) to inhibit WCC and to regulate theN. crassacircadian clock (27) (Figure 4e).N. crassa white collarloss-of-function mutants are unable to produce carotenoid photoprotectants, e.g., by regulating the enzyme phytoene dehydrogenase (al-1) (27). The interplay between WC-1 and WC-2 appears highly conserved in fungi since fungal genomes always encode both GATA factors (23,44).
Plant GATAs were originally studied because GATA elements were enriched in the promoters of light- and circadian clock–responsive genes (4,101). SeveralA. thalianaGATA gene family members are light or dark regulated (65).AtGATA2is a key light-signaling transcription factor that mediates photomorphogenesis (62) (Figures 2band4e). Further,AtGNCandAtGNLtake part in chloroplast biogenesis andchlorophyllsynthesis, two light-dependent processes (8,15) (Figure 4e). Their light regulation is, among others, repressed by the phytochrome-regulated PIFs (90) (Figure 1b). Additionally,AtGNLis strongly light inducible (72,84). Another interesting link between plant GATAs and the fungal WCC is the occurrence of CCT domains in several C-GATAs (Figure 1). CCT domains are commonly found in proteins regulating information from the light environment, and they are present in TOC1, a major regulator of plant circadian rhythms (99).
Research on plant GATA factors over the past 10 to 15 years has greatly advanced the understanding of this conserved transcription factor family.Phylogenomicanalysis reveals that the four GATA classes found inangiospermsare already present in land plants. The occurrence ofLLM-domainB-GATAs in algal species may suggest that these GATAs, which control photosynthesis and chloroplast biogenesis in angiosperms, could control similar functions in algae. The second motif typical for LLM-domain B-GATAs, theHAN domain, is only found in land plants where HAN-domain B-GATAs control growth and differentiation processes typical for multicellular organisms. C-GATAs are outstanding because of the small size of this family in any tested organism and because all species analyzed only contain one protein with an intact GATA domain. Since GATAs are evolutionarily conserved, it can be speculated that they have also conserved aspects of their biological function, e.g., in the synthesis of metal-binding complexes, in nitrogen or carbon metabolism, or in light-responsive growth. In contrast to animal GATAs, where GATAs are known to function together with interacting proteins, the biochemical mode of function of plant GATAs still needs to be unraveled. Similarly, future research has to concentrate on the identification of direct GATA target genes at the genome-wide level.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
Work on GATA transcription factors in the laboratory of C.S. is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (grants SCHW751/9-1, SCHW751/9-2, and SCHW751/15-1). C.E.B.-H. is supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Biological and Environmental Research, as part of the Quantitative Plant Science Initiative at Brookhaven National Laboratory and award DE-SC0018301.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...

DownloadSupplemental Table 1(XLSX).

Literature Cited


