We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Charles Darwin recognized that carnivorous plants thrive in nutrient-poor soil by capturing animals. Although the concept of botanical carnivory has been known for nearly 150 years, its molecular mechanisms and evolutionary origins have not been well understood until recently. In the last decade, technical advances have fueled the genome and transcriptome sequencings of active and passive hunters, leading to a better understanding of the traits associated with the carnivorous syndrome, from trap leaf development and prey digestion to nutrient absorption, exemplified, for example, by the Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula), pitcher plant (Cephalotus follicularis), and bladderwort (Utricularia gibba). The repurposing of defense-related genes is an important trend in the evolution of plant carnivory. In this review, using the Venus flytrap as a representative of the carnivorous plants, we summarize the molecular mechanisms underlying their ability to attract, trap, and digest prey and discuss the origins of plant carnivory in relation to their genomic evolution.
Article metrics loading...
Charles Darwin recognized that carnivorous plants thrive in nutrient-poor soil by capturing animals. Although the concept of botanical carnivory has been known for nearly 150 years, its molecular mechanisms and evolutionary origins have not been well understood until recently. In the last decade, technical advances have fueled the genome and transcriptome sequencings of active and passive hunters, leading to a better understanding of the traits associated with the carnivorous syndrome, from trap leaf development and prey digestion to nutrient absorption, exemplified, for example, by the Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula), pitcher plant (Cephalotus follicularis), and bladderwort (Utricularia gibba). The repurposing of defense-related genes is an important trend in the evolution of plant carnivory. In this review, using the Venus flytrap as a representative of the carnivorous plants, we summarize the molecular mechanisms underlying their ability to attract, trap, and digest prey and discuss the origins of plant carnivory in relation to their genomic evolution.
Carnivorous plants survive in nutrient-poor habitats by feeding on trapped animals. These specialists sometimes do not even bear true roots; instead, leaves are modified to accommodate a trap function. Some species utilize passive traps, while others have evolved active traps to capture prey.
So far, there is no evidence that carnivorous plants have highjacked genes from their animal victims to build traps capable of catching fast-moving animals such as flies and ants. How else, then, could botanical carnivory evolve? Recent genome and transcriptome projects with active-hunting carnivorous plantsUtricularia,Dionaea, andAldrovandaand with passive-trappingDroseraandCephalotusshow gene expression patterns also found in noncarnivorous plants that defend against herbivore and pathogen attacks. Some plants in nutrient-poor habitats appear to have rewired their ancient herbivore defense into offense and became green flesh-eaters.
Charles Darwin (20) pioneered the carnivorous plants field and was the first to publish a book onInsectivorous Plants. Readers interested in systematics, ecology, and ecophysiology may find these subfields covered in the latest 2018 book by Ellison & Adamec (24), which also includes a complete list of references, from historic reports to research published as late as 2017. In this review, we explore the roots of carnivory, its molecular evolution, and the development of the body plans and organs formed to capture and process animal prey.
Reflecting their highly specialized functions, the carnivorous organs’ morphology often deviates from their noncarnivorous counterparts. Carnivorous organs evolved in five independent orders of flowering plants, and, without exception, all known carnivorous devices are modified leaves (Figure 1). The snap trap leaves seen in a sister pair of genera—DionaeaandAldrovanda—are equipped with a touch-sensing mechanism that allows a bilobed leaf to snap just like a man-made foothold trap. A similarly rapid movement can be found in another form of active trap: suction traps in the aquatic carnivorous genusUtricularia. Although the trap leaf movements in active traps are completed within subseconds, much slower movements are sometimes also important for the carnivorous syndrome of passive flypaper trap leaves, which represent the most common category of trapping mechanisms found inDrosera,Drosophyllum,Triphyophyllum,Roridula,Byblis, andPhilcoxia. In certain species ofDrosera, glandular hairs called tentacles move toward captured prey and present the digestive fluid. This movement may accompany the bending of leaf lamina. Although the tentacle and lamina movements usually take a few tens of minutes, an exception is the movement of the catapult traps ofDrosera glanduligeraand a few related species, in which outer tentacles can snap within several hundred milliseconds to smash prey onto the sticky droplets of inner tentacles (90). Some species ofPinguiculacan move their sticky lamina upon prey capture by upward curling of the leaf margins or by forming a depression around the prey (89).

Figure 1Click to view


The movement has not been confirmed in the other categories of trap leaves.Genliseaproduces eel trap leaves, in which spiraling leaves and uniformly oriented nonglandular hairs lead prey to the digestion chamber. Next to the flypaper traps, pitfall traps are the second most popular form of trap leaves.Brocchinia reductaandCatopsis berteronianaare tank bromeliads whose erect, overlapping leaves store rainwater for carnivory as well as for water storage. Other than those, pitfall traps are found inCephalotus,Nepenthes,Darlingtonia,Heliamphora, andSarracenia. They form pitcher-shaped leaves with slippery rims (6,11).
Although the developmental basis of the phenotypically diverse traps is mostly unknown, the suction traps and pitcher-shaped pitfall traps may be the outcomes of similar developmental modifications. The adaxial–abaxial polarity plays an important role in the development of planar organs, including leaves (38). Its modification can result in the conversion of planar leaves into cup-shaped, rod-shaped, or other forms of leaves. Analysis of marker gene expression suggests that the spatial changes of the adaxial and abaxial domains are associated with the development of pitcher-shaped leaves inSarracenia purpurea(37). It is noteworthy that the spatial expression changes are likely to be achieved by cell layer–specific oriented cell divisions leading to the asymmetric proliferation of the adaxial/abaxial tissues in leaf primordia whose initial shape is planar. The importance of the adaxial–abaxial polarity, in combination with the proximodistal polarity field, has been suggested in the bladder-shaped leaves ofUtricularia(65,118). In both systems, it has been proposed that relatively simple genetic changes can cause drastic morphological evolution (37,118).
Because of the scarcity of the fossil record, it is quite challenging to understand how carnivorous plants evolved from ordinary plants in the past. There are fossilized trap leaves in the Roridulaceae (99). Still, their strong morphological similarity to extant species does not fill the gap between noncarnivorous ancestors and carnivorous species. However, thanks to multiple rounds of innovation in genome sequencing technology in the last decade, it is becoming possible to tackle this issue with emerging genomic resources. So far, nuclear genome sequences have been reported in nine species of carnivorous plants, covering four angiosperm orders and five different trapping strategies (Supplemental Table 1). Although the represented gene set may not be nearly complete, transcriptome sequences have been analyzed in a broader range of carnivorous plants (93), including six species from the One Thousand Plant Transcriptomes Initiative (66). There is no doubt that the pace of genome analysis will continue to increase until all major carnivorous plant genomes become available. Here, we discuss how genomic changes allowed plants to become carnivorous.
Given that carnivorous plants evolved from noncarnivorous ancestors, the origin of the genes that regulate carnivory was a major mystery. Recent findings have highlighted that the carnivory-related genes tend to have been repurposed from ancestral genes that had functioned in specific biological processes conserved in flowering plants. Digestive enzymes secreted in the fluids of carnivorous plants likely have origins in pathogenesis-related proteins in noncarnivorous ancestors (36). Analysis of multiple transporters inDionaeasuggests nutrient uptake in gland cells has been adapted from root functions (101,103). In Caryophyllales, transcriptomic changes upon insect capture are regulated by the jasmonate signaling pathway, which is well known to mediate defense against herbivores in noncarnivorous plants (7). Such evolutionary repurposing from ancestral to derived function is called gene co-option (112). Although a gene can be specialized to the new function in this process, there is a possibility of retaining the ancestral function, in which case the gene becomes multifunctional.
The genetic basis of carnivory is best understood in terms of prey digestion and nutrient absorption, as many genes have been identified from multiple species (Supplemental Table 2). For other important traits of carnivory, such as flower-like scents (23,60), ultraviolet reflection-absorption patterns (58,75), nectar production (5,8), wax production (42,105), mucilage production (41,43), endocytotic nutrient uptake (2,61), trap leaf development (37,65,118), trap leaf movement (90,102), and carnivory-related phenotypic plasticity (26,36,44), researchers await the identification of underlying genes to understand where the genetic building blocks came from.
A drastic change of lifestyle may allow the genome to dispense with certain categories of genes that are no longer necessary. There are two lineages of aquatic carnivorous plants with sequenced genomes:AldrovandaandUtricularia. Among the carnivorous plants that tend to have degenerated root systems (3), these two taxa are characterized by further root degeneration.Aldrovandaproduces an ephemeral root only upon germination (1), whereasUtricularia, together with its sister genusGenlisea, completely lack a root system (3). The root degeneration is paralleled by likely losses of genes important for root development and functions. Developmental regulators, such asWUSCHEL-RELATED HOMEOBOX 5(WOX5),ROOT HAIR DEFECTIVE 6(RHD6),LOB DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1(LBD1), andCASPARIAN STRIP MEMBRANE DOMAIN PROTEINS(CASPs), are not represented in the sequenced draft genome ofAldrovandaand also, in some cases, in related nonaquatic carnivorous plants (82). The sequenced genome ofUtricularia gibbalacks important root regulators as well, including root-expressed subfamilies of MADS-box genes (54,64).
Besides gene losses, the carnivorous lifestyle may also impose additional selective pressure that contributes to the rise of new genes with novel, carnivory-related functions. New genes arise through different mechanisms: de novo gene birth (15), horizontal gene transfer (108), and gene duplication (68,83). For the carnivory-related genes characterized so far (Supplemental Table 2), gene duplication has been highlighted as a mechanism of gene acquisition. For example, the genome ofCephalotusharbors multiple genes that encode aspartic protease secreted in digestive fluids, and those genes were generated by repeated tandem gene duplications (36). Tandem duplications have also contributed to the generation of genes with trap-specific expressions, such as cytochrome P450 genes and O-acyltransferase genes inCephalotus(36), and cysteine protease genes andSHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE(SVP) MADS-box genes inU. gibba(64).
Whole-genome duplication, or polyploidy, is another mechanism that can provide new genes (114). All extant eudicots share the ancient triplication of the haploid genome (the so-called γ event) (56,57).Cephalotushas maintained diploidy since then (36), whereas one or more ancient whole-genome duplications have been detected in the lineages connected to the Lentibulariaceae (54,64), the Droseraceae (82,107,119), or the Nepenthaceae (107).
Many more whole-genome duplications have happened during the diversification within genera, including inDrosera(96) andByblis(39). The reported chromosome counts (95) suggest further recent polyploidy events withinPinguicula,Utricularia, andGenliseabut likely infrequently or not at all during the diversification ofSarraceniaandNepenthes. Although it has been implied that ancient polyploidization contributed to the origins of carnivory-related genes (54,82), there is no confirmed case of the involvement of more recent polyploidizations in the evolution of the carnivorous lifestyle.
Although gene duplication is a likely mechanism underlying carnivorous plant evolution, it is noteworthy that ancestral genes can acquire a carnivory-related function without creating a new copy (Supplemental Table 2). For example, the ammonium transporterDmAMT1is expressed in the gland cells of the Venus flytrap and mediates NH4+uptake from the prey, while maintaining putative ancestral expression in roots and terrestrial noncarnivorous tissues without duplication (40,103). In the confirmed cases of digestive fluid proteins inCephalotus, there was no consistent trend indicating whether the genes were duplicated (36).Cephalotus-specific duplication may be involved in the origins of three enzymes (aspartic protease, GH18 chitinase, and RNase T2), but there is no such evidence in five families (GH19 chitinase; β-1,3-glucanase; PRp27; purple acid phosphatase; and class III peroxidase). Thaumatin-like protein has both duplicated and nonduplicated genes that encode proteins secreted into the digestive fluid.
To make the step from being prey for herbivores to being a predator that hunts them, carnivorous plants had to rebuild leaf endings into traps. The Venus flytraps recognize herbivores and snap shut faster than the animal meal can escape.
When wounded by animals foraging on them, leaves of noncarnivorous plants send electrical signals to warn cells in the proximity as well as the other leaves about the imminent herbivore attack. This electrical signal, also called slow wave potential (SWP) inArabidopsis, travels only at 0.1 cm/s and is thus 100 times slower than the electrical signal in theDionaea muscipulatrap (30). Given that the amplitude and shape of this slow electrical event is quite variable even within one plant or organ, this signal is also called variation potential. Translating the electrical signal into plant defense, such as the production of repellants or toxins, can even take several hours. This is generally too long for the local leaf to take up arms and stop the invader, but it works for systemic leaves.
Electrical waves travel long-distance via the vasculature with the phloem sieve tubes serving as the cables (35,50). To speed up electrical signaling associated with prey recognition in the trap, the phloem network of theDionaealeaf is structured in a highly parallel manner (29), reminiscent of the leaf vasculature of monocot plants. In the petiole, the venation appears less patterned, with endings that are not interconnected, like in the leaves of dicotyledonous plants; in the flytrap, they are interconnected. Other than the petioles ofDionaea, the flytraps are electrically isolated (S. Scherzer, J. Böhm, A. Iosip, I. Kreuzer, D. Becker, et al., unpublished observations). This network architecture and the fast action potential (AP; addressed below) enable the electrical signals to move at a speed of 10 cm/s, which is 100 times faster than SWPs running theArabidopsisleaf andDionaea’s petiole. Being uncoupled from the petiole, APs do not enter the petiole, and wounding-induced SWPs do not make it into the trap. This way, SWPs elicited within the petiole cannot confuse prey capturing, and APs originating from the trap will not affect the petiole's herbivore defense signaling. Due to the peculiar leaf anatomy and expression of AP-generating ion channels (see Section 3.3.2), the flytrap turns into a fast electrical communication system.
Regarding the hunting cycle of carnivorous plants, we here focus on the Venus flytrap as an example, as this system is the best understood (Figure 2). In short,Dionaeaplants attract small animals and recognize potential prey via touch-sensitive hairs on the inner trap surface. Upon prey–trigger hair contacts, the trap closes and forms a kind of green stomach in which the victim is digested and animal-derived nutrients are taken up. When the nutrient stock runs dry, the trap opens again and prepares for hunting another nutrient-rich animal.

Figure 2Click to view


DoesD. muscipula, the Venus flytrap, use a particular mechanism to attract animal prey? The distal halves ofDionaealeaves develop into snap traps that have protruding teeth at their margins (Figure 3a). The inner surface of this bilobed structure is densely packed with digestive glands colored by anthocyanins that are produced when the carnivorous plants starve (51,63). Insects are attracted by visual cues, including ultraviolet reflection-absorption patterns (71). In addition to visual cues, Venus flytraps emit a volatile organic moiety of 60 different compounds that was shown to, for example, attract flies such asDrosophila melanogaster(see63and references therein), most likely because the scent released has a strong similarity to the bouquet of fruits and flowers. The rim of the trap is free of digestive glands but bordered by a single-stranded row of nectaries. Insects have been observed following lines of nectaries as if they were streets paved by an attractant. Nectars are naturally rich in sugars, and flies have the necessary sensors for detecting all main dietary saccharides (18). Among these sugars, fructose is detected by distinct labella gustatory receptors (113). It will be interesting to learn if, and under which conditions, nectaries present on the traps of different carnivorous plants produce prey-attracting chemical cues.

Figure 3Click to view


How do carnivorous plants recognize the prey that is attracted to and wanders around the open trap? Within the lawn of digestive glands, multicellular sensory hairs protrude from the inner trap surface (Figures 2and3). These equally spaced trigger hairs consist of a basal podium and distal lever connected via a tailed indentation zone (see55and references therein). A ring of elongated cells surrounding the center of the indentation zone are equipped with mechanosensors. When prey that is searching for food collides with the trigger hair, it is bent, and cells in the sensory zone are mechanically stressed. Venus flytrap trigger hairs are micronewton mechanosensors that can trigger APs for deflections >3° and forces >30μN (14,102). The differential mechanical sensitivity of trigger hairs from traps of different sizes provides them with the ability to recognize and catch insect prey with body weights as small as those of mosquitos. This way, the trap processes only prey that is not able to escape through the teeth of the closed capture organ and thus large enough and sufficiently energy-rich relative to the trap size. Very likely as protection against a false response—closure without captured prey—and to prevent a futile investment of energy, the trap closes only after a trigger hair is stimulated twice (49). Rather than an insect, a falling object that hits a trigger hair will not move and stimulate more than one AP. As a further safety valve to circumvent a false response, the trap has a memory and closes only when the second stimulation is received within 20 s (109). This touch memory for fast trap closure is based on cytoplasmic calcium threshold dynamics in touch-sensitive cells of the trigger hair podium and trap motor cells.
Mechanical stimulation of the indentation zone cells is translated into an electrical signal spreading from the trigger hair base all along the entire surface of the bilobed trap. This electrical signal is received in the motor cells of the trap and turned into a turgor change, very likely via the opening of voltage-dependent ion channels (28). This activation causes the viscoelastic energy stored in the open trap to relax and the metastable trap system to collapse to its energy-stable, closed state (34,98). The cell type(s) that receive the trap's haptoelectrical signal and translate it into ion channel opening and thus turgor changes (comparable to guard cells upon stomatal closure; for a review, see48) are to date unknown, but strategies to identify them are addressed in the following sections.
To understand how, in the trigger hair, the mechanical stimulus is translated into an all-or-nothing-type AP, a large number of these touch-sensitive hairs were isolated, and the expression pattern of ion transporters was analyzed (55). When compared to the entire traps, digestive glands, and nonexcitable trap rims, the trigger hair expression profile was quite unique (55). In line with the touch-sensing function, among the most differentially expressed ion channels, mechanosensitive (MS) channels (92) of the MSL (4,45) and OSCA (76,121) types were identified. Homologs fromArabidopsisare activated in response to mechanical and osmotic stresses. These MS channels with OSCA and MSL types conducting Ca2+and respective anions, upon the bending of the trigger hair, are likely to translate sheering stress into calcium and to trigger the depolarization of the plasma membrane, with the cells in the indentation zone giving rise to the initiation of the AP and Ca2+wave (22,90a,102,109).
Besides the two MS channel types that are differentially expressed in the trigger hair, a Shaker-type potassium channel was found exclusively expressed in the MS organ: KDM1 (K+channelDionaea muscipula1), a homolog of the guard-cell-expressed K+channel KAT1 inArabidopsis(19; for a review, see47). KAT1 provides for hyperpolarization-energized K+uptake and turgor formation. Like KAT1 early in guard cell/stoma development, voltage-dependent KDM1 is expressed when the trigger hair gains turgor, touch sensitivity, and its ability to fire APs (55). Given that KDM1, like KAT channels in other species, is susceptible to the potassium channel blocker cesium, and Cs+treatment prevents touch-induced, trigger-hair-intrinsic AP firing, proper K+uptake and its gradient seem required for trigger hair action. This notion is supported by the fact that during high-frequency trigger hair stimulation, not every touch initiates an AP (102). Cesium ions create negative feedback on touch AP firing (55). At a frequency of 1 Hz, only three APs get fired in a row before the system shuts off. After a retention time of about 1 min, however, the trigger hair regains firing capacity. This behavior and the fact that the trap's electrical network is not a target of high-frequency firing shutdown are in line with the prediction that KDM1 is required to shuttle K+back to the touch-sensing podium cells in the hyperpolarization phase of the AP.
Carnivorous plants in the family Droseraceae likeDionaea,Aldrovanda, andDrosera, as well as sensitive plants, such asMimosa, fire all-or-nothing-type APs similar in shape to those found in animals (49,62,70) (Figure 3; also see the sidebar titled Animal Action Potential).
Cells in the plant body contain about 100 mM K+but are facing an extracellular fluid of low ionic strength containing 0.1–1 mM K+and accompanying anions as well. Furthermore, plants do not express animal-type voltage-dependent Na+channels (47). As a consequence, plant cells cannot depolarize the plasma membrane by opening sodium channels like animal cells do during their APs (91) to let a positively charged Na+moiety enter the cell. Plants instead take advantage of the outward-directed anion gradient. Upon stimulation, the opening of anion channels and thus the efflux of negatively charged ions depolarize the plasma membrane by up to 100 mV (67), as much as Na+channels in the animal counterpart. Similar to the scenario in the animal system, the opening of depolarization-activated K+outchannels repolarizes the plant cell in the postdepolarization phase (49). The Venus flytrap rests at around −120 to −140 mV. When the membrane potential drops to a threshold of about −100 mV, calcium- and voltage-dependent anion channels open and initiate the depolarizing phase of the AP.
ANIMAL ACTION POTENTIAL
Excitable cells in the human body contain about 100 mM K+and 10 mM Na+as major cationic solutes and face an extracellular fluid containing 100 mM Na+and 10 mM K+. In resting animal cells, the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-driven Na+/K+pump maintains the inward-directed Na+and outward-directed K+gradient. The animal action potential is initiated by a predepolarization step from about −70 mV to −40 mV sufficient to activate voltage-dependent Na+channels. In turn, the resulting Na+influx depolarizes the cell up to a membrane potential of about +40 mV (91), a value close to the Nernst potential of the Na+ion. With the progressively positive-going membrane potential swing, Shaker-type voltage-dependent K+channels activate and repolarize the membrane potential.

How are the molecular players of the flytrap AP identified? During leaf maturation inDionaea, the trap is not excitable until it opens for the first time (S. Scherzer, J. Böhm, A. Iosip, I. Kreuzer, D. Becker, et al., unpublished observations). By comparing the expression profile of as-yet-unexcitable traps with those that just became excitable, a distinct set of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) encoding ion channels, carriers, and pumps has been spotted. Among them, GLR-type Ca2+channels (30,111), TMEM-type Ca2+-activated Cl−channels (21), and GORK-type voltage-dependent K+channels (47) become highly expressed during the transition to the excitable state. Besides these ion channels, an AHA-type H+ATPase (94; S. Scherzer, J. Böhm, A. Iosip, I. Kreuzer, D. Becker, et al., unpublished observations) and a proton-driven anion transporter together with a HAK5-type H+/K+symporter (101) and NRT-type H+/anion symporter (110,116) were also found to be transcriptionally upregulated. On the basis of the electrical properties, kinetics, and pharmacology of the AP-associated transporters, distinct phases underlying the unique flytrap electrical wave have been decomposed (S. Scherzer, J. Böhm, A. Iosip, I. Kreuzer, D. Becker, et al., unpublished observations). In short, with the electrical wave propagating, GLRs can open and allow Ca2+ions to enter, which activates Ca2+-dependent, voltage-dependent anion channels. Ongoing anion efflux would cause the membrane potential to further drop and reach the depolarization peak. During the progressive positive-going swing of the membrane potential, voltage-dependent Shaker-like K+channels (47) may open and initiate the repolarization phase. In addition to the K+channels, an electrogenic pump is likely to drive H+out of the cell, which further repolarizes the membrane potential and merges with the transient overshoot hyperpolarization phase. Finally, H+-driven and H+/K+and H+/Cl−transporters together with hyperpolarization-activated K+channels likely reset the ion gradients, reassume the resting state, and prepare for the firing of a subsequent AP.
The fact that two APs are required to rapidly close the trap and capture the prey is evidence thatDionaeacan count (see the sidebar titled How Animals Count). After the initial AP is fired, the flytrap memorizes and responds based on the time lapse between the first two APs and the frequency of successive APs. What is the molecular nature of the clock? Hedrich & Neher (49) argued that the clock might involve cytosolic calcium transients in a way that each AP triggers the opening of voltage-dependent Ca2+-permeable ion channels. This hypothesis has been tested experimentally by transformingDionaeawith the genetically encoded Ca2+reporter GCaMP (109). The first touch causes the cytoplasmic Ca2+level to increase in the touch-sensitive podium cells in the trigger hair. The Ca2+signal and an AP are elicited in the trigger hair, and both travel as a wave along the entire trap surface. With the first touch, however, the Ca2+level reaches only a subthreshold level, which is not yet sufficient for trap closure. When another AP is fired within 30 s, the cytosolic Ca2+concentration passes the threshold and the trap closes. The longer the time after the first AP, the more the cytoplasmic Ca2+level drops, so that the second AP-associated Ca2+rise does not exceed the threshold required for fast trap closure. In this scenario, a third stimulation following right after the second makes the cytoplasmic Ca2+level pass the threshold, which leads to trap closure. This shows that the integration of amplitude over time matters during counting.
HOW ANIMALS COUNT
Many animals, including humans, analyze sensory information to estimate quantities that guide behavior and decisions. Our brains are provided with a sense of numbers (78,87). That is, we can intuitively and effortlessly perceive numbers of items or events. This number sense might even be hardwired and innate, as suggested by some habituation studies in one-week-old infants (32). Starting at the age of two, a child's very first step into mathematics is learning to count. Behavioral studies indicate that the sense of numbers even exceeds the subitizing range (i.e., low numbers up to 4), as higher number estimates can be adapted in a similar way (13). Astonishingly, however, our current knowledge of the structures and mechanisms of sensory and cognitive processing of the brain is still fragmentary. By understanding the flytrap's sensory networks and cellular biochemistry resembling accumulator neurons known from the animal system, one may get deeper insight into the evolution of the first stages of the ability to count.

The stimulated trigger hair sends a Ca2+wave together with an AP to the trap lobes. Which comes first? By recording calcium changes and AP at the same time, Scherzer and colleagues (S. Scherzer, J. Böhm, A. Iosip, I. Kreuzer, D. Becker, et al., unpublished observations) found that both signals were traveling at the same speed. A cytoplasmic Ca2+wave propagating from cell to cell or along the phloem network just by diffusion (about 10−5cm2/s) would be by orders of magnitude slower than the propagation of the AP (10 cm2/s). It is thus not unlikely that the electrical energy of the AP speeds up Ca2+movement and vice versa. This way, the Ca2+and electrical gradient across the cell membranes could self-energize the chemoelectrical wave for driving long-distance signals.
TheDionaeamutantdyscalculia 11(dysc1) does not snap the trap closed with two or more trigger hair stimulations; instead, the capture organ stays open (A. Iosip, S. Scherzer, D. Becker, J. Schultz, I. Kreuzer & R. Hedrich, unpublished observations). However, upon trigger hair stimulation,dysc1fires APs just like the traps of wild-type plants do. Thedysc1traps also do not respond to cold- and heat-shock-induced Ca2+signals (12,46,88). This behavior indicates thatdysc1traps are not able to decode the Ca2+signal. By comparing the transcriptome profile of stimulated wild-type and mutant traps, researchers have spotted DEGs in signaling components downstream of the Ca2+signal.
How is the Ca2+signal translated into trap closure, and which components are involved? Signaling cascades in eukaryotes often take advantage of distinct protein phosphorylation-dephosphorylation modification of certain key steps in the pathway. To learn about stimulus and memory-dependent phosphorylation events, touch-induced changes in flytrap proteome and plasma membrane–delimited phosphoproteome will have to be analyzed in future studies (for touch responses inArabidopsis, see115) to find out which voltage-dependent ion channel is activated by the APs, triggering the influx of Ca2+, and which ion channels are addressed by Ca2+sensors to release osmotically active K+and Cl−ions, thus causing a drop in turgor that feeds forward into fast trap closure.
Regarding prey digestion by carnivorous plants, we here focus on the Venus flytrap as an example, as this system is the best understood. In short, when the flytrap has imprisoned the animal victim, it turns from a mouth into a stomach-like organ. As in the animal counterpart, electrical and hormonal stimuli activate digestive glands. During prey digestion, the meal is disassembled into nutrient-rich building blocks, and the green stomach switches on an intestine mode with the three-layer, multifunctional glands gaining an intake mode in addition.
When the flytrap counts two trigger hair–derived calcium-electrical waves, it closes in a fraction of a second. In this state, the trap is not hermetically sealed, though. If the touch organ is not further stimulated, the trap opens again after about half a day. The struggling prey, however, keeps on touching the trigger hairs, thus haptoelectrically advancing the slower trap-sealing phase, which, within the next 5 to 6 h, turns into a tightly sealed green stomach-like organ to digest the animal prey (27,104) (see the sidebar titled What Is Going on in Our Stomach Under the Control of the Endocrine System?). The trap-sealing phase, but not the Ca2+threshold-dependent initial fast closure, is governed by the touch/wounding hormone jasmonate [jasmonic acid (JA)] (30,31). Two APs also activate JA signaling via transcriptional regulation of the JA receptor COI1 and coreceptor JAZ1 (10,73,74). By administering a series of 5–10 consecutive touch APs (104; A. Iosip, S. Scherzer, D. Becker, J. Schultz, I. Kreuzer & R. Hedrich, unpublished observations), one can mimic the ongoing stimulation by prey trying to escape the trap. As a result, the biosynthesis of JA and JA-Ile, the natural COI1 receptor ligand, increases. When the prey is no longer agitating the trigger hairs, AP firing ceases. In the situation of an immobile prey, the JA/JA-Ile concentration drops to the prestimulation level again within 4 h. If the exhausted insect after rest starts panicking again and triggers another train of APs, the JA concentration is kept at an elevated level. This trap JA response upon AP firing differs in its amplitude and kinetics of concentration rise and decay from that induced by wounding (A. Iosip, S. Scherzer, D. Becker, J. Schultz, I. Kreuzer & R. Hedrich, unpublished observations). Trigger hair stimulation causes a rise in JA after a few minutes, while wounding JA reaches similar levels after 1 h only. Thus, repetitive haptoelectric stimulations seem to address different JA pools or biosynthesis pathways than wounding does (117). LOX6 contributes to rapid JA synthesis inArabidopsis(17) and is predicted to have a β‐barrel domain that may bind divalent metals such as Ca2+. It is thus not unlikely that LOX6, like Ca2+-sensitive steps in JA biosynthesis, contributes to haptoelectric-Ca2+-triggered touch hormone production (for a contrasting view, see85).
At the level of the trigger hair, touch (mechanical energy) is transformed into a trap-delimited response: propagating APs and Ca2+waves (electrical and chemical energy). In the trap cells, information about the AP shape, kinetics, and frequency is decoded and translated into JA release, which has the chemical potential to govern downstream processes (27,104). Hormone-treated traps seal hermetically, just like those that are haptoelectrically stimulated. Nuclear magnetic resonance imaging analysis shows that this is brought about by an increase in the size of the cells of the outer layer versus the inner layer of the trap (104). This differential volume change in the trap is reminiscent of the processes in the pulvini of plants that move their leaves or leaflets (79) and movements in grass stomata (100). In the latter two systems, the volume and turgor changes result from K+and anion movement from one pulvinus layer to the other and the osmotic water fluxes that follow. Stomatal guard cells in grasses are surrounded by subsidiary cells. When stomata close, K+and Cl−together with water move from guard cells to subsidiary cells. During stomatal opening, inverse solute and water fluxes take place. JA is known to induce stomatal closure (33). Future experiments will have to prove whether the same types of K+, anion, and water channels operate the flytrap sealing movements and reopening after prey digestion, similar to the stomatal action.
WHAT IS GOING ON IN OUR STOMACH UNDER THE CONTROL OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM?
The human digestive system includes all gastrointestinal organs, including the mouth, stomach, and intestines. To provide the human body with building blocks for muscle growth, a piece of meat enters our digestive system via our mouth. Minced to a pulp, the protein-rich moiety is passed over to the stomach. The stomach, via the vagus nerve, is connected to the brain and aroused by the sight, odor, and taste of attractive food. In addition to vagal electrical control, digestion is also governed by enteric or intestinal hormones such as gastrin. This peptide hormone and the vagus nerve trigger the release of both pepsin, an endopeptidase that breaks down proteins into small peptides, and gastric acid (HCl) from the parietal cells of the stomach lining when food is ingested.
Most absorption of what we eat and drink happens in the intestines. Virtually all nutrients from the diet are absorbed into the blood across the highly polarized epithelial cells of intestinal mucosa. Anatomical, histological, and functional specializations along the gastrointestinal tract are responsible for effective and regulated nutrient and ion transport. Meat is rich in amino acids and sodium. Amino acids are taken up by Na+- and H+-driven cotransporters (59), and sodium is taken up at least partially via the epithelial Na+channels (ENaC) (97).

JA treatment, besides inducing trap sealing, activates the digestive glands. This is best seen with JA-exposed traps that already secrete an aqueous moiety before complete closure (27,104). Glands densely covering the inner trap surface appear as domes based on three layers (Figure 2). The outer cell layer is formed by secretory cells filled with exocytotic vesicles. Upon trigger hair stimulation or JA treatment, vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane but not when the Ca2+channel inhibitors Gd3+and La3+are present. These findings fit the notion that haptoelectric-Ca2+signaling addresses JA biosynthesis as well as the exocytosis of a prey-degrading enzyme cocktail that is rich in chitinases and proteases (84,106). The initial, transient Ca2+influx gets superimposed by the long-term H+efflux (104), providing ideal conditions for acid-activated hydrolases. This indicates that the Ca2+-induced fusion of acid-loaded secretory vesicles represents an early event in gland activation. In the phase that follows, acidic vesicles become loaded with a lytic hydrolase cocktail. To initiate the transcription of chitinases and proteases, it needs at least five APs. Their transcription rate increases gradually with the number of APs, tending to saturate with 20 trigger hair–induced APs. Blocking the JA receptor suppresses the haptoelectric stimulation of hydrolase transcription (10), indicating that the production of hydrolases under nitrogen scarcity is under the control of JA signaling and the decoding of AP/Ca2+signals by number and frequency. Independent of mechanical or chemical (JA) stimulation, the secretion of protein-loaded vesicles was obtained 6 to 12 h poststimulation. Protein secretion measured via carbon fiber amperometry reaches a peak after a day (104). Within this time, the sealed green stomach gets completely filled with a hydrolase moiety as acidic as pH 2 at the end.
The lytic cocktail secreted into the green stomach hydrolyzes the chitin of the insect's exoskeleton and the meat underneath. Now the gland-operated chemosensors kick in to feedforward decomposition of the animal meal. Chitin-breakdown products (84), in other words, prey-typical components, are recognized by gland cells that express LysM-type chitin receptors (7). This behavior indicates that the sensors for prey-derived nutrients or chemical signals boost or take over haptoelectrically initiated basic hydrolase production and food stock processing. It will be interesting to see whether prey chemosensing involves similar Ca2+- and JA-dependent steps as the touch response.
JA has also been observed to cause stomach formation and digestive enzyme production inDrosera(62,77,86). Interestingly, prey- and chitin-induced phytohormone accumulation and gene expression have also been observed in the passive-hunting pitcher plantNepenthes(120). JA-independent regulation of digestive enzyme activity was, however, recently postulated to operate in the carnivorous butterwortPinguicula(60a). Here, more detailed future analyses will have to confirm whether some carnivorous genera really did not build their flesh-eating ability on the ancient JA-dependent herbivore defense systems (7).
When the prey gets progressively decomposed, building blocks of nitrogen- and phosphorus-rich macromolecules such as chitin, proteins, and nucleotides become available. These nutrients very likely are absorbed in the glands' second cell layer that comes with a microvilli-like surface extension (104). In contrast to plant roots in general andDionaearoots in particular, transporters for the ingestion of prey-derived N-metabolites, such as theDionaeaNH4+channel DmAMT1, are only induced in the flytrap's gland by AP firing and JA (103). Interestingly, it needs five or more touch-induced APs to trigger the expression of solute transporters (10). For example, to effectively mine the animal's K+stock, Ca2+kinase-dependent, low-affinity, high-capacity AKT1 potassium channels are expressed side by side with the high-affinity, low-capacity, proton-driven HAK5 potassium transporter (101). As a result of efficient nutrient uptake, almost no prey constituents are left behind when, after finishing the meal, the trap opens again. Meat comes with loads of salt that for most plants is toxic at high doses but apparently not for flytraps. After contact with prey resulting in at least five touch-induced APs, traps start expressing plant-type HKT Na+channels (10).
When the trap reopens, no solutes or liquid is left behind. How does the flytrap know when the green stomach is empty, in order to open up the trap and initiate another hunting cycle? At the moment, one can only speculate that nutrient sensors are involved, similar to those operating in plant roots, which help plants to explore the underground (80). What about the digestive enzymes secreted into the green stomach that themselves are rich in nitrogen? One could imagine a scenario where, after loss of prey-derived substrates, the hydrolases digest themselves and glands take them back as building block entities. To keep up with their water needs, traps not only have to recycle preinvested nitrogen for hydrolase fluid phase secretion but must also regain large, exocytosis-associated volumes of water as well.
What if soil water becomes limiting during drought conditions? Under water shortage, the stress hormone abscisic acid (ABA) is produced, and touch-induced fast trap closure is retarded. Touch stimulation of trigger hairs, however, still elicits APs. Under these conditions, more than two APs are required for trap closure (27). However, under water stress, ABA appears to alter the counting of fired APs or decision making accordingly. This way, ABA makes trap closure impossible after two prey contacts and unlikely even after more than two strikes. This kind of desensitization also affects JA signaling and biosynthesis and, in turn, the water movement from the plant/trap body needed to fill the green stomach with an aqueous digestive cocktail. In other words, when the water status is critical (i.e., the plant is thirsty), saving water has a higher priority over eating to refill the nutrient stores.
The mechanisms of carnivory have just begun to be elucidated. Although advances in genome sequencing studies have made a large contribution to carnivorous plant research (Supplemental Table 1), not all bottlenecks have been eliminated. One of the remaining issues is genetic modification technology. Successful genetic modification has been reported inDrosera rotundifolia(9,53),Drosera capensis(72),Nepenthes alata(72),U. gibba(81,118), andD. muscipula(109), and its application will be an important consideration for the future study of plant carnivory.
Forward genetics is another unappreciated technique (but see an attempt for quantitative trait loci mapping of insect capture traits inSarraceniain Reference69), as there are a number of varieties that have altered the carnivorous habit in some species. Fascinating examples fromDionaea, for example, include a cultivar called Dr no trap, which completely lacks the snap trap while leaving the photosynthetic flat petiole intact (Supplemental Figure 1), and thedysc1mutant, in which the trap appears normal but lacks the ability to move (A. Iosip, S. Scherzer, D. Becker, J. Schultz, I. Kreuzer & R. Hedrich, unpublished observations).
Noncarnivorous plants with carnivory-like traits are another frontier to study the evolution of carnivorous plants. Flypaper-trap-like sticky leaves are found inIbicella luteaand other so-called protocarnivorous plants that lack the ability to absorb nutrients but often capture small invertebrates with leaves and/or flowers for defense (25). They are of interest for the study of early stages in carnivorous plant evolution. Similar to carnivorous plants, parasitic plants and mycoheterotrophic plants sequester nutrients from other organisms. Comparative analysis of these categories of plants may provide insights into the common and unique trends of genetic changes associated with reduced photosynthetic dependency and alternative nutritional sources (Supplemental Appendix 1). Furthermore, plant carnivory is not a final destination of angiosperm evolution. The family Ancistrocladaceae in Caryophyllales, for example, is considered to have lost plant carnivory, on the basis of its phylogenetic position (52). Studies of Ancistrocladaceae and their relatives will provide insight into how plastic the genetic changes are in the transition between noncarnivorous and carnivorous lifestyles. Last but not least, convergent evolution is a prominent feature of carnivorous plant evolution (Supplemental Appendix 2), which opens a venue to study the repeatability of the complex trait evolution (36).
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We acknowledge the following sources for funding: the European Research Council under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP/20010-2015)/ERC grant agreement 250194-Carnivorom (R.H.), German Research Foundation (DFG) Reinhart Koselleck grant 415282803 (R.H.), Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT)/Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI grant 18J00178 (K.F.), and Sofja Kovalevskaja Program of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (K.F.). We are grateful to Dirk Becker, Ines Kreuzer, and Sönke Scherzer, who helped in preparing the text and figures. We also thank Dirk Becker, Manfred Heckmann, Ines Kreuzer, Erwin Neher, Manfred Schartel, Jörg Schulz, and Frances Sussmilch for discussion.
1dysc1was renamed fromerrorbecause the failure in trap closure was not identified, and we find that the namedysc1better describes the mutant's inability to count APs. Future genome sequencing ofdysc1will be needed to identify the underlying genetic defect(s).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...

Download allSupplemental Materialas a single PDF. Includes Supplemental Appendices 1-2, Supplemental Figure 1, Supplemental Tables 1-2, and Supplemental References.Revised Nov. 12, 2021.

Literature Cited


