We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
H+-ATPases, including the phosphorylated intermediate–type (P-type) and vacuolar-type (V-type) H+-ATPases, are important ATP-driven proton pumps that generate membrane potential and provide proton motive force for secondary active transport. P- and V-type H+-ATPases have distinct structures and subcellular localizations and play various roles in growth and stress responses. A P-type H+-ATPase is mainly regulated at the posttranslational level by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of residues in its autoinhibitory C terminus. The expression and activity of both P- and V-type H+-ATPases are highly regulated by hormones and environmental cues. In this review, we summarize the recent advances in understanding of the evolution, regulation, and physiological roles of P- and V-type H+-ATPases, which coordinate and are involved in plant growth and stress adaptation. Understanding the different roles and the regulatory mechanisms of P- and V-type H+-ATPases provides a new perspective for improving plant growth and stress tolerance by modulating the activity of H+-ATPases, which will mitigate the increasing environmental stress conditions associated with ongoing global climate change.
Article metrics loading...
fn1a*These authors contributed equally to this article
H+-ATPases, including the phosphorylated intermediate–type (P-type) and vacuolar-type (V-type) H+-ATPases, are important ATP-driven proton pumps that generate membrane potential and provide proton motive force for secondary active transport. P- and V-type H+-ATPases have distinct structures and subcellular localizations and play various roles in growth and stress responses. A P-type H+-ATPase is mainly regulated at the posttranslational level by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of residues in its autoinhibitory C terminus. The expression and activity of both P- and V-type H+-ATPases are highly regulated by hormones and environmental cues. In this review, we summarize the recent advances in understanding of the evolution, regulation, and physiological roles of P- and V-type H+-ATPases, which coordinate and are involved in plant growth and stress adaptation. Understanding the different roles and the regulatory mechanisms of P- and V-type H+-ATPases provides a new perspective for improving plant growth and stress tolerance by modulating the activity of H+-ATPases, which will mitigate the increasing environmental stress conditions associated with ongoing global climate change.
H+-ATPasesare adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-driven proton (H+) pumps that couple ATP hydrolysis with the generation of electrochemical proton gradients across membranes. H+-ATPases mainly include the phosphorylated intermediate–type (P-type) and vacuolar-type (V-type) H+-ATPases (VHAs).P-type H+-ATPases, which belong to the P3Asubfamily (4), are present only in fungi and plants, and their common structures are characterized with 10 transmembrane helices and 3 cytosolic domains, including the N-terminal, catalytic, and C-terminal autoinhibitory domains, in the cytoplasm (87). P-type H+-ATPases use the energy stored in ATP to translocate protons during the catalytic cycle, which involves the formation of a phosphorylated intermediate of the conserved Asp residue in its catalytic domain. Most plant P-type H+-ATPases are localized in the plasma membrane (PM) (thus, they are named PM H+-ATPases), with the exception ofArabidopsisH+-ATPases/autoinhibited H+-ATPase 10 (AHA10) and its homologs, which are localized in the tonoplast (3,103,118).
VHAs differ markedly from P-type H+-ATPases with respect to their subcellular localization, structures, biochemical mechanism, and evolutionary origins (35,85,96). VHAs are present in eukaryotes such as fungi, plants, and animals (10,96). VHAs are localized in the vacuolar membrane and endomembrane compartments within the secretory pathway, such as thetrans-Golgi network/early endosome (TGN/EE), a highly dynamic organelle that receives and sorts proteins from the endocytic, recycling, and secretory pathways (24,119). VHAs belong to multisubunit H+pumps and contain 2 subcomplexes that are composed of 13 subunits: The peripheral V1complex (VHA-A, VHA-B, VHA-C, VHA-D, VHA-E, VHA-F, VHA-G, and VHA-H) is responsible for ATP hydrolysis, and the membrane-integral V0complex (VHA-a, VHA-c, VHA-c′, VHA-c″, VHA-d, and VHA-e) is responsible for proton translocation, while VHA-c′ is not present in plants (107). Vacuolar H+-pyrophosphatase (V-PPase) located in plant vacuoles is also a H+pump but uses pyrophosphate rather than ATP to pump H+through the tonoplast into the vacuole (35). F-type ATPase is also a H+pump that is located in the inner mitochondrial and chloroplast thylakoid membranes. Although the general structures of F-type ATPases and VHAs are remarkably similar (96), they show distinct functions in plants. F-type ATPases typically use a proton gradient to synthesize ATP and do not generally hydrolyze ATP to generate proton motive force, while VHAs hydrolyze ATP to generate proton motive force in plants. Thus, V-PPase and F-type ATPase do not belong to the H+-ATPase family. Here, we focus on the evolution and the regulatory roles of P- and V-type H+-ATPases in plant growth and stress adaptation.
The plant P-type H+-ATPase is composed of a single polypeptide and encoded by a multigene family. There are 12 members inArabidopsis thaliana(AHA1–AHA12), and 10 members in rice (Oryza sativa), which can be classified into 5 subgroups [O. sativaPM H+-ATPase 1 (OSA1)–OSA10] (9,114). The number of P-type H+-ATPase genes is much smaller in nonflowering plants and algae plants (Figure 1a). However, 20 P-type H+-ATPase genes exist in the genome of bryophyteMarchantia polymorpha, which is even higher than the number in white lupin (Lupinus albus) (Figure 1a), a legume crop with high adaptation capacity to phosphorus deficiency (131). The enlarged gene family of P-type H+-ATPase in vascular plants should be associated with genome expansion during evolution and could be important for adaptation to various environmental conditions. A phylogenetic analysis of P-type H+-ATPases with 8 representative species across the plant lineage indicates that P-type H+-ATPases can be grouped into 10 clades (Figure 1b).

Figure 1Click to view


The C-terminal inhibitory domain of P-type H+-ATPase is regulated by phosphorylation at specific Ser/Thr residues (28). Based on the sequences of the C-terminal region, P-type H+-ATPase can be divided into two types, the penultimate Thr-containing H+-ATPases (pT H+-ATPases) that are mainly found in vascular plants, and non-penultimate Thr-containing H+-ATPases (non-pT H+-ATPases) that are mainly found in algae (83). The bryophytes contain both pT and non-pT H+-ATPase genes (83). Some vascular plants, such as the lycophyteSelaginella moellendorffii, fernAzolla filiculoides, and cereal crop rice, also have only one gene encoding non-pT H+-ATPase, but there are no non-pT H+-ATPases in some other vascular plants likeArabidopsisand white lupin (Figure 1a,b). The acquisition of the penultimate Thr in the C-terminal of P-type H+-ATPase is possibly associated with the transition of plants from water to land (83). Theposttranslational regulatorycomponents of P-type H+-ATPase, such asProtein kinaseSOS2-like 5 (PKS5), Peptide-containing sulfated tyrosine 1 receptor (PSY1R), FERONIA (FER), Abscisic acid insensitive 1 (ABI1), and14-3-3 proteins, also exist across the plant lineage (Figure 1a). However, it remains unclear whether the origin of pT H+-ATPase is linked to the evolution of the protein kinase/phosphatase that phosphorylates and dephosphorylates the penultimate Thr.
The total number of genes encoding 13 types ofVHAsubunits ranges from 15 inChlamydomonas reinhardtiito 33 in white lupin (Figure 1c). InArabidopsisand rice, the 13 subunits are encoded by a total of 28 and 23 VHA genes, respectively. More than one gene encodes VHA-a in plant species, and the targeting domain of VHA-a1 is conserved within the spermatophytes (73). One to four genes encode VHA-E subunits across all of the eight plant species (Figure 1c). Phylogenetic analysis of VHA-E protein sequences across the plant lineage suggests that the algae, bryophyte, fern, and flowering plants are classified into distinct clades (Figure 1c). Two protein kinases, Salt overly sensitive 2 (SOS2) and With-no-lysine kinase 8 (WNK8), interact with VHA-B and VHA-C subunits and may regulate the activity of VHAs inArabidopsis(8,51). Their homologs also exist in all of these plants (Figure 1c), suggesting that the regulatory mechanism of VHAs is conserved across the plant lineage.
Studies have indicated that expression levels of PMH+-ATPasegenes are responsive to signals and environmental factors, such as low pH (152), salt stress (13,141), iron deficiency, and phosphorus deficiency (142). Thus, the abundance of PM H+-ATPases could be increased or reduced to ensure proper hydrolysis and pump activities under different conditions. Only a fewtranscription factors, such as MdbHLH104, PeWRKY1, PetPH3, and PetPH4, have been identified that directly regulate the expression of PM H+-ATPase genes (89,117,141,148). In addition, PM H+-ATPase genes exhibit tissue-specific expression patterns (27,85,114). Further studies are required to identify upstream transcription factors and their correspondingcis-elements that confer the tissue-specific and stimuli-responsive expression patterns of PM H+-ATPase genes.
Posttranslational regulation of PM H+-ATPase by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation plays a major role in the activation and/or inhibition of its activity. Phosphorylation of penultimate Thr (Thr947 in AHA2) within the autoinhibitory C-terminal is an essential step for binding of 14-3-3 proteins to relieve C-terminal autoinhibition and thus for the activation of PM H+-ATPase (34,55,60). Generally, 14-3-3 proteins function as dimers and bind the C-terminal of PM H+-ATPases at a conserved binding site (His/Ser-Tyr-pThr-Val-COOH) (28,34,60). Over time, multiple phosphorylation sites have been identified, including at least six Thr/Ser residues in the C-terminal of PM H+-ATPases (28,43,93). Among them, phosphorylation at Ser899 and/or Ser931 of AHA2 represses the pump activity, while phosphorylation at Thr881 and/or Thr947 of AHA2 enhances the pump activity (32,33,44,108) (Figure 2a). Several protein kinases andphosphataseshave been involved in the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of PM H+-ATPases, such as PKS5, FER, PSY1R, Sucrose non-fermenting 1–related protein kinase 2.2 (SnRK2.2), D-clade of type 2C protein phosphatases (PP2C-Ds), and ABI1 (32,44,81,88,91,102) (Figure 2a).Plant hormones[e.g., auxin and abscisic acid (ABA)], fungi toxins (e.g., fusicoccin and tenuazonic acid), lipids, and biotic and abiotic stresses (e.g., pathogens and salinity) have been documented to induce regulation ofP-type H+-ATPaseactivity through protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation and/or by modulation of 14-3-3 protein binding to the C-terminal of PM H+-ATPase (11,42,81,88,108,138). In addition, a conserved cysteine residue (Cys327 in AHA2) near the Asp residue in the DKTGT phosphorylation site of PM H+-ATPases plays a critical role in protecting the protein from attacks of reactive oxygen species, possibly through cysteine modifications (127).

Figure 2Click to view


PM H+-ATPase activity is also regulated by variation of the protein abundance and/or localization at the PM. H+-ATPase translocation control 1 (PATROL1) has been identified as a translocation factor of AHA1 in guard cells (45). The endocytosis of PM H+-ATPase is inhibited by auxin, which may contribute to auxin-mediated acid growth (41). SYP132 (Syntaxin of plants 132) is associated with the endocytosis of PM H+-ATPases and reduces the density and activity of H+-ATPases at the PM (128).
The activities of VHAs are tightly regulated at multiple levels, but mainly at thetranscriptionaland posttranslational levels. The transcript levels of genes encoding diverse VHA subunits have been reported to be responsive to environmental stresses, such as salinity and heavy metals (38), which are usually consistent with the high abundance of VHA proteins under these stresses (122). Some VHA subunits that are encoded by multiple isogenes show tissue-specific and distinct stress-responsive expression patterns (84,105,116), suggesting their specific roles under varying environments. Severalprotein kinaseshave been identified to interact with and phosphorylate VHA subunits in plants (Figure 2b).ArabidopsisWNK8 can bind and phosphorylate VHA-C (51) (Figure 2b). Calcium-signal-related protein kinase SOS2 can interact directly with VHA-B1 and VHA-B2 and could regulate VHA activity under salt stress (8) (Figure 2b), but whether and how SOS2 phosphorylates VHA-B1/VHA-B2 and/or other VHA subunits are unclear. VHA activity in barley protoplasts is activated by exogenous calcium-dependent protein kinase HvCDPK1 (78), suggesting the potential phosphorylation of VHA subunits by HvCDPK1. VHA activity has also been found to be activated by blue light, and14-3-3 proteinsinteract with VHA-A, which can be phosphorylated in vitro by a tonoplast-bound kinase in barley (61). But whether and how 14-3-3 proteins regulate VHA activity are still unknown. In addition, redox regulation is important for controlling VHA activity for different metabolic requirements. Hydrogen peroxide inhibits the ATP hydrolysis and H+-pumping activity of plant VHA, which can be reactivated by cysteine and glutathione (113). Two cysteines that are conserved in plant VHA-E have been suggested to form a disulfide bridge in vitro and regulate VHA activity under oxidizing conditions (113).
According to theacid growth theory, auxin activates PM H+-ATPases, which is hypothesized to be the initial step in hypocotyl elongation (90). Upon activation, PM H+-ATPase acidifies the apoplast, followed by the activation of enzymes involved in cell wall loosening (40). Auxin activation of the PM H+-ATPase involves Transport inhibitor response 1 (TIR1)/Auxin signaling F-box (AFB) receptors, Small Auxin Up-RNA (SAUR) proteins and PP2C-Ds (31,91,108). SAURs specifically interact with PP2C-Ds and inhibit their phosphatase activities (101,102). PP2C-D1/PP2C-D2/PP2C-D5/PP2C-D6 interact with PM H+-ATPases and dephosphorylate the penultimate Thr947 of AHA2, thus negatively regulating the activity of PM H+-ATPases and hypocotyl elongation inArabidopsis(91,102) (Table 1). Recently, transmembrane kinase 1 (TMK1) and TMK4 have been found to directly phosphorylate the penultimate Thr947 of PM H+-ATPases, and they are required for auxin-induced PM H+-ATPase activation, apoplastic acidification, and hypocotyl cell expansion (68). In roots, TMK-dependent auxin signaling also promotes PM H+-ATPases activation, but does so to counter the rapid alkalization caused by the intracellular TIR1/AFB auxin signaling pathway (67).
Representative plant H+-ATPase (P- and V-type) isoforms and their subcellular localizations and physiological functions

Brassinosteroids (BRs) also induce hypocotyl elongation by upregulating the expression ofSAURsand further increase the phosphorylation of PM H+-ATPase penultimate Thr via the Brassinosteroid insensitive 1 (BRI1)-Brassinosteroid insensitive 2 (BIN2) signaling pathway (82). In contrast, ABA represses hypocotyl elongation by inducing dephosphorylation of the penultimate Thr of PM H+-ATPase (47). This process is dependent on ABI1, which is a clade A protein of the PP2C family functioning in early ABA signaling (47). Peptide-containing sulfated tyrosine 1 (PSY1) and Rapid alkalinization factor (RALF) are two kinds of secreted peptides influencing plant development and cell elongation (86). Recently, PSY1 and its receptor protein kinase PSY1R have been found to phosphorylate AHA1/AHA2 at Thr881 and activate PM H+-ATPase, thus initiating hypocotyl cell elongation through apoplast acidification (33). The interaction between RALF and its receptor FER can induce phosphorylation of AHA2 at Ser899 and result in the inhibition of H+efflux (37,44), but whether and how RALF-FER functions in the regulation of hypocotyl cell elongation are still unclear.
PM H+-ATPase plays a key role in blue light (BL)-mediated stomatal opening (53). Overexpression of AHA2 in guard cells using the strong guard cell promoter GC1 enhances light-induced stomatal opening inArabidopsis(126) (Table 1). Consistently, overexpression of OSA1 also promotes stomatal opening and photosynthesis in rice (145). AHA1 plays a major role in stomatal opening inArabidopsis(79,133). Under irradiation with BL, BL-photoreceptor protein kinases Phototropin 1 (PHOT1) and PHOT2 are activated by inducing autophosphorylation in guard cells (54,59). The activated PHOT1 and PHOT2 subsequently phosphorylate protein kinase BLUE LIGHT SIGNALING1 (BLUS1) at Ser348 within its autoinhibitory domain and then transmit the signal to type 1 protein phosphatase (PP1) and its regulatory subunit PRSL1 (52,109–111), which finally activates PM H+-ATPases in guard cells by phosphorylation of a penultimate Thr (53,133). Red light also stimulates stomatal opening. Red light has been found to promote stomatal opening in whole leaves by inducing the phosphorylation of C-terminal Thr of PM H+-ATPases in guard cells (2).
Fertilization of flowering plants is dependent on the delivery, by the highly polarized tip growth of pollen tubes, of sperm cells to the embryo where female gametes are located. During in vitro cultivation of pollen tubes, the germination media was found to be acidified (115). Later, PMH+-ATPasewas proposed to energize pollen tube growth and underlie cell polarity (15,85).Nicotiana tabacumAHA1 (NtAHA1) is associated with cell polarity and tip growth of the pollen tube (15). Recent studies demonstrated that the pollen-specific PM H+-ATPase isoforms AHA6, AHA8, and AHA9 are essential for pollen tube growth and fertility (49) (Table 1).aha6 aha8 aha9triple mutants display reduced extracellular ion fluxes and intracellular pH gradients, resulting in aberrant pollen tube phenotypes. These AHAs could generate extracellular H+fluxes and sustain the cytosolic H+/pH gradient for pollen tube growth (49).
Petunia(Petunia hybrida) flower color is strongly influenced by vacuolar pH in flower petal cells because it affects the coloration of anthocyanins that accumulate in the vacuole. Mutations in one of the seven distinct loci (PH1–PH7) reducevacuolar acidificationin these cells, resulting in a bluish flower color and reduced acidity of petal homogenates (23). Using the pH-dependent color change ofPetuniaflowers as a rather beautiful proxy to screen for vacuolar pH mutants, a vacuolarP-type H+-ATPase, also named PH5, has been identified. PH5 is localized to the tonoplast, contributes to vacuolar acidification inPetuniaflowers, and determines flower color by hyperacidifying petal cell vacuoles (118) (Table 1). A further screen identified PH1, which is a member of the P3B-ATPase family, similar to bacterial Mg2+transporters, and assumed previously not to be present in plants (30). PH1 also resides in the tonoplast and has no electrogenic activity on its own, but it can bind to PH5 and promote H+-pumping activity (30). PH1 also has an additional role in protein trafficking to the vacuole (29). In addition, a homolog of PH5, AHA10, also localizes to the tonoplast and is required for proanthocyanin accumulation in seed coat endothelium cells and brown seed coloration inArabidopsis(3) (Table 1). The upstream regulators of PH1 and PH5 have been identified: PH3 and PH4, which encodetranscription factorsof the WRKY and MYB family, respectively, activate genes involved in vacuolar acidification by forming a complex with the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein ANTHOCYANIN1 (AN1) and the WD-repeat protein AN11 (89,117).
Tonoplast-localized P-type H+-ATPases also regulate the accumulation of organic acids, such as citric acid and malic acid, in vacuoles of the fruit of certain plants (74). The sour taste ofCitrusfruits is due to the extreme acidification of vacuoles in juice vesicle cells. It seems that tonoplast-localized P-type H+-ATPases are needed in the cell types in which extremely acidic vacuole pH is required. This may also suggest that theH+-pumping efficiencyof these P-type H+-ATPases is higher than that of VHAs, whose H+-pumping efficiency may not be sufficient to create the strongly acidic vacuole pH needed for the physiological functions of vacuoles in special tissues of plants. A recent study shows that tonoplast-localized P-type H+-ATPase homologs inCitrus,CitPH1andCitPH5, are expressed in sour lemon, orange, pomelo, and Rangpur lime fruits, while their expression is strongly reduced in sweet-tasting acidless varieties (103). Downregulation ofCitPH1andCitPH5is associated with mutations that disrupt expression of MYB, bHLH, and/or WRKY transcription factors homologous to those activatingPH1andPH5inPetunia(103). These findings provide a new strategy to genetically engineer or select for taste quality inCitrusand other fruits by altering expression or otherwise manipulating P-type H+-ATPases.
VHAs represent a major fraction of the total tonoplast protein and drive the massive fluxes of ions and metabolites into vesicles by energizing secondary active transporters (symporter, antiporter, or uniporter) and channels across the tonoplast (106). VHAs play important roles during plant growth and development, such as vacuolar pH homeostasis,endosomal trafficking, stomatal opening, male gametophyte development, and hypocotyl cell expansion (Table 1).
VHAs play important roles in endocytic and secretory pathways, including transport between different endosomal compartments, and the recruitment of proteins involved in vesicle formation (21,24). The VHA-a family containing three different isoforms is responsible for targeting VHA to different subcellular sites inArabidopsis(Table 1). VHA-a1 targets the VHA to the TGN/EE and is required for endocytic and secretory trafficking, whereas VHA-a2 and VHA-a3 are localized to the tonoplast and are required for vacuolar ion homeostasis and efficient nutrient storage (24,63,64,72). VHA-a1-containing VHAs are exported in a coat protein complex II (COPII)-dependent manner, while VHA-a3-containing complexes are delivered to the tonoplast in a Golgi-independent manner (120). Recent studies indicated that the VHA-a1-targeting domain serving as both an endoplasmic reticulum–export and a TGN/EE-retention motif is necessary and sufficient for TGN/EE localization (73). Furthermore, VHA-a3 is partially rerouted to the TGN/EE in the absence of VHA-a1 (73).
The vacuolar pH invha-a2 vha-a3double mutants increases to 6.4 as compared to 5.9 in wild type (63), while the proton concentration invha-a2 vha-a3vacuoles is still tenfold higher than that in the cytosol (vacuolar pH 6.4 versus cytosolic pH 7.4). Increased V-PPase activity cannot compensate for the lack of VHA invha-a2 vha-a3, and thefugu5-1 vha-a2 vha-a3triple mutant, which impairs both VHA and V-PPase, is conditionally viable and retains significant vacuolar acidification (64). Since the TGN/EE has a more acidic lumen than the vacuole inArabidopsis, its acidic vesicles likely have a higher net rate of proton delivery to the vacuole and thereby attain greater vacuolar acidification (64,72). Alternatively, a H+pump different from the known VHAs could be responsible for the residual acidification. Very recently, computational modeling has been employed to explain the residual vacuolar acidification observed in plants lacking vacuolar H+pump activity. Vesicular trafficking of Ca2+/H+antiporters from the TGN/EE to the tonoplast and the activity of ATP-dependent Ca2+pumps at the tonoplast might explain the residual acidification observed inArabidopsismutants impaired in both VHAs and V-PPase (50). Future experimental work is required to validate the proposed mechanisms of vacuolar acidification regulation.
A specific VHA inhibitor, Concanamycin A (ConcA), prevents luminal acidification of endomembrane compartments such as TGN/EE and vacuole (64,72) and blocks protein trafficking to the PM as well as endocytic transport from the TGN to late endosomes inArabidopsis(24).PutVHA-cfromPuccinellia tenuiflorais mainly localized in endosomal compartments, and overexpression of PutVHA-c could facilitate the endosomal trafficking by improving VHA activity (150). Therefore, it is plausible that the trafficking of proteins destined for vacuoles, endosomes, and the PM is energized by the activity of VHAs.
Nitrate (NO3−) accumulation in the vacuole is achieved by a H+-coupled anion transporter, primarily the CLC-a (chloride channel a) NO3−/H+antiporter inArabidopsis(22). Nitrate concentration is strongly reduced, but nitrate assimilation is increased in thevha-a2 vha-a3mutant, suggesting that vacuolar nitrate storage is a major growth-limiting factor forvha-a2 vha-a3, which shows day-length-dependent growth retardation (63). VHAs also regulate the storage of Ca2+, based on the evidence that Ca2+concentration in leaf extracts ofvha-a2 vha-a3is much lower than in wild-type plants. In addition, VHA activity is reduced in vacuolar Ca2+/H+antiporter mutantcax1 cax3and calcineurin B-like (CBL; a Ca2+sensor protein) mutantcbl2 cbl3(19,112), suggesting a possible link between Ca2+signaling and VHA activity.
Vacuolar ion transporters play important roles in stomatal movements by influencing ion fluxes across the tonoplast.Vacuolar acidificationmediated by vacuolar H+pumps has been found to be necessary for the rapid stomatal closure induced by ABA, because thevha-a2 vha-a3double mutant and also V-PPase mutantvhp1display delayed stomatal closure (6). Phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate, a low-abundance signaling lipid associated with endo-lysosomal and vacuolar membranes in eukaryotic cells, plays a critical role in vacuolar acidification and morphology during ABA-induced stomatal closure (6). A recent study showed that phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate exerts its positive effect on vacuolar acidification by inhibiting the activity of CLC-a rather than by directly stimulating the activity of VHA or V-PPase (14).
VHAis essential for Golgi function during the development of the male gametophyte (26). VHA inhibitor ConcA affects Golgi organization in pollen tubes, and mutation of VHA-A results in complete male and partial female gametophytic lethality (26). In addition,vha-a1mutants cannot produce seeds due to a defect in pollen development, indicating that VHA-a1 plays an essential role for male gametophyte development (73). VHA-E1 is essential for maintaining a functional secretory system during embryo development but not in the haploid gametophytes (105), while VHA-E2 is not essential for gametophyte development (25) (Table 1). Furthermore, ubiquitous expression of VHA-E3, in contrast to VHA-E2, is able to complement loss of the essential subunit VHA-E1 (25).
A major role of VHA is to drive solute uptake into the vacuole and thus influence turgor pressure and cell expansion (106). In a screening approach to identify genes suppressing the etiolation response ofArabidopsishypocotyls in the dark, a mutantde-etiolated 3(det3) was identified as carrying a weak allele of VHA-C, leading to reduced VHA activity (97) (Table 1). The reduced hypocotyl cell expansion indet3seedlings was associated with ethylene-mediated and 12-oxophytodienoic acid signaling (12). Mutation of VHA-a3 does not prohibit hypocotyl cell expansion, but inhibition of VHA-a1 is sufficient to restrict cell expansion (12).
VHA also regulates root growth. Among the five VHA-c members inArabidopsis,VHA-c1is highly expressed in expanding tissues (cotyledons, hypocotyls of etiolated seedlings, and the elongation zone of roots), whileVHA-c3is predominantly expressed in the root cap (84). Suppression ofVHA-c1orVHA-c3transcript using RNA interference reduces root growth (84). In addition, VHA-B1 has been identified in nuclear complexes with hexokinase1 (HXK1), and thevha-B1mutants are insensitive to high glucose-mediated repression of growth, such as cotyledon expansion and root elongation (20). It will be interesting to investigate the mechanism and physiological significance of the association between VHAs and glucose signaling.
Saline–alkaline stress characterized by high salt (salinity) and high pH (above 8.0; alkalinity) causes combined damage from high pH stress, ion toxicity, and osmotic stress and limits crop productivity. Maintaining the H+gradient across the PM to reduce the rhizosphere pH and keep the function of H+-gradient-dependent Na+transporters (e.g., SOS1 Na+/H+antiporter) is essential for saline and alkaline tolerance. Thus, PMH+-ATPaseplays a positive role in saline and alkaline stress tolerance. It has been found that constitutively expressing PM H+-ATPase 4 (PMA4) increases salt tolerance in tobacco (N. tabacum) (36) (Table 1). Overexpression ofPopulus euphraticaWRKY1 confers salt tolerance in tobacco by activating the expression of PM H+-ATPase geneNtHA4(141). ZmNSA1, a calcium sensor protein in maize, also negatively regulates saline–alkaline tolerance by indirectly regulating two PM H+-ATPase genes, MHA2 and MHA4 (13).
Regulation of PM H+-ATPases at the posttranslational level is important for plant responses to saline and alkaline stresses. PKS5, an SOS2-like protein kinase regulated by SCaBP1 (an SOS3-like Ca2+sensor) inArabidopsis, dephosphorylates AHA2 at Ser931 and thus represses PM H+-ATPase activity by preventing the interaction between14-3-3 proteinand the C-terminal of AHA2 (32) (Table 1).Arabidopsisloss-of-functionpks5mutants with higher H+efflux activity are more tolerant to saline–alkaline stress (139). Tomato 14-3-3 protein TFT4 also plays important roles in alkaline tolerance by modulating H+efflux and basipetal indole-3-acetic acid transport in root tips (129). Furthermore, PKS5 phosphorylates SOS2 at Ser294 and represses SOS2 activity under normal conditions, while 14-3-3 proteins mediate a salt-induced Ca2+signal, repress PKS5, and release SOS2 to activate PM H+-ATPase and SOS1 upon salt stress (140) (Figure 2a). In addition, another Ca2+sensor, SCaBP3, promotes the interaction between PKS5 and AHA2, thereby further enhancing and/or stabilizing PKS5-mediated repression of PM H+-ATPase activity under saline–alkaline stress (138). Recently, phosphatidylinositol has been found to inhibit PM H+- ATPase activity by binding the C terminus of AHA2, and the dynamic changes of phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate levels could modulate H+-ATPase and Na+/H+antiporter activities to maintain ion homeostasis inArabidopsisunder salt stress (137).
Roles of root-apex H+fluxes in regulating root growth and development under drought stress have been proposed (99). PM H+-ATPases are involved in ABA-mediated stomatal closure in order to reduce water loss under drought (79). Constitutively active AHA1 in guard cells disrupts stomatal closure under ABA treatments, suggesting that inactivation of PM H+-ATPase is essential for ABA-induced stomatal closure (79). Recently, VESICLE-ASSOCIATED MEMBRANE PROTEIN 711 (VAMP711) was identified as essential for ABA-mediated inhibition of PM H+-ATPase through its direct interaction with AHA1 and AHA2 and repression of their activities (132). ABA also suppresses BL-induced stomatal opening by inhibiting the phosphorylation of PM H+-ATPases with the involvement of key ABA-signaling components like PP2Cs and SnRKs (46,146). Because both PP2Cs and SnRKs are multigene families, it is important to study the underlying molecular relationships between different members of these families and PM H+-ATPase under drought stress.
Under drought stress, ABA is accumulated and modulates auxin transport in the root tip ofArabidopsisand rice plants, which further activates PM H+-ATPase to release more H+along the root tip for drought adaption (130). However, application of 10 μM ABA suppressed 50% of H+efflux from wild-type roots, leading to a high inhibitory effect on root growth inArabidopsis(88). However, the molecular mechanisms of concentration-dependent effects of ABA remain largely unknown.
PM H+-ATPase-mediated H+efflux plays a critical role in roothydrotropism(80,81). Hydrotropism, the directed growth of roots toward the moisture patches in soils for water acquisition, is an important response to uneven soil moisture (17).ArabidopsisBR receptor BRI1 regulates root growth for water acquisition by interacting with AHA2 and thus modulating H+fluxes in root apices (80) (Table 1). Furthermore, ABA-associated H+efflux is required for root hydrotropism inArabidopsisand tomato (81,143). The expression levels of ABA biosynthesis geneABA4on the dry side of tomato roots are significantly higher than that on the wet side under hydrostimulated treatment (Y. Li & W. Xu, unpublished data). ABI1 dephosphorylates AHA2 at Thr947 and inhibits H+efflux to negatively regulate root hydrotropism (81) (Figure 3). Thus, the H+efflux and cell elongation on the dry side of the root are increased, while the H+efflux and cell elongation on the wet side of the root are lower. The asymmetric growth of the cells on both sides of the root leads to root bending towards the wet side for acquiring water (Figure 3). In addition, recent studies indicated that indole-3-acetic acid was higher on the dry side of the primary root inArabidopsisand maize during hydrotropic response (17,125); further studies are needed to elucidate whether and how hormonal cross-talking regulates root hydrotropism mediated by PM H+-ATPase.

Figure 3Click to view


Soil drying enhancesrhizosheathformation, and plants with larger rhizosheaths are more tolerant to drought stress than those with smaller rhizosheaths (7,147). Rhizosheath is the term commonly used to describe the soil that is around the roots and can be bound by root hairs (76). Root hair, mucilage secreted by roots or microbes, and soil structure can affect rhizosheath formation (147). Rice can form rhizosheaths under soil drying but not under continuous flooding (147). Our recent study found H+secretion is associated with rice rhizosheath formation (124). Furthermore, rice G protein γ subunit qPE9-1 can modulate PM H+-ATPase activity and H+secretion by interacting with 14-3-3 protein OsGF14b (124). OSA1 overexpression in plants can lead to the secretion of more H+to the outer cortical cells of roots for root hair development and microbe recruitment (Figure 4c), thereby enhancing root hair growth for rhizosheath formation under soil drying (F. Xu & W. Xu, unpublished data). Rhizosheath formation is a trait that may potentially be modified to increase plant water use, and further studies are necessary to elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying H+-ATPase-mediated rhizosheath formation in response to climate change.

Figure 4Click to view


PMH+-ATPaseis important for plant adaptation to nutrient stresses, such as phosphorus (P) deficiency, iron (Fe) deficiency, and aluminum (Al) toxicity. The expression ofAHA2andAHA7is induced by low P inArabidopsis; AHA2 participates in modulating primary root elongation by mediating H+efflux in the elongation zone, while AHA7 is important for root hair formation by mediating H+efflux in the differentiation zone (142) (Table 1). Under P deficiency, citrate exudation from cluster roots of white lupin is associated with the upregulation of PM H+-ATPase activity (131,134). Transgenic rice plants overexpressing 14-3-3 protein OsGF14b can increase P uptake by enhancing H+efflux and rhizosheath formation under P deficiency (124) (Figure 4c). In addition, some PM H+-ATPase genes are induced by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and play important roles in energizing the periarbuscular membrane and facilitating uptake of nutrients such as P and N in arbusculated plant cells (62,69,123).
PM H+-ATPase-mediated rhizosphere acidification is required for the mobilization of rhizosphere Fe, and AHA2 is the major isoform for rhizosphere acidification inArabidopsis(94). Recently, in apple, MdbHLH104, a bHLH transcription factor, was found to positively regulateMdAHA8expression and promote H+efflux, thus improving rhizosphere Fe availability and Fe deficiency tolerance (148). PM H+-ATPase activity is also increased by Al stress through the upregulation of transcriptional, translational, and posttranslational levels of PM H+-ATPases, and all of these play a role in Al-induced citrate exudation (18,98). TheArabidopsis aha2-4knockout mutant is more sensitive to Al stress, suggesting a positive role of AHA2 in Al resistance (144). However, whether and how PM H+-ATPase is regulated at posttranslational levels under nutrient deficiency are still unclear.
The stomatal aperture is regulated by pathogens for entry and by plants for defense. The fungal pathogenFusicoccum amygdalisecretes the fungal toxin fusicoccin in order to constitutively activate guard cell PM H+-ATPases and promote stomatal opening (77). Fusicoccin binds to, and stabilizes, the PM H+-ATPase-14-3-3 protein complex, resulting in the irreversible activation of PM H+-ATPase through inhibition of its dephosphorylation (34). By contrast, tenuazonic acid from a phytopathogenic fungus,Stemphylium loti, inhibits plant PM H+-ATPase with a dependence on the regulatory C terminus (11), but it remains unknown whether it is involved in the regulation of stomatal aperture and plant defense. Plants have evolved an innate immune system to induce stomatal closure and thus restrict pathogen invasion through inactivation of PM H+-ATPase. RPM1-INTERACTING PROTEIN4 (RIN4), which is a negative regulator of plant immunity, interacts with and activates AHA1 and AHA2 to regulate stomatal apertures, thus inhibiting the entry of bacterial pathogens into leaves (70). Phosphorylation of RIN4 increases the interaction with AHA1 and results in higher PM H+-ATPase activity, increased stomatal opening, and susceptibility to pathogens (66). An AAA+-ATPase family protein, GENERAL CONTROL NONREPRESSIBLE4 (GCN4), was found to negatively regulate PM H+-ATPase activity and stomatal aperture by interacting with RIN4 and14-3-3 proteinsand mediating their degradation (58). In addition, RIN4-mediated regulation of PM H+-ATPase and stomatal aperture is linked with the jasmonic acid signaling pathway (135,151), which plays an essential role in plant resistance to herbivore and wounding stresses. Recently, it has been found that AHA1 negatively regulates the generation of slow wave potentials, which activate the jasmonic acid defense pathway in response to wounds and attacks from herbivores (65). It would be interesting to investigate whether other H+-ATPases also participate in the generation of slow wave potentials and/or herbivore defense.
The transcript levels, protein levels, and activity of VHAs have been documented to be induced by salt stress in both halophytes and glycophytes (38,122).Arabidopsismutants that are impaired in one of the VHA subunits, such as VHA-C, VHA-c1, and VHA-c3, are more sensitive to salt stress (8,84). Reduction of VHA activity in the TGN/EE by knockdown ofVHA-a1also leads to increased salt sensitivity, while mutations of tonoplast-localized VHA-a2 and VHA-a3 do not affect salt sensitivity or accumulation (63) (Table 1). It is plausible that VHA-mediated pH homeostasis in the endosomal system may contribute to salt tolerance by affecting the activity of endosomal Na+/H+exchangers. Overexpression of a single subunit of VHA can improve salt tolerance in various plants (1,5). Therefore, the increase of VHA activity is an important salt stress response in plants, since VHA can provide proton-driving force for vacuolar Na+/H+exchanger 1 (NHX1) to sequester Na+into vacuoles to enhance salt tolerance (8). Researchers have also suggested that VHA activity is regulated by the interacting proteins of VHA subunits under salt stress, such as protein kinase SOS2 inArabidopsisand small GTPase OsRab11 and its cognate GTPase-activating protein 1 (OsGAP1) in rice (8,100) (Figure 2b).
During cold acclimation, plants accumulate specific types of solutes in the vacuole to enhance freezing tolerance. Protein abundance of VHA subunits (e.g., VHA-d2, VHA-c4, and VHA-E1) and VHA activity were found to increase during cold acclimation (95). This was accompanied by increased concentrations of soluble sugars and organic acids in the vacuole (95). These results suggest that VHAs may be involved in cold tolerance, possibly by facilitating solute accumulation in the vacuole (95).
Sincevacuolar compartmentalization of heavy metalsrelies on tonoplast energization and proton motive force, VHAs are also involved in heavy metal tolerance in plants. The activity of VHA in plants is differently influenced by heavy metals; VHA activity in cucumber is induced by copper stress but repressed by cadmium stress (56,57). TheArabidopsis vha-a2 vha-a3double mutant exhibits reduced tolerance to excess zinc (Zn), suggesting that detoxification of Zn,which might be mediated by a vacuolar Zn2+/H+antiporter, is associated with VHA activity (63). However,vha-a2 vha-a3displays more resistance to Al stress because its roots can secrete more malate and citrate into the apoplast to detoxify Al (144). The detailed roles of VHAs in stress adaptation should be further explored.
In a plant cell, proteins with different subcellular localizations should be coordinated in order to cope with various endogenous signals and environmental stresses. P-type H+-ATPases and VHAs that have distinct localizations can also exert their functions in the same physiological process, such as hypocotyl and root growth, stomatal movement,vacuolar acidification, and salt tolerance, suggesting that these two kinds of H+pumps are coordinated to conduct the same physiological function in plants (Figure 4a,b). The unexpected link between a P-type H+-ATPase (AHA10) and vacuolar accumulation of secondary metabolites suggests that P-type H+-ATPases control energization of the vacuolar membrane either directly or indirectly, e.g., via control of vesicle trafficking (3). P-type H+-ATPases have also been shown to exist in vacuolar membranes inPetuniaflowers andCitrusfruits (103). Common regulatory mechanisms of P- type H+-ATPases and VHAs may act in concert to regulate vacuolar pH homeostasis.
It is well established that the efficient exclusion of excessive Na+from the cytoplasm and vacuolar Na+sequestration are the most important steps in salt tolerance. Both the PM Na+/H+antiporter SOS1 and the vacuolar Na+/H+antiporter NHX1 exclude Na+from the cytosol driven by the proton motive force generated by the PM H+-ATPase and the vacuolar H+pumps, respectively (8,140) (Figure 4b). The SOS pathway may be a coordinated regulator of the tonoplast and PM sodium exchange. The dynamic plasticity of all of these H+pumps, as well as their fundamental roles in the maintenance of cytosolic Na+homeostasis, may require a set of shared regulatory mechanisms. 14-3-3 proteins, well-known activators of PM H+-ATPases, would be ideal candidates and have been recently shown to interact specifically with the VHAs (61).
Genetic analysis also suggests a correlation between PM H+-ATPases and VHAs in Al tolerance. PM H+-ATPase activity is induced in the VHA-impairing mutantvha-a2 vha-a3under Al stress (144). In response to Al stress, a preferred activation of PM H+-ATPase transcripts over VHA-a2 and VHA-a3 transcripts is triggered to drive cytosol organic acid (OA) efflux into apoplastic space to detoxify external Al3+, while VHA-a2 and VHA-a3 are inhibited to reduce OA transport into the vacuole (144). The coordination of vacuolar H+-ATPase and PM H+-ATPase dictates the distribution of OAs into either the vacuolar lumen or the apoplastic space that, in turn, determines Al tolerance capacity in plants. At present, the detailed molecular mechanisms underlying the converse regulation of these PM- and tonoplast-localized OA transport systems are still unknown. It will be interesting to investigate the coordination mechanisms of P-type H+-ATPases and VHAs in plant growth and stress adaptation in the future.
H+-ATPases have been one of the most important research topics in plant physiology for many years. In this review, we summarized the evolution and regulation of P-type H+-ATPases and VHAs and their roles in plant growth and stress responses. Much progress has been made to enlarge the understanding of the molecular and biochemical regulatory mechanisms underlying the powerful functions of H+-ATPases in plant growth and stress responses. However, many questions remain to be answered.





The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We are grateful for the financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFE0118100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31872169), the Technology Foundation of China National Tobacco Corporation Fujian Company (2021350000240014), the Scientific Research Fund of Yangzhou University (137012325 and 137012326), and the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LY20C150002). We thank Prof. Yiyong Zhu (Nanjing Agricultural University) for critical reading of the manuscript.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


