We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Sugar translocation between cells and between subcellular compartments in plants requires either plasmodesmata or a diverse array of sugar transporters. Interactions between plants and associated microorganisms also depend on sugar transporters. The sugars will eventually be exported transporter (SWEET) family is made up of conserved and essential transporters involved in many critical biological processes. The functional significance and small size of these proteins have motivated crystallographers to successfully capture several structures of SWEETs and their bacterial homologs in different conformations. These studies together with molecular dynamics simulations have provided unprecedented insights into sugar transport mechanisms in general and into substrate recognition of glucose and sucrose in particular. This review summarizes our current understanding of the SWEET family, from the atomic to the whole-plant level. We cover methods used for their characterization, theories about their evolutionary origins, biochemical properties, physiological functions, and regulation. We also include perspectives on the future work needed to translate basic research into higher crop yields.
Article metrics loading...
fn1a*These authors contributed equally to this article
Sugar translocation between cells and between subcellular compartments in plants requires either plasmodesmata or a diverse array of sugar transporters. Interactions between plants and associated microorganisms also depend on sugar transporters. The sugars will eventually be exported transporter (SWEET) family is made up of conserved and essential transporters involved in many critical biological processes. The functional significance and small size of these proteins have motivated crystallographers to successfully capture several structures of SWEETs and their bacterial homologs in different conformations. These studies together with molecular dynamics simulations have provided unprecedented insights into sugar transport mechanisms in general and into substrate recognition of glucose and sucrose in particular. This review summarizes our current understanding of the SWEET family, from the atomic to the whole-plant level. We cover methods used for their characterization, theories about their evolutionary origins, biochemical properties, physiological functions, and regulation. We also include perspectives on the future work needed to translate basic research into higher crop yields.
It has been almost twelve years since sugars will eventually be exported transporters (SWEETs) were characterized (20), and progress in our understanding of these proteins has been rapid. Members of this family have been shown to function asuniporters(19,20), facilitating the translocation of sugars across membranes along the substrate concentration gradient. This distinguishes them from other plant sugar carriers such as the sugar transport proteins (STPs), sucrose transporters/sucrose carriers (SUTs/SUCs), and tonoplast sugar transporters (TSTs), which transport sugars with the help of the electrochemical proton gradient in the same or opposite direction of sugar movement, asproton/sugar symportersorantiporters(19). Compared with the proton-dependent transporters, SWEETs are small transporters, typically consisting of seven transmembrane helixes (TMHs) (20,37,88). Their prokaryotic homologs, the SemiSWEETs, are even smaller and composed of only three TMHs—two SemiSWEETs are necessary to form a translocation pore (40,54,104). So far, no biological functions have been reported for SemiSWEETs.
Members of the SWEET family have been found in every sequenced plant genome. While SWEETs have been associated mainly with biological processes requiring sugar efflux in plants, such as nectar secretion (61), pollen nutrition (34,55,86), and seed filling (21,82,98,99), experiments in heterogeneous systems (e.g.,Xenopusoocytes and human cells) have shown that SWEETs can transport sugars bidirectionally. Therefore, potential roles in sugar uptake deserve more attention (Supplemental Table 1).
SWEETs have been cloned, crystallized, modeled, mutated, engineered, and genetically edited; yet, there is much that we still do not know about them. Thus, this is a good time to examine what we have learned about this family and to evaluate the avenues of research that are most needed going forward. To avoid redundancy with excellent reviews that have summarized the physiology of SWEETs inArabidopsis(11,14,18,19,30,46), here we focus instead on summarizing their molecular substrate recognition mechanisms and bridging research between model and crop plants.
From an evolutionary perspective, the size of the SWEET family varies greatly across species. For example, in a study that characterized 3,249 7-TMH SWEETs and 3-TMH SemiSWEETs (43), 44.4% of these proteins were found in green plants, 24.6% in bacteria, 12.9% in Oomycota, 12.7% in Metazoa, and 1.2% in green algae, and less than 1% of these proteins were found in archaea, fungi, Protista, and other algae. Similarly, in a study that included 228 SWEETs and 58 SemiSWEETs (40), SWEETs were found in all eukaryotic supergroups and SemiSWEETs in archaea, bacteria, and to a much lesser extent in eukaryotes. Of course, this information may change with the release of newly annotated genomes or resequencing.
Two hypotheses for the origin of SWEETs have been proposed. Hu et al. (40) argued that eukaryotic SWEETs originated from the fusion of a SemiSWEET from archaea with another SemiSWEET from bacteria, accompanied by the appearance of an inversion helix (TMH4). This hypothesis was backed by the observation that the amino acid sequences of many bacterial MtN3 domain proteins preferentially aligned with the first 3 TMHs, while all of the archaeal SemiSWEETs aligned with the last 3 TMHs of SWEETs (40). On the other hand, Xuan et al. (106) proposed that SWEETs originated from gene duplication and fusion of SemiSWEETs. This hypothesis was backed by experimental evidence that the dimerization of SemiSWEETs can create a functional translocation pore (79,104,106) and then further supported by the discovery of SWEETs with 6 and 7 TMHs in bacteria and more than 100 SemiSWEETs with 3 or 4 TMHs in plants (43). Additionally, SuperSWEETs with more than 18 TMHs have been reported in oomycetes (43). It remains unclear what the roles of these additional TMHs are, but some possibilities include helping SuperSWEETs fold, changing their substrate selectivity, or facilitating their interaction with other proteins. Taken together, gene duplication and fusion were the major driving forces during the evolution of the SWEET family, which may lead to subfunctionalization or neofunctionalization in higher organisms (4,58).
The number ofSWEETgenes in different species varies from 6 inPhyscomitrella patens, a nonvascular moss species, to 55 inGossypium hirsutum, a tetraploid dicot, and 108 inTriticum aestivum, a hexaploid monocot crop (14), indicating a significant expansion of the family in both monocot and dicot lineages (30,58). The family can be divided into four phylogenetic clades based on protein sequences. The phylogenetic analysis by Li et al. (58) suggested that clade II is evolutionarily close to algae and thus considered the most ancient, with clade I and the common ancestor of clades III and IV diverging next. However, Zhang et al. (112) observed a discrepancy in the placement of clade II and clade I when a few more nonvascular species were included, intimating that more plant genomes are necessary to resolve the evolutionary history of the family. Interestingly, clade III has the highest number of genes (based on an analysis of 31 plant species) and no clade III SWEETs were identified after surveying 4 bryophyte species: 1 species each from hornworts and liverworts and 2 from mosses (58,112). Therefore, the evidence suggests that clade III SWEETs did not appear until the speciation of vascular plants and that they expanded greatly afterward. Coincidently, cell wall invertases (CWINs), rather than vacuolar invertases (VINs) or cytosol invertases (CINs), were also not found in nonvascular species, and CWINs likely coevolved with the vascular development of higher plants (91). Thus, the evolutionary signatures of clade III SWEETs and CWINs in plants correspond well to their physiological functions in phloem loading and unloading.
Interestingly, positive selection sites were identified in only a few SWEETs from 31 surveyed species (58). Some of these SWEETs belong to clade III, including the soybean (Glycine max) GmSWEET10a that underwent a strong selection and GmSWEET10b that underwent an ongoing selection for seed size and oil content during domestication (58,98). The identification of positive selection sites may help predict which functions of SWEETs from clade III are under selection pressure. Overall, analysis of the evolutionary dynamics can trace the fate of SWEET genes and predict their potential functions.
Plasma membrane–localized SWEETs have been characterized primarily using mammalian cells,Xenopusoocytes, and yeast cells. The original system used was a Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET)-sensor-based screen in HEK293T cells (which have very low endogenous sugar transport activity). Due to the high detection sensitivity with the relatively high affinities of glucose sensors such as FLIPglu600μΔ13V and FLII12Pglu700μδ6 or sucrose sensors such as FLIPsuc90μΔ1V (later renamed FLIPsuc90μδ3A) and FLIPsuc-2-10μ (Table 1), this system continues to serve as a powerful tool to detect SWEET transport activity (10,22,27,61,98). However, it is not a convenient system for measuring transport kinetics compared toXenopusoocytes or yeast systems (Table 1). The functional characterization of SWEETs in oocytes is conducted using radiolabeled sugars (20,22,98), which is particularly useful in measuring sugar efflux compared with other systems. Finally, growth assays in yeast are the most accessible and popular methods of characterization. EBY4000 (hxt1through-17D::loxP gal2D::loxP stl1D::loxP agt1D::loxP ydl247wD::loxP yjr160cD::loxP) (102), the most commonly used yeast strain, lacks 17 hexose transporters and can be used to test the transport of a wide range of hexoses, such as glucose, fructose, galactose, and mannose. Nonetheless, yeast is not ideal for detecting sucrose transport, and FRET sensors or radiotracer experiments in oocytes must be used instead. Overall, yeast growth assays are not very sensitive, although yeast radiolabeled sugar uptake is much better (Table 1). For instance, the yeast growth assay failed to detect glucose accumulation mediated by the maize transporter ZmSWEET1b, but both yeast radiotracer uptake assays and the glucose sensor FLIPglu600μΔ13V detected it (93).
Comparison of different exogenous systems for SWEET characterization

Beyond these three heterologous systems, other methods have been used, too, including a liposome isotope uptake assay (88), cyanobacterial sugar secretion assay (106), single-molecule FRET in insect cells (37), and SWEET-derivedsingle-fluorophore biosensor(69). Plant cells have been used for functional studies, too. For example, the potato (Solanum tuberosum) transporter StSWEET11 was assayed with an interactor in protoplasts isolated from tobacco (2), while AtSWEET17 transport activity was detected using vacuoles isolated fromArabidopsismesophyll cells (35), in addition toXenopusoocytes (16). It is not unusual for multiple systems to be employed together, and, given the limitations of each system, care should be taken when interpreting results obtained from a single system (Supplemental Table 1).
For SWEETs not localized in the plasma membrane, scientists may make artificial liposomes or isolate organelles (mostly vacuoles) for transport studies (Table 1).Xenopusoocytes and yeast are also options if the proteins can be modified and targeted to the plasma membrane. Another option would be to target sugar FRET sensors to the lumen of organelles. Ultimately, determining which system needs to be used depends on the SWEET of interest.
The structures of four SemiSWEETs and two plant SWEETs have been resolved so far (37,52,54,88,94,104). SemiSWEETs form dimers, and each protomer is composed of three TMHs that wrap into a 1-3-2 three-helix bundle (THB) conformation (104). The crystal structures of SemiSWEETs have been obtained in the inward-open state (EcSemiSWEET fromEscherichia coli), occluded state (TySemiSWEET fromThermodesulfovibrio yellowstoniiand LbSemiSWEET fromLeptospira biflexa), and outward-open state (VsSemiSWEET fromVibriosp. N418 and EcSemiSWEET). The existence of these different states has established that their transport cycles follow the alternating access model, where access to the substrate-binding site alternates between the two sides of the membrane (52). Similar to their bacterial counterparts, the first three TMHs of eukaryotic SWEETs form one THB while the last three form a second one (37,88). The rice OsSWEET2b was crystalized in the inward (cytosolic)-open state, forming trimeric assembly (88), while theArabidopsisAtSWEET13 was crystalized in the inward-open state with a 2′-deoxycytidine 5′-monophosphate that contains the hydroxyl moieties found in sugars bound to the putative sugar-binding sites (37). The topology of the THBs in SWEETs is similar to that in SemiSWEETs. Therefore, it was assumed that SWEETs also follow an alternating access mechanism.
Crystal structures of SWEETs and SemiSWEETs have provided vital insights into the transport mechanism, such as the location of the substrate-binding site and the identity of residues critical for transport activity. Two THBs are needed to form the substrate-binding pocket, which is located closer to the extrafacial side of the membrane. Within it, conserved Asn (N73 and N192 in AtSWEET1, N77 and N197 in OsSWEET2b, and N76 in AtSWEET13) and Trp/Phe (W176 in AtSWEET1, F181 in OsSWEET2b, and W180 in AtSWEET13) residues are essential for substrate recognition (37,88) (Figure 1a,b). The substrate-biding site is closed to the extrafacial side by a gate with conserved Asp and Tyr residues, and in SWEETs, the intrafacial gate contains several conserved Pro residues (88). The off-center position of the substrate-binding site raises questions about the number and functions of the additional THBs in SuperSWEETs, which may not be able to form functional substrate-binding sites. Resolving the structure of SuperSWEETs with cryo-electron microscopy could help clarify this issue (15).

Figure 1Click to view


The structures of SemiSWEETs have allowed researchers to formulate molecular dynamics simulations to understand the process of substrate translocation. For example, Latorraca et al. (52) performed long-timescale unbiased molecular simulations of LbSemiSWEET starting from the glucose-bound outward-open crystal structure. This study identified more gating residues on the extrafacial and intrafacial sides of the transporter that undergo a coordinated motion to keep the transporter closed at one of the ends to satisfy the requirements of the alternating access model (Figure 1c). But the key observation of this study was that the conformational change from an outward-open state to an inward-open state remains the same with and without the substrate. In other words, the glucose molecule takes a free ride across the membrane as the transporter undergoes the conformational change between outward-open and inward-open states. Latorraca et al. (52) also performed simulations from the docked pose of glucose in the inward-open state of the EcSemiSWEET and observed the glucose release to the cytoplasmic side, helping identify critical residues that facilitate this process.
Molecular dynamics simulations have also been deployed to recreate the complete transport cycle of the eukaryotic OsSWEET2b (79). The key result from the study by Selvam et al. (79) was that glucose induces similar conformational changes as the transporter without glucose. In other words, SWEETs also follow the free-ride mechanism observed for LbSemiSWEET. Intriguingly, glucose molecules were found to actively remodel the free-energy landscape by lowering the energy barrier between the key conformational states of OsSWEET2b to facilitate their transport (79). However, while the conformational changes may be similar, the interaction of glucose with the residues in the translocation pore is markedly different between OsSWEET2b and the bacterialVibriosp. VsSemiSWEET (23). The structural origin of these differences is the presence of the inversion linker TMH4 in SWEETs. SemiSWEETs adopt a symmetric structure with a narrow translocation pore due to the homodimerization of the THBs, whereas SWEETs form an asymmetric structure with a broader pore size. This structural difference leads to the sliding of glucose in the SemiSWEET pore, whereas glucose tumbles while interacting with pore residues in SWEETs (23) (Figure 1d). This result has important implications for the substrate selectivity in SWEETs and SemiSWEETs, given that the pore size of the tunnel determines the size of the substrate that can be translocated. As a consequence, the physical mechanism of transport and the substrate preferences vary between SWEETs and SemiSWEETs.
SWEETs form functional homo- and heterooligomers. OsSWEET2b was captured as a tightly packed homotrimer in its crystal structure (88). Moreover, the split ubiquitin two-hybrid system in yeast, split GFP assays in plants, and single-molecule FRET experiments in Sf9 insect cells indicate thatArabidopsisSWEETs can both homo- and heterooligomerize (37,106). Dimers seem to be favored over higher-order complexes of AtSWEET13 in the Sf9 expression system, and, interestingly, cytosolic C-terminal regions also dimerize in sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (37). As a consequence of these interactions, SWEETs can exhibit dominant-negative repression whereby nonfunctional proteins (usually mutated at residues in the intra- or extrafacial gates) can prevent the substrate transport of coexpressed wild-type proteins (37,88,106).
AtSWEET1, the founding member of the family (20), through homology-based prediction from crystal structures of SemiSWEETs and OsSWEET2b and molecular dynamics simulations, has served as a model to evaluate the functions of critical residues for glucose transport (79,88,104). In addition, many other residues have been selected and tested based on sequence alignments (43,106). The effect of point mutations on the glucose transport activity of AtSWEET1 is shown inFigure 1a, as well as those for AtSWEET13 inFigure 1b. It is worth noting that some residues in the transport path in AtSWEET1 are different from those in AtSWEET13, which may be associated with their preferred substrates, as discussed below (37).
Generally, clade III SWEETs prefer to transport sucrose, while clades I, II, and IV favor hexoses (30) (Supplemental Table 1). Sequence comparison and the crystal structure of AtSWEET13, which can transport both glucose and sucrose (22,37), revealed essential residues that, when mutated, shift substrate selectivity between sucrose and glucose. Specifically, Val23, Ser54, Val145, and Ser176 (numbered according to AtSWEET13) in disaccharide transporters correspond to larger Leu, Asn, Met, and Asn residues, respectively, in monosaccharide transporters, making the substrate-binding pocket of the latter too small to accommodate sucrose (37) (Figure 1a,b).
When tested for uptake in yeast andXenopusoocytes, the affinity constants of SWEETs have been found to range from five to a few hundred millimoles, depending on the substrate (20,22,38,95) (Supplemental Table 1). Moreover, the ratio between their influx and efflux affinity constants is close to one. That is, SWEETs have been proposed to be symmetric transporters (69), unlike other well-characterized sugar carriers like the human GLUT1 (13).
Interestingly, the clade III AtSWEET13 and AtSWEET14 have also been shown to transport the plant hormone gibberellic acid (GA), whose structure (a five- plus a six-carbon ring) is similar to sucrose. The affinity constants for both transporters towards GA3, the major bioactive GA produced in the fungusGibberella fujikuroi, were found to be in the hundreds-of-micromoles range (45). This is a startling fact, considering that the affinity of clade III SWEETs for sucrose is tens of millimoles. Which residues in the transporters interact with GA and what recognition mechanism explains the high affinity are unknown, but the interaction seems physiologically relevant, as theatsweet13 atsweet14double mutant has a defect in anther dehiscence (45) and higher levels of GA in the elongation zone of roots compared with wild-type plants (72).
SWEETs have been implicated in many cellular efflux steps of sugar allocation. The current evidence fromArabidopsis, where functional characterization of different family members is most complete (Figure 2), suggests that clade III SWEETs mediate phloem loading and unloading, while clade I and II SWEETs complete the final distribution of sucrose, glucose, and fructose within sink tissues (21,22). Meanwhile, clade IV members are responsible for vacuole sugar storage (16). While most of these functions are conserved across different species, many exceptions exist, and analysis is complicated by the fact that closely related members are usually coexpressed and genetic knockout of any SWEET often results in compensatory upregulation of other family members. Changes in the expression pattern of SWEETs tend to precede critical developmental transitions that require extensive rerouting of sugar allocation, such as flowering (5) and the onset of senescence (41), further convoluting the interpretation of the evidence.

Figure 2Click to view


Carbon is fixed in leaves via photosynthesis, and carbohydrates, mainly sucrose, are loaded into the phloem for transport to sink tissues in seeds, roots, stems, and young leaves that need to import sugars to support their development. Sugar transporters, including SWEETs, play central roles during allocation. Inapoplasmic phloem–loadingspecies likeArabidopsisand maize, some clade III SWEETs in leaf phloem parenchyma cells facilitate the release of sucrose into the apoplasmic space. Sucrose is then imported into the sieve element–companion cell complex (SE-CC) against the concentration gradient by SUT/SUCproton/sugar symporters(18), namely AtSUC2 inArabidopsis. TheArabidopsisAtSWEET11 and AtSWEET12 are specifically expressed in phloem parenchyma cells proximal to the SE-CC in leaves, and theatsweet11 atsweet12double mutant shows stunted growth, compromised sucrose translocation into the phloem, and more sugar and starch retention in leaves (22). However, the phenotype ofatswseet11 atsweet12is much less severe than that of theatsuc2mutant. This result was partially explained by the upregulation ofAtSWEET13inatsweet11 atsweet12(22), which aligns with the recent finding that AtSWEET13 is expressed in phloem parenchyma cells, too (47). Indeed, theatsweet11 atsweet12 atsweet13triple mutant was more stunted than theatsweet11 atsweet12double mutant, although not as stunted asatsuc2(X. Xue, unpublished data). This indicates that other SWEETs may play a role in phloem loading beyond AtSWEET11, AtSWEET12, and AtSWEET13. Our sextuple mutantatsweet10 atsweet11 atsweet12 atsweet13 atsweet14 atsweet15was much smaller thanatsweet11 atsweet12 atsweet13, comparable with the phenotype of theatsuc2mutant (X. Xue, unpublished data). This finding suggests that more SWEETs are involved in phloem loading or can be recruited to the process by yet-unknown feedback mechanisms, although the relative contributions of individual SWEETs await quantification. Similarly, Bezrutczyk et al. (12) reported thatZmSWEET13a,ZmSWEET13b, andZmSWEET13care highly expressed in leaf veins in maize, particularly in abaxial bundle sheath cells of rank-2 intermediate veins and phloem parenchyma cells. Thezmsweet13a zmsweet13b zmsweet13ctriple mutant is severely stunted with a high accumulation of starch and soluble sugar in leaves (10), similar to thezmsut1mutant (81) (Figure 3). These studies suggest that SWEET-SUT/SUC-mediated apoplasmic phloem loading is conserved throughout the plant kingdom.

Figure 3Click to view


The participation of SWEETs in the development of stem and root vegetables deserves particular attention. For example, the potatoStSWEET11is expressed in the phloem of young swelling tubers during tuberization, which is involved in sucrose efflux into the cell wall space. StSWEET11 interacts with a FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT)-like protein, SELF-PRUNING 6A (StSP6A), to block sucrose leakage into apoplasm, therefore favoringsymplasmic sucrose transport. Elevated sugar and starch in leaves and reduced final tuber yield were observed whenStSWEET11was downregulated via RNA interference (RNAi) (2).
Since the endosperm and embryo are symplasmically isolated from the maternal seed coat, apoplasmic seed filling requires at least two efflux steps. First, sugars must be released from maternal tissues into the apoplasmic space between the seed coat and the endosperm. Second, sugars must be released from the endosperm/aleurone into the apoplasm between the endosperm/aleurone and the embryo. Chen et al. (21) found thatAtSWEET11,AtSWEET12, andAtSWEET15are sequentially expressed in the seed coat and endosperm. Theatsweet11 atsweet12 atsweet15triple mutant retains more starch in the seed coat and results in wrinkled seeds with retarded embryo development and reduced starch and lipid content due to less sugar available in embryonic tissues (21). Similarly, two parallel studies in rice found that OsSWEET11 is necessary for sucrose release from maternal tissues during early seed filling (65,109). However, Yang et al. (109) also showed that theossweet11 ossweet15double mutants had more severe seed-filling defects with nonfunctional endosperm and more residual starch levels in the pericarp, intimating that OsSWEET11 and OsSWEET15 also participate in sucrose influx into the aleurone. Other OsSWEETs are also reported to participate in sugar transport and thereby impact starch metabolism during seed filling (55). In soybean, the glucose and sucrose transporters GmSWEET10a and GmSWEET10b are expressed in the seed coat for sugar export and underwent stepwise selection during domestication. The double mutantgmsweet10a gmsweet10bhas a lower seed weight, accumulating significantly more sugars in the seed coat and less in the embryo (98), consistent with the results fromatsweet11 atsweet12 atsweet15.In addition, GmSWEET15 expressed in the endosperm also plays a critical role in sucrose efflux in developing seeds to provide nutrients for filial tissue development (99).
During seed filling, the embryo takes up sugar at least in the form of hexoses, as suggested by the defects caused by the loss of CWINs (92). Thus, it is not surprising that clade II SWEETs, which transport hexoses, are also crucial in seed filling. In maize,ZmSWEET4c, a locus associated with domestication, is specifically expressed in the basal endosperm transfer layer (BETL), the route used by maternal nutrients to enter seeds. Loss ofZmSWEET4ccauses a defect in seed filling and BETL differentiation (82). Similarly, the rice ortholog OsSWEET4 is also a target of domestication selection, and theossweet4mutant shows a strong empty pericarp phenotype. Both ZmSWEET4c and OsSWEET4 transport glucose and fructose (82). Recently, Lu et al. (64) found that AtSWEET4 expressed in nucellus exports hexoses toward the endosperm inArabidopsis. Taken together, these results intimate a relay from clade III SWEETs in the seed coat to clade II in the embryo during seed filling and a conserved role of SWEET4 in the transport of sugars from maternal tissues to the endosperm.
SWEETs are also crucial for fruit development. For instance, SlSWEET15 protein was detected in vascular tissues and seed coats in developing tomatoes (Solanum lycopersicum), where it is thought to mediate sucrose efflux from the phloem into the apoplasm surrounding parenchyma cells and from the seed coat into the apoplasm (49). In another example from cucumber (Cucumis sativusL.), the hexose transporter CsSWEET7 in companion cells of unloading vascular tissues is responsible for fruit development (59). The knockdown mutant ofcssweet7exhibits smaller fruits with lower soluble sugar levels (59).
Even before SWEETs were characterized as sugar transporters (20), the rice disease susceptibility geneXa13/Os8N3(OsSWEET11) was already known to be involved in the interaction between plants and pathogens (24,108). Many plant pathogenic bacteria inject type IIItranscription activator-like (TAL) effectors (TALEs)into host cells to cause virulence. Chu et al. (24) cloned thexa13recessive alleles and found that promoter mutations confer race-specific resistance to bacterial blight. At the same time, Yang et al. (108) found thatOs8N3induction upon infection byXanthomonas oryzaepv.oryzae(Xoo) strain PXO99Adepends on the type III effector PthXo1. Os8N3 RNAi plants showed resistance to strain PXO99Awhile remaining susceptible to other strains (108), but the pathogenesis mechanism was elusive until Xa13 was found to be a sugar transporter (20). We now know that PthXo1 directly binds to an effector binding element (EBE) in the promoter ofOsSWEET11to activate its expression. This facilitates sugar release into the apoplasmic space (20,75), where it is available for the bacteria to take up and reproduce. Both mutated PthXo1 and mutated EBE in theOsSWEET11promoter eliminate PthXo1-mediated induction, thus conferring disease resistance. Althoughossweet11mutants are resistant to PXO99A, rice carryingxa13alleles can still be infected by strains producing other type III effectors, such as AvrXa7, PthXo2, or PthXo3 (6,20). Together, these studies suggest that the pathogen triggers disease susceptibility in a gene-for-gene manner.
Other clade III SWEETs are also susceptibility genes. TheXoostrain PXO339 inducesOsSWEET13/Xa25, and downregulation ofOsSWEET13leads to resistance (62). It is worth noting that PXO339 rapidly induces the expression of the dominantXa25but not the recessive resistant allelexa25. Additionally, the TALE AvrXa7 binds to an EBE within the promoter ofOsSWEET14and activates transcription (6,75). Both AvrXa7 and PthXo3 induce the expression ofOsSWEET14, and the knockout mutant of OsSWEET14 or knockdown mutant ofOsSWEET14by RNAi results in resistance toXoostrains relying on AvrXa7 or PthXo3 for virulence (6). Resistance to PXO339 may be due to the recessive allele failing to respond to transcriptional induction, altered sugar transport activity (since eight amino acids are different between the recessive and dominant alleles), or both (62). Later, Li et al. (56) proved that OsSWEET12 conferred susceptibility toXoostrains by designing artificial TALEs that activated the expression of this transporter, while Streubel et al. (84) manipulated artificial TALEs to specifically target 20OsSWEETsin rice to screen for other potential susceptibility genes. Consistent with the study by Li et al. (56), OsSWEET12 and OsSWEET15 were confirmed to confer susceptibility toXoo(84), although no naturally occurring TALEs have been identified that can directly induce their transcription.
In dicot crops, SWEETs are also hijacked by bacterial pathogens to make hosts more susceptible. For example, in cassava (Manihot esculenta), TAL20Xam668 specifically induces the sucrose transporterMeSWEET10ato elevate the pathogenicity ofXanthomonas axonopodispv.manihotis(25). Furthermore, in cotton (G. hirsutum),Xanthomonas citrisubsp.malvacearumspecifically activatesGhSWEET10dvia Avrb6, an important TALE for virulence (27). Intriguingly, only the clade III sucrose facilitators are recruited to induce virulence by bacterial pathogens, indicating that clade III members and TALEs coevolved during the host and pathogen tug-of-war.
Furthermore, SWEETs can also be manipulated by protist and fungi pathogens. For example, expression ofAtSWEET11andAtSWEET12is upregulated by the protistPlasmodiophora brassicaeduring gall formation in roots (commonly known as clubroot disease) and loss ofAtSWEET11andAtSWEET12results in less sugar accumulation at the site of infection and a delay in pathogen development (90). The double mutantatsweet11 atsweet12also exhibits reduced susceptibility towards the fungal hemibiotrophColletotrichum higginsianum(33), andZmSWEET4a,ZmSWEET4b, andZmSWEET11awere upregulated in infected seedlings and adult leaves by the basidiomycete fungusUstilago maydis(83). Overexpression of the plasma membrane–localizedIbSWEET10in sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas[L.] Lam) leads to decreased sucrose levels upon infection byFusarium oxysporum, and, consequently, plants are more resistant, while the RNAi lines are more susceptible (60).
In addition to being hijacked by pathogens for nutrition,SWEETsare also upregulated to sequester sugars away from pathogens in response to pathogen infections. InArabidopsis, AtSWEET2 localizes to the tonoplast and imports glucose into vacuoles, thus limiting cellular sugar efflux (17).AtSWEET2is dramatically induced duringPythium irregulareinfection, and theatsweet2mutant shows reduced tolerance toPythium. Therefore, sequestering carbon in vacuoles to reduce sugar efflux into the rhizosphere and inhibit pathogen growth is a strategy for plant disease resistance (17).
Expression profiling of different species, such asMedicago truncatulaandLotus japonicus, showed that SWEETs were transcriptionally regulated during symbiotic interaction and SWEET proteins were observed at the periarbuscular membranes. For example, the nodule-specific expression ofMtSWEET11suggests that it has a role in sucrose distribution within nodules, but it was not found to be critical for symbiotic nitrogen fixation (50), whereas the periarbuscular membrane–localized MtSWEET1b is involved in arbuscular maintenance as arbuscule-specific overexpression of dominant-negative alleles of MtSWEET1b results in enhanced arbuscule collapse (3; for more detail, see also14,46). Thus, although there is a lack of direct evidence supporting the role of sugar transport mediated by SWEETs during symbiosis, it is not inconceivable, given the dependence of root microbiota on host-derived carbon.
Sugars serve not only as sources of energy and carbon but also as osmolytes and signaling molecules (76–78). In addition, abiotic stresses such as cold, heat, drought, and nitrogen limitations alter sugar accumulation (78). These responses are often driven by changes in the expression of sugar transporters such as SWEETs.
Sugars are known as osmoprotectants. The expression of both the vacuolar transporter genesCsSWEET16in the tea plantCamellia sinensisandAtSWEET16inArabidopsisis downregulated by cold stress, and overexpression ofAtSWEET16confers plants increased tolerance to low temperatures (48,96). RNAi downregulation ofAtSWEET4expression leads to lower sugar content in leaves and chlorosis, while overexpression ofAtSWEET4,CsSWEET1a, orCsSWEET17, encoding a plasma membrane–localized isoform, increases sugar accumulation and enhances freezing tolerance inArabidopsis(63,110). Overexpression of the senescence-upregulated sucrose transporterAtSWEET15/SAG29makes plants hypersensitive to salt stress by regulating cell viability (80). On the other hand, perturbations that result in a higher accumulation of soluble sugars in leaves, such as that observed in theatsweet11 atsweet12double mutants, exhibit greater freezing tolerance (53). Together, these studies support the notion that the accumulation of soluble sugars preserves cell membrane integrity during cold stress (77).
SWEETs play a crucial role in response to drought stress. InArabidopsis, water deficiency increases carbon translocation from shoots to roots to favor the development of the latter. This is accomplished by promoting phloem loading via upregulation ofAtSWEET11–AtSWEET13,AtSWEET15, andAtSUC2in leaves, as well as phloem unloading via upregulation ofAtSWEET11–AtSWEET15in roots (29). Furthermore, although not directly implicated with drought tolerance,ZmSWEET1bexpressed in subsidiary cells positively regulates stomatal opening, likely affecting water use efficiency (93).
ManySWEETmembers often show very different spatial-temporal expression patterns over the developmental stages, which correlates with conserved functions among different species. For example,AtSWEET9,Brassica rapa BrSWEET9, andNicotiana attenuata NaSWEET9are specifically expressed in the nectary tissue for nectar secretion during the reproductive stage (61);AtSWEET11–AtSWEET13are specifically expressed in phloem parenchyma cells andZmSWEET13a–ZmSWEET13care expressed in phloem parenchyma cells and abaxial bundle sheath cells of the leaf tissue for phloem loading (10,12,22,47); andZmSWEET4is expressed in the BETL andOsSWEET4is expressed at the base of the spikelet for seed filling (82). These similarities would suggest conserved regulation. However, unlike the extensive effort that has been put into the physiological characterization of SWEETs, only a handful of studies have attempted to provide evidence of their direct transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation, including alternative splicing. For example, it has been reported that OsSWEET13 and OsSWEET14 from rice require their genomic DNA sequence for vascular-specific expression, as transcriptional β-glucuronidase (GUS) fusions under only their promoters lose specificity, indicating some regulatory domains reside in introns or coding sequences (31). A similar result was observed for AtSWEET11 and AtSWEET12 inArabidopsis. A series of deletions fused with GUS showed that promoter regions alone could not recapitulate the expression patterns ofAtSWEET11, but two duplicated exonic domains are individually essential for proper expression (112).
We know too few direct regulators of SWEETs to discern conserved regulatory pathways, but a few studies deserve special mention. In rice, OsDOF11 regulates sugar transport in phloem by directly binding to the promoter region ofOsSWEET11andOsSWEET14(103), while the abscisic acid (ABA)-responsive transcription factor OsbZIP72 binds to the promoter regions ofOsSWEET13andOsSWEET15to activate their expression during drought and salinity stress (66). The cotton transcription factor GhMYB212 directly associates with binding sites in the promoter ofGhSWEET12to regulate the carbon supply available for fiber elongation (87). Finally, the transcription activator MaRAP2-4 fromMentha arvensisis upregulated during waterlogging stress and can bind the promoter ofAtSWEET10and upregulate its expression in transgenicArabidopsisplants (70). This latter result suggests that not only SWEETs but also the regulatory networks that control their expression may be conserved across species.
SWEETsare also regulated at the posttranscriptional level. Many SWEETs have different isoforms, which may carry out different physiological functions. For example, the teaCsSWEET17is alternatively spliced into two isoforms: a plasma membrane–localized CsSWEET17 with transport activity and a cytoplasm-localized CsSWEET17-Ex (exclusion) that loses transport activity (110). Furthermore, their expressions are differentially regulated by cold acclimation (110), likely at the posttranscriptional level, which is an exciting observation that deserves further investigation. The phloem parenchyma cell-specific expression ofAtSWEET11is posttranscriptionally regulated too (112).
SWEETs were detected to be phosphorylated in response to stresses (67,97). Peptides of AtSWEET11 were found to be rapidly phosphorylated upon sucrose, H2O2, mannitol, ABA addition, cold, and low-K+treatment (67,97). These data indicate that the function of SWEETs can be regulated at the posttranslational level, although molecular evidence demonstrating how transport activity is altered by phosphorylation is lacking. The tendency of their cytosolic C termini to form dimers may be involved in this process (37).
SWEET transport activity can also be regulated by interactors. For example, the interaction between StSP6A and StSWEET11 in potatoes impairs transport activity in protoplasts and yeast, which supports a mechanism where protein–protein binding blocks sucrose leakage to the apoplasm during tuber development (2). Also, the interaction between two copper transporters, OsCOPT1 and OsCOPT5, and OsSWEET11 was reported to modulate copper distribution duringXooinfection (111), although it is unclear whether this interaction will impact OsSWEET11 sugar transport. Finally, the dominant-negative effect displayed by SWEETs is a valuable way of inhibiting their transport activity in planta, primarily when the identity of the SWEETs expressed in a tissue is unknown or to circumvent the potential upregulation of compensatory SWEETs. Presumably, the mutated protein can form heterooligomers with any functional SWEET transporter present if they interact. This concept was demonstrated with a mutated OsSWEET11 in rice (32) and MtSWEET1b inM. truncatula(3).
The potential of manipulating SWEETs to enhance crop performance is best illustrated by the engineering of bacterial blight–resistant rice.Transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs)have been used to edit EBEs in SWEET promoters. This was first demonstrated using AvrXa7 and PthXo3 to introduce indels in the promoter region ofOsSWEET14, rendering plants resistant toXoostrains that depend on this pair of effectors for virulence (57). Subsequent editing of Tal5 EBEs inOsSWEET14also resulted in disease resistance to the correspondingXoostrains (42). As an alternative approach, ectopic overexpression of a dominant-negative form of OsSWEET11 in mesophyll cells can improve resistance to the sheath blight disease caused byRhizoctonia solani(32).
Broad-spectrum resistance can be achieved by stacking EBE mutations in multipleSWEETs. Sequence analysis of TALE genes in 63Xoostrains revealed 6 nonoverlapping EBEs in the promoters ofOsSWEET11,OsSWEET13, andOsSWEET14. CRISPR-Cas9 editing of these EBEs in the Kitaake, IR64, and Ciherang-Sub1 cultivars resulted in resistance toXoostrains that depend on the PthXo1, PthXo2B/Tal7PXO61, PthXo2C, PthXo3, AvrXa7, TalC, or TalF effectors without yield penalties (31,68). Similarly, stacking indels in EBEs recognized by PthXo1, PthXo2, PthXo2B/Tal7PXO61, PthXo3, and a novel PthXo2C-like effector, Tal5LN18, also resulted in broad-spectrum resistance (105) (Figure 4).

Figure 4Click to view


Compared with achievements in decreasing pathogen susceptibility, efforts toward improving carbon allocation using SWEETs have had limited success. Constitutive expression ofSWEETsmay not result in gains, depending on the specific tissue expression and subcellular localization of the target SWEETs. For example, overexpression ofAtSWEET11andAtSWEET12using theCaMV35Spromoter resulted in stunted phenotypes (30), and overexpression ofStSWEET11in potato decreased tuberization (2). Remarkably, tissue-specific overexpression ofGmSWEET10aandGmSWEET10bin soybean leads to an increase in seed size and oil content (98), while overexpression ofMtSWEET1binMedicagoroots enhanced growth of the intraradical mycelium during arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis (3).
Manipulating the expression of multipleSWEETssimultaneously with the help of master regulators could be an effective strategy to increase yields, albeit more research is necessary to identify such regulators. For example, the rice transcription factorOsDOF11is expressed in leaf vascular parenchyma cells and phloem cells, where it directly regulates the expression ofOsSWEET11,OsSWEET14, andOsSUT1(103). Thus, targeted ectopic expression of regulators like OsDOF11 may be a better strategy to remove bottlenecks in sugar allocation, as it could result in the coactivation of other genes involved in the process.
Lastly, beyond crops, understanding the molecular function of SWEETs could also impact other biotechnology applications, such as biofuel production. For example, a recent study showed that a chimera of NcSWEET1 from the anaerobic fungiNeocallimastigomycotaenhances glucose and D-xylose coutilization when expressed inSaccharomyces cerevisiae(71). Another more recent study showed that AtSWEET7 could cotransport glucose and xylose simultaneously without glucose inhibition on xylose transport in yeast for fermentation (51). The resulting strains could be valuable in improving the fermentation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates, which contain D-xylose, for efficient and rapid production of cellulosic biofuels and chemicals.
Research on the SWEET family of sugar transporters has seen remarkable advances in the last few years. Nevertheless, many key questions remain about the relationship between their molecular structures and functions, their gene and protein regulation, and the translation of basic research into improved crop yields.
At the molecular level, several residues involved in sugar recognition are conserved across the family, even in SemiSWEETs, while less conserved residues determine pore size and thus substrate selectivity of different clades. SemiSWEETs appear to have a narrow translocation pore, while SWEETs have a broader pore due to the presence of TMH4, suggesting differences in determining the size of favorable substrates (23). Researchers have proposed that SWEETs capable of transporting disaccharides have bigger substrate-binding pockets than those that favor monosaccharides, as demonstrated with amino acid replacements that made the sucrose transporter AtSWEET13 more like clade I and II glucose transporters (37), albeit some clade III SWEETs transport glucose and some clade I and II SWEETs transport sucrose.
Unfortunately, too few SWEET structures have been captured, compared to the numbers of SWEET members across different species and kingdoms, to give us an adequate understanding of substrate selectivity. Molecular dynamics simulations have shown success at predicting unseen states or the spontaneous transitions of SemiSWEETs and SWEETs. They have shown that glucose diffuses freely from the periplasmic to the cytoplasmic side to follow a free-ride mechanism and lowers the energy barrier between the key conformational states to facilitate their transport (79). Since a SWEET is able to transport different substrates (Supplemental Table 1), the questions are whether different sugars have various efficiencies in lowering this energy barrier and how we can improve the efficiency of sugar bound to SWEETs to favor sugar movement. In addition, the crystal structure of OsSWEET2b showed that TMH4 strongly interacts with THB1 but barely contacts THB2 in the inward open conformation (88). It is important, then, to identify whether this interaction is consistent in all conformational states and whether TMH4 fine-tunes transport activity. More crystallographic studies aided by molecular dynamics simulations could improve not only our understanding of the translocation pathway but also the evolution and physiological roles of different clades.
It is worth noting that, although SWEETs have been widely reported to transport sugars, at least two members fromArabidopsis, AtSWEET13 and AtSWEET14, have been demonstrated to transport GAs (45). The SWEET family is not the only one reported to transport very different substrates. For example, NITRATE TRANSPORTER 1 (NRT1)/PEPTIDE TRANSPORTER (PTR) family (NPF) members transport a huge variety of substrates, including nitrate, chloride, glucosinolates, ABA, jasmonates, auxin, and GAs. In addition, many NPF proteins transport more than one substrate (26). We need to explore whether SWEETs recognize such a diversity of substrates as well, and how and why this promiscuity evolved.
Lipids play a critical role in maintaining the oligomeric state of membrane proteins via direct binding combined with changes in bulk membrane properties, as demonstrated for VsSemiSWEET (36), or with alteration of the stability of different conformational states, as indicated for OsSWEET2b (101). However, the structures of SemiSWEETs and SWEETs have not revealed specific lipid-binding sites. Therefore, investigating the impact of membrane composition, such as the plasma versus vacuole membrane, on their substrate selectivity and regulation could provide new avenues for engineering SWEETs and enhancing abiotic stress tolerance in crops. This is particularly relevant because sugar accumulation offers protection against cold stress, and SWEETs may be involved in water use efficiency (93).
It is still critical to develop new yeast strains or systems for the convenient analysis of SWEET transport activity. Mainly, generating a yeast strain with a low background signal to detect sucrose transport would substantially facilitate characterization. In addition, most of the existing heterologous systems are ideal for plasma membrane–localized SWEETs but not endomembrane-localized SWEETs. Identifying the mechanism underlying different subcellular localizations of SWEETs may help target some SWEETs to the plasma membrane for functional studies in addition to shedding light on the relationship between structures and localization. Moreover, the frequently usedFRET sensorscan only detect glucose and sucrose (20,22). Thus, new FRET sensors with higher affinities and optimized dynamic ranges for other sugars are needed. So far, only a few SWEETs have been reported to transport GA. It is also worth exploring whether the recently developed GA FRET sensor can be used for SWEET mediating GA transport tests (73).
The C termini of SWEETs can be modulated by phosphorylation (97). We need to find the regulatory kinases and bring new insights into how these modifications alter transport activities, whether phosphorylation can shift the kinetics of SWEETs, and what conditions trigger these modifications. Furthermore, since SWEETs can form dimers and oligomers (37,88,106), we also need to explore whether the transport activities of individual units are fine-tuned when the numbers of interacting monomers change or when oligomerization of SWEETs with different substrate selectivities occur. Some SWEETs have been reported to functionally interact with StSP6A in potato and OsCOPT1 and OsCOPT5 in rice (2,111). In addition, membrane protein–protein interaction assays in yeast have shown that SWEETs physically interact with many other proteins (44). It would be valuable to address whether these interactions also happen in planta and what their effect may be on transport activities and biological functions.
Additionally, we do not yet know whether there is an interplay between phosphorylation and oligomerization of SWEETs. Structural and computational studies have not provided a basis for the potential interplay between different regulatory modes of SWEETs. For reference, the plant nitrate transporter NRT1.1 undergoes a phosphorylation-induced dimer breakdown to allow transition between low- and high-affinity states (85). Finding out whether SWEETs can undergo similar transitions would require capturing the structure of SWEETs with their C-terminal tails in a phosphorylated and oligomeric state. Alternatively, an integrated computational investigation of different phosphorylation and oligomerization states could also reveal potential mechanisms of interplay between regulatory modes.
At the organismal level, extensive research has focused on functional studies of SWEETs in different species. In comparison, we know relatively little about their regulation. We know that the specific expression of SWEETs is associated with their cell-type/tissue-specific functions and that their genomic sequences seem to be required for their vein tissue–specific accumulation in rice andArabidopsis(31,112). However, specific patterns of SWEET expression are highly diverse. For example,ZmSWEET4is specifically expressed in cells of the BETL for sugar import into the corn endosperm for seed filling (82), whileZmSWEET1bis specifically expressed in subsidiary cells for guard cell movement (93). However, we do not know the mechanism controlling their specificity. More effort should be made to identify responsible regulatory domains and decode underlying mechanisms, as understanding the precise control of sugar flux is critical for optimizing sugar allocation (9). Yeast one-hybrid screening combined with single-cell sequencing (12,47) and other high-throughput methods like ribosome sequencing (Ribo-Seq) or translating ribosome affinity purification sequencing (TRAP-Seq) could prove valuable to support this effort (7,39).
Many abiotic stresses, such as drought and heat stress (1,74), and nutrient deficiencies, such as magnesium and phosphate (28,89), alter carbon allocation among different tissues (9). SWEETs respond to these stresses to varying degrees at the transcriptional level. We need to determine how these responses affect sugar allocation and what other mechanisms regulate and modify the activity of SWEETs under these different conditions. Genetically engineered FRET sugar sensors turned out to be a powerful tool to monitor sugar dynamic changes in vivo under ABA treatment (107) that can mimic stress responses. Thus, expressing FRET sensors insweetmutants will facilitate a better understanding of the roles of SWEET in stress responses at the cellular or even subcellular levels. Alternatively, the activity of SWEETs can be monitored directly with transport activity biosensors (69).
Lastly, increasing crop yields requires not only carbon, in the form of sugars, but also water and nitrogen. It would be interesting to design a SWEET with broad substrate selectivity and high transport capacity to explore how this will affect yields. At present, multiscale in silico models that integrate carbon-, water-, and nitrogen-associated transporters at the subcellular and whole-plant levels are lacking, limiting our ability to predict how modifyingSWEETexpression patterns could improve yields (8). Given our rudimentary understanding of SWEET regulation, iterating between the generation of transgenic lines and high-throughput phenotyping may be necessary to sequentially remove pathway bottlenecks under different environmental conditions (9).




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We thank Dr. Bing Yang and Dr. Liang Feng for helpful discussion and comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by National Science Foundation grant 1942722 to L.S.C. and by the startup funds of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign to L.-Q.C.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...

DownloadSupplemental Table 1(XLSX).

Literature Cited


