We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Plants have an extraordinary diversity of transcription machineries, including five nuclear DNA-dependent RNA polymerases. Four of these enzymes are dedicated to the production of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), which are ribonucleic acids with functions independent of their protein-coding potential. lncRNAs display a broad range of lengths and structures, but they are distinct from the small RNA guides of RNA interference (RNAi) pathways. lncRNAs frequently serve as structural, catalytic, or regulatory molecules for gene expression. They can affect all elements of genes, including promoters, untranslated regions, exons, introns, and terminators, controlling gene expression at various levels, including modifying chromatin accessibility, transcription, splicing, and translation. Certain lncRNAs protect genome integrity, while others respond to environmental cues like temperature, drought, nutrients, and pathogens. In this review, we explain the challenge of defining lncRNAs, introduce the machineries responsible for their production, and organize this knowledge by viewing the functions of lncRNAs throughout the structure of a typical plant gene.
Article metrics loading...
Plants have an extraordinary diversity of transcription machineries, including five nuclear DNA-dependent RNA polymerases. Four of these enzymes are dedicated to the production of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), which are ribonucleic acids with functions independent of their protein-coding potential. lncRNAs display a broad range of lengths and structures, but they are distinct from the small RNA guides of RNA interference (RNAi) pathways. lncRNAs frequently serve as structural, catalytic, or regulatory molecules for gene expression. They can affect all elements of genes, including promoters, untranslated regions, exons, introns, and terminators, controlling gene expression at various levels, including modifying chromatin accessibility, transcription, splicing, and translation. Certain lncRNAs protect genome integrity, while others respond to environmental cues like temperature, drought, nutrients, and pathogens. In this review, we explain the challenge of defining lncRNAs, introduce the machineries responsible for their production, and organize this knowledge by viewing the functions of lncRNAs throughout the structure of a typical plant gene.
Ribonucleic acids (RNAs) have a complex relationship with genetic information. The discovery of protein biosynthesis mechanisms revealed that RNA relates to genetic information in at least three distinct ways (111). It can directly carry genetic information as messenger RNA (mRNA). It can perform structural and enzymatic roles as ribosomal RNA (rRNA). Or it can serve at the interface between genetic information and protein sequence as transfer RNA (tRNA). Although mRNA was not the first RNA discovered (61), it serves as the reference point from which all other RNA types are termed noncoding RNA (ncRNA), an ambiguous and negatively inflected definition. As the ncRNA catalog expanded, ncRNAs were not merely seen as molecular fossils but rather as the new frontier for discovery. In this modern RNA world, numerous essential processes were understood to be ncRNA driven (36).
The eighteenth-century physicist Felice Fontana was the first to study a cellular structure made of ncRNA. While observing “vesicles” (cells) derived from eel epidermis, he discerned “an oval body, with a spot in its center” (44). Thanks to Emil Heitz and Barbara McClintock in the 1930s, Max Birnstiel, Oscar Miller, and Barbara Beatty in the 1960s, and contemporary cell and molecular biologists, we now understand Fontana's oval to be the cell nucleus and the central spot to be the nucleolus. This nuclear body is the dynamic nexus of rRNA synthesis, rRNA processing, and preribosome assembly tethered to the nucleolus organizer regions in eukaryotic chromosomes (103).
Although the widespread presence of ncRNA has been known for a long time (46), our knowledge about ncRNA exploded with the advent of technologies for genome-wide RNA detection. Microarrays and high-throughput sequencing in animals, fungi, and plants revealed that, beyond conventional gene loci, large portions of eukaryotic genomes are transcribed (32,35,89,152). Large genomes appeared to be full of countless, previously unknown ncRNAs. However, the lack of evidence for functionality soon challenged the significance of this genome-wide transcription (49). Most transcribed loci that do not encode proteins lack sequence conservation and are thus unlikely to be under selection. Moreover, disrupting their expression or sequence often yields no evident phenotype. Even their existence is being questioned, as some of these transcripts may be technical artifacts or products of transcriptional noise (78).
Systematic functional studies of the last decade put a spotlight on the mechanisms and functions of ncRNA, especially on the longer subset termed long noncoding RNA (lncRNA). This work revealed conclusive biological functions for a limited number of plant lncRNAs and explained certain aspects of their molecular mechanisms. These lncRNAs are the focus of this review. Before we proceed to describing their biosynthesis, mechanisms, and functions, we must clarify what we include in our definition of lncRNA.
We propose the following definition: A lncRNA is an RNA that has a function independent of its protein-coding potential and that is produced by a mechanism other than molecular ruler–based dicing or trimming. Below we explain the three essential criteria of this revised definition and how it mitigates the shortcomings of past definitions used widely in the literature.
The first criterion we apply to define lncRNAs is the test of functionality. The mere presence of an RNA does not imply function because transcription and other mechanisms of RNA biosynthesis are inherently noisy (124). RNA transcripts that frequently occur at a locus may ultimately become functionalized, but the stochastic products of transcriptional noise are excluded from our definition of lncRNA. Admittedly, the act of transcription may sometimes be functional and the RNA just a by-product (17). Such transcripts are included in our definition because it is technically hard to distinguish the functional role of transcription from its transcript products. Finally, a large pool of RNA is detectable only in mutants defective in the RNA degradation machinery (71,128). These RNAs may reflect RNA processing noise and are excluded from lncRNA, unless clear evidence of function exists. Exclusion from our definition does not imply that transcriptional noise and RNA processing noise are unworthy research subjects. Rather, we argue that these stochastic RNAs are quantitative evidence about the fidelity of the RNA biogenesis machinery, not units of cellular function.
Defining functionality is not trivial. In a strict definition, function is a product of selection (49). Sequence conservation is the easiest test of selection. However, conservation is also relatively rare: Only 3.9% of theArabidopsisgenome that does not encode proteins shows evidence of selection (54). An alternative test relies on genetic evidence and observing phenotypic consequences after altering the candidate RNA. To assign functionality, we require an RNA to meet one of these two tests. A lower bar for functionality is the causal role test, which relies on the RNA's involvement in a molecular process (49). RNAs that have been shown to be involved in a genetic or biochemical pathway, but lack evidence of selection or have not been tested for phenotypic effect upon disruption, are termed putative lncRNAs. In many cases, altered phenotypes are seen only after lncRNA overexpression, rather than deficiency. While overexpression remains an important tool, it is vulnerable to technical artifacts. lncRNAs only validated using this latter method are also included in the putative lncRNA category.
The second criterion we apply to define lncRNAs is that they have a function independent of any protein-coding potential. This criterion mitigates a shortcoming of the literal view of noncoding because a lack of encoded polypeptides is impossible to prove conclusively (64). We recognize here that an RNA molecule may combine both coding and noncoding functions (9,82). When these functions are unrelated, the noncoding role clearly fits the definition of lncRNA. However, mRNAs also use a variety of mechanisms to affect their own expression. Examples of such mechanisms are sequence elements affecting RNA processing, signals that control subcellular localization, and riboswitches. Such autoregulatory features within mRNAs are directly related to their coding potential and do not fit the definition of lncRNA. Finally, our definition includes structural RNAs, in which the functional structure is encoded in the nucleotide sequence but is independent of the genetic code.
The third criterion we apply to define lncRNAs is their biogenesis mechanism, which is clearly distinct from that of small RNA biogenesis. This criterion is consistent with early uses of the term lncRNA (120) and avoids the need for an arbitrary size cutoff (traditionally at 200 nt), which has no justification in the origin or function of various lncRNAs. Small RNAs, in contrast, have a well-defined size range and conserved biogenesis mechanisms, which make them distinct from lncRNAs (8). Therefore, we define lncRNAs as products of biogenesis mechanisms other than the activity of Dicer endonucleases or exonuclease protection within Argonaute proteins. Our definition includes rRNA, tRNA, small nuclear RNA (snRNA), and various outlier classes of RNA (Table 1), which were previously categorized with little consistency (86,105).
Plant lncRNAs discussed in this article, listed here with their biological functions and their observed lengths and grouped by the RNA polymerase enzyme(s) required for their biogenesis
Abbreviations:AG,AGAMOUS;AtTR,Telomerase RNA subunit; circRNA, circular RNA;FLC,FLOWERING LOCUS C;IPS1,INDUCED BY PHOSPHATE STARVATION1; lncRNA, long noncoding RNA; LSU, large ribosomal subunit;P5SM,5S rRNA structural mimic; RdDM, RNA-directed DNA methylation;SEP3,SEPALLATA3; snRNA, small nuclear RNA; snoRNA, small nucleolar RNA; SSU, small ribosomal subunit; TE, transposable element;TLC1,TELOMERASE COMPONENT 1.

Successful efforts have been made to systematically classify lncRNAs by their distinct properties (22,113). Many of the proposed common features of lncRNAs that determine biological function closely parallel well-established attributes of proteins. In fact, lncRNAs resemble proteins in being structurally and functionally heterogeneous. At the same time, lncRNAs mostly lack common evolutionary origins and do not have universally conserved mechanisms of action. The category of lncRNA is thus extremely broad. Although our understanding of plant lncRNAs is still limited, the lack of universal lncRNA properties may be intrinsic to this class of RNAs.
The ability to combine genetic and structural capacities in one molecule distinguishes lncRNAs from proteins. A good example of this combination is tRNA, which has genetic information in the anticodon and adopts a conserved structure, which facilitates reversible binding of amino acids and association with the ribosome. Further examples of this combination are instructive because they reveal conceptually novel mechanisms of lncRNA action.
An important implication of these distinct lncRNA properties is that they expand our understanding of evolutionary conservation. In a typical scenario, conservation of sequence determines the conservation of structure and function, as in the case of theTelomerase RNA subunit(AtTR), which provides the RNA template for telomere DNA synthesis and is essential for catalysis in the ribonucleoprotein telomerase enzyme (39). However, structure and function may remain conserved even in the absence of strong sequence conservation, as suggested for the lncRNACOOLAIR(55). Moreover, functional conservation may occur even without sequence or structural similarity by virtue of a consistent location relative to a gene (41,47,99).
Terrestrial plants have evolved the most diverse transcriptional machinery yet described for any taxonomic group of eukaryotes (132). This enzymatic machinery includes two novel nuclear DNA–dependent RNA polymerases that are dedicated to lncRNA synthesis. Given these specialized enzymes, the lncRNA production machinery is particularly complex in plants and thus deserves an in-depth introduction.
Eukaryotes deploy three conserved multisubunit RNA polymerases (Pol I, II, and III) to transcribe their nuclear genomes into various coding and noncoding transcripts (28). All three of these RNA polymerases produce lncRNA: Pol I and Pol III are dedicated to lncRNA production, and Pol II, despite its primary function in mRNA biogenesis, also produces a range of lncRNAs. Remarkably, plants use two additional enzymes, Pol IV and Pol V, to produce lncRNAs that are essential for recognizing and silencing transposable elements (TEs).
Nuclear RNA polymerases assemble from 12 to 17 subunits, including unique combinations of the largest two subunits, which enclose the catalytic center (28,109,110). The plant nomenclature assigns equivalent numbers to the first 12 subunits, which are structurally and functionally homologous in Pol I, II, III, IV, and V (Figure 1a). Each transcription machinery in plants generates distinct lncRNAs (Table 1) that are governed by specialized transcription factors, the core enzyme's sequence specificity, its other biochemical properties, and associated RNA processing activities. Armed with deep sequencing, proteomics, and structure determination techniques, scientists are probing ever deeper into the enzyme complexes that synthesize lncRNA.

Figure 1Click to view


The most abundant lncRNA class in the cell is rRNA that catalyzes protein synthesis. To produce this rRNA, Pol I transcribes tandemly repeated genes into long rRNA precursors, which are processed into 18S, 5.8S, and 25S rRNAs (Figure 1b). These mature rRNAs, in addition to 5S rRNAs (see below), associate with ribosomal proteins to assemble into the small and large ribosomal subunits. Pol I transcription is thus coupled to ribosome biogenesis, which requires further lncRNA-containing ribonucleoproteins and is beyond the scope of our review (117). A distinct property of Pol I is the tight coordination of its activity with cell growth and organismal development. Structurally, Pol I is distinguished by its catalytic subunits NRPA1 and NRPA2 and comprises several other fully or partially specialized proteins for a total of 14 subunits (109) (Figure 1a). The primary rRNA transcripts, their processed forms, and the assembled catalytic ribozyme are all lncRNA, according to our definition.
While Pol II transcripts represent only 3% of the total steady-state RNA in a cell (137), Pol II transcription accounts for protein-coding transcripts (pre-mRNAs) and a significant subset of lncRNA (Figure 1b). A distinct feature of Pol II transcripts is the precise regulation of their production and activity accomplished at both the transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels. These regulatory mechanisms include general transcription factors (GTFs, or TFII complexes), promoter-specific factors, the Mediator complex, and RNA processing steps that impact transcription initiation, elongation, splicing, and termination (28).
Pol II assembles from the largest and second-largest catalytic subunits (NRPB1 and NRPB2), as well as smaller polypeptides that are, in part, common to other RNA polymerases (Figure 1a). These plant proteins form a 12-subunit Pol II complex, homologous to the archetypal yeast Pol II (28,110). Pol II is unique among RNA polymerases in that its largest catalytic subunit (NRPB1) contains a long array of heptapeptide repeats in the C-terminal domain (CTD). Like other Pol II enzymes, the plant Pol II CTD is extensively posttranslationally modified, providing a platform to integrate the state of transcription with downstream RNA processing (80).
In addition to the 12 core subunits, Pol II relies on specialized factors to escort it through the steps of transcription. These proteins facilitate both coding and noncoding transcription by Pol II. Promoters contain a range of specific transcription factor binding sites, providing an opportunity to respond and integrate multiple environmental and internal signals that regulate Pol II initiation. Pol II transcribing through a gene body is assisted by a range of transcription elongation factors (4) that support Pol II processivity during elongation. Once Pol II reaches the end of a gene, transcription must reliably terminate to avoid read-through transcription of neighboring genes. In plants, this termination process has not been extensively studied, but the torpedo model adapted from work in other systems is gaining support (85).
Both mRNA and lncRNA products of Pol II undergo extensive cotranscriptional and posttranscriptional processing (Figure 1b). These processes often include RNA capping, splicing, polyadenylation, and nuclear export, depending on the transcript. In the case of mRNAs, processing ensures subsequent translation on ribosomes, while in the case of lncRNAs, it assures proper structure, localization, and accumulation (95). In addition, Pol II products are subject to nonsense-mediated decay, RNA uridylation, and additional quality control steps implicating the RNA exosome and RNAi pathways (23,33).
In plants, the distinction between coding and noncoding Pol II transcription has not yet been attributed to a specialized Pol II complex or to specialized GTFs, as was reported in yeast andDrosophila(2,43). However, the genes encoding subunits of the GTFs TFIIA, TFIIB, TFIID, and TFIIE are duplicated in plant evolution (77), which may indicate that the plant Pol II transcription machinery is more complex than currently appreciated.
Pol III synthesizes hundreds of relatively short (<500-nt) lncRNAs with diverse but essential functions. Most notably, Pol III produces the tRNA adaptor molecules that transform mRNA codon information into amino acids during translation (Figure 1b). In addition, Pol III transcribes 5S rRNA, an essential part of ribosomes, and U6 snRNA, a crucial component of the spliceosome catalytic core (25,134). Plant cells have diverged evolutionarily from yeast and vertebrates to use Pol III, instead of Pol II, for U3 small nucleolar RNA and telomerase RNA production (21,39,69). In terms of enzyme composition, Pol III is distinguished by the catalytic subunits NRPC1 and NRPC2, as well as by several specialized polypeptides, for a total of 17 subunits (109) (Figure 1a). Due to Pol III being mostly coordinated with cell growth and division, the regulation of Pol III transcription is less complex than that of Pol II.
Studies of gene silencing and RNA polymerase subunits inArabidopsisrevealed two novel transcription machineries in plants; both are dedicated to lncRNA biogenesis (57,65,101,104). The first enzyme, Pol IV, produces precursors for small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) that silence TEs via RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM). Pol IV has been implicated in flowering time control inArabidopsisand epigenetic interactions between chromosomes, such as paramutation in maize (1,20,38). Work inBrassicaceaespecies, tomato, and other crops has revealed roles for Pol IV in sexual reproduction and seed development (24).
Pol IV, like its molecular cousin Pol II, is composed of 12 subunits (110) (Figure 1a). The 3D structure of Pol IV has not been determined, but comparing Pol IV molecular data to the yeast Pol II structure is informative (42,51,52,110). Pol IV's first and second largest subunits (NRPD1 and NRPD2) assemble to form the catalytic core. Pol IV copurifies with SAWADEE HOMEODOMAIN HOMOLOG 1 (SHH1) and CLASSY family (CLSY1/2/3/4) proteins, which facilitate the recruitment, initiation, and/or elongation of Pol IV transcription in silent chromatin (52,76) (Figure 2). SHH1 specifically binds dimethylated histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9me2) and unmethylated histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) and is involved in recruiting Pol IV to its target loci (75). CLSY proteins are SWI/SNF-like factors critical for locus-specific Pol IV transcription, with the SHH1 transcription factor selectively partnered to CLSY1/2 (157).

Figure 2Click to view


Unlike Pol II, which typically transcribes DNA downstream of gene promoters to produce transcripts thousands of nucleotides long, Pol IV does not rely on sequence-encoded promoters and transcribes mostly TEs and intergenic regions. Although Pol IV transcripts are ∼26–45 nt in length and are templates for RNA-DEPENDENT RNA POLYMERASE 2 (RDR2), both primary Pol IV transcripts and secondary RDR2 products fit our definition of lncRNA until they are processed by a Dicer (Figure 2). These transcripts have an A or G as their first nucleotide, which is also observed in products of other RNA polymerases (13,151). Pol IV transcription is error prone, likely because it lacks proofreading mediated by the canonical trigger loop and bridge helix in the active site of Pol II (94).
Two models for Pol IV termination have been proposed to explain the short Pol IV transcription units. DNA methylation at positions of the Pol IV transcript 3′ termini in vivo led the authors of one study to argue that 5-methylcytosine induces Pol IV termination (151). However, Pol IV transcribes methylated DNA without difficulty in vitro. Transcription assays using a series of DNA templates showed that an annealed DNA-DNA hybrid downstream of Pol IV is sufficient to terminate RNA extension (122). These results suggest a different model, in which the Pol IV transcription bubble constrains RNA product lengths, because Pol IV cannot displace a nontemplate DNA strand.
The distinct transcription activities of Pol IV and RDR2 can be coupled in vitro, showing that Pol IV synthesizes primary transcripts and feeds these lncRNAs directly to RDR2 as templates for dsRNA synthesis (52,122) (Figure 2). Pol IV-RDR2 physical coupling is conserved inArabidopsisand maize and so is likely common to flowering plants (51,52). The resulting dsRNA precursors are then processed by DICER-LIKE 3 (DCL3) into 24-nt siRNAs, which are loaded onto ARGONAUTE 4 (AGO4) and help specify sites of de novo DNA methylation in concert with Pol V.
Pol V is another plant-specific RNA polymerase specialized in lncRNA production and TE silencing (97). In contrast to Pol IV, Pol V does not directly contribute to siRNA production but is needed for siRNAs to recognize their complementary target loci in the genome. The main distinguishing feature of Pol V is its largest subunit, NRPE1 (Figure 1a), which contains a unique CTD that is essential for its specific properties (37,65,104,139). Another unique subunit of Pol V is NRPE5 (73,110). The other subunits of Pol V are shared either with Pol IV or with Pol II and Pol IV (110), reflecting that Pol IV and Pol V originated from Pol II during the evolution of terrestrial plants (93,132).
Pol V, like Pol IV, has the remarkable property of initiating transcription in a sequence-independent manner. There is no evidence of Pol V transcription initiation being mediated by GTFs binding promoter sequences (16,62,140). Instead, Pol V has been proposed to transcribe pervasively, possibly even transcribing the majority of the genome (130). The presence of DNA methylation is correlated with higher rates of Pol V transcription, which facilitates efficient maintenance of TE methylation (62,92,130). This mark is recognized by the SET- and RING-associated domain proteins SUVH2 and SUVH9 (63), which recruit Pol V and/or facilitate transcript elongation (62,92). Pol V transcription also requires the DDR complex, composed of the factors DRD1, DMS3, and RDM1; this complex has been proposed to allow for the active transcription of chromatin containing repressive marks (74,141,142,156). Pol V transcription is highly accurate but substantially slower than other RNA polymerases (94). Little is known about the mechanisms of Pol V transcription termination and further processing or degradation of Pol V transcripts, beyond the observation that Pol V interacts with RRP6L1, a nuclear exosome subunit with 3′-to-5′ exonuclease activity (139).
Transcription by Pol V allows for the recruitment of AGO4-siRNA complexes to their complementary targets in the genome (130,142) (Figure 2). This recruitment is facilitated by the interaction between AGO4 and the CTD of NRPE1 (37). One model assumes that sequence specificity of AGO4-siRNA recruitment is achieved by base-pairing between siRNA and DNA (72), which leads to a commonly asked question: What is more important, noncoding transcripts or the act of noncoding transcription? Several lines of evidence support the importance of lncRNA itself and suggest base-pairing between siRNA and nascent Pol V–produced lncRNA (91,108,142). Binding of AGO4 leads to the recruitment of other RNA-binding proteins and eventually de novo DNA methyltransferase DRM2 and other enzymes responsible for repressive chromatin modifications (15,155,158).
Most lncRNAs are studied in the context of protein-coding gene regulation and as a result can be functionally or mechanistically connected to mRNA expression. In certain cases, lncRNAs target elements in these genes to control their expression. But this connection also means that certain lncRNAs are produced within coding genes or are processed from mRNA transcripts during their maturation. Below we summarize our current understanding of plant lncRNAs by discussing the best characterized examples, organized along functionally relevant elements of protein-coding genes (Figure 3).

Figure 3Click to view


Promoters of protein-coding genes are sequence elements located upstream of transcription start sites (TSSs) and are among the primary determinants of gene expression. Their main role is to efficiently recruit Pol II and regulate the timing and context of transcription initiation. Several studies have observed that promoters are bidirectional and can thus also be a source of promoter upstream transcripts (68,128). Conversely, Pol II transcription into the gene body often terminates prematurely, resulting in the generation of short promoter-proximal RNAs (129). Promoters are therefore a rich source of Pol II transcripts with little apparent protein-coding potential. Following our definition, we refer to these cases as putative lncRNAs, because in the majority of cases they have not been assigned a function.
Not only are promoters a source of lncRNAs, but promoter activity can also be directly or indirectly controlled by lncRNA. A prime example, discussed below, is the lncRNA that facilitates Mediator complex assembly, a key step in transcription initiation. Additional cases include lncRNAs that control DNA topology and the deposition of specific histone marks that control promoter activity.
A well-studied example of lncRNA acting at a gene promoter isELENA1, which is transcribed by Pol II within the promoter region of the pathogen response genePR1(119).ELENA1acts by controlling Mediator occupancy at thePR1promoter (Figure 3). Mediator is a large multisubunit protein complex that integrates transcription factor effects and transmits these regulatory signals to Pol II.ELENA1is transcribed from and acts on the PR1 promoter but is also active when ectopically transcribed from a plasmid. It acts by binding the Mediator subunit MED19.ELENA1transcription is induced by flg22, a bacterial peptide elicitor of pathogen response in plants. Supporting the hypothesized role ofELENA1in pathogen response, artificial miRNA knockdown ofELENA1causes a compromised pathogen response, whereasELENA1overexpression lines show enhanced pathogen response (119). The modulation of lncRNA-Mediator interactions is thus one mechanism by which lncRNAs can control promoter activity and regulate plant responses to environmental challenges like bacterial infection.
Promoters are also known to engage in interactions with other chromosomal regions. These interactions span a range of distances and are thought to be responsible for connecting distant regulatory elements with proximal promoters. At least twoArabidopsislncRNAs have been shown to affect the formation of chromosome loops involving promoters of their target loci. TheAPOLOlncRNA is transcribed 5 kb upstream of the genePID, which encodes a regulator of auxin transport (6).APOLOis transcribed by both Pol II and Pol V and affects root development by regulatingPIDexpression. Experiments based on RNAi knockdown ofAPOLOlncRNA showed thatAPOLOcontrolsPIDexpression by contributing to the formation of a chromosome loop between theAPOLOlocus and thePIDpromoter. Changes in chromosomal interactions associated withAPOLOexpression are dependent on DNA methylation and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) at thePIDpromoter.APOLOalso controls local chromatin looping and engages in R-loop formation at a set of itstranstargets (7).
COLDWRAPis derived from the promoter ofFLOWERING LOCUS C(FLC), a key regulator of flowering time;COLDWRAPcontrols the intragenic gene loop between theFLCgene promoter and its first intron (66) (Figure 4).COLDWRAPis required for efficient silencing ofFLCtranscription in response to prolonged cold exposure, a process termed vernalization, which accelerates flowering. This function was discovered using RNAi knockdown, as well as the expression ofFLCfrom a transgene with theCOLDWRAPregion deleted. The molecular mechanisms ofCOLDWRAPaction include establishment of a repressive intragenic loop that forms in response to cold exposure and is dependent onCOLDWRAP. In addition,COLDWRAPbinds the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) subunit CLF, contributing to its localization to theFLCgene, as well as facilitating H3K27me3 ofFLCchromatin in response to vernalization. Together, these examples demonstrate that the modulation of chromosome looping is another mechanism used by lncRNA to affect the function of gene promoters.

Figure 4Click to view


Another mechanism used by lncRNA to control promoter function is chromatin modifications, which include posttranslational histone modifications and DNA methylation. A typical promoter of an actively transcribed plant protein–coding gene is associated with high levels of histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and histone acetylation. These modifications peak near the 5′ end of the transcribed region, corresponding to the early elongation phase of Pol II transcription. Such promoters are typically devoid of the chromatin marks present further downstream in the transcribed gene body, such as histone 2B ubiquitination (H2Bub), histone H3 lysine 4 monomethylation (H3K4me1), and histone H3 lysine 36 dimethylation (H3K36me2) (80). lncRNA mediated regulation of gene promoters includes changes in histone modifications, such as deposition of repressive histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) marks, a mechanism associated with functions of the previously discussed lncRNAsAPOLOandCOLDWRAP. Importantly, posttranslational histone modifications are often established cotranscriptionally by histone-modifying enzymes associated with the elongating Pol II holoenzyme (4). It is therefore often difficult to disentangle the effects of the act of transcription and changes in cotranscriptional histone modifications.
An example of lncRNAs that act on gene promoters via transcription are Pol II transcripts derived from improper transcription termination. Such transcripts are observed inArabidopsismutants defective in BORDER proteins, which are transcription elongation factors containing TFIIS-like domains (147). While abundant read-through transcripts are observed inbordermutants, most of these RNAs lack any assigned function and cannot be termed lncRNA. However, some such transcripts appear to silence downstream genes, presumably because of read-through into the target gene promoters and TSSs. On the basis of the deficiency phenotype ofbordertriple mutants, this mechanism was implicated in photomorphogenesis (147). This is an example of how the phenomenon of transcriptional interference may repress transcription units (48,121). A similar process was reported for transgene-derived putative lncRNAs that target theQUA1gene promoter (100).
A common source of noncoding transcripts in plant gene promoters are TEs, which not only are genomic parasites but also contribute to gene regulation (58). Approximately 36% ofArabidopsisgenes and 85% of maize genes are present within 1 kb of a TE (58,84). Noncoding transcription by Pol II, as well as by the specialized RNA polymerases Pol IV and Pol V, provides a surveillance system that recognizes TE sequences, allowing for the establishment and maintenance of DNA methylation and repressive histone modifications (102). Consequently, the transcriptional silencing machinery, including Pol IV and Pol V, is also commonly found to target gene promoters (154,156).
RNA silencing of gene promoter–localized TEs affects the expression of limited subsets of protein-coding genes in flowering plants (3,20,87,136,154). The effects of TE silencing on gene expression were initially proposed to rely on heterochromatin spreading from the TEs into gene promoters, which turned out not to be the case (84). Instead, RdDM at TE edges is responsible for the maintenance of heterochromatic marks within TEs (84,127), and the mechanism that allows RdDM to affect gene promoters is likely related to the silencing of TEs (58). Moreover, TEs not only serve as a source of lncRNAs that regulate neighboring genes, but these lncRNAs also affect distant genes by controlling long-range chromosomal interactions (116). Despite having little sequence conservation, TE edges have features similar to those of promoters, especially the frequent initiation of Pol IV and Pol V transcription at the edges of long TEs (16,150,151).
A specialized instance of lncRNA targeting promotor regions is nucleolar dominance, which is the selective silencing of rRNA genes in certain hybrid species (103). For example, in allotetraploidArabidopsis suecica(Arabidopsis arenosa×A. thaliana), only rRNA genes derived fromA. arenosaare expressed. By contrast, rRNA genes derived fromA. thalianaare silenced by DNA methylation and repressive histone modifications at their Pol I promoters (131) (Figure 1). lncRNAs synthesized from the intergenic spacer (IGS) separating adjacent rRNA genes have been implicated in this dominance ofA. arenosaoverA. thalianarRNA genes in the hybrid (106). Pol I transcription traversing theA. arenosaIGS is thought to read-through the downstream Pol I promoter, generating 24-nt siRNAs capable of triggering RdDM intransto silenceA. thalianagenes residing on different chromosomes. Other RNA polymerases that transcribe the IGS and rRNA genes (e.g., Pol II and Pol IV) may also generate primary precursors of siRNAs (106). Together, these examples demonstrate the multifaceted roles of lncRNA in controlling promoters by establishing chromatin modifications (Figure 3).
The 5′ untranslated region (5′UTR) is the gene interval between a Pol II TSS and the corresponding mRNA's AUG start codon. 5′UTRs are noncoding features that control mRNA stability and translation (149), but they do not qualify as lncRNAs by default. Identifying bona fide lncRNAs that arise at the TSS or within the 5′UTR is complicated because of the many mRNA variants and small upstream open reading frames (ORFs) that overlap the 5′ regions of plant genes (123,133). Putative lncRNAs detected in genic regions must thus be carefully validated using molecular genetics to test for mechanisms of lncRNA biogenesis and function.
Pol II selection of a TSS delimits the beginning of the 5′UTR and can govern the 5′ extremity of the mRNA-coding region. TheDICER-LIKE 4(DCL4) gene uses lncRNA to control TSS selection and protein sequence inArabidopsis(107). In most tissues, theDCL4promoter is targeted by RdDM, forcing Pol II to initiate at a position downstream in the gene to yield the predominant, cytoplasmic DCL4 isoform. In mutants deficient for lncRNA transcription by Pol IV,DCL4promoter methylation is lost, allowing Pol II to initiate at the alternative, upstream TSS. This longer mRNA includes a 5′ nuclear localization signal and encodes a nuclear DCL4 isoform accountable for a class of 21-nt siRNAs specific to wild-type siliques and seeds. Nuclear DCL4 likely accumulates in those particular tissues because they have reduced levels ofDCL4promoter methylation (107).
Properties of 5′UTRs that can convey lncRNA function include RNA secondary structures and conserved sequence elements (81,82). Such properties were observed for the untranslated 5′ leader region of the cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S RNA, which plant Pol II synthesizes by transcribing viral DNA in the nucleus. The highly structured 35S leader and related viral 8S lncRNA are processed into massive quantities of siRNAs, overwhelming the host antiviral defense machinery. This lncRNA decoy mechanism is hypothesized to protect CaMV-coding regions from antiviral cleavage (14). No endogenous lncRNAs have yet been reported to directly regulate a plant 5′UTR. However, in other systems, lncRNAs do act at 5′UTRs (19), leaving open the prospect that lncRNA-5′UTR interactions could be discovered for plant mRNAs. Together, these two examples demonstrate that TSS regions and 5′UTRs may be targeted by and give rise to lncRNA.
While diverse RNA polymerases produce lncRNAs (Figure 1), the majority of these lncRNAs are involved in processes that influence how Pol II transcripts are expressed, processed, or translated as mRNAs (Figure 3). An essential lncRNA-controlled process is splicing, which removes introns from mRNA sequences. Introns are a fertile landscape for lncRNA evolution because of their abundance and complex relationship with protein production (60). The spliceosome consists of protein factors combined with snRNAs, which perform structural and catalytic functions in the spliceosome (143). Although snRNAs have the term small in their name (Table 1), they share no commonalities with Dicer-produced small RNAs and fit our definition of lncRNAs. Acting at various levels in splicing, these lncRNAs determine the ultimate protein-coding sequence in most, if not all, plant mRNAs (Figure 3). Recent studies in plants have begun to show how the intron-exon architecture of Pol II transcripts also facilitates lncRNA production.
Beyond having a direct enzymatic function in splicing, plant lncRNAs also regulate alternative splicing, which can be responsive to developmental or environmental cues (18,114). An intriguing example is the 60-nt circular RNA (circRNA) that forms from exon 6 backsplicing in theSEPALLATA3(SEP3) gene ofArabidopsis(27). This circRNA is hypothesized to form an R-loop (RNA:DNA hybrid) at theSEP3gene locus to regulateSEP3pre-mRNA splicing, resulting in defects in flower development (27). Another example of a lncRNA controlling splicing isASCO, which associates with the core splicing component PRE-MRNA PROCESSING 8 (PRP8) as well as with SmD1 inArabidopsis. RNAi-mediated knockdown of theASCOlncRNA led to splicing defects at a subset of genes and reduced PRP8 binding at a subset of its pre-mRNA targets (112). These examples demonstrate that lncRNA may regulate alternative splicing in plants (Figure 3).
Although introns are typically degraded quickly, they may also give rise to lncRNAs. One example isFLC, for which a capped, nonpolyadenylated sense RNA is produced from intron 1 (56). This lncRNA is known asCOLDAIRand is clearly distinct fromCOOLAIR, which is a collection of capped, spliced, and polyadenylated antisense lncRNAs (126). TheCOLDAIRpromoter resides withinFLCintron 1 and is sufficient for cold-responsive expression. WhereasCOOLAIRexpression peaks after 10 days of cold treatment,COLDAIRexpression peaks after 20 days. BecauseCOLDAIRassociates with the CLF-containing PRC2, it has been proposed to recruit PRC2 toFLCin response to cold. PRC2, in turn, methylates histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and causes the repression ofFLC(56). This work shows that intronic transcripts, likeCOLDAIR, can affect gene expression incis.
Another example of introns contributing to lncRNA production comes from studies of floral development.AGAMOUS(AG) encodes a MADS-box protein that specifies stamen and carpel fates inArabidopsisflowers. The second intron ofAGgives rise to a lncRNA termedAG-incRNA4, which interacts with CLF. Consistent withAG-incRNA4acting to controlAGexpression, CLF is enriched in chromatin corresponding to theAG-incRNA4genomic segment. Furthermore, RNAi knockdown ofAG-incRNA4causes decreased H3K27me3 atAGand increased accumulation ofAGmRNA in leaves, along with developmental phenotypes typical ofAGoverexpression (144). This work suggests thatAG-incRNA4may recruit PRC2 and repressAG, therefore contributing to tissue-specific expression ofAG. Although the connection between lncRNAs and PRC2 remains debated in various organisms (98), this example further shows that introns may give rise to lncRNAs that regulate gene expression (Figure 3).
In addition to lncRNAs produced from introns or lncRNA function in the regulation of splicing, lncRNA can be subject to alternative splicing. TheCOOLAIRlncRNAs that silenceFLCduring vernalization are capped, spliced, and polyadenylated (126). Cold treatment inducesCOOLAIRantisense transcription, which extends to cover nearly the entireFLCgene. Because of splice sites oriented antisense toFLC,COOLAIRoccurs as three alternatively spliced isoforms (126) (Figure 4). The longestCOOLAIRisoform includes three noncoding exons: one downstream of theFLCtranscript and the other two spanningFLCexon 7 and exon 1. Proper splicing ofCOOLAIRis essential for its function inFLCrepression, as demonstrated in splicing factor mutants andCOOLAIRmutants with disrupted splice sites (95) (Figure 4). Moreover, natural variations inCOOLAIRsplicing have been linked to its function inFLCrepression (83).
Alternative splicing also regulates the plant Pol III machinery via expression of an exonic lncRNA. InArabidopsis, the Pol III GTF TFIIIA is encoded by two alternatively spliced mRNA isoforms. The first isoform encodes the functional TFIIIA protein and is thus essential for viability. The second isoform expressed from theTFIIIAgene is a lncRNA, which is a noncoding 5S rRNA structural mimic (P5SM) and serves a purely regulatory function (53). BecauseP5SMbinds the L5 ribosomal protein (mimicking the 5S rRNA) and promotes Pol III synthesis of actual 5S rRNA,P5SMis thought to sense free L5 protein and adjust transcription to maintain equivalent amounts of L5 protein and 5S rRNA, whose transcripts are products of distinct RNA polymerases. The exon-skipping architecture andP5SMform ofTFIIIARNA are conserved throughout terrestrial plants, likely making this an ancient type of gene regulation by a plant lncRNA (53). Together, these examples demonstrate the importance of alternative splicing in lncRNA biogenesis and function.
Not all Pol II–transcribed genes code for proteins, as indicated above (Figure 1b). One such class comprises the genes for primary microRNAs (pri-miRNAs), which are capped and polyadenylated transcripts that fold into stem-loop hairpin structures. The processing of pri-miRNAs into miRNAs by DICER-LIKE 1 (DCL1) is a complex pathway that has been extensively studied in plants. miRNA biogenesis, miRNA targeting of mRNAs, and related gene regulatory processes have been reviewed elsewhere and are beyond the scope of our review (8,148). While mature miRNAs do not fit our definition of lncRNAs, pri-miRNAs may have Dicer-independent functions and are, intrinsically, a form of lncRNA that controls miRNA accumulation. Recent evidence indicates that pri-miRNAs are methylated by the adenosine methylase MTA (12). The presence ofN6-methyladenosine is needed for proper pri-miRNA structure, which in turn facilitates the activity of the DCL1-containing microprocessor complex and miRNA production (12).
The activity of miRNAs can also be controlled by lncRNAs that mimic miRNA targets, also known as miRNA sponges (45). Such lncRNAs contain miRNA binding sites and are properly recognized by a miRNA. However, this binding has no consequence for lncRNA. Instead, the miRNA sponge lncRNA sequesters the specific miRNA and prevents it from functionally repressing its target mRNAs (45,152). Together, these cases show that lncRNAs control miRNA biogenesis and can also modify the biological activity of miRNAs in gene regulation.
The 3′UTR is defined by the interval between the translation stop codon and the mRNA polyadenylation site. Compared to mammalian 3′UTRs, which have a median length of 700 nt, plant 3′UTRs are shorter, ranging from 240 nt inArabidopsisto 470 nt in rice (123). Analogous to the case of alternative TSSs, described above, alternative polyadenylation sites can generate RNA isoforms with different primary sequences, secondary structures, 3′UTR lengths, and regulatory potential (123).
Alternative polyadenylation may affect the length and function of lncRNAs, as reported forCOOLAIR(88), in which the selection of a proximal polyadenylated site leads to suppression ofFLCexpression (Figure 4). This case demonstrates that changes in the 3′UTR linked to alternative polyadenylation may disrupt lncRNA function. Other forms of polyadenylation site selection are probably widespread in plants, but the extent to which they affect lncRNAs is not yet known.
Transcription terminators are DNA segments with sequences that signal for RNA polymerase to terminate transcription, marking the end of the gene. lncRNAs can control a terminator's ability to stop Pol II transcription. A failure to terminate results in transcriptional read-through, as observed inbordermutants (147), in plants expressing a mutant Pol II enzyme with accelerated transcription (79), as well as in mutants for XRN 5′-to-3′ exoribonucleases (71). In most cases, these read-through transcripts have not been assigned a function and do not meet the definition of lncRNA. One example in which failure to terminate transcription generates a functional lncRNA is the lncRNASVALKA, which is antisense toCBF1and initiates from the adjacent downstream gene (67).SVALKAmodulates cold response by controlling expression of the full-lengthCBF1mRNA.
Conversely, terminators are also a source of antisense transcripts, a class of lncRNAs that are widespread in theArabidopsisgenome (153). More than 1,800Arabidopsisgenes have promoter sequence elements near their terminators and a promoter-associated SWI-SNF complex bound at their 3′ ends (5). The ability of these terminators to serve as promoters may be controlled by other lncRNAs, as well as by the act of transcription termination itself. Below we describe this complicated interplay between lncRNA and terminators.
Extensive evidence supports the view that terminators can serve as promoters to drive lncRNA transcription in the antisense orientation relative to protein-coding genes (135,152). Such antisense transcripts may work not only incisbut potentially also intrans, affecting other genomic regions with sequence similarity (alleles, homologs, and homeologs). Significantly, not all antisense transcripts are initiated from within terminators. Read-through transcription of adjacent genes, TEs, introns, and other sources also contributes to antisense transcription.
A well-known example of an antisense transcript starting within a terminator isCOOLAIR(126). It originates from an autonomous promoter that overlaps with the terminator ofFLC(Figure 4).COOLAIRis strongly induced by cold and contributes to the initial repression ofFLC; such repression is then reinforced by Polycomb complexes in concert with two additional lncRNAs:COLDAIRtranscribed from the firstFLCintron (56) andCOLDWRAPtranscribed from theFLCpromoter (66). While the mechanism ofCOOLAIRaction is unclear, single-molecule RNA FISH revealed a cloud ofCOOLAIRsurrounding theFLClocus, suggesting that antisense lncRNA accumulates there (115). This process leads to removal of the active chromatin marks H3K36me3 and H3K4me1, which contributes toFLCrepression (29,40) (Figure 4).
Another case of an antisense transcript that originates from a gene terminator occurs on theDELAY OF GERMINATION 1(DOG1) locus, which controls the natural variability of seed dormancy amongArabidopsisaccessions (11,41).DOG1has two polyadenylation sites, and the proximal one overlaps the promoter of an antisense transcript known as1GOD(31). How1GODcauses repression ofDOG1is currently unknown, butDOG1expression is extensively regulated, allowingDOG1to respond to abscisic acid and revealing a role of DOG1 in drought regulation (146).
BothCOOLAIRand1GODact incis, meaning that they affect the alleles from which they are produced. However, other antisense transcripts act intrans. This finding is mostly based on studies that rely on antisense lncRNA overexpression from transgenes (34). As such, the function and mechanisms of these antisense transcripts are supported by varying degrees of experimental evidence. Together, these examples illustrate the importance of antisense lncRNAs transcribed from promoters within terminators of protein-coding genes.
Because transcription terminators often serve as lncRNA start sites, an interesting consequence is that transcription termination itself may control the activity of antisense promoters. In both case studies of antisense lncRNAs inArabidopsis(COOLAIRfromFLCand1GODfromDOG1), the antisense promoter can autonomously drive expression of a transgenic reporter. However, in the latter case, changing from the proximal to the distalDOG1polyadenylation site on the sense strand (the protein-coding strand) suppresses1GODlncRNA expression (70).
Transcription termination may control lncRNA production in one additional manner. Failure to efficiently terminate transcription leads to read-through transcription, which produces RNA that spans fragments of neighboring genes. Such RNA has the potential to control expression of those neighboring genes, which has been proposed in mutants defective in the transcription termination machinery or RNA exonucleases (71).
lncRNAs may also control the initiation of antisense transcription from transcription terminators, which has been shown for putative lncRNAs forming R-loops (145). Within theFLCterminator, R-loop formation stabilized by the R-loop binding protein AtNDX was reported to suppressCOOLAIRtranscription initiation (125) (Figure 4). Together, these examples demonstrate the interplay between transcription termination and lncRNA production.
Antisense transcripts may also originate from genomic regions stretching beyond the transcription terminator. A good example of this class of antisense lncRNA is theSUFtranscript in the liverwortMarchantia polymorpha(59).SUFis transcribed from an intergenic promoter and overlaps the second half of theMpFGMYBgene, a key MYB-type transcription factor contributing to female identity.SUFacts incisand repressesMpFGMYBin male plants. These actions indicate that antisense lncRNAs may control gene expression even if they are transcribed from promoters beyond transcription terminators.
Pervasive transcription generates a unique category of lncRNAs produced across the genome with limited sequence specificity (32,35,89,152). Pervasive transcription has been reported in many species, but it is essential to distinguish between pervasive lncRNAs of defined biological function and the products of transcriptional noise or sequencing artifacts.
One example of pervasive lncRNA production is Pol V's function in the maintenance of genome integrity. Pol V transcription has been proposed to provide the lncRNA scaffolds needed to silence newly integrated or activated TEs. To this end, Pol V transcribes a large portion, or potentially even the entirety, of theArabidopsisgenome (130). Pervasive Pol V transcription may be essential because new TE insertions lack universal DNA motifs or chromatin marks that may recruit Pol V for TE silencing. In this model, silencing specificity is determined primarily by TE-derived siRNAs (30) that require Pol V pervasive transcription for target recognition.
The role of Pol V in pervasive transcription is further supported by its involvement in DNA repair (138). DNA double-strand breaks are repaired by a mechanism that shares elements with RNA silencing, including the requirement for Pol V (90,138). Because DNA double-strand breaks form at random genomic positions, Pol V may transcribe chromosomes without much sequence specificity. These examples indicate that widespread noncoding transcription may be functional even when it is not constrained by the gene structure or other features of the genome.
As explained above, plant lncRNAs have remarkably diverse biogenesis mechanisms, as highlighted by the four distinct RNA polymerases (Pol I, III, IV, and V) dedicated to lncRNA production. The products of these polymerases and noncoding products of Pol II display a broad range of sizes (Table 1). Therefore, no arbitrary size cutoff adequately splits ncRNAs into small RNA and lncRNA categories. Instead, we offer an inclusive definition based on RNA biogenesis mechanisms. The diversity of plant lncRNAs is also reflected in their complex relationship with protein-coding RNAs. For this reason, the lack of protein annotations or predicted ORFs is of little use in defining lncRNAs. Our expanded lncRNA definition thus relies on the presence of a demonstrated biological function that is independent of the protein-coding potential of an RNA.
The mechanisms of plant lncRNA function are still poorly understood, with many fundamental questions open. One big question concerns the commonality of transcriptional regulation by lncRNA. Are most or even all plant genes regulated by lncRNA mechanisms similar to those attributed to the genesFLC,DOG1, andPID? This scenario is quite possible, but the impact of lncRNA relative to protein factors at each gene likely varies and should be the subject of future research efforts. Another open question concerns the most common mechanisms of lncRNA function. While some overarching themes have been proposed (22,113), our knowledge about the generality of these mechanisms is limited. More plant lncRNAs have to be studied in depth to determine which aspects of lncRNA biology are universal and which are locus specific. Another unresolved question concerns the limits of lncRNA functionality. Current evidence supports the involvement of lncRNA in all steps of gene expression that engage nucleic acids, from chromatin modifications to translation. How common are the purely structural roles of lncRNA, unrelated to gene expression and protein translation?
Finally, lncRNA evolution is another exciting frontier. The tremendous variety of plant lncRNAs helps explain the lack of any narrowly conserved mechanism of action. Through diversity, lncRNAs have endless adaptive potential, which resembles the functional variation of proteins in some respects. In extreme cases, convergent evolution in eukaryotes has independently produced different protein and lncRNA enzymes with the same catalytic activity and function (50). While some lncRNAs are highly conserved and can be expected to fit into paradigms established for the evolution of proteins, many lncRNAs lack sequence conservation, meaning that only a blurry line distinguishes them from noisy or pervasive transcription.
Two hundred and forty years after the first observation of a lncRNA-containing structure (44), our knowledge of this fascinating group of nucleic acids has exploded and is still quickly expanding. Many exciting new discoveries certainly await.
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We thank Sebastian Marquardt, Michał Krzysztoń, and Bart Rymen for critical reading of the article. The research of A.T.W. is funded by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under award R01GM108722 and by National Science Foundation grant MCB1934703. T.B. is supported by the LabEx consortia ANR-10-LABX-0036_NETRNA and ANR-17-EURE-0023 from French Programme d'Investissements d'Avenir funds and by French Agence Nationale de la Recherche grant ANR-17-CE20-0004-01. S.S. is funded by the Foundation for Polish Science (TEAM POIR.04.04.00-00-3C97/16) and by Polish National Science Centre grants OPUS UMO-2016/23/B/NZ1/02989 and SONATA BIS UMO-2018/30/E/NZ1/00354.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


