We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Rosaceae (the rose family) is an economically important family that includes species prized for high-value fruits and ornamentals. The family also exhibits diverse fruit types, including drupe (peach), pome (apple), drupetum (raspberry), and achenetum (strawberry). Phylogenetic analysis and ancestral fruit-type reconstruction suggest independent evolutionary paths of multiple fleshy fruit types from dry fruits. A recent whole genome duplication in the Maleae/Pyreae tribe (with apple, pear, hawthorn, and close relatives; referred to as Maleae here) may have contributed to the evolution of pome fruit. MADS-box genes, known to regulate floral organ identity, are emerging as important regulators of fruit development. The differential competence of floral organs to respond to fertilization signals may explain the different abilities of floral organs to form fleshy fruit. Future comparative genomics and functional studies in closely related Rosaceae species with distinct fruit types will test hypotheses and provide insights into mechanisms of fleshy fruit diversity. These efforts will be facilitated by the wealth of genome data and resources in Rosaceae.
Article metrics loading...
Rosaceae (the rose family) is an economically important family that includes species prized for high-value fruits and ornamentals. The family also exhibits diverse fruit types, including drupe (peach), pome (apple), drupetum (raspberry), and achenetum (strawberry). Phylogenetic analysis and ancestral fruit-type reconstruction suggest independent evolutionary paths of multiple fleshy fruit types from dry fruits. A recent whole genome duplication in the Maleae/Pyreae tribe (with apple, pear, hawthorn, and close relatives; referred to as Maleae here) may have contributed to the evolution of pome fruit. MADS-box genes, known to regulate floral organ identity, are emerging as important regulators of fruit development. The differential competence of floral organs to respond to fertilization signals may explain the different abilities of floral organs to form fleshy fruit. Future comparative genomics and functional studies in closely related Rosaceae species with distinct fruit types will test hypotheses and provide insights into mechanisms of fleshy fruit diversity. These efforts will be facilitated by the wealth of genome data and resources in Rosaceae.
Fruits represent a key evolutionary innovation for seed protection and disposal in angiosperms, and they show wide phenotypic diversity (28). Further, fruits are an indispensable part of animal and human diets and contribute greatly to agricultural output. They are diverse in morphology, size, texture, color, and taste as a result of evolutionary adaptation and human selection. Whereas some angiosperm families like Brassicaceae, Fabaceae, Vitaceae, and Poaceae produce rather similar fruit types, the Rosaceae family and a few others develop a wide array of fruit types, includingdrupe(a fleshy fruit with a hard endocarp surrounding a seed, as in peach, plum, and cherry),pome(a fleshy fruit derived from hypanthium as in apple and pear),drupetum(a fleshy fruit with many small drupe-like fruits, as in raspberry), achene (a dry fruit with a single seed), and achenetum (a fruit with multiple achenes, as in strawberry). The diverse fruit types in Rosaceae make it a favorite plant family for comparative developmental and evolutionary studies.
Fruits are derived from floral tissues after pollination, and differences in floral structure contribute to Rosaceae fruit diversity. Although Rosaceae species develop similar flowers characterized by five sepals, five petals, and numerous stamens, their pistils/carpels exhibit variations in number, shape, fusion, and relative position to other floral organs. For instance, peach (drupe) has a single carpel that does not fuse with the surrounding hypanthium (Figure 1a). In contrast, apple (pome) has five fused carpels that are positioned inferior to other floral organs and fuse with the cup-shaped hypanthium (Figure 1b). In strawberry and raspberry, numerous unfused carpels emerge from a raised stem tip called a receptacle (Figure 1c,d). These variations are the foundation for initial fruit diversity.

Figure 1Click to view


The second level of fruit diversity in Rosaceae comes from differential enlargement of specific floral tissue(s) in response to pollination and fertilization signals. For instance, peach is a typical botanical fruit with its fruit flesh derived from the ovary wall. On the other hand, apple and strawberry are accessory fruits as their fruits are derived from the hypanthium and receptacle, respectively. The differential ability of floral tissues to develop into fruit contributes greatly to fruit diversity in Rosaceae. A third level of diversity depends on whether a fruit becomes dry or fleshy. This review focuses primarily on the study of Rosaceae species with fleshy fruits because of their tremendous economic value and diversity.
The Rosaceae family includes four main fruit types (Figure 1). In the drupe type, which includes peaches, plums, and cherries, the single ovary upon fertilization develops into a botanical fruit with a fleshy ovary wall (Figure 1a). The innermost layer of ovary wall, the endocarp, becomes lignified and forms a hard shell, the stone, encasing the single seed inside. In the pome fruit type, which includes apples and pears, the fleshy fruit is derived from the fusion of the hypanthium, a cup-like base resulting from the fusion of the lower half of the sepals and petals, with the ovary (Figure 1b) (80,123). The five carpels of the ovary fuse with one another to develop into the central core of the pome fruit (Figure 1b). For the drupetum-type fruit, such as the raspberry, the receptacle, the raised stem tip, gives rise to numerous unfused carpels, which are part of theapocarpous gynoecium. Each of the carpels develops into a fleshy achene (Figure 1c). Interestingly, each drupelet forms its own stone encasing a seed inside, as in the drupe fruit of the peach. The receptacles subtending these drupelets are not fleshy (Figure 1c). In contrast to the raspberry, the achenetum-type fruit of the strawberry develops a fleshy receptacle while its numerous carpels develop into dry achenes (Figure 1d). Given the relatively close phylogenetic relationship betweenFragariaandRubusand their similar flower structures (Figure 1c,d), it is intriguing that homologous floral organs possess distinct fruit-forming ability.
Most of our current understanding of fleshy fruit development was learned through the study of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), an excellent model for fleshy fruit development. Genes that control fruit size and shape have been identified (84), and de novo domestication can be attained in the span of a few years (57,130). Comparisons of fleshy fruit development between Rosaceae and tomato will reveal their conserved and unique mechanisms. Furthermore, recent progress in phylogeny, genomics, and functional studies in Rosaceae will help advance our understanding of the molecular bases underlying the evolution of different fleshy fruit types.
Rosaceae has ∼100 genera with over 3,000 species (44). Traditional taxonomy, using fruit morphologies and other characteristics, grouped Rosaceae species into four subfamilies: Rosoideae (e.g., roses, strawberries, and raspberries, mostly with aggregate fruits); Amygdaloideae (e.g., peaches, plums, and cherries, withdrupes); Maloideae (e.g., apples, pears, and hawthorns, mostly withpomesor related fruits); and Spiraeaoideae (e.g.,Spiraea, many withfollicetum, a type of dry fruit) (90). However, molecular phylogenetic analyses using chloroplast genes indicated that neither Rosoideae (s.l.) nor Spiraeaoideae are monophyletic (all members forming a single clade), leading to the reclassification of Rosaceae into three subfamilies: Rosoideae (s.s.), Amygdaloideae (s.l.), and Dryadoideae (79).
Most of the members of the previous Rosoideae (s.l.) form the slightly smaller Rosoideae (s.s.), with the remainder forming the newly defined Dryadoideae, consisting of four genera and approximately 20 species that produce achenes or achenetums (79). According to the phylogeny using plastid genes, Maloideae and Amygdaloideae (s.s.) are monophyletic and nested within Spiraeaoideae, prompting the naming of the combined clade of all three subfamilies into the newly expanded Amygdaloideae (s.l.) (79). Rosoideae (s.s.) and Amygdaloideae (s.l.) are further divided, respectively, into six and nine tribes; roses, strawberries, and raspberries belong to three different tribes, respectively, whereas the previously defined Maloideae (with pomes) and Amygdaloideae (s.s., with drupes) groups are given the tribe names Maleae and Amygdaleae in this classification system supported by phylogeny using chloroplast genes (79). However, in the chloroplast-gene-based Rosaceae phylogeny, the relationships among the subfamilies and among the tribes are not clear. Therefore, a more informative, strongly supported, and well-resolved phylogeny is needed to understand the evolution of fruit types.
Recent phylogenetic analyses using nuclear genes have been effective in resolving difficult relationships, including those among members of relatively large families (43,120,127,128). To provide a clearer understanding of Rosaceae evolutionary relationships, researchers performed a phylogenetic study using nuclear genes from 125 Rosaceae species, representing all 16 tribes and most of the genera (118) (Figure 2). In this nuclear phylogeny, all three subfamilies and all 16 tribes, including Maleae (apple and pear, with pomes), Amygdaleae (peach and cherry, with drupes), Rubeae (raspberry and blackberry, with drupetum), and Potentilleae (strawberry, with fleshy receptacle), are maximally supported as monophyletic. In addition, Dryadoideae was the first to separate, whereas Rosoideae (s.s.) and Amygdaloideae (s.l.) are sister groups. Furthermore, in Rosoideae, the Ulmarieae tribe was the first to separate from the other five tribes, with Rubeae being the second earliest branch; in Amygdaloideae (s.l.), the relationships among the nine tribes are highly supported, not only reaffirming the sister relationship of Maleae and Gillenieae (with follicetum), but also identifying the sister lineage for the drupe-producing Amygdaleae as the small tribe Lyonothamneae, which has only a single species,Lyonothamnus floribundus. This species is a tall tree (more than 10 m) with the unusual property of producing dry fruits from an ovary with only two to three carpels.

Figure 2Click to view


Using the new Rosaceae phylogeny, a statistical analysis (i.e., ancestral character reconstruction) has traced a possible evolutionary history of fruit types in Rosaceae (118). According to this analysis (Figure 2), the ancestral fruit type for Rosaceae, Rosoideae (s.s.), and Dryadoideae wasachenetum, whereas the ancestral fruit type for Amygdaloideae (s.l.) wasfollicetum. For most Rosoideae tribes, the ancestral fruit type was also achenetum, although the ancestral fruit type for Rubeae could bedrupetum. For most tribes in Amygdaloideae (s.l.), including Maleae, the ancestral fruit type was follicetum, but the ancestral fruit type of Amygdaleae could be drupe.
Accordingly, the ancestral dry fruit types have given rise in parallel to different fleshy fruits in various Rosaceae groups. In Rosoideae (s.s.) (Figure 2b), individualacheneshave evolved fleshy outer tissues to form the drupetum of Rubeae, while the receptacle in strawberries has become enlarged and fleshy, without dramatic changes in the achenes themselves. In roses (Roseae), yet another evolutionary path resulted in the increased fleshiness of thehypanthium, which has extended upward to enclose the achenes, whereas the receptacle did not appear to enlarge. In the nuclear phylogeny (Figure 2a), theFragariagenus is part of a large tribe (Potentilleae) that also includes many other genera with the dry fruit achenetum, whereas raspberry/blackberry belong to another tribe (Rubeae) with a separate history. Therefore, despite the structural similarities between strawberries and raspberries/blackberries, their fleshy components are different and likely evolved via different pathways.
In Amygdaloideae (s.l.), two major fleshy fruit types, drupe and pome, were derived from the dry fruit follicetum, via two rather different evolutionary paths (Figure 2c). For the drupes of peach, plum, apricot, and cherry (in the tribe Amygdaleae), the nuclear phylogeny placed Amygdaleae as sister to the tribe Lyonothamneae, which produces a follicetum with two to three carpels, a reduction from the ancestral type of five or more carpels. This relationship strongly supports the gradual reduction of carpel number from five to two or three, eventually leading to the one-carpelled drupe-type fruit in the ancestor of peach, plum, and cherry that became fleshy after the separation from Lyonothamneae. Separately, the pome-fruit bearing species all belong to the Maleae tribe, which is sister to the dry-fruit-producing Gillenieae tribe. Because the dry fruits from members of both Gillenieae and the early-divergent genera of Maleae have five carpels, and the pome fruit is a product of the fusion between the hypanthium and the five-carpelled ovary, a possible evolutionary history is the change from five unfused carpels to fused carpels to further fusion of the ovary with the hypanthium, with additional changes to various fleshy types related to the typicalpomeof apples and pears (Figure 2c). The nuclear phylogeny of a number of genera in the subtribe Malinae supports the successive divergence of the ancestors ofCrataegus(with the partial enclosure of the ovary by the hypanthium),Eriobotrya(with thin flesh), andPseudocydonia(with many ovules), suggesting somewhat different evolutionary paths from that of apples and pears.
The MADS-box genes are intimately linked to the evolution of developmental novelties such as floral organs in angiosperms (76,101). The most well-studied MADS-box proteins all belong to the MIKC type or type II groups because of the presence of four domains (from N to C terminus), the MADS-box (M), intervening (I), keratin-like (K), and C-terminal (C) domains. During flower development, the identity of four floral organ types—sepal, petal, stamen, and carpel—is determined by the combinatorial action of four classes of MADS-box genes: A, B, C and E. Specifically, sepals are specified by A and E genes; petals are specified by A, B, and E; stamens are determined by B, C, and E; and carpel identity is determined by C and E MADS-box genes (70,101).
Whole genome duplication (WGD) events followed by preferential gene retention and subsequent divergence may have contributed to angiosperm diversification. Duplicated MADS-box genes resulting from an ancient WGD in the common ancestor of angiosperms may have led to the origin of flowers as well as other innovative traits, including fruits (98,104). Similarly, whole genome sequencing of apple and pear identified a relatively recent (∼50 million years ago) WGD in the Maleae tribe that was proposed as a contributor to the formation of Maleae-tribe-specific pome fruit (107). Further, a group of type II MADS-box genes containingSVPandAGL24was found to have substantially expanded, suggesting that members of this group potentially served as regulator(s) of pome fruit formation (107).
To further test this hypothesis, researchers performed phylogenomic analysis using genomic and transcriptomic data sets to uncover further evidence for WGDs in Rosaceae, especially in the ancestors of Maleae and Amygdaleae, with pome anddrupefruits, respectively (118). The results suggest that WGDs might have contributed to the origins of the pome and drupe types of fleshy fruits. In addition, the WGD that was placed at the origin of the Malinae subtribe with pome-bearing genera (Figure 3a) was also strongly supported by large syntenic chromosome regions in the apple and pear genomes (56).

Figure 3Click to view


Studies inArabidopsisindicated that MADS-box genesAG,FUL, andSHPare important for fruit development (19). Moreover, theSVPgene was found to cause enlarged sepals when overexpressed (65). Homologs ofAG,FUL, andSVPin apple are expressed during the development of the pome fruit, suggesting a role in pome fruit development (46,122). Since the pome fruit is derived from a hypanthium, with fused basal portions of sepals and petals, the class AAP1gene, required for sepal and petal identities, may also participate in pome fruit formation. Indeed, molecular phylogenetic analyses revealed that homologs ofAG,FUL,SHP,SVP, andAP1experienced a duplication event corresponding to the WGD at the origin of Malinae (Figure 3) (56). The coincidental occurrences of both the duplication of multiple MADS-box genes, due to the WGD event, and the origin of the pome and related fruits in Malinae support the idea that the increased MADS-box gene copies might have allowed the functional innovations necessary for the evolution of the pome fruit.
To understand fleshy fruit diversity from a developmental perspective, it is important to introduce the concept offruit set, the decision to abort or to proceed with fruit development (34,50). After a flower is fully developed, further development is blocked. Successful fertilization induces the production of hormonal signals in the seed. These hormonal signals relieve the developmental block and promote botanical or accessory fruit development.
The phytohormones auxin and gibberellic acid (GA) are identified as the fertilization-induced signals. Removal of theachenes(individual ovaries) from cultivated strawberries (Fragaria×ananassa) completely arrested thereceptaclefrom developing into fruit, while exogenous application of synthetic auxin or GA can restore the receptacle fruit growth (71,102). Free auxin is found to accumulate in the achenes, in contrast to the low level of auxin in receptacles, demonstrating that auxin is synthesized within the fertilized achenes (71,72). In the diploid strawberryFragaria vesca, the application of exogenous auxin, GA, or both to emasculated flowers also induced fertilization-independent (parthenocarpic) fruit (52,60). RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) profiling of staged and finely dissectedF. vescafruit revealed transcript accumulation of auxin and GA biosynthesis genes in the ghost (endosperm and seed coat) soon after fertilization. Subsequently, promoters of auxin biosynthesis genes fused to the gene for β-glucuronidase in transgenic strawberry revealed strong expression of auxin biosynthesis genes in the endosperm (25). In contrast to auxin and GA biosynthesis in the achenes, auxin-signaling genes, auxin-response factors (ARFs), and auxin/indole-3-acetic acid (AUX/IAA) repressor genes are highly expressed in the receptacle (52), indicating that the receptacle is the site of auxin perception and response (Figure 4).

Figure 4Click to view


In addition to strawberry, exogenous applications of auxin or GA were shown to cause parthenocarpic fruits in other Rosaceae species, including rose, apple, pear, loquat, and severalPrunus, as well as in other flowering plants, includingArabidopsis, tomato, and grape (12–14,31,66,73,81,91,97,110). Furthermore, ectopic overexpression of the auxin biosynthesis genedefH9-iaaMin strawberry and raspberry (67) and overexpression of the GA biosynthesis genegibberellin 20-oxidasein tomato (32) led to parthenocarpic fruits. In addition to biosynthetic genes, overexpressing the auxin receptorTIR1led to parthenocarpic tomato fruit, probably as a result of auxin hypersensitivity (24,83).Parthenocarpycan also be induced when repressors of auxin or GA-signaling pathways were mutated or suppressed, as demonstrated byarf8mutants inArabidopsisand transgenic knockdowns of tomatoARF7,ARF8, orIAA9(18,35,36,112,113). These results led to the proposal that the IAA9/ARF7/ARF8 repressor complex inhibits fruit set in the ovary tissue ofArabidopsisand tomato. DELLA proteins are repressors of GA signaling (99); a tomatoproceramutant with a point mutation in theSlDELLAas well as a transgenic tomato containing an antisense construct againstSlDELLAdeveloped parthenocarpic fruits (8,64).Arabidopsis dellamutants form seedless fruit due to constitutive activation of GA signaling (30). Together, these results indicate that auxin and GA are evolutionarily conserved signals for the induction of fruit set across angiosperm species.
While little is known about the molecular mechanisms by which pollination and fertilization induce auxin/GA production in seed, recent studies in fertilization-induced seed development shed some light on this process, as seed set and fruit set appear to respond to the same fertilization-induced signal (50,86). InArabidopsis, the initiation of seed development is repressed by histone H3K27 methylation, mediated before fertilization by the evolutionarily conserved Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). Mutations in any of four PRC2 components, MEDEA (MEA), FERTILIZATION-INDEPENDENT ENDOSPERM (FIE), FERTILIZATION-INDEPENDENT SEED2 (FIS2), and MULTICOPY SUPPRESSOR OF IRA1 (MSI1), lead to the fertilization-independent autonomous endosperm development and derepression of target gene expression (10,38,55,74). The PRC2 complex is also required to block the development of the maternally derived seed coat prior to fertilization (85). After the fertilization of the central cell, an auxin signal is produced in the endosperm and subsequently transported to the maternal integuments to release the block on seed coat development. The transport of auxin to the seed coat depends on the type I MADS-box transcription factor AGAMOUS-LIKE 62 (AGL62), asagl62mutants displayed retention of auxin in the endosperm and impaired seed coat development (29). By responding to the same signal, fruit set and seed set are coordinated, which is likely critical for the appropriate timing of seed dissemination.
Recently, loss-of-function mutations in a type II MADS-box gene,AGL6, led to facultative parthenocarpy in tomato (53), suggesting a repressive role forAGL6in fruit set. RNA-seq data from finely dissected tomato fruit tissues showed thatAGL6expression peaks in the ovule at 0 days postanthesis (DPA); however, at 5 DPA,AGL6expression declines rapidly (Figure 5a) (27,77,94). An examination ofAGL6homolog (gene38250) in wild strawberryF. vescareveals a similar expression trend: highly specific expression in the ovule followed by gradual decline postfertilization (Figure 5b). Given its strong expression in the ovule prefertilization,AGL6may repress auxin/GA signal production in the ovule. Nevertheless, mutants ofAGL6inArabidopsis, petunia, and rice exhibit a range of phenotypes unrelated to fruit development, implicating thatAGL6may function as a SEP-like protein (20). Therefore, despite expression similarity in tomato and strawberry, the specific mechanism ofAGL6function in fruit development requires further investigation.

Figure 5Click to view


An intriguing question is why certain floral organs can form fruit flesh while other floral organs cannot. Exogenous auxin or GA application does not change the species-unique fleshy fruit type, suggesting that genetic factors may underlie fruit identity, which endows a specific floral organ with the competence to respond to the fertilization signal. Surprisingly, we know almost nothing about the genes involved in bestowing this tissue-specific fruit identity.
Given that fruits, like flowers, function to ensure reproductive success in angiosperms, type II MADS-box genes could also determine fruit identity. Indeed, ectopic expression of C class genesTAGL1(SHP) orTAG1in tomato results in fleshy sepals (75,78). The partial homeotic transformation from sepals to carpels in these tomato plants might have also converted the nonfruit identity of sepals to the fruit identity of carpelloid sepals. The above study indicates that C class MADS-box genes may specify fruit identity in species with ovary-derived botanical fruits.
Interestingly, some insect species have acquired the ability to induce the growth of fruit-like galls from vegetative tissues. Transcriptome profiling of leaves of wild grapevine (Vitis riparia) infected by a galling parasite called phylloxera (Daktulosphaira vitifoliae) revealed that the phylloxera leaf gall is both phenotypically and transcriptionally similar to carpel (89). The expression of 39 orthologs ofArabidopsisgynoecium development genes, includingAG,SHP2,FUL,SEP1, andAGL6, is elevated in the phylloxera leaf gall when compared with age-matched leaves, supporting the hypothesis that carpel identity is tied to fruit identity in species with ovary-derived fruits.
While apple'shypanthiumis often considered a fusion of the bases of sepals, petals, and stamens (80), recent studies indicate that the sepal base contributes most to the apple fruit flesh (123,124). Hence, sepal identity might be tied to fleshy fruit identity in apple, and as such, class A genes such asAP1andAP2could be involved in specifying fruit identity in apple or other species with hypanthium-derived fruits. A transposon insertion in an apple microRNA gene,miR172, was identified that led to twofold reduction of themiR172transcripts and larger fruit size (125). Conversely, overexpression ofmiR172in transgenic apple partially converted sepals to petals and dramatically reduced fruit size. In transgenic lines with 20- to 24-fold increase ofmiR172transcripts, the flowers consisted entirely of carpels that did not develop into fleshy fruit even after hand pollination. This is not surprising given that apple carpels only contribute to the core of the apple and may not possess the flesh-forming competence. In contrast, sepal tissues that are reduced or absent due to their conversion to petal or carpel in themiR172overexpression lines may underlie the reduced ability to form fleshy fruits and hence the development of thin hypanthium and smaller-sized fruit.
InArabidopsis,miR172functions to repress class A floral homeotic geneAP2post-transcriptionally (11), and AP2 represses the expression of class C MADS-box genesAGandFUL(21,49,121). Therefore, the effect ofmiR172on apple fruit size is likely mediated byAP2. Increased AP2 activity due to transposon insertion inmiR172may positively promote fruit identity while reduced AP2 activity due to overexpressedmiR172may lead to a loss of fruit identity.
Interestingly, tomato plants that strongly overexpressedmiR172also developed abnormal flowers consisting entirely of carpel tissues. However, unlike the apple flowers, these carpel-only tomato flowers developed parthenocarpic fruit (124). The ectopic and extra carpels may somehow bypass the requirement of auxin/GA signals forfruit set, perhaps as a result of interorgan communication (111). The findings thatmiR172overexpression lines have similar floral phenotypes but distinct fruit phenotypes in apple and tomato suggest that, while the regulation of floral organ identity bymiR172is similar in apple and tomato, their floral organs possess distinct competencies to form fleshy fruits.
Several publications have suggestedSEPALLATA1/2/4and relatedFBP9genes promote fruit flesh formation in apple. Antisense suppression ofSEPALLATA1/2/4-like genesMdMADS8andMdMADS9, as well asFBP9-likeMdMADS7, caused sepaloid petals and severely reduced apple fruit flesh in the cortex layer (45). This reduction of fruit flesh may be mediated partly through a reduction ofMdMADS6found inMdMADS7,MdMADS8, andMdMADS9antisense apple plants. Interestingly, in wild type apple,MdMADS7andMdMADS6exhibit low expression early in fruit development but then show a gradual increase of expression as fruit develops (45). The expression and phenotype suggest a positive role ofSEP1/2/4andFBP9MADS-box genes in fruit flesh formation in apple. In the cultivated strawberry, another Rosaceae species withaccessory fruit, suppression of aSEP1/2-like gene,FaMADS9, led to the repression ofreceptaclefruit development similar to the loss of fruit flesh in apple described above (92). Hence, the activities ofSEP1/2/4and the closely relatedFBP9-clade MADS-box genes are required for fleshy fruit development in apple and strawberry. Unlike the C and A class floral genes discussed above, the role ofSEP1/2/4andFBP9might be directly linked to fleshy fruit development instead of to floral organ identity. Nevertheless, their positive roles in fruit development in other Rosaceae species are yet to be demonstrated.
Based on the studies discussed above, we propose that MADS-box proteins, including SEP1/2/4, FBP9, and other unidentified members, likely define a new class of MADS-box transcriptional complexes, which we name the F (fruit) class. MADS-box genes belonging to this class should fulfill the following criteria: (a) They show expression in the species-specific fruit tissue(s), (b) their expression increases soon after fruit set and continues to increase as fruit enlarges, (c) their loss-of-function mutants arrest fruit development, and (d) their ectopic expression may cause ectopic fleshy fruit. We hypothesize further that the functions of F class MADS-box genes may not be as conserved as those of the ABCE genes for floral development. Thus, these F class genes may act differently in different species, reflecting the apparently greater plasticity of fleshy fruit development and suggesting possible convergent evolution of such gene functions.
In apple, the B classMdPISTILLATA(MdPI) gene (MDP0000286643) is a single-copy gene (107). Several apple varieties, including Rae Ime, Spencer Seedless, and Wellington Bloomless, develop abnormal flowers resembling B class mutants with an increased number of sepals and pistils and a lack of petals and stamen. Interestingly, these abnormal flowers develop parthenocarpic apple fruit. A transposon insertion in theMdPIgene is responsible for the flower and fruit phenotype (123). Transgenic downregulation ofMdPIalso produced similar parthenocarpic apple fruit (126), suggesting thatMdPIinhibits fruit set. In contrast, overexpression ofMdPIin transgenic apple caused sepal-to-petal conversion and flattened fruit shape due to inhibition of cell expansion toward the base of the fruit (126). Since apple fruit flesh is derived mostly from the fused sepal base, the increased number of sepals inMdPIloss-of-function mutants may somehow bypass the requirement of auxin/GA signal for fruit set. An alternative interpretation is that during the evolution ofpomefruit,MdPImay have gained new functions to inhibit cell division and cause floral organ development to arrest prior to pollination/fertilization.
The inhibitory effect of PI on cell division is supported by studies in grape (Vitis vinifera). Thefleshless berrymutant in the grape cultivar Ugni Blanc was caused by ectopic expression of the grapevine homolog ofVvPISTILLATA(VvPI). An insertion of a miniature inverted-repeat transposable element in the promoter ofVvPIcaused its ectopic expression in fruit, shoot, and leaves, instead of its normal expression in flower organs (26). Depending on the cell layer in which the transposon insertion occurs, the phenotypes are different. When the mutation occurs in the L1 and L2 cell layer, fruit set is blocked. When the insertion occurs in the L2 layer,VvPImisexpression prevents fleshy pericarp development by blocking the differentiation of vacuolated cells that are characteristic of mesocarp tissues. This suggests thatVvPImight encode a general inhibitor of fruit flesh development that is not normally expressed in the fruit tissues of grape.
InArabidopsis, the B class genesPI/AP3promote petal and stamen differentiation by repressing photosynthesis and nutritional signals (63).AtPIdirectly binds and represses two GATA transcription factors, GNA and GNL; these two GATA factors redundantly promote chlorophyll biosynthesis in flowers and leaves (63). Given the role ofMdPIandVvPIin repressing fruit flesh in apple and grape (26,126),PImay repress fruit flesh development in part by repressing photosynthesis.
An interesting observation is that fleshy fruit, irrespective of their fruit type, all develops from formerly green floral tissues such as the sepal/hypanthium in apple, the ovary wall in raspberry and peach, and the receptacle (stem tip) in strawberry. Thus, photosynthesis and related metabolic processes might be required for fleshy fruit formation and may contribute to competence for fruit development.
Supporting the hypothesized positive role of photosynthesis in fruit formation, microarray analysis revealed the upregulation of a large number of photosynthesis-related genes at postanthesis (4 DPA) in tomato. Further, antisense-IAA9tomato plants, which exhibitparthenocarpy, showed strong and precocious activation of photosynthesis-related genes at 0 DPA as well as at 4 DPA. A similar dramatic upregulation of genes in sucrose catabolism was also observed in antisense-IAA9during fruit set. Therefore, activation of photosynthesis and sucrose metabolism appears to accompany fruit set (113).
With abundant RNA-seq data from the flower and fruit of diploid wild strawberry, robust consensus coexpression networks have been established (93). Clusters of genes correlating to specific tissue or stages could be identified by mining the consensus network athttp://www.fv.rosaceaefruits.org. The clusters of genes associated with the postfertilization ghost (endosperm and seed coat) and receptacle fruit are enriched for Gene Ontology terms related to iron transport. This is likely due to the requirement of active iron transport for photosynthesis and other biochemical activities during fleshy fruit initiation and development.
An emerging theme from the studies presented above is that active repression mechanisms must exist to prevent precocious fleshy fruit development without pollination/fertilization. This active repression occurs in two ways. The first is the repression of the synthesis of fertilization signals auxin and GA at the ovule. The second is the active repression of floral tissues (ovary wall, sepals, hypanthium, and receptacle) from forming fruits, fleshy or dry, in the absence of fertilization. Epigenetic regulators such as PRC2 and transcription factors including MADS-box genes are critical in repressing the synthesis of fertilization signals in the ovule, while repressors in auxin signaling (IAA9/ARF8/ARF7) and GA signaling (DELLA) act at floral tissues to prevent them from developing into fruit. These repression activities are inactivated upon successful fertilization.
While the fertilization-induced signals, auxin and GA, are highly conserved across angiosperms, significant diversity exists in Rosaceae fleshy fruit types, where different floral organs in the same species possess different competence to develop into fleshy fruit. This fruit-type diversity is likely driven by their mode of seed dissemination and specific interactions with animals and their environment.
The exogenous application of auxin, GA and cytokinin as well as genetic mutations remove the active repression mechanisms described above and lead to parthenocarpic fruit characteristic of a given species. For instance, application of auxin to strawberry flowers does not cause them to form fruits resembling raspberry. How could a specific organ develop into fleshy fruits in each different species? The studies described above support the hypothesis that the fertilization-induced signals are transported equally to all floral organs/tissues, yet only certain floral tissue(s) are competent to respond to the signals. This competence to develop fruit flesh appears to depend on both positive and negative genetic factors. First, photosynthetic capability appears to be needed for a floral organ to develop into fruit, as nonphotosynthetic organs such as petals and stamens do not normally form fruits. Second, the floral organ should be of correct organ identity. The expression of C and E class MADS-box genes (AG,SEP) is required to specify carpel identity; this carpel identity is tied to the fruit-forming competence in species with ovary-derived fruit such as peach. Conversely, the expression of A class genes such asAP2andAP1is needed to preserve sepal/hypanthiumidentity, which is tied to fruit formation and larger fruit size in apple. Third, the competent floral organ should be sensitive to the fertilization-induced signal. Genes acting in auxin, GA, and cytokinin perception and signaling pathways should be expressed in the competent floral organ. A final condition is that the floral organ may need to repress the expression of B class MADS-box genes and their partnerSEPgenes to allow photosynthesis and other cellular and biochemical activities required for fruit development.
Figure 6specifically illustrates the competence hypothesis, highlighting the role of differential competence factors in specifying fruit type. In an unfertilized ovule, auxin and GA biosynthesis are repressed by MADS-box genes (such asAGL6) and PRC2 (Figure 6a); mature floral tissues arrest their development due to the repressor activities of auxin and GA signaling components (IAA/ARF/DELLA) (Figure 6a). However, competent and incompetent floral organs are distinct, as illustrated by the competent carpel (ovary wall) and incompetent petal/stamen and sepal. In the competent carpel, the C + E MADS complex not only specifies carpel identity but also promotes competence byactivating the expression of auxin/GA receptors,promoting the expression of F class MADS-box genes, andcoexisting with the photosynthetic capability. By contrast, in petal/stamen tissue, the A + B + E or C + B + E (B + E for short) MADS complexes specify their respective floral organ identity but at the same time repress photosynthesis, which may preclude the competence of the petal/stamen to develop into fruit. Finally, sepal (an example of a noncompetent organ) is specified by A + E genes and could undergo photosynthesis but fails to activate the expression of auxin/GA receptors and/or F class MADS-box genes.

Figure 6Click to view


Upon pollination and fertilization (Figure 6b), auxin and GA produced in the fertilized seed are perceived only by the competent organ (the carpel inFigure 6b), where signal perception causes the degradation of IAA and DELLA, removing inhibition of F class MADS-box genes and leading to subsequent fruit development. In incompetent petal/stamen and sepal, however, the auxin/GA receptor genes are not expressed and will not respond to the auxin/GA. As a result, F class MADS-box genes remain inhibited. Even in the presence of mutations that knock out DELLA or IAA, the F class MADS-box genes will not be expressed due to an absence of activators (i.e., C + E genes in the example here) (Figure 6b).
To sum up, a fruit-competent floral organ should possess the ability to express auxin and GA receptors, to activate F class MADS-box genes, and not to repress photosynthesis. During the evolution of different fruit types, different floral organs have acquired competence. If sepal/hypanthium is the competent organ, as in the case of apple, the A + E genes may have acquired the ability to activate F class MADS-box genes and auxin/GA receptors in the sepal/hypanthium. In strawberry, the putative GA receptor GID1c is specifically expressed in thereceptaclebut not in the ovary wall (52), which may underlie the receptacle's competence in strawberry. Future comparative genomic analyses of closely related species with distinct fruit type may help uncover mechanisms and genes that contribute to the evolution of differential competence. For example, the genusPotentillais very closely related to strawberry, with an estimated 24 million year divergence (5,118). While they share similar floral characteristics, mostPotentillado not develop fleshy fruit (5). Large-scale differences in transposons between the genomes ofPotentilla micranthaandF. vescawere reported (5); these differences could contribute to gene expression changes affecting fruit development.
With the rapid progress in sequencing technologies, Rosaceae research is poised to enter a new era with the marked increase of available whole genome sequences (Table 1). In addition to comparative genomic studies, whole genome sequences are the foundation for designing various research platforms, including high-density genotyping tools and genome-wide association studies, to identify key genes, address biological questions, and improve fruit yield. A summary of genomic resources for Rosaceae follows.
A list of Rosaceae species, ploidy, and genome sequencing paper/data

The cultivated strawberryFragaria×ananassais anallo-octoploid. For the first time, a near-complete chromosome-scale assembly of theF. ananassagenome was recently published (22). A previous draft genome assembly forF. ananassais also available (42). For the wild diploid strawberryF. vesca, four genome assemblies, including the newest v4.0 (23), help establish diploid strawberryF. vescaas a model for the cultivated strawberry and other Rosaceae species. Among these assemblies, theF. vescagenome v1.1 (96), v2.0 (100), and the recent v4.0 (23) received additional annotations: They are v1.1.a2 (16), v2.0.a2 (59), and v4.0.a2 (58), respectively (Table 1). The draft genome ofP. micrantha(5), a species that does not develop fleshy fruit but is closely related toFragaria, is also available (Table 1).
ForMalus, whole genome data for apple include a de novo assembly of a Golden Delicious doubled haploid (GDDH13) (15) along with three versions of assembly for the heterozygous apple genome (107). Recently, an anther-derived homozygous line of apple, Hanfu, was used for a high-quality assembly (HFTH1) (129). ForPyrus, which is closely related toMalusand developspomefruit, the whole genome sequences of the European pearPyrus communisBartlett double haploid genome v2.0 (61) and Chinese white pearPyrus bretschneideriv1.1 genome (119) have recently become available following the initial whole genome sequencing ofP. bretschneideriv1.0 (117) andP. communisv1.0 (9). Recently, genomes of 113Pyrusaccessions, including 63 Asian and 50 European pears, were sequenced and analyzed, providing abundant genomic data (116).
ForPrunus, peach (Prunus persica) genome v1.0 (108) and v2.0 (109) have been serving as the reference genome for the otherPrunusspecies. However, whole genome sequences of otherPrunusare now becoming available, including whole genome assemblies of sweet cherryPrunus aviumgenome v1.0 (95); two almond genomes,Prunus dulcisTexas (1) andPrunus dulcisLauranne (87); and apricotPrunus armeniaca(47). The draft genomes of hexaploid plumPrunus domesticav1.0 (6) and wild cherryPrunus yedoensis var. nudifloragenome v1.0 (3) are also available (seeTable 1).
Raspberry is appreciated for its high antioxidant and vitamin content in addition to its interesting fruit. The black raspberry (Rubus occidentalis) has a high-quality chromosome-scale genome assembly (106) that improves upon two previous versions, v1.1 (48) and v1.0 (105). The closely related red raspberry (Rubus idaeus) also has a draft genome (115).
Rose is the world's most important ornamental plant. Doubled haploid lines ofRosa chinensisOld Blush were used by two groups of researchers to assemble the rose genome (41,82). Extensive synteny was found with theF. vescagenome even though rose and strawberry have evolved distinct fleshy fruits (Figure 2b). A draft genome of a wild rose,Rosa multiflora, was also published (69).
The Genome Database for Rosaceae (GDR) is the central repository and data-mining resource for Rosaceae genomics, genetics, and breeding (51). In addition to hosting whole genome assemblies, GDR now provides a reference transcriptome (RefTrans) that combines published RNA-seq and expressed sequence tag data. Both the genes from the whole genome assemblies and the transcripts in RefTrans are annotated for homology to the genes of other plant species and the assignment of InterPro domains (68) and Gene Ontology terms (2,33). The data can be accessed through the species page, gene/transcript search page, Jbrowse (4), and BLASTX (7). GDR also contains extensive marker, quantitative trait loci (QTL), and genetic maps and phenotypic and genotypic data for publicly available cultivars. In addition, recent genome assemblies in each species are used in synteny analysis using MCScanX (114) with the results available through the new Synteny Viewer. The synteny analysis along with functional annotation of gene models using sequence similarity enabled GDR to integrate data among species. The alignment of transcripts and markers, used in genotyping and QTL mapping, to the whole genome sequences, allows scientists to utilize data from different types, species, and disciplines. Some of the Rosaceae whole genome sequence data are also available from three primary sequence databases: GenBank (88), European Nucleotide Archive (39), and the DNA Data Bank of Japan (54). Some of the comparative genomics resources also have whole genome data for a limited number of Rosaceae species. This includes Phytozome (37), CoGe (Comparative Genomics) (62), and Plaza (103) (Table 2). There are also project databases where the whole genome data are available, such as The Apple Genome and Epigenome, The Pear Genome Project, the Institute of Applied Genomics, and Strawberry Genome Resources (Table 2).
A list of websites with genomic resources for Rosaceae
Abbreviation: N/A, not available.





The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We apologize to colleagues whose work was not included due to space limitations. We thank Dirk Joldersma for his comments. The research of Z.L. is supported by the National Science Foundation (IOS 1444987) and the Maryland Agricultural Experiment Station Hatch Project (MD-CBMG-8881), and the research of D.M. is supported by the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) Specialty Crop Research Initiative (SCRI) and the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture National Research Support Project 10 (NRSP10).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


