We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
The plant epidermis serves many essential functions, including interactions with the environment, protection, mechanical strength, and regulation of tissue and organ growth. To achieve these functions, specialized epidermal cells develop into particular shapes. These include the intriguing interdigitated jigsaw puzzle shape of cotyledon and leaf pavement cells seen in many species, the precise functions of which remain rather obscure. Although pavement cell shape regulation is complex and still a long way from being fully understood, the roles of the cell wall, mechanical stresses, cytoskeleton, cytoskeletal regulatory proteins, and phytohormones are becoming clearer. Here, we provide a review of this current knowledge of pavement cell morphogenesis, generated from a wealth of experimental evidence and assisted by computational modeling approaches. We also discuss the evolution and potential functions of pavement cell interdigitation. Throughout the review, we highlight some of the thought-provoking controversies and creative theories surrounding the formation of the curious puzzle shape of these cells.
Article metrics loading...
The plant epidermis serves many essential functions, including interactions with the environment, protection, mechanical strength, and regulation of tissue and organ growth. To achieve these functions, specialized epidermal cells develop into particular shapes. These include the intriguing interdigitated jigsaw puzzle shape of cotyledon and leaf pavement cells seen in many species, the precise functions of which remain rather obscure. Although pavement cell shape regulation is complex and still a long way from being fully understood, the roles of the cell wall, mechanical stresses, cytoskeleton, cytoskeletal regulatory proteins, and phytohormones are becoming clearer. Here, we provide a review of this current knowledge of pavement cell morphogenesis, generated from a wealth of experimental evidence and assisted by computational modeling approaches. We also discuss the evolution and potential functions of pavement cell interdigitation. Throughout the review, we highlight some of the thought-provoking controversies and creative theories surrounding the formation of the curious puzzle shape of these cells.
The plant epidermis is the outer layer of cells surrounding the entire organism, and, despite usually being only one cell thick, this crucial layer serves many important functions. In addition to the obvious role of holding together the inner tissues, the epidermis acts as the interface of interaction with the environment, where external signals are perceived and responses initiated. This is of particular importance for plants considering their sessile nature. The survival of plants absolutely depends on their responses to dynamically changing environmental conditions, as well as reactions to external threats. The epidermis also provides protection against adverse conditions and pathogen invasion; gives mechanical strength to the plant; controls the uptake and exchange of gases, nutrients, and water; and even attracts pollinators (52,69,70). Moreover, the epidermis produces the cuticle, which prevents water loss, plays roles in signaling and interacting with the environment, and prevents organ fusion (70,116). Last but certainly not least, the epidermis has vital functions in tissue and organ polarity, growth, and morphogenesis, as well as de novo organogenesis (70). Clearly, the epidermis is not just a protective skin but plays multiple essential roles in plant growth, development, and survival.
In order to achieve this myriad of diverse functions, epidermal cells occur in a variety of sizes and shapes throughout the plant body, all specialized for different roles. Some examples within the epidermis of cotyledons and leaves include the branched shapes of trichomes, which form a barrier against insects and herbivores; the crescent shapes of guard cells, which allow the stomatal aperture to be regulated; and the intriguing puzzle shapes of pavement cells, which serve functions that are a little more obscure (52,56,70). It has long been known that the convex upperpericlinalcell walls of pavement cells in some species can act as lenses, focusing light towards the photosynthesizing mesophyll (108,128), but why do theanticlinalcell walls form interdigitating undulations in many species? This has been a hot topic of debate for some years (see Section 4.3).
InArabidopsis thalianaleaves, around half of the pavement cells originate from cell divisions that initially occur throughout the leaf primordium. Cell proliferation is subsequently replaced by cell expansion, firstly at the leaf tip before the spreading of this transition zone in a wave towards the leaf base (53,109) (Figure 1a). The other half of these pavement cells arise from the spiral patterns of meristemoid cell divisions, which also result in the generation of stomata (51) (Figure 1a,b). The resulting spiral-shaped,anisocyticstomatal complexes are scattered throughout the surface of the developing leaf. They may serve to accurately space stomata for efficient gas exchange by creating a ring of pavement cells around each one (51,124).Arabidopsismeristemoids usually undergo one to three asymmetric divisions, which generate young pavement cells called stomatal lineage ground cells (SLGCs), before ultimately differentiating into a pair of guard cells via symmetric division (106,120) (Figure 1b).

Figure 1Click to view


During their development, the pavement cells of many species display multidirectional expansion in the two-dimensional plane parallel to the leaf surface, while their expansion perpendicular to the leaf surface is limited due to the thick outer periclinal cell wall (136). During expansion, their anticlinal and periclinal cell walls develop in-plane and perimeter undulations, respectively, resulting in multiplelobesandnecksthat interdigitate with those of their neighboring pavement cells, resembling pieces of a jigsaw puzzle (84) (Figure 1a,b). Although we are still far from fully understanding how this interesting shape arises, we are beginning to develop a picture of the many interacting signaling and regulatory components that are involved. These include but are not limited to the cell wall, mechanical stresses, the cytoskeleton, a range of signaling proteins, and phytohormones. The purpose of this review is to highlight what is currently known regarding these aspects of pavement cell shape regulation.
The cell wall, which surrounds every plant cell, must be flexible to allow cell morphogenesis but also rigid to provide protection to the plant (31). These features are made possible due to the complex composition of theprimary cell wall, which is spatially and temporally controlled and varies among species, cell types, developmental stages of growth, and even within individual cells (28). Furthermore, the cell wall controls cell and organ shape acquisition (11), including that of pavement cells, via its composition and consequent mechanical properties. This is evidenced by minor modifications in various cell wall components resulting in changes in pavement cell shape (84).
Cellulose microfibrilorientation provides directional wall stiffness (72) such that the direction of cell expansion is perpendicular to their orientation (5). Therefore, when aligned in specific regions, cellulose microfibrils can locally restrict wall expansion, resulting inanisotropicgrowth of the cell (118). The degree of cellulose crystallinity also affects wall mechanical properties (113). Cellulose-deficient mutants display abnormal pavement cell interdigitation (27,48), which also occurs as a result of cellulase treatment (66), revealing a role for cellulose in regulating the shape of these cells. Microfibril deposition is thought to be guided by corticalmicrotubules, which have been demonstrated to functionally associate with cellulose synthase (100). Cellulose microfibrils are therefore assumed to follow the cortical microtubule transfacial arrays observed at neck regions of pavement cells (Figure 2a; see also Section 2.4). Neck regions of periclinal walls display enhanced stiffness inArabidopsiscotyledons, as measured usingatomic force microscopy(AFM) andBrillouin microscopy(1,114), with the stiffness patterns appearing to match the fan-like arrays of periclinal microtubules (114) (Figure 2b). However, regarding anticlinal walls, although cellulose microfibril enrichment and enhanced stiffness at anticlinal neck regions have often been inferred, evidence supporting these assumptions is lacking. Furthermore, there have been few studies confirming the assumed transfacial arrangement of cellulose microfibrils with direct evidence since such observations were made by Panteris and colleagues (98) in two fern species over 25 years ago. Recently, via cellulose staining, Bidhendi and colleagues (18) observed cellulose enrichment at the transfacial neck regions ofArabidopsiscotyledons. It seems rather difficult to conclusively distinguish whether the staining along the anticlinal wall was confined to a particular wall side. However, the logical conclusion would be that cellulose microfibrils occur along the anticlinal wall neck side, extending to and/or from the fan-like arrays shown on the outer and inner periclinal wall neck regions (18) (Figure 2a). The authors also observed enriched cellulose following a neck-to-neck pattern along the periclinal wall. They hypothesize that this leads to anisotropic reinforcement of lobes to restrict their widening but facilitate their elongation (18), consistent with experimental observations of lobe expansion (39). In support of this theory, chemical reduction of cellulose crystallinity decreases lobe expansion (18). Moreover, the anisotropy of periclinal cellulose microfibrils visualized by staining was found to be higher at neck than lobe regions in the wild type but not in a mutant displaying decreased cellulose crystallinity and reduced lobe expansion (1). As lobe initiation still occurs in the mutant, crystalline cellulose likely plays a role confined to lobe expansion by enhancing wall stiffness at periclinal neck regions (1).

Figure 2Click to view


Pectinis likely to play a role in cell wall mechanical properties (32). Demethylesterification of pectin such ashomogalacturonanis thought to alter cell wall stiffness; however, there is conflicting evidence regarding whether this modification results in softer (4,23,84,103,104) or stiffer (21,102) cell walls. In pavement celllobes, demethylesterified homogalacturonan enrichment was found inanticlinalwalls, at the junctions withpericlinalwalls, in leaves ofZea mays(maize),Vigna sinensis(cowpea), and two fern species (123). Enrichment of demethylesterified homogalacturonan has also been observed at theneckregions of periclinal walls inArabidopsiscotyledons (1,18) (Figure 2a). It was furthermore shown that this enrichment precedes the appearance of periclinal microtubule arrays during early curvature, suggesting that pectin rather than cellulose may contribute to increased cell wall stiffness at early lobing periclinal necks (1).
Interestingly, local anticlinal wall expansion has very recently been linked with demethylesterification-driven expansion of homogalacturonan nanofilaments in pavement cells ofArabidopsiscotyledons (58) (Figure 2a). Such nanofilaments were not found in the periclinal walls, where homogalacturonan is rather thought to form a mesh, indicating that the mechanisms regulating lobe formation may be distinct in anticlinal and periclinal walls. These anticlinal homogalacturonan nanofilaments were found to be arranged in parallel arrays and to be greater in diameter on the neck side of the lobe-neck junctions, where they are proposed to be low or demethylesterified, than on the lobe side or straight wall regions, where they are proposed to be highly methylesterified (58) (Figure 2a). This suggests a (de)methylesterification-mediated mechanism for reversible lateral anticlinal wall stretching (58). However, as these results conflict with several previous findings and challenge well-established theories of plant cell growth (reviewed in34), further work is needed for their validation.
Majda and colleagues (84) found local enrichment of demethylesterified homogalacturonan, as well as that of (1,4)-β-d-galactan and (1,5)-α-l-arabinan, at the middle region of straight anticlinal cell walls in youngArabidopsisleaf pavement cells, prior to the lobing event (Figure 2a). Using AFM, the authors also found this region to be mechanically softer than the two cell wall ends, indicating that local cell wall softening may precede lobe initiation (84) (Figure 2b). Furthermore, the authors revealed a stiffness gradient across the anticlinal cell wall of more mature, interdigitated pavement cells, with the lobe side of lobe-neck junctions being stiffer than the neck side (84) (Figure 2b). They also uncovered (1,4)-β-d-galactan and (1,5)-α-l-arabinan enrichment at the softer neck regions (84) (Figure 2a). Taken together, the current experimental data therefore suggest local stiffening of periclinal and softening of anticlinal wall neck regions (Figure 2b). This again indicates that lobing mechanisms may be distinct in anticlinal and periclinal walls, and these mechanical properties are likely to be influenced in a rather complex manner by cellulose and pectin. It should also be kept in mind that different organs (cotyledons and leaves) were used to achieve these various data sets.
Expanding cells within the plant epidermis often undergo tremendous internal mechanical stresses originating from two aspects: turgor pressure–driven forces uniformly acting on the cell wall and the interplay with neighboring and underlying cells as a result of differential cell growth (reviewed in115and125). Mechanical stress in the wall, which can be either compressive or tensile, is a tensor, thus containing mechanical information of magnitude and direction (60), both of which are influenced by cell shape (117). In the context of a tissue, neighboring cells can alter stress patterns by generating local mechanical conflicts via differential growth, resulting in symmetry breaking (reviewed in22). As stresses cannot be measured experimentally, computational modeling approaches have been widely used to predict stress patterns (115).
Plant cells have adopted strategies to balance these stresses, such as the deposition ofcellulose microfibrilsinto the wall, guided bymicrotubulealignment along the maximum stress direction, which provides tensile strength for stress endurance (68,114) (see Section 2.5). The increased thickness of the outer periclinal walls compared to anticlinal walls in the leaf epidermis, in addition to restricting expansion perpendicular to the leaf surface, is an adaptation to resist stress and prevent cell rupture or excessive bulging (125). In addition, stresses may also be managed by cell division, and adjustment of cell shape, as has been proposed for interdigitating pavement cells (117). Importantly, mechanical stresses are increasingly being recognized as instructional signals to trigger cellular responses, such as microtubule reorganization (60,115), and thereby control cell shape formation, including the puzzle shape of pavement cells.
Cell wall mechanical stresses are considered to be important for triggering pavement cell lobe initiation, but there is debate over the kind of stresses that may be present in the epidermal tissue. The immediate splitting apart of the cotyledon epidermis upon cutting, accompanied by mesophyll emergence, is consistent with the presence of tensile force in the epidermis (114). This has been interpreted as evidence for the existence of cell wall stretching in this tissue (84) (Figure 2b). However, there also exists skepticism regarding this idea, with some arguing that this is unlikely, due to the air-filled spaces present in the underlying mesophyll (20). An alternative theory is the presence of compressive forces in this tissue, based on geometry and turgor pressure (18) (Figure 2b).
The cytoskeleton plays central roles in plant cell shape determination due to its ability to self-organize and guide the deposition of wall materials while being influenced by signals such as light or mechanical stresses, as well as by cytoskeletal regulators. Cortical microtubules, which reside in the cortex underlying the plasma membrane and cell wall, are highly dynamic structures and are crucial in maintaining cell growth orientation and thereby determining cell shape (88,122). Evidence for their critical role in pavement cell lobe formation includes reduced interdigitation upon treatment with microtubule-depolymerizing drugs (6,97) and in a series of microtubule-deficientArabidopsismutants (3,26,110,133). Cortical microtubule enrichment, arranged in parallel arrays along anticlinal walls at lobe-neck junctions, as well as fan-like arrays radiating from neck tips along periclinal walls have been repeatedly observed in lobed pavement cells of both cotyledons and leaves of several species (6,18,44,46,98,114,136) (Figure 2c). Periclinal microtubules have also been observed across lobe bases, connecting adjacent necks (18). These periclinal and/or anticlinal microtubule arrays may be formed through the extension of one another, as microtubules occasionally appear to span periclinal and anticlinal walls in transfacial arrays at neck regions (18,98,136). However, there is a lack of evidence conclusively distinguishing whether the anticlinal arrays are actually positioned on the neck or lobe side of the wall.
These aligned microtubules have been assumed to regulate lobe formation through indirectly modulating cell wall mechanical anisotropy via the guided deposition of cellulose microfibrils, leading to stiffness and growth restriction of the wall in neck regions (see Section 2.1). There exists a long-standing theory that such enrichment of persistently aligned microtubules in both periclinal and anticlinal walls appears before lobe initiation and therefore drives the lobe initiation event (45,99). Experimental evidence provided by Armour and colleagues (6) seemed to confirm this theory inArabidopsis. However, these ideas are challenged by the findings that microtubule arrays are not always limited to particular subregions of lobes or necks (17,110,136), that they sometimes occur along diffusely growing walls of pavement cells (136), and that when limited to neck regions, they only appear after lobe initiation (18). It has therefore been speculated that such arrays may possess multiple functions in pavement cell morphogenesis, such as anticlinal microtubule arrays potentially locally restricting anticlinal wall height to promote lateral cell expansion within the epidermal plane (17). Additionally, the fan-like periclinal microtubule arrays observed in neck regions (Figure 2c) have been speculated to generateanisotropicstrain sufficient to break cell wall symmetry and initiate lobe formation (17,125). However, it now seems more likely that enrichment of periclinal microtubules at the neck zones of growing lobes promotes their amplification rather than initiation, as such enrichment failed to occur in a multiple basic proline-rich protein (BPP) microtubule-associated protein familyArabidopsismutant displaying shallow lobes (133).
In addition to the role of cortical microtubules in determining cell shape, feedback mechanisms may regulate their orientation depending on the cell geometry (38,118). Computational modeling predicts that microtubule array anisotropy depends on the edge curvatures of a cell, with more anisotropic arrangements found in smoother than in sharper cell edges (91). DevelopingArabidopsispavement cells typically display varying degrees of edge curvature (2); therefore, the observations of aligned cortical microtubule arrays may be related to cell geometry. Moreover, computational simulations, as well as recent experimental evidence, indicate that the geometry of the puzzle shape alone is sufficient to generate such anisotropic microtubule arrays (30,38). However, many signals, such as blue light, phytohormones, and mechanical stress, can rapidly and completely reorient microtubule networks (41,59,91); therefore, microtubule patterns in growing plant cells are clearly the outcome of combined factors and complex interactions.
The self-organizing behavior of cortical microtubules is a consequence of the angle at which individual microtubules encounter each other. Shallow-angle encounters generate parallel arrays via zippering, while steep-angle encounters generate either turnover via catastrophe or continued growth and crossover (36). In this way, randomly distributed microtubules can rapidly form stable aligned arrays upon self-encounter, which can also occur in response to intrinsic cell geometry and other cues (2). This is precisely controlled at the molecular level by a number of regulators acting on microtubule (de)stabilization (Figure 2c), in which deficiencies result in abnormal microtubule arrangements and subsequent cell shape phenotypes in pavement cells. For example, inArabidopsismutants of the microtubule-severing enzyme katanin, which has been shown to be required for the responses of microtubules to cell geometry (38), pavement cells display disorganized microtubules and abnormal shapes (81). Conversely, deficiencies in SPIRAL 2 (SPR2) (AT4G27060) or the augmin complex, which have been found to antagonize katanin at microtubule crossover sites, result in well-aligned microtubule arrays in pavement cells (129,131). Additionally, the microtubule-associated protein CYTOPLASMIC LINKER-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN (CLASP) (AT2G20190) accumulates at specific cell edges and confers the capacity of microtubules to grow around sharp edges and form arrays spanning adjacent cell faces (2). This likely includes the transfacial arrays that are thought to span anticlinal-periclinal wall junctions in developing pavement cell necks (2).
Plant cortical microtubules can directly respond to mechanical signals and perturbations (60). While compression tends to induce microtubule depolymerization or catastrophe, tension favors microtubule polymerization or stabilization (reviewed in60,73). InArabidopsiscotyledon and leaf pavement cells, compression of the tissue surface induces microtubule alignment with predicted stress patterns at supracellular levels (68,114). Microtubules have been shown to align preferentially along the maximal tensile stress direction at potential stress hotspots in thepericlinalneckregions ofArabidopsiscotyledon pavement cells (18,114) (Figure 2b,c). In this way, microtubules are thought to aligncellulose microfibrilsparallel to stress directions to resist strain and maintain a growth pattern (33,125). As cellulose microfibrils can promote local growth anisotropy (118), a positive feedback loop has been proposed. In this scenario, pavement cell shape-dependent stresses guide microtubule alignment, subsequent cellulose microfibril deposition, and consequent wall reinforcement in periclinal necks, which in turn contributes to shape amplification and maintenance (18,114,117). Such a feedback mechanism may also involve stress-induced changes inpectinchemistry affecting cell wall stiffness (18).
An intriguing question is how directional stress is perceived and transduced into microtubule rearrangement, which may depend on players controlling their dynamics (131). Microtubules of anArabidopsismutant defective in the katanin complex, which has a reduced microtubule-severing activity, display a correspondingly decreased response to mechanical perturbations in cotyledon pavement cells (114). Accordingly, this response is enhanced in sepal epidermal cells ofspr2(64), in which an increased microtubule-severing activity was demonstrated in pavement cells of the cotyledon (131). Given the key roles of katanin and SPR2 in controlling microtubule rearrangement, it is likely that these proteins, probably together with other players, are involved in sensing mechanical signals (131). More recently, an interesting hypothesis has been proposed wherein microtubules spontaneously follow the maximal tensile stress direction by default due to their dynamic instability and self-organizing properties (60).
Corticalactin filamentshave been proposed to act in the spatial regulation of pavement celllobeformation, although their precise role is rather unclear (69). Local enrichments of cortical actin filaments have been frequently observed at the tips of expanding lobes in several species (37,44,46,99,110) (Figures 2cand3), where, according to one theory, they may drive the directional trafficking of cell wall components toward the cell periphery to facilitate local wall expansion and growth (45,46). Moreover, perturbation of actin filaments via drug treatments or disruption of actin-related proteins (see Section 3.2) specifically affects lobe expansion (6,24,80), suggesting a role restricted to expansion rather than initiation of lobes. For example, a number ofArabidopsismutants in which genes related to the actin-related protein 2/3 (ARP2/3) complex are affected consistently display mislocalized cortical fine actin filaments, resulting in reduced interdigitation (80). Surprisingly, despite these findings, one study that closely monitored actin filament organization during lobe morphogenesis inArabidopsisfailed to observe actin filament enrichment in expanding lobe tips, finding them, instead, concentrated at the neck regions adjacent to periclinal walls (6). One suggested explanation for such inconsistent observations is the variety of markers tagging different actin-binding proteins used for actin filament visualization (6). Nonetheless, it is clear that more research is required to elucidate the true roles of actin filaments in pavement cell shape regulation.

Figure 3Click to view


There is also evidence supporting roles for several other cell wall–related factors in pavement cell shape regulation. Xyloglucan is ahemicellulosethat may play minor roles in cell wall mechanics (101), and fucosylated xyloglucan was found to be scarce in the middle region of straightanticlinalcell walls prior to lobing inArabidopsisleaf pavement cells, being rather enriched at the two cell wall ends (84). Additionally, the β-1,3-glucan polysaccharide callose has been found to display some regions of enrichment in the leaf pavement cell anticlinal walls of cowpea and two fern species (123). Furthermore, local cell wall thickenings, thought to be formed as a result ofmicrotubule-guided cellulose microfibril deposition, have been observed at neck regions in leaf pavement cells of several species (97,98) and postulated to locally resist strain during lobing (99), although such thickenings do not seem to occur inArabidopsis(17). The cuticle, produced by the cell wall, also appears to be important for pavement cell shape, considering the cell shape defects of some cuticle-affectedArabidopsismutants (96,119). Finally, the regulation of pavement cell interdigitation is also likely to occur via endomembrane trafficking of cell wall components. Cell wall expansion relies on the targeted delivery of cell wall components to the plasma membrane via secretion (67), in which actin filament enrichment at lobe tips (Figures 2cand3) may play a role (45,46) (see Section 2.6).
Computational modeling approaches, some of which we have already mentioned, have been widely used to understand growth in variousArabidopsisorgans and cells, including pavement cells (8,18,20,58,65,66,84,114,117). Plant cells can be represented as inflated balloons, where stresses applied on their walls originate from turgor pressure and occur at the tissue level (15,63). Many of the existing simulations of plant cell growth rely on finite element analysis, in which regions of interest such as tissues, cells, or cell walls are divided into a finite number of simple elements delineated by nodes and assembled in a mesh structure (142). Shape parameters such as length and thickness of cell walls and their mechanical features, provided by experimental data, are integrated in silico in a suitable model. Then a growth hypothesis is tested under the application of virtual stress.
Several such computational models have proven useful with regard to understanding pavement cell wall lobe initiation. One such finite element model, developed by Haas and colleagues (58), predicted lobe initiation and maturation over several growth iterations upon implementation of observed localhomogalacturonandemethylation rate andanisotropicorganization across the anticlinal wall. This supports a crucial role for demethylesterified pectin in pavement cell shape (see Section 2.2). Another finite element model, developed by Majda and colleagues (84), showed that the generation of small waves can result from differential stiffness properties along and across the anticlinal cell wall upon either stretching or compression. Based on experimental data, which supported their stretching-based model, the authors suggested that the mechanochemical polarity of the anticlinal wall generates undulations in pavement cells under tension (Figure 2a,b; see also Section 2.2). However, Bidhendi & Geitmann (20) challenged the tension-based model and, upon reproducing it, claimed that only negligible undulations ensue after anticlinal wall stretching. Furthermore, in their simulations, the addition of outer and inner periclinal walls on the two sides of an anticlinal wall fragment suppresses waves. They subsequently proposed alternative finite element models including periclinal walls, which showed that application of a stress-mimicking turgor pressure generates compressive forces (18). In the model, small waves are initiated under these forces in the anticlinal walls and further amplified when softened regions are added between the initiating stiffened periclinalnecks(18). In contrast with Majda and colleagues (84), Bidhendi and colleagues (18) therefore argue in favor of a compression-induced buckling mechanism initiating undulations (Figure 2b), with the geometry and heterogeneous mechanical properties of the periclinal wall sustaining lobe amplification.
To understand a process such as cell wall lobing in detail, it is important that a variety of computational models are developed and alternative hypotheses generated that challenge one another. However, the comparison of models must be done carefully, as all models represent simplified systems in which the output can diverge depending on the variables added to the system (20,85). Moreover, models must be validated experimentally, which may be difficult in the case of cell wall stress patterns (79), and continuously refined according to the biological data (19).
Rho of plants (ROP) guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)-dependent signaling pathways have been shown to coordinate pavement cell interdigitation inArabidopsisby regulating the spatial dynamics of microtubule andactin filamentnetworks. ROP2 (AT1G20090), which is functionally redundant with ROP4 (AT1G75840), preferentially accumulates atlobetips (45,47) (Figure 3), and loss or gain of ROP2/4 function affects interdigitation (45,46). Moreover, activated ROP2/4 has been suggested to locally induce the assembly of fine cortical F-actin in lobes through activating a ROP-interactive CRIB motif–containing (RIC) protein, RIC4 (AT5G16490) (Figure 3), thereby promoting lobe expansion (45). RIC4 was shown to primarily accumulate at incipient lobes and lobe tips, with this localization pattern tightly relying on the activity of ROP2/4 (45), and inhibition of RIC4 activity also alters pavement cell shape (45). However, RIC4 does not appear to directly bind to F-actin, and the assembly of fine cortical F-actin via RIC4 is thus possibly dependent on unknown actin-binding proteins (82). Perplexingly, Belteton and colleagues (17) recently reported a failure to observe any pavement cell phenotype in aric4mutant and argued, therefore, against a role for ROP2/4-RIC4-activated actin assembly in lobe formation. It should be noted, however, that their work focused onArabidopsiscotyledons, while earlier results were based on true leaves (45), which may suggest some differences in the mechanisms of pavement cell shape regulation between these organs.
In contrast to ROP2/4, ROP6 (AT4G35020) primarily localizes to the neck zones of pavement cells, and its activated form can directly activate the microtubule-binding protein RIC1 (AT2G33460), leading to transverse microtubule alignment (Figure 3) and subsequent local growth inhibition (47). While knockoutric1mutants display an altered lobe phenotype,RIC1andROP6overexpression result in pavement cells lacking lobes (45,47). It has been shown that by physically interacting with the katanin subunit KATANIN 1 (KTN1) (AT1G80350), RIC1 promotes the detachment of branched cortical microtubules, resulting in their ordered arrangement (81) (Figure 3).
These results suggest that the ROP6-RIC1-KTN1 pathway promotes neck formation by ordering the microtubule arrangement to restrict growth, while the ROP2/4-RIC4 pathway promotes lobe expansion by modulating actin filament assembly (Figure 3). Furthermore, evidence suggests that these two pathways antagonize each other to spatially coordinate the microtubule and actin filament networks required for pavement cell interdigitation (45,47) (Figure 3). While activating RIC4-dependent actin assembly in lobe tips, ROP2 simultaneously inhibits RIC1-mediated microtubule alignment in these regions (45). In the neck regions, where growth is locally restricted by aligned microtubules, RIC1 in turn suppresses ROP2-RIC4 to prevent outgrowth (45).
The suppressor of cyclic AMP receptor (SCAR)/Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein family verprolin-homologous (WAVE) protein complex has been identified as a central ROP effector, underlying how actin polymerization is achieved through upstream ROP signaling (Figure 3). Members of the SCAR family, subunits of the SCAR/WAVE complex inArabidopsis, primarily function in activation of the ARP2/3 complex (13,43,139), a nucleator of actin filament polymerization (75,80,89) (Figure 3). Additionally, the ARP2/3 complex can also be activated inArabidopsisby a direct interaction between the PIROGI (AT5G18410) subunit of the SCAR/WAVE complex and the active form of ROP2 (12) (Figure 3). A wide range of mutants with defective gene functions in the SCAR/WAVE-ARP2/3 pathway exhibit abnormal pavement cell phenotypes in several species (12,13,44,75,80,89,110,139,141). However, neither the SCAR/WAVE nor ARP2/3 protein complexes have yet been biochemically isolated from plants. Moreover, although ARP2/3 is mainly found on multiple organelle surfaces positioned adjacent to actin bundles, the association between ARP2/3 localization and pavement cell lobe formation appears to be rather ambiguous (140).
In addition to these downstream effectors, the dedicator of cytokinesis (DOCK) family guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) SPIKE 1 (SPK1) (AT4G16340) has been proposed to participate in the regulation of pavement cell morphogenesis via ROP signaling inArabidopsis(14,110). SPK1 functions in activating ROPs (Figure 3) and is thereby thought to mediate both the activation of the SCAR/WAVE-ARP2/3 pathway controlling actin polymerization (14) and the organization of corticalmicrotubulearrays (111). Since thespk1mutant has a stronger pavement cell phenotype than that ofscar/waveorarp2/3mutants, SPK1 is thought to have both SCAR/WAVE-ARP2/3-dependent and -independent functions in pavement cells (14,110). Interestingly, SPK1 has been characterized as a peripheral endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated protein (Figure 3) that accumulates at and promotes the formation of the ER exit site, an ER subdomain specialized for cargo export (137). This localization pattern is reminiscent of that of some of the SCAR/WAVE subunits, large inactive pools of which also localize at the ER surface (138). It is therefore likely that the ER plays a key role in the early activation of SPK1-ROP-SCAR/WAVE signaling (138). However, the multiple intracellular pools of ARP2/3 suggest that several levels of regulation are involved in the SPK1-SCAR/WAVE-ARP2/3 signaling pathways controlling pavement cell shape (140).
The master phytohormone auxin has long been known to stimulate plant cell growth, and pavement cells are no exception.Arabidopsisauxin signaling–defective mutants show reduced pavement cell size (132), and certain auxin treatments or enhanced auxin biosynthesis can result in larger pavement cells (55). The cell growth–stimulating effects of auxin are due in part to the multiple means by which it promotes cell wall loosening and extension (reviewed in86). Auxin is thought to regulate cell wall properties throughhomogalacturonandemethylesterification, which, together withcellulose microfibrils, is required for the polarity of the auxin efflux carrierPIN-FORMED1 (PIN1) (AT1G73590) (23,42) in a feedback mechanism for directional auxin transport.
Auxin is also well known to play important roles in cell polarity and shape, includingArabidopsispavement cell morphogenesis. Auxin treatments or enhanced biosynthesis can increase pavement cell lobing in cotyledons and leaves, depending on the auxin concentration (54,55,135). Conversely, a deficiency in auxin biosynthesis results in decreased cell lobing in cotyledons, which is rescued by auxin treatment (135). Interestingly, fluctuating auxin response gradients have very recently been demonstrated to occur within the developing spiral stomatal complexes of leaves and shown to be important forlobedevelopment in young pavement cells (55). As mentioned previously, ROPs, which are activated by auxin and in turn mediate auxin-responsive gene expression (126), are thought to play antagonistic roles in pavement cell lobes andnecks(see Section 3.1). Auxin has indeed been shown to activate ROP2 and ROP6 in leaf protoplasts (134). Furthermore, the pavement cell lobe-specific localization of RIC4, interactor of ROP2/4, is lost in cotyledons of an auxin biosynthesis–defective mutant but rescued by auxin treatment (135). The receptor-like kinase TRANSMEMBRANE KINASE 1 (TMK1) (AT1G66150), which has been confirmed to mediate auxin signaling by phosphorylating transcriptional repressors of auxin-responsive genes (29), may be involved in auxin activation of ROPs. Indeed, research has suggested that TMK1 regulates pavement cell shape via the auxin-mediated activation of ROP2 and ROP6 at the plasma membrane (134) (Figure 3). This regulatory pathway has also been proposed to involve the plasma membrane–localized putative auxin receptor AUXIN BINDING PROTEIN 1 (ABP1) (AT4G02980) (134,135). However, the potential roles of ABP1 have since become rather controversial (50). Interestingly, auxin has recently been suggested to promote the formation of diffusible, interdependent ordered lipid nanodomains and TMK1 nanoclusters at the plasma membrane, leading to nanoclustering of active ROP6, which in turn leads to cortical microtubule reorganization (95). Moreover, a recent report proposed a role for the cell wall, together with the cytoskeleton, in regulating plasma membrane protein nanodomain size and dynamics (90). Therefore, these studies raise the possibility that cell wall composition may link plasma membrane polar domain formation and symmetry-breaking events during lobe initiation. Subsequently, auxin diffusion might allow amplification of the initiated lobes, as suggested by a simple interface equation model (65). In this model, wall curvature leads to a lower concentration of a signaling molecule such as auxin on the lobe side and a higher concentration on the neck side (65). This in turn should lead to ROP2/4 and ROP6 dominance on the lobe and neck sides, respectively, allowing them to coordinate interdigitation, as discussed in Section 3.1.
Further evidence for the important role of auxin in pavement cell shape inArabidopsisincludes the observations thatpin1mutants show reduced interdigitation and that PIN1 localizes to plasma membrane zones at lobe tips, suggesting local accumulation of extracellular auxin (135) (Figure 3). Additional experiments indicated that the lobe tip polarity of PIN1 may be regulated by phosphorylation. PINOID (PID) (AT2G34650) kinase-phosphorylated PIN1 was shown to localize to the plasma membrane of pavement cell necks and nonlobing regions (77). Conversely, FLOWER-SPECIFIC PHYTOCHROME-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 1 (FYPP1) (AT1G50370)-dephosphorylated PIN1 localizes to the plasma membrane of lobes (77). Furthermore, evidence suggests that TYPE-ONE PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 4 (TOPP4) (AT2G39840) regulates pavement cell shape by maintaining PIN1 polarity in pavement cells via direct dephosphorylation (57). By inhibiting clathrin-mediated PIN1 endocytosis, auxin can stabilize PIN1 at the plasma membrane, thus promoting its own flow (94,112), and this has been proposed to occur specifically at the plasma membrane of the pavement cell lobe tip. Research has suggested that this is achieved via auxin activation of ROP2/4, which may inhibit clathrin-mediated PIN1 endocytosis by promoting F-actin accumulation via RIC4 (92,135) (Figure 3). Moreover, recent work supports important roles for several auxin influx and efflux carriers, including PIN3 (AT1G70940) and PIN7 (AT1G23080), in establishing the fluctuating auxin gradients involved in lobe formation inArabidopsisleaf pavement cells (55).
Although roles for PIN proteins inArabidopsispavement cell interdigitation have been well established, a recent study reported contradictory findings. Belteton and colleagues (17) failed to observe a pavement cell phenotype in cotyledons of a nullpin1mutant, in contrast to previously published data for both cotyledons (135) and leaves (57). Moreover, Belteton and colleagues (17) only observed PIN1 localization at the basal margins of young leaves, in agreement with an earlier study (76) but in sharp contrast with the polarized PIN1 localization in lobe tips reported previously by several other studies (57,77,135). Furthermore, cell lobing defects in cotyledons of single or combination mutants of PIN3, PIN4 (AT2G01420), and PIN7 were not detected (17). On the contrary, a more recent comparison of pavement cells in cotyledons and leaves of a triplepin3 pin4 pin7mutant, while also finding no phenotype in cotyledons, revealed a significant cell lobing defect in leaves (55). We postulate, therefore, that pavement cell shape regulatory mechanisms may vary according to the position and developmental stage of the tissue in question. In support of this idea, pavement cell shape intopp4-1mutants is strongly affected in the third leaves but not in the cotyledons or the first or second leaves (57). Additionally, the pavement cells of a mutant defective in the ROP-interacting protein INTERACTOR OF CONSTITUTIVE ACTIVE ROP 1 (ICR1) (AT1G17140) are less interdigitated than the wild type on the adaxial (top) but not abaxial (bottom) leaf side (74). Indeed, pavement cells have been found to display more interdigitation on the abaxial than the adaxial leaf surface in many species (see127and references therein), suggesting some differences in pavement cell shape regulation between these two epidermal layers. It is therefore possible that the apparently contrasting observations regardingArabidopsis pinmutants and PIN1 localization result from differences in the locations and developmental stages of the cells under study, as well as other potential factors of influence, such as seedling age and growth conditions.
Regardless of the uncertainties currently surrounding ABP1 and PIN1, we can be confident that auxin plays a significant role in shaping pavement cells. Further evidence for the importance of auxin in this process comes, for example, from the reduced pavement cell interdigitation phenotype of the previously mentionedicr1mutant (74). ICR1 has been shown to function in auxin transport specifically by regulating PIN recycling at the plasma membrane (61). Moreover, the stability of ICR1 is in turn regulated by auxin, thus suggesting that this protein participates in auxin feedback regulation of its own flow (62).
Aside from auxin, other phytohormones also play roles in pavement cell shape inArabidopsis. This includes cytokinin, which has recently been confirmed as a key regulator of the cell proliferation-to-expansion transition in leaves (121). In contrast to the decreased cell-lobing phenotypes of auxin signaling–defective mutants, cytokinin signaling–defective mutants display increased pavement cell interdigitation (78). While auxin acts to promote cell lobing, cytokinin appears to act upstream of ROPs as an inhibitor of cell lobing (78) (Figure 3), implying the importance of auxin-cytokinin balance and feedback during pavement cell shape regulation. Interestingly, brassino-steroids have also recently been shown to play a role in regulating pavement cell shape, specifically by mediatingmicrotubulestabilization (83) (Figure 3). As has been shown for many other developmental processes, phytohormonal regulation upstream of molecular players acting in pavement cell interdigitation is likely to be crucial and complex, and it will be fascinating to learn more as research develops.
The interdigitated pattern of pavement cells in the leaf epidermis is an evolutionary feature of vascular plants that can be dated all the way back to the Paleozoic Era (541 to 242 million years ago), according to the fossil record of ferns (105). From the perspective of evolution, such a puzzle shape has been speculated to provide many different kinds of benefits (see Section 4.3) that may have facilitated natural selection.
Pavement cells in vascular plants have evolved a great diversity of shapes, their form and degree of undulation varying substantially (127) (Figure 4), which may be due to evolutionary responses to environmental changes (130). There are several examples of environmental conditions affecting the degree of pavement cell interdigitation, such as low-water stress enhancing interdigitation in several drought-resistant plant species (9). In the aquatic plantRanunculus aquatilis, the pavement cells of leaves grown above water display interdigitation, but those grown below water do not (7). In the leaves of succulents, dry air conditions preferentially induce the formation of nonlobed pavement cells, while high humidity induces the formation of lobed cells (25). Adaxial pavement cells tend to display a stronger degree of undulation in shade leaves than in sun leaves (i.e., leaves positioned mainly in shade or sun, respectively) (130). As mentioned previously, pavement cells are often more interdigitated on the abaxial than adaxial leaf side (Figure 4), a trend that appears to be common among vascular plants (127). Moreover, diversity of pavement cells also occurs within individual leaves and among populations of a single species, as well as among different species at phylogenetic scales (10,71,127) (Figure 4).

Figure 4Click to view


In terms of development, pavement cell shape shows a dynamic variation as the leaf grows, with straight walls developing into complex, undulating walls upon cell expansion in many plant species (98). Monitoring pavement cell morphogenesis inArabidopsishas revealed heterogeneous growth (39,40), with a faster increase inlobenumber at earlier than later phases of cell expansion (6,136). Given the diverse forms of pavement cells, an extensive quantitative analysis of their shape at phylogenetic scales might reveal the functional relevance of cell lobing. Such a broad quantitative survey, combined with a modern phylogenetic approach, was performed recently by Vőfély and colleagues (127), in which vascular plants were classified into five clades: ferns, gymnosperms, early diverging angiosperms, monocots, and eudicots. Quantitative results revealed that pavement cells of ferns tend to display highly interdigitated shapes, while those of core monocots (except maize) and gymnosperms tend to interdigitate less. However, the pavement cells of eudicots were found to be extremely variable in their degree of interdigitation (Figure 4). Interestingly, the degree of epidermal cell interdigitation negatively correlates with organ growth anisotropy inArabidopsiscotyledons and sepals, inArabidopsismutants with altered organanisotropicgrowth compared to wild type, and also in fruit pods of several species of the Brassicaceae family (117). Computational modeling suggested that epidermal cell interdigitation in isotopically growing organs serves to reduce cell wall stress (117) (see Section 4.3). However, it should be noted that Vőfély and colleagues (127) failed to find a negative correlation between pavement cell and leaf anisotropy in their survey of vascular plants.
The phylogenetic signal, or tendency of closely related species to resemble each other more than distantly related species, was revealed to be strong for epidermal cell shape traits in all clades except for the eudicots, the clade in which pavement cell interdigitation is extremely variable (127). Thus, regarding the functions underlying interdigitation, results from this work indicate that the puzzle shape may have been selected for different reasons in different species during evolution rather than arising for a common reason. In light of the previously mentioned effects of environmental conditions on the degree of interdigitation, the eudicots in particular may have evolved mechanisms for the enhanced plasticity of the puzzle shape. An ability to alter interdigitation in response to certain growth conditions in this clade might also help to clarify why a number of apparent contradictions and controversies have arisen in the field of pavement cell shape regulation over the past few years.
The molecular basis of interdigitated pavement cell evolution may largely rely on cytoskeletal regulation. This is not only because cytoskeletal patterns within expanding pavement cells of many plant species are quite consistent (reviewed in99) but also because several proteins responsible for these patterns, via cytoskeletal (re)organization or polymerization, for example, are functionally conserved in monocots and eudicots (37,44,141). Regarding microtubule alignment, many species display similar arrangements of parallelanticlinaland fan-likepericlinalcortical microtubule arrays inneckzones (Figure 2c; see also Section 2.4), although the anticlinal array length varies occasionally (reviewed in99). Additionally, lobe tip-localized corticalactin filamentaggregations (Figures 2cand3; see also Section 2.6) have been visualized in several species, includingArabidopsis, maize, andOryza sativa(rice), exclusively during the lobe expansion stage (44,46,141).
At the molecular level, the ARP2/3 complex and its activators, members of the SCAR/WAVE complex, which are involved in actin polymerization (Figure 3), are highly evolutionarily conserved (37,44,141). InArabidopsis, mutants with compromised SCAR/WAVE-ARP2/3 functions display pavement cell shape defects, as mentioned previously (see Section 3.2). Similar mechanisms may exist in maize because loss of maize BRICK1 (BRK1), the homolog of theArabidopsisBRK1 (AT2G22640) subunit of the SCAR/WAVE complex, also leads to loss of cortical actin filament accumulation, thereby resulting in impaired lobe formation (44). Moreover, mutants in rice genes encoding homologs ofArabidopsisSCAR/WAVE complex subunits generate abnormal F-actin arrangements and display reduced pavement cell interdigitation (141). Given the evolutionary distance of eudicots and monocots, the actin filament–dependent regulation of the lobe expansion process may be conserved in these two clades.
The diversity of plant cell wall chemistry might also be a determinant in the evolution of pavement cell shape. Indeed, cell wall composition is known to vary considerably with developmental stage, cell type, and season across land plants, as a result of its interactions with the environment (reviewed in107). Additionally, this variation also occurs at a subcellular level (1,6,84,123). It appears that the question of how such diversity of pavement cell shape arose during evolution is not simple to address. Many other factors may also be involved in this process, including environmental adaptions and molecular cues, and we can look forward to future research addressing this interesting topic.
Piece by piece, a picture of complicated, multi-level, interacting mechanisms generating pavement cell interdigitation is slowly being assembled. But why such investments in creating this intriguing jigsaw puzzle shape? As previously mentioned, environmental conditions may affect the degree of pavement cell interdigitation (see Section 4.1), which in some cases appears rather logical. For example, low-water-stress-induced interdigitation is thought to enable enhanced solute transport to the guard cells to promote stomatal closure and prevent water loss in the monocotErianthus arundinaceus(9). However, in most cases, the reasons behind the puzzle shape are much more difficult to infer, although this has not hindered a wide range of educated guesses at these reasons from emerging over the years.
One of the general functions of pavement cells is thought to be the spacing out of other cells in the leaf epidermis (54,124), which may perhaps be assisted by the lobed shape. Stomata are separated from each other by at least one other cell, which is likely to allow efficient ion and water exchange during stomatal closure or opening (51,106). Another suggestion has been that the lobed shape of large pavement cells may function to create an effective scaffold to hold together smaller neighboring cells (124), thus maintaining epidermal integrity. Researchers have also suggested that the increased cell-cell contacts formed by interlocking pavement cells enhance overall tissue integrity by eliminating air spaces between the cells, enhancing cell-cell adhesion, improving resistance to tension, and increasing tissue mechanical strength (52,69,87,99,125). Epidermal layer integrity is, after all, essential for maintaining its skin-like functions in protecting and holding in place the underlying leaf tissues, and mechanical strength is of particular importance to the epidermis due to the presence of large air spaces in the underlying mesophyll. Moreover, the leaf epidermis has been shown to be mechanically stiffer than the mesophyll, thus forming a sandwich-like structure within the leaf, which is thought to be important for maintaining mechanical stability (93). It has also been suggested that pavement cell interdigitation may help the leaf blade to maintain the flat shape necessary for maximal light capture (49). It is important that the leaf be strong and stable while sustaining flexibility to allow bending without breaking under mechanical stresses such as wind, which may also be enabled by another interesting potential function of the undulated cell walls whereby they act like springs, allowing reversible stretching and deformation (123).
The epidermis of a developing leaf is a mosaic of various cell shapes with widely differing growth rates, within which pavement cells at a range of developmental stages neighbor each other, and cell wall growth rates are heterogeneous within individual pavement cells (40). These features should allow a high level of growth plasticity at the tissue and organ levels, and interdigitation may thus enable faster-growing pavement cells to protrude into their neighbors in a way that avoids creating tissue-level forces (125). Finally, as mentioned earlier, it has recently been suggested that the puzzle shape may serve above all to reduce mechanical stress in the epidermal cell walls (117). Computational finite element modeling implied that, in comparison to anisotropic cell elongation, isotropic cell expansion such as occurs in the cotyledon and leaf epidermis results in enhanced turgor pressure–induced mechanical stresses in the walls, which are reduced by the formation of cell lobes (117). Dispersal of these stresses by lobing should reduce maximal cell wall stress at the middle of the cell, which might otherwise cause rupture or outward bulging of the outer periclinal wall (117). This suggestion is supported by the recent observation of such a bulging phenotype in mutants displaying very shallow pavement cell lobes (133). This compelling theory suggests that mechanical stresses act as drivers of epidermal cell interdigitation by triggering mechanisms to disperse and reduce such stresses via cell lobing (117).
It should be noted that many of these interesting and creative theories are based on evidence generated withArabidopsis, a species displaying a rather high degree of pavement cell interdigitation, unlike many other species within the eudicot clade. As discussed previously, the extreme variability of pavement cell interdigitation within this clade deems it unlikely that there exists one single underlying function for the puzzle shape of pavement cells that applies to all species (see Section 4.1). It may well be that many of the postulated functions for this curious and unique cell shape hold true in some cases, depending on the particular species and growth conditions.
Over the years, extensive experimental and simulation-based studies have provided a wealth of clues prompting numerous theories on jigsaw puzzle–shaped pavement cell shape regulation and functions. The exact sequence of events preceding lobe initiation and unfolding during lobe expansion is still debated, but it is clear that the cell lobing process is dependent on complex signaling and feedback mechanisms. Although some studies have resulted in apparently contradictory conclusions, the formation of several alternative hypotheses that can be tested, disputed, and revised is an important part of the scientific process leading to deep understanding of complicated biological processes. Such debates help to uncover new pieces of the curious puzzle of pavement cell form and function.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We gratefully thank Olivier Hamant, Peter Grones, and Stéphane Verger for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (S.L.), Kempe Foundation grants SMK-1759 (F.J.) and JCK-1912.1 (Z.R.), as well as Vetenskapsrådet (the Swedish Research Council) and Vinnova (Verket för Innovationssystem) (S.M.D. and S.R.).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


