We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
The ancient DNA revolution of the past 35 years has driven an explosion in the breadth, nuance, and diversity of questions that are approachable using ancient biomolecules, and plant research has been a constant, indispensable facet of these developments. Using archaeological, paleontological, and herbarium plant tissues, researchers have probed plant domestication and dispersal, plant evolution and ecology, paleoenvironmental composition and dynamics, and other topics across related disciplines. Here, we review the development of the ancient DNA discipline and the role of plant research in its progress and refinement. We summarize our understanding of long-term plant DNA preservation and the characteristics of degraded DNA. In addition, we discuss challenges in ancient DNA recovery and analysis and the laboratory and bioinformatic strategies used to mitigate them. Finally, we review recent applications of ancient plant genomic research.
Article metrics loading...
The ancient DNA revolution of the past 35 years has driven an explosion in the breadth, nuance, and diversity of questions that are approachable using ancient biomolecules, and plant research has been a constant, indispensable facet of these developments. Using archaeological, paleontological, and herbarium plant tissues, researchers have probed plant domestication and dispersal, plant evolution and ecology, paleoenvironmental composition and dynamics, and other topics across related disciplines. Here, we review the development of the ancient DNA discipline and the role of plant research in its progress and refinement. We summarize our understanding of long-term plant DNA preservation and the characteristics of degraded DNA. In addition, we discuss challenges in ancient DNA recovery and analysis and the laboratory and bioinformatic strategies used to mitigate them. Finally, we review recent applications of ancient plant genomic research.
The analysis of DNA from long-deceased tissues was first reported in 1984 with the publication of 213 base pairs (bp) of mitochondrial DNA from a museum-preserved quagga, a recently extinct zebra relative (56). This foundational study demonstrated that DNA from historic tissues had significant potential for long-term survival and recovery through the tools of modern molecular genetics. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) revolution in the late 1980s led to rapid expansion of the burgeoning ancient DNA (aDNA) field, when researchers began to simultaneously probe the limits of DNA survival and understand the nuance and difficulty involved in working with archaeological and paleontological biomolecules (94). The primary challenges that emerged were extreme sensitivity to contamination by modern DNA sources and the degraded nature of aDNA molecules.
Early reports of DNA from Mesozoic bone (163), Miocene plant remains (45), and remains in amber (reviewed in143) are among the formative results that were later learned to have originated with contamination (131). The growing pains of the new methodology guided the aDNA field toward a set of rigorous experimental criteria for ensuring the authenticity of aDNA (26,43). These criteria included physical isolation of aDNA lab work from other molecular facilities; stringent, specialized laboratory procedures (e.g.,41); independent replication of experimental results; and predictions about the preservation and behavior of ancient biomolecules (26). The revision and formalization of aDNA procedures ultimately shaped the field for the ensuing two decades of rigorous research.
aDNA methodologies matured during the PCR era. Soon after the emergence of genomic technologies, however, the aDNA field began a protracted shift to massively parallel high-throughput sequencing that reflected the broader trend in genomics. Early genomic applications to ancient specimens involved highly multiplexed PCR and amplicon sequencing (72), screening of a woolly mammoth genome at low coverage to estimate divergence from elephants (107), and cytoplasmic genome assembly from ancient organisms (72). The first complete genome of an ancient organism—an ∼20,000-year-old woolly mammoth from Siberia—was published in 2008 using the now-defunct 454 sequencing platform (85). In the subsequent decade, aDNA methods have been refined and optimized for the genomic era, genomic data collection costs have dropped by orders of magnitude, and the early promise that ancient specimens could be completely integrated into nuanced analytical frameworks using large data sets is being realized (108,133).
Plant research has been integral to each phase of the aDNA revolution. Closely following the quagga proof of concept for aDNA survival, researchers began assessing the biomolecular preservation potential of herbarium specimens (114) and amplifying short fragments of maize DNA (119), eventually gaining early insights about the process of domestication (46). PCR was deployed extensively throughout the 1990s with archaeological and paleoecological plant remains, including charred and desiccated seeds, maize cobs, fossil plants, archaeological textiles, herbarium sheets, and sediment cores (96). As with other study systems, the oldest of these materials—prequaternary fossil remains (45)—are now widely considered early examples of contaminated experiments, and they helped shape the rigorous procedures and the maturation of the field. Plant research has kept pace with the paleogenomic revolution, beginning with the genome-wide analysis of cotton evolution in 2012 (95) and continuing with more recent studies of a wide range of species across diverse study areas discussed in this review.
Additionally, in several cases, plant research was at the forefront of ancient biomolecular developments. The first aDNA target sequence capture was carried out with maize (10); the first ancient RNA was reported by hybridization in cress (118) and by sequencing in maize (37); the first ancient RNA viruses were recovered from barley (136); and the earliest ancient epigenomic sequencing was carried out on well-preserved barley specimens (137) (Figure 1). Furthermore, the domestication of plants was an early research framework for tests for selection using aDNA, providing a real-time evolutionary account of specific human-influenced traits in crop species (58). Lastly, plant research led the way for applying population genetic methods to aDNA datasets, again motivated by questions of domestication and crop movements (38,58).

Figure 1Click to view


In total, the history of ancient plant DNA closely reflects broader advances in the aDNA field, and there are several key benefits to working with ancient specimens compared with only modern material. These advantages include the ability to integrate extinct variation to contextualize modern biodiversity and understand species dynamics through time, resolve taxonomic and compositional uncertainty in archaeobotanical and paleoecological contexts, and track in real time processes such as crop domestication and Quaternary human impacts on diverse ecosystems. While fundamental limits to aDNA survival and obstacles to its recovery still exist, plant aDNA research in the genomic era is increasingly subtle and powerful, owing to the ability to build complete ancient genomes into nuanced analytical frameworks.
The two most ubiquitous challenges to authentically ancient DNA analysis are (a) the rapid degradation of DNA in deceased tissues and (b) the contamination of experiments and sample materials by ubiquitous sources of high-quality modern DNA. The latter is preempted by strict adherence to stringent protocols for aDNA analysis (26,41,43), but the former imposes fundamental limits on aDNA recoverability.
Isolated DNA in solution is known to spontaneously break down at a predictable rate governed by temperature and the chemical environment (77). The number of DNA molecules at a given size decreases through exponential decay with a measurable half-life (77). While this prediction has been previously applied to aDNA breakdown (6), a recent meta-analysis suggested instead that in animal hard tissues, most DNA fragmentation occurs rapidly after organism death (68), a result predicted by previous experimental work (22). In most cases, DNA is lost entirely, but in the rare conditions favorable to DNA preservation, fragmentation then appears to slow dramatically to some level of stability and then decay more slowly over long time frames. Instead of sample age, this study found that DNA fragmentation was best predicted by thermal fluctuations and precipitation in the regional environment (68). Even within single archaeological sites, relative age was a poor predictor of which samples would be most fragmented. The oldest DNA that is widely accepted as authentic was recovered from a 500- to 700-thousand-year-old horse recovered in the North American permafrost under exceptional preservational conditions, underscoring the environmental factors involved with DNA survival (93).
In contrast to what is known about skeletal remains, ancient genomes for a similar study in plants that sample sufficient time depth and environmental variability for this kind of analysis have not yet been generated. In addition, the highly variable composition of plant tissues compared with animal hard tissues warrants an independent investigation of their preservational dynamics. Studies using herbarium leaf tissue have observed a more constant rate of DNA breakdown than that in bone (157) but have focused on a maximum time span of ∼300 years rather than the 500 thousand years possible with animal genomes. Moreover, the herbarium pattern of DNA breakdown is restricted to a single preservational method: desiccation and protected storage, sometimes with chemical treatments or heat. In total, much more work is necessary to establish empirical expectations for ancient plant DNA survival.
In addition to physical fragmentation, DNA accumulates chemical damage and compositional biases that can be used as markers of authentically ancient fragments. Most prominently, cytosine nucleotides tend to spontaneously lose an amine group and convert to deoxyuracil (18). During library preparation, this uracil residue is complemented by an adenine template on the opposite strand and recovered during sequencing as a thymine on the original strand. When mapping reads to a reference sequence, these misincorporations cause a surplus of reference C to read T mismatches in ancient genomes. Further, this process occurs much more rapidly in the single-stranded overhangs occurring at the ends of fragments than in the double-stranded body of the molecule. As such, an abundance of C-to-T mismatches in the 5′ end of reads, and complementary G-to-A mismatches in the 3′ end, are treated as one gold standard for aDNA authenticity in the genomic era (68,116). This pattern can also be used to discriminate endogenous from contaminant molecules, particularly in cases like human and hominin research where contamination is ubiquitous and difficult to isolate (134).
To summarize, we expect that DNA from historic and ancient tissues will be highly fragmented, chemically damaged, substantially depleted of endogenous DNA, and mixed with environmental DNA. Consistent with long-established criteria for aDNA authenticity (26,43), these characteristics are useful for validating the results of aDNA studies and for discriminating authentic from contaminant DNA sources. The nature of DNA contamination and decay also has significant implications for the laboratory processing and informatic components of aDNA genomics, listed inTable 1and discussed in Section 3.
Step-by-step comparison of processes and assumptions in modern genomics and ancient plant DNA research

Archaeological plant remains comprise a wide variety of robust tissues and minute structures preserved in diverse environmental conditions. Several of these remains are useful for aDNA recovery and analysis.
Archaeobotanical macrofossils—organic tissues including seeds, fruits, cobs, shells, and wood—are preserved by four key mechanisms: (a) charring, often in storage pits or hearth features; (b) desiccation in dry caves, rock-shelters, or arid environments; (c) anaerobic waterlogging; and (d) partial or complete mineralization. The vast majority of archaeobotanical remains worldwide are charred, often with complete carbonization of organic tissue but good structural preservation allowing morphological examination. Charred remains are routinely recovered from archaeological sediments and features through flotation, and a range of analytical approaches can be applied to reconstruct aspects of past plant communities and human use (100).
Early attempts to amplify DNA fragments from charred cereal grains were successful in a low proportion of seeds across several experiments (2,3,19). Preserved pockets of organic matter were thought to remain in some incompletely carbonized tissues, facilitating recovery of trace levels of DNA (20,96). Even in the genomic era, PCR remains the most sensitive method for recovery of a single target present at very low copy numbers, and early work with charred remains seems to have leveraged this sensitivity where minute levels of DNA persisted in a small fraction of burned seeds. However, attempts at archaeogenomic analysis with charred remains have been uniformly disappointing. A recent reanalysis of charred plant archaeogenomic attempts representing four species using both metagenomic and target capture approaches revealed a total of only 26 authentically ancient reads across more than 200 million total fragments sequenced (90). Further, this study revisited raw data from a previous genomic test case using charred cereal grains (21) and found that the previous results were more likely based on exogenous molecules homologous to the target reference genomes rather than successful recovery of endogenous DNA. In total, charred plant remains do not appear to be good candidates for genomic studies of aDNA unless methodological innovations substantially improve recovery success.
Desiccated and waterlogged archaeobotanical macrofossils, however, have proven to be excellent reservoirs for DNA survival over at least ten thousand years and in diverse environments (Figure 2). Dry caves and rock-shelters (67,81,145,152), arid Andean (64,161) and Egyptian (139) sites, and the desert southwestern United States (29) have all shown excellent DNA preservation in plant remains, and all complete genome sequences from archaeological plants to date have been from dry-preserved remains. Waterlogged remains are less frequent since they rely on serendipitous deposition in bodies of water where decomposition is impeded. However, waterlogged grape pips (23,110), gourd rinds (65), squash seeds (66), and oak wood (151) have yielded high-quality data sets using target sequence capture or focusing on cytoplasmic DNA analysis with genomic methods. Finally, no recent studies have tested mineralized remains for DNA preservation, and chances of success with these materials seem limited owing to the replacement of organic tissue with inorganic substrate.

Figure 2Click to view


Pollen, starch grains, and phytoliths constitute valuable resources for environmental and archaeological reconstruction, particularly in regions such as the humid tropics where conditions prevent macrofossil preservation (100,150). Pollen contains genomic material for reproduction, and, as with charred remains, there were some early PCR-based successes extracting DNA directly from ancient pollen grains (99). In the genomic era, this approach has largely been subsumed by sedimentary ancient DNA (sedaDNA) strategies, discussed in Section 2.3. Starch grains—tightly bound amylose residues cross-linked with amylopectin—are not expected to carry any nucleic acids and have not been targeted as aDNA sources.
On the other hand, phytoliths—noncrystalline silica bodies in diverse plant taxa and tissues—often contain organic material sufficient for direct radiocarbon dating, suggesting significant incidental sequestration of cellular debris during phytolith formation (103). Although the only published attempt at phytolith DNA recovery was unsuccessful (33), it remains plausible that phytoliths could be a viable source of nucleic acids. Moreover, researchers exploring long-term data storage using synthesized DNA found that storing information-bearing DNA molecules in amorphous silica beads was extremely effective at combatting degradation, substantially outperforming other room-temperature DNA storage strategies, including desiccation and chemical preservation (48). Thus, if DNA is present in phytoliths during a plant's life cycle, it could possibly survive archaeological time spans in a chemical microenvironment optimal for DNA preservation.
The early 2000s saw the first genetic characterization of ancient plant communities preserved in permanently frozen soil and cave sediments (160). Using generic plant DNA markers (metabarcodes), Willerslev and colleagues (158) later demonstrated that diverse plant species could be retrieved from small amounts of bulk sediment samples over very long time spans [>400 kyr before the present (BP)]. This method does not rely on the preservation of identifiable plant fossils, which is advantageous where a large proportion of a plant's structures and many plant species do not preserve and therefore go undetected by traditional paleoecological methods. However, many plants leave genetic traces in the environment that can be preserved in geological and archaeological deposits. Several paleogenetic studies have since utilized bulk sedaDNA and plant metabarcodes to investigate past floristic assemblages from marine, lacustrine, terrestrial, and archaeological sediments, as well as basal glacial ice (9,25,61,87,101,158,159).
More recently, shotgun metagenomic sequencing of lake and marine sediments has provided a new, revolutionizing way to retrieve and analyze partial and whole plant genomes (97,102). This approach was used for investigating past floras from Holocene archaeological middens (129) and in Pleistocene cave sediments from hominin sites in Europe (135). Recent bulk extraction and shotgun metagenomic sequencing from stalagmites yielded ∼80-kyr-BP-old plant DNA (142), and sedaDNA-based research in marine deposits provided a faithful correlate to pollen and macrofossil remains (101,138). The shotgun metagenomic approach allows simultaneous analysis of all organismal DNA for a more comprehensive understanding of the past environment, and this approach also improves the verification and quantification of DNA degradation (e.g., cytosine deamination) as a measure of DNA authenticity (102).
Despite recent methodological advances and expanded possibilities in both metabarcoding and sedaDNA, we still have limited knowledge about the taphonomy of environmental DNA, such as the pathway of deposition and the conditions that encourage long-term preservation in the different depositional environments (98). From the current literature we can observe that only a subset of plants and other organisms in the environment leave detectable genetic traces in the associated sediment. This is likely caused by a multitude of factors, including key taphonomic processes such as distance from source to deposit and the individual biomass production of living organisms (7). Another important limitation is the lack of complete reference databases and full reference genomes available. While the data are constantly expanding, only a small fraction of all plants currently have their full genomes sequenced. Bias-correcting approaches such as phylogenetic intersection analysis can be invoked to mitigate effects of database gaps, such as false positive hits to overrepresented species (138). But as the number of species in databases grows because of lower costs for genome sequencing, this bias will decrease, improving the taxonomic resolution of metagenomic analysis and ushering in possibilities beyond the current presence-absence taxonomic identification.
Archaeological and paleontological remains of ancient feces—coprolites—provide an exceptional opportunity to investigate past diets and health (49). For decades, archaeologists have dissected coprolites to reveal their macroscopic and microscopic contents, such as plant fibers, seeds, pollen, and intestinal parasites (113). With the advent of PCR, researchers began investigating paleofeces with genetic markers for intestinal bacteria (39), parasitic worms (57,78), gut microbiomes (124), and, in the case of ancient human feces, the chromosomal sex of the defecator (144). In addition to these lines of inquiry, several groups inferred the plant component of coprolites though PCR amplification of plastome barcodes. For example, Poinar et al. (106) tested a 20-thousand-year-old fecal bolus of an extinct giant ground sloth and found genetic evidence of eight orders of plants, only four of which were observed through macroscopic analysis. The researchers argued this molecular detection is advantageous because it captured a greater range of the ground sloth's diet, although one additional plant taxon was identified only through macroscopic examination, suggesting that a combined approach may be the most fruitful. Other researchers have used plastome markers to examine the plant component of human diets, including the colon contents of Ötzi the Iceman (120) and a pre-Clovis coprolite from Paisley Caves, Oregon (112).
Advances in DNA sequencing technologies allow researchers to treat coprolites as metagenomic samples, much like what is now done with ancient sediment samples. Rather than amplifying genetic markers for plants, shotgun sequencing can be used to take a genetic snapshot of all taxa present in a coprolite, including gastrointestinal pathogens, beneficial species of the gut microbiome, and dietary plants and animals. So far, this direction has been limited, and in fact recent studies of plant DNA from coprolites continue to follow a metabarcoding approach, where PCR amplicons are sequenced on an Illumina platform [e.g., New Zealand birds (17) and New Zealand dogs (162)]. However, this may change in the future because of the recognition that PCR amplification of genes yields a biased picture of ancient microbiomes due to gene length polymorphisms and variations in primer binding sites (167). Even though coprolites are relatively uncommon in the archaeological and paleontological records, often restricted to dry cave contexts for long-term preservation, we anticipate increased interest in shotgun metagenomics of paleofeces, as this approach should provide the most accurate characterization of diet and gut microbiomes.
Global herbarium collections contain approximately 350 million specimens amassed during the last ∼400 years and are increasingly viewed as valuable repositories for genome-scale biodiversity data (14). As herbaria digitize their collections at a quickening pace (12), photos and metadata associated with each specimen become available through online databases such as the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (146). The collections thus become more accessible and the number and diversity of potential scientific applications expand, especially with advances in DNA extraction and high-throughput sequencing (47,109). Genomic sequencing approaches successfully applied to historical herbarium specimens include shotgun deep sequencing (80,165), genome skimming (11,86,91), targeted DNA capture (52,55,123), single nucleotide polymorphism assays (149), and de novo organellar genome assembly (11,122). In addition to their well-established and common usage providing material for studies of molecular systematics (92), herbarium collections often contain large numbers of well-preserved, expertly curated conspecific specimens that can be grouped in time and space according to their associated metadata and are therefore particularly well-suited for population genomic studies of temporal evolution and ecological change (15).
Herbarium specimens can be used if samples cannot be collected in the wild, such as when species are endangered or extinct or collection from the wild is not feasible due to high cost and time restrictions. For example, Konrade et al. (69) tested about 500 herbarium specimens of black cherry (Prunus serotina) to sample the whole eastern North American range of this widespread species. They were able to detect a weak signal of isolation by distance by using 15 microsatellite loci. This pattern would be difficult or even impossible to detect without having samples from the whole range. In another study, Olofsson et al. (92) analyzed 28 herbarium specimens collected between 1872 and 2013 in their phylogenetic study of the Oleeae tribe (Oleaceae, Lamiales), some of which originated from remote areas in tropical Asia and Australasia, and neotropical America. They showed that it is possible to infer the phylogeny even with low-depth genome skimming data when using high copy regions such as the plastome or nuclear ribosomal clusters.
Herbarium specimens are also increasingly used for generating DNA barcodes, either to improve barcode reference databases or to verify the identification of a specimen. It is notable that the barcode success is highly dependent on the sample age. For example, Korpelainen & Pietiläinen (71) used standard barcode protocols to obtain plastid barcodes of Finnish angiosperm species from over 3,000 herbarium specimens collected between 1867 and 2013 as part of the Finnish Barcode of Life initiative (https://www.finbol.org). The success rate of barcoding was only 35% in specimens collected between 1867 and 1899 compared to about 90% in those collected between 2001 and 2013, underscoring the increasing difficulty of long fragment recovery in aging specimens. Target sequence capture using reliable orthologous panels of targets across plants has potential as a powerful method for herbarium systematics and data collection similar to barcoding strategies (e.g.,59).
Ancient plant genomics combines the biological complexities of plant genomes with the practical challenges of ancient genomics. Plant genomes include massive genome size variation. Domestic grasses range from ∼400 Mbp (rice) to 16 Gbp (bread wheat) haploid genome size, and flowering plants span at least 68 Mbp to 148 Gbp, a >2,000-fold range of variation (75). Compared with an approximately fourfold variation in mammalian genomes (e.g.,62), this extensive range presents data collection challenges in many species, especially when DNA is highly fragmented and tissues are contaminated by environmental DNA. Thus, target sequence capture (44) presents a useful method to reduce data collection requirements in many cases that may be intractable using shotgun sequencing. Ploidy variation complicates plant research broadly (74), and allopolyploid genomes that arose through hybridization present additional challenges in short fragment mapping and target capture experimental design when paralogous targets are rampant. Moreover, in diploids and polyploids alike, ample hemizygosity and genomic structural variation have evolved even over the comparatively short Holocene time span of domestication (16,166), introducing fundamental variation in genomic composition among individuals. The variable breeding systems of plants—inbreeding and outcrossing, plus vegetative propagation and diverse ecological breeding contexts—render many population genetic assumptions unreliable, and plant population analyses often must rely on modified and purpose-built approaches. Finally, the three cellular sources of DNA in plants—plastids, mitochondria, and the nucleus—have the potential for substantial horizontal transfer (65,155), posing risks of variable copy number, nonspecific read mapping, and confounded variant calling. Plant aDNA research, in total, must consider these and other fundamental difficulties of plant biology in the context of the specific research design and analytical requirements necessary for aDNA broadly (Table 1).
The fragmented, low-quantity, and fragile nature of aDNA requires strict protocols to mitigate contamination from modern sources and recover minuscule quantities of degraded DNA from diverse tissues. Isolating DNA from varied samples including herbarium vouchers, ancient seeds, coprolites, and sediment cores requires a wide range of off-the-shelf and purpose-built methods. These techniques are often based on protocols for fresh samples with modifications to maximize the recovery of degraded DNA. Protocols continue to be optimized, and here we highlight the most common approaches and issues in the laboratory component of plant archaeogenomics.
Of the substrates used in ancient plant genomic research, herbarium samples are peculiar in their often pristine visual appearance. Thus, one might assume that herbarium samples have biomolecular and biochemical traits much like living plants and therefore could be treated as such in the laboratory. Researchers have frequently extracted DNA from herbarium specimens using techniques developed for fresh plant tissues. For example, cetyl-trimethyl ammonium bromide is one of the most popular methods for isolating DNA from living plants (32), and many researchers have applied it to herbarium samples (8,27,28). Commercial kits have also been used to recover DNA from herbarium samples, such as the use of a Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen) onJuniperusaccessions up to 80 years old (1) and successful testing of the 100-year-oldSartidia perrieri–type specimen with a BioSprint 15 DNA Plant Kit (Qiagen) (13).
Despite some successes with conventional DNA extraction methodologies, DNA contained within herbarium specimens is far from pristine. In one study, newly prepared herbarium vouchers were found to contain only 3% of the amount of DNA as fresh tissue, leading the authors to argue that the vast majority of DNA is lost during herbarium specimen preparation (141). The amount of DNA destroyed through conservation treatments is variable, and some methods, like air drying, are more forgiving than alcohol drying (125). However, it is difficult to infer how much DNA is preserved in individual vouchers because treatment methods were rarely recorded during the conservation process. In addition to the net loss of DNA molecules, DNA in herbarium samples is much more fragmented than DNA in fresh tissues. In a set of experiments on herbarium specimens collected over the past 170 years, Weiß et al. (157) observed median DNA fragment lengths of 50–90 bp, similar to that of archaeological bones hundreds to thousands of years old. The DNA in herbarium samples is also chemically damaged by cytosine deamination (50), similar to other aDNA substrates (see Section 2). However, cytosine deamination is a time-dependent process (68,126), and therefore most herbarium samples exhibit very low levels of chemical damage.
Herbarium collections are a nonrenewable resource, so researchers must minimize destructive sampling and maximize DNA recovery. Today, herbarium specimens are increasingly used for genome-wide characterization as opposed to PCR-based assays (15), and consequently it is critical to retain the short DNA fragments that are ideal for short-read sequencing technologies. Gutaker et al. (51) performed one of the most recent and relevant investigations, usingArabidopsis thalianaaccessions collected from 1839 to 1898. After comparing multiple methods including cetyl-trimethyl ammonium bromide, they ultimately recommended a digestion buffer containingN-phenacylthiazolium bromide (PTB) and dithiothreitol used previously for ancient gourd rinds (65), followed by a specialized silica-binding purification originally developed for ancient skeletal remains (30).
Regardless of the DNA extraction method, it is critical to recognize that herbarium specimens, though relatively young, require special handling and processing beyond what is appropriate for fresh plant tissue. Samples should be collected with sterile implements, and care must be taken to avoid cross contamination in the herbarium and in the laboratory. Disposable gloves are essential, as they minimize DNA transfer between samples and also reduce skin contact with mercuric chloride, a toxin once used routinely as a conservation treatment (156). The impact of mercury salts on DNA preservation is an interesting but so far underexplored issue (35). Due to these challenges, Shepherd & Perrie (132) have argued that herbarium accessions should be processed in physically isolated laboratories with extensive controls to monitor contamination, following the principles of aDNA research (26). Because many herbarium samples yield low amounts of endogenous DNA, extraction in dedicated paleogenomic laboratories is ideal (41). At a minimum, herbarium vouchers must not be processed in facilities where amplified DNA is present.
Researchers attempting to recover nucleic acids from archaeological macrofossils face similar challenges as with herbarium vouchers, and therefore they implement some of the same laboratory strategies. As with herbarium samples, laboratory methods must be optimized to recover short DNA fragments while minimizing contamination. DNA extraction and all preamplification steps must be performed in a dedicated aDNA laboratory as this is the best practice to avoid and monitor sources of contamination. Various DNA extraction methods have been successfully used by different research groups, but in comparing extraction protocols on archaeobotanical remains, Wales et al. (153) reported optimal success with a digestion buffer containing sodium dodecyl sulfate, proteinase K, and dithiothreitol, followed by a phenol-chloroform extraction. Wales & Kistler (154) have provided an updated version of the method, which implements an optimized silica purification for ultrashort DNA.
A key consideration is the great range of macrofossil tissue types—for example, maize cobs, cereal seeds, gourd rinds, sunflower heads, twigs, and hardwood. In contrast to herbarium samples, where leaf tissue is normally available for testing and metabolite composition is often similar across taxa, the diversity of plant macrofossils requires researchers to investigate if tissue-specific compounds may interfere with DNA purification or library preparation. In addition to the plant-derived compounds, humic acids from the archaeological sediment may adhere to small macrofossil remains. Humic compounds often coextract with DNA due to their similar chemical properties, and they create downstream problems through enzymatic inhibition (82). Based on these issues, it is unlikely that one DNA extraction method will consistently outperform the others across all archaeological macrofossils, and small pilot studies are often advisable to determine the best option for a given set of samples.
Extraction of plant and other DNA from coprolites and archaeological soil follows similar approaches as plant macrofossils. For coprolites, Poinar et al. (106) demonstrated that plant DNA could be recovered from 20,000-year-old dung of the extinct Shasta ground sloth using a PTB digestion buffer. PTB cleaves cross-links between DNA and macromolecules, and it is thought that this may release trapped DNA from ancient feces. However, experiments by Rohland & Hofreiter (117) indicate that PTB can have a negative effect on DNA recovery, and other researchers have isolated plant DNA from ancient human and other coprolites without PTB (112,162). Given recent success recovering ultrashort DNA from herbarium vouchers with PTB (51), there is a need to reinvestigate the efficacy of the additive. For sedimentary DNA studies, a major concern is the coextraction of humic acids, and a range of extraction methods have been explored (97). In some cases, modification of commercial kits for soil DNA has been useful, e.g., implementation of inhibitor-removing buffers from the PowerSoil Kit (MoBio/Qiagen) (102). A simple lysis buffer (Tween-20 and proteinase K) paired with silica binding can also recover ultrashort DNA from sediment (115).
After DNA is isolated from herbarium vouchers, archaeological macrofossils, coprolites, or sediment, the subsequent laboratory steps are identical. For high-throughput sequencing, raw DNA must be converted to DNA libraries, taking special care to retain short fragments and maximize complexity in light of low input concentrations. One of the most common library preparation methods relies on blunt-end ligation of custom adapters (84), which is more efficient and less biasing for aDNA than the AT-overhang adapter ligation methods common in commercial kits (130). Modified single-tube protocols have built on this fundamental strategy and optimized library complexity and DNA yield from ancient sources (24). A more sophisticated single-stranded library preparation protocol starts by denaturing double-stranded DNA molecules so that each strand can be individually sequenced (42), offering advantages with highly degraded template DNA. Optionally, deaminated cytosine sites can be enzymatically repaired using uracil-DNA glycosylase before library preparation, although the presence of deaminated sites is a useful indicator of DNA authenticity (116). Following library preparation, samples can be treated similarly to highly fragmented modern DNA for shotgun-sequenced or target enrichment using hybridization capture (44).
Paleogenomics has helped dissect evolutionary processes such as population bottlenecks (152), recent local adaptation (29,139,145), ancient admixture (81), and dispersal (29,64) in various plant species. Notably, genetic studies based on archaeobotanical remains—as well as any other paleogenomic study—are complicated by postmortem DNA degradation (18). The degradation and chemical damage in aDNA have the effect that paleogenomic data sets consist of very short sequencing reads, increased apparent error rates, and low genomic coverage. These features have the potential to affect bioinformatic analyses from initial data processing to end-stage evolutionary inferences.
In most studies, sequencing reads from an ancient plant sample are mapped to a reference genome from the same or a closely related species using modifications to standard algorithms (76,127). The accuracy of this process decreases for shorter reads with high error rates, for which mapping locations become ambiguous in some cases. This issue is of particular relevance for plant genomes, which can be heterogeneous in size, even within the same species (16), as well as highly repetitive, which hinders the retrieval of information from short reads. For instance, due to its high repeat content and recent whole genome duplication, only 21% of the maize genome can be unambiguously mapped with reads 30 nucleotides in length (111). Moreover, larger genomes call for larger volumes of sequencing data in order to reach useful genome coverage, thus increasing sequencing costs for samples with low endogenous content.
In genomic studies, once sequencing data have been mapped, information at specific genomic coordinates is transformed into genotypes (89). However, this is usually not possible for paleogenomic studies, where low depth of coverage is a common feature of the data. Furthermore, higher error rates derived from postmortem damage incorporate artificial variation that cannot be otherwise excluded through high-depth genotyping. Strategies to circumvent this issue include random sampling of one read at sites of interest (e.g.,64,111), or estimating genotype likelihoods that incorporate the uncertainty of the data (70). In addition, to decrease the effect of aDNA-specific error, it is common to (a) restrict analyses to transversion polymorphisms that are not subject to deamination error, (b) rescale mapping quality before variant calling (60), or (c) hard mask or remove ends of fragments (64) according to the likelihood of a base call representing a deaminated site.
Different genetic markers from nuclear and organellar genomes can be targeted by researchers to learn about the evolutionary history of plants from archaeobotanical or herbarium samples, including predefined single nucleotide polymorphisms, specific genes, genomic tracts, or complete genomes. Historically, due to their high copy number and short length, uniparental organellar markers have been commonly typed in aDNA studies. In plants, the plastid genome has been frequently used in phylogenetic studies involving archaeobotanical and herbarium samples (66,73,148,151,152). However, for some plant species, obtaining useful information from the mitochondrial and plastid genomes from ancient samples can be challenging (155). Although their high copy number makes them attractive targets in degraded DNA sources, these genomes are prone to frequent genomic rearrangements and cytoplasmic–nuclear gene transfer, complicating and limiting analysis (155).
Evolutionary inference based on population allele frequencies represents an additional challenge in plant paleogenomics. Due to their different reproduction and cultivation mechanisms (sexual or asexual, self-fertilizing or outcrossing, or annual or perennial), the properties of plant populations differ between species. As such, these mechanisms impact population histories and are relevant when considering the sampling strategies and potential analyses. This is particularly relevant for domesticated plant species, a major focus of plant paleogenomics. Cultivated plants often have strong population structure and individuals from the same group are highly related (88). Thus, obtaining a sample that properly represents the species or population variability is complicated, as is analyzing the data in a standard population genetics framework. Furthermore, the sampling process is limited by specimen availability when working with archaeobotanical remains or herbarium samples. Thus, sampling multiple individuals from the same population is not always possible. To date, there are very few instances of studies with truly population-level data from ancient plant specimens. These include two genomic surveys of ancient maize from two archaeological sites in the US Southwest where signatures of local adaptation to high altitude and production of sugar and starch were identified and traced through time (29,145).
Ancient and historic plant genomic research is especially impactful for unraveling complex evolutionary trajectories by augmenting the present-day view of biodiversity with molecular data sampled through time. Plant domestication is one of the most formative processes in human history, emerging independently around the world in the early Holocene, and it is critically important for anthropology, archaeology, ecology, and biodiversity studies. Domesticated plants are well-represented in the archaeobotanical record, and their dynamic relationships with humans over recent timescales provide opportunities for real-time evaluation of how domesticated systems evolve. As such, domestication is chief among target study areas being approached with renewed perspective and empirical rigor in the archaeogenomic era (4) and has been a key focus of ancient plant DNA research throughout the field's brief history.
Maize, a staple crop produced at over one billion tons per year globally, has been the most frequent target of archaeogenomic domestication research owing to excellent preservation throughout much of its precolonial range in the Americas. Archaeobotanical microfossils and modern microsatellite-based genetic analysis suggest that domestication began ∼9,000 years BP in the lowland Balsas River Valley of southern Mexico (83,105). Sporadic macroremains outside of the domestication center in Mexico and Central America begin at ∼6,500 BP (104), and maize becomes the dominant staple of Mesoamerica only ∼3,000 BP—6,000 years after the onset of domestication (63). PCR-based studies with maize established the timing for when key domestication traits became acquired and fixed near the domestication center (58), and they unraveled routes of dispersal and distribution of biodiversity in South America (38). Genome capture methods were later deployed with archaeological material in the southwestern United States and in Mexico to refine the model for human-mediated movement of plants northward from the domestication center and regional adaptation over time mediated by adaptive introgression from crop wild relatives and long-term habitation of the desert southwest environment (29).
As archaeogenomic studies have increasingly exploited genome-wide datasets, maize has been targeted for four ancient genome sequencing experiments to date. Two studies focused on ∼5,300-year-old maize from near the source region in Mexico (111,147), each revealing a mix of wild-type and maize-like alleles at key domestication loci four millennia after the onset of domestication. These findings underscored the protracted arc of domestication as a long-term evolutionary process with extensive ongoing gene flow from wild populations and weak, landscape-level selection on suites of traits valuable to human cultivators. A third study, analyzing maize genomes from the Turkey Pen site in Colorado, reconstructed aspects of the growth phenotype to demonstrate a marginal level of adaptation to local conditions, shedding light on the selective stress involved with the rapid human-driven dispersal of crop plants into new landscapes (145). Most recently, a fourth study analyzed traditional and archaeological biodiversity to suggest that the first maize carried into South America was in a state of partial domestication ∼7,000 years ago (64). This study suggests a stratified model of domestication that began in a single large Mesoamerican gene pool and continued with parallel human selection pressures in multiple regions.
Near Eastern wheat domestication was another early focus area for an aDNA approach, but because archaeobotanical wheat is preserved almost exclusively by charring, results were infrequent and based entirely on PCR experiments (reviewed in96). Nonetheless, these studies elucidate some early population dynamics of wheat traits that are important in domestication. More recently, an archaeological emmer wheat genome was reported from 3,000-year-old Egyptian remains, revealing genetic erosion of biodiversity over time through the ancient presence of haplotypes that are absent in modern wheats (128).
The first genomic analysis of ancient plants was aimed at understanding genome evolution during cotton domestication (95). This experiment, showing changes in transposable element composition through archaeological time, suggested a punctuated equilibrium-like model for recent cotton evolution where massive genomic compositional events accompanied domestication with implications for diversity and biology. Other archaeological DNA studies have focused on domestication biogeography in barley (81), the mutation load and adaptive hybridization in sorghum through an Egyptian time series (139), historical biogeography and biodiversity in North and South AmericanChenopodiumspecies (67,161), evolutionary ecology and domestication in squashes (66) and bottle gourds (34,65), the evolution and long-term management of domesticated grapevines (110), and the domestication gene pool of sunflowers (152).
Genetic analysis of herbarium specimens has been important for our understanding of the domestication history of both the potato (Solanum tuberosum) and the sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas). Roullier et al. (121) performed genetic analyses on 57 historical herbarium collections of sweet potato, along with over 1,000 modern samples, finding evidence of pre-Columbian movement of the species from South America to Oceania. To further elucidate the plant's evolutionary relationships and domestication history, Muñoz-Rodríguez et al. (86) used genome skimming and target capture approaches to sequence complete plastid genomes and over 600 nuclear genes from 75 herbarium specimens and 125 germplasm repository tissue samples of sweet potato and its crop wild relatives. With these data, the authors concluded that the modern domestic crop evolved solely from anIpomoea trifidaancestor. More recently, Gutaker et al. (52) used a targeted capture approach to deep sequence selected regions of the potato genome, including the plastid genome and over 330 genes related to photoperiod response. This approach was applied to generate data from 88 samples representing contemporary and historical diversity of the domestic potatoes, including some herbarium specimens originally collected by Charles Darwin and one collected 359 years ago. The authors reported that a major population turnover occurred in European potato crops after the year 1750, during which Chilean genotypes admixed into the existing diversity derived from Andean landraces. In addition, they detected adaptation of European potatoes to longer days by quantifying temporal change in allele frequencies at theStCDF1gene.
In addition to regionally and taxonomically focused domestication studies, the interface of archaeology and genetics is being explored to rethink commonalities of domestication across diverse ecosystems and the fundamental evolutionary dynamics involved. For example, the frequency of simple Mendelian traits, such as a nonshattering rachis in wheat and increased seed size in barley, can be traced through thousands of years of archaeobotanical deposits, and selection coefficients can be inferred from the rate of change (40). The results demonstrate very weak selection pressures over extremely protracted periods for fundamental domestication traits, commensurate with natural selection rather than focused breeding efforts. Although not based on aDNA, this archaeological and genetic finding establishes predictions testable through ancient crop genomics. For example, weak selection on many loci spanning thousands of years requires that a substantial amount of the biodiversity in wild populations must be maintained in crop progenitors for efficacious selection and a robust domestic population. This prediction runs counter to traditional predictions of a substantial genetic bottleneck during domestication. However, initial analysis across three grain crops suggests that a classical bottleneck may not be required or beneficial during the domestication process, and that gradual genetic erosion through serial founder effects and postdomestication breeding are the primary drivers of diversity loss in crop species (5).
Domestication has been a topic of special evolutionary interest, beginning with the opening chapter ofOn the Origin of Species, because of the dramatic outcomes when plants and animals adapt to the human environment with mutualistic benefits. The new insights discussed here highlight new possibilities for domestication science in the archaeogenomic era at the interface of archaeology and genetics and underscore the potential for fundamental revisions to our understanding of the domestication process. aDNA provides a powerful tool kit to interrogate the domestication process in archaeological and evolutionary real time, rather than inferring its complexities solely from modern plants shaped by the postindustrial world. The genomic era in particular has introduced unprecedented levels of nuance to our biological and anthropological understanding of crop domestication.
Ancient and historic DNA can integrate a temporal perspective with other long-term or transient processes in ecology and evolution. For example, the analysis of invasive plant species offers to help elucidate fundamental evolutionary questions, such as convergent adaptation to similar environments and whether de novo mutations or standing variation contributes most to adaptation to new ranges. The incorporation of historic herbarium samples offers an opportunity to study these processes because changes in population structure, shifts in allele frequencies, and the emergence of de novo mutations can be directly observed over time (36). In a study ofA. thaliana, a self-fertilizing plant native to Eurasia that recently colonized North America, the authors used herbarium samples collected between 1863 and 1993 in combination with modern specimens from North America and were able to identify several de novo mutations that had risen to immediate or high frequencies (36). Quantitative variation in root traits could be explained by a small number of de novo mutations of intermediate frequencies. The authors were also able to estimate the substitution rate by using the collection dates of the herbarium specimens. They estimated the time of the most recent common ancestor, which relates to the colonization of the plant in North America.
Herbarium specimens contain not only DNA from the specimens themselves, but also the metagenomic DNA of microorganisms that populated the sample (164). Using samples from different times and locations can help elucidate origins and introduction pathways as well as population dynamics of plant pathogens (15). Shotgun-sequenced genomes of the pathogenic oomycetePhytophthora infestans, which causes late potato blight, showed that its genetic structure within Europe had changed dramatically since the potato's introduction. ThePhytophthoralineage that caused the Irish famine (HERB-1) was completely replaced by the US-1 lineage in Europe, which later caused the twentieth-century global outbreak of potato famine (79,165). By using collection dates of historic herbarium specimens to calibrate branch length and estimate divergence times in a Bayesian phylogenetic framework, the diversification of the pathogen could be related to the Spanish Conquest of Central and South America.
The contemporary evolution of herbicide resistance in crop fields is another increasingly problematic challenge in modern-day agriculture. It has been proposed that resistance alleles already present in a population are advantageous over de novo mutations due to lower negative pleiotropic effects on the life cycle of weeds—that is, new variants have more potential for disruptive physiological effects compared with standing variation. In a study of the grass weedAlopecurus myosuroidesusing herbarium specimens collected between 1788 and 1975, amplicon sequencing revealed that a herbicide resistance allele was already present in a specimen from 1888, predating the use of herbicides (31). Whole genome sequencing with high-throughput sequencing technologies can further enable the identification of other resistance alleles, especially nontarget-site resistance, in the future to better understand the population genetic context and consequences of herbicide resistance (122).
The characterization of past landscapes, ecosystems, and human practices through sedaDNA analysis has expanded our biomolecular tool kit to allow for the detection of organisms that leave few fossil traces. For the sedaDNA community, the development of shotgun sequencing for metagenomics is arguably as important as the innovation of PCR for the larger aDNA field. Still, this approach is in its infancy, and the full potential and limits of shotgun metagenomics for sedaDNA remain to be explored. Moving forward, shotgun metagenomics holds tremendous potential for characterizing complete ancient genomes and revealing new insights on past environment with organisms across all trophic layers (97).
The first 35 years of aDNA research has established the basic expectations and limits of DNA preservation, utilized targeted strategies in hypothesis-driven studies across study areas, and embraced genomic methods to fully integrate diversity through time into molecular genetic frameworks. Plant-focused aDNA research has played key roles throughout this coming-of-age process for archaeogenomics and paleogenomics. The genomic revolution has ushered new research and perspectives into important evolutionary processes such as plant domestication, with the potential to help us fundamentally evaluate long-held assumptions. Moreover, aDNA methodologies have unlocked herbaria and museum collections as repositories of long-term genetic variation, giving insight into population dynamics and biodiversity through time, and making possible large-scale surveys of genomic variance and adaptation based on curated plant tissues. Ancient plant genomics leverages the power of diachronic sampling—integrating materials sampled through multiple timepoints, a key strategy in archaeology and paleontology—combined with the tremendous information landscape of genomes. We are still in the beginning phases of deploying plant archaeogenomics to explore novel and long-standing research questions across fields. As within other focus areas of aDNA research, genomics allows us access to unprecedented complexity in the history of plants and people, and we continue to learn how aDNA rejects simplistic models of evolution. The admonition to “be sparing with Occam's razor” (53) will describe the exciting next years of ancient plant genomics.
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We thank Tom Gilbert for helpful discussions and feedback on the manuscript.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


