We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
C4photosynthesis evolved multiple times independently from ancestral C3photosynthesis in a broad range of flowering land plant families and in both monocots and dicots. The evolution of C4photosynthesis entails the recruitment of enzyme activities that are not involved in photosynthetic carbon fixation in C3plants to photosynthesis. This requires a different regulation of gene expression as well as a different regulation of enzyme activities in comparison to the C3context. Further, C4photosynthesis relies on a distinct leaf anatomy that differs from that of C3, requiring a differential regulation of leaf development in C4. We summarize recent progress in the understanding of C4-specific features in evolution and metabolic regulation in the context of C4photosynthesis.
Article metrics loading...
C4photosynthesis evolved multiple times independently from ancestral C3photosynthesis in a broad range of flowering land plant families and in both monocots and dicots. The evolution of C4photosynthesis entails the recruitment of enzyme activities that are not involved in photosynthetic carbon fixation in C3plants to photosynthesis. This requires a different regulation of gene expression as well as a different regulation of enzyme activities in comparison to the C3context. Further, C4photosynthesis relies on a distinct leaf anatomy that differs from that of C3, requiring a differential regulation of leaf development in C4. We summarize recent progress in the understanding of C4-specific features in evolution and metabolic regulation in the context of C4photosynthesis.
The evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis fundamentally changed the geosphere and biosphere and also the energy transformations that support life on Earth (60). In oxygenic photosynthesis, the energy contained in sunlight is harvested and used for the extraction of electrons from water and for the buildup of a proton gradient, eventually leading to the production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate hydrogen (NADPH). These energy and reducing equivalents are then used for the reduction of CO2into carbohydrates in the Calvin-Benson cycle. The process of CO2fixation is catalyzed by ribulose 1,5 bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco), which can react either with CO2, forming two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate (3PGA), or with O2, forming one molecule of 3PGA and one molecule of 2-phosphoglycerate (2PG). 3PGA can directly reenter the Calvin-Benson cycle. However, 2PG inhibits at least three enzymes of the Calvin-Benson cycle: triose phosphate isomerase, sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphatase (SBP), and phosphofructokinase (62). It therefore must be removed quickly. At least three different metabolic routes for the removal of 2PG have evolved in cyanobacteria, and in all vascular plants 2PG is metabolized by the photorespiratory pathway, which converts two molecules of 2PG into 3PGA, CO2, and NH3(54). During the early stages of evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis, the atmosphere of Earth contained very little oxygen and large amounts of CO2. Hence the gas composition of the atmosphere favored the carboxylase reaction of Rubisco, and the oxygenase reaction played only a very minor metabolic role for photosynthetic organisms. However, over billions of years of oxygenic photosynthesis, the oxygen levels rose and the CO2concentration declined. During the Eocene-Oligocene transition, the atmospheric CO2concentrations decreased to 450 ppm or less (206). Under these atmospheric conditions, many C3plants frequently experience carbon limitation, excess light energy is unproductively dissipated by various protection mechanisms, and photorespiration represents a major highway of carbohydrate metabolism (75). In a typical C3plant, the majority of NH3released during photorespiration is refixed at the expense of ATP and reducing power. Also, the CO2that is released by photorespiration can be refixed by Rubisco, or it gets lost back into the atmosphere. Losses of CO2and energy by photorespiration are particularly serious when the capacity for O2binding of Rubisco increases.
Fossil evidence indicates that during the Oligocene, the first plant lineages evolved a carbon concentration mechanism that is able to reduce the rate of photorespiration [see Hennacy & Jonikas (79) for a discussion of algal and cyanobacterial types of carbon concentrating mechanisms]. In these plants, CO2is prefixed as HCO3−by an enzyme that displays no oxygenase activity, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC), forming the C4acid oxaloacetate (OAA) as the first detectable reaction product. CO2is released again from C4metabolites at the site of Rubisco, thereby forming a high CO2atmosphere around the enzyme. In crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM), the prefixation of CO2by PEPC is temporally separated from the Rubisco reaction. Prefixation takes place primarily at night when transpiratory water loss is low, and the C4reaction products are stored in the vacuole, mainly in the form of malate. During the day malate is decarboxylated, creating a high CO2atmosphere around Rubisco while the stomata remain closed. CAM plants are therefore characterized by remarkably high water-use efficiency. In C4species, the PEPC and Rubisco reactions are separated spatially. CO2is prefixed in one leaf compartment by PEPC and transported to the Rubisco-containing compartment in the form of a C4metabolite, thus producing a high CO2atmosphere around Rubisco (Figure 1). This arrangement represses the oxygenase reaction and allows Rubisco to operate near substrate saturation at high light conditions (110). Implementation of the C4pathway underpinned the evolution of highly productive plant species with improved light conversion as well as water- and nitrogen-use efficiency. The C4pathways evolved independently in more than 60 plant species from different phylogenetic groups, among them crop plants such as maize, sugarcane, sorghum, millet, teff, and amaranth (154).

Figure 1Click to view


Before the discovery of their underlying biochemistry, C4species had already been distinguished by high vein density and the typical Kranz anatomy in the cross sections of their leaves (57,74). Two different cell types are arranged concentrically around the leaf veins: an internal ring consisting of large enforced bundle sheath cells (Kranz) and a second external layer of mesophyll cells. Later studies established that both cell types represent different compartments of the C4carbon concentration mechanism. The first CO2fixation step by the PEPC takes place in the outer mesophyll cell tissue, while the Rubisco reaction is confined to the bundle sheath. A high bundle sheath-to-mesophyll cell ratio ensures the efficient exchange of metabolites between the two cell types. The increased metabolic role of the bundle sheath in the carbon fixation process in the C4leaves is reflected by an increase in the number and arrangement of organelles in this cell type. The enforced cell walls of the bundle sheath cells minimize the leakage of CO2from the Rubisco-containing cells. Although Kranz anatomy is characteristic for the majority of and most efficient C4species, C4photosynthesis has more recently also been found in succulent plants with bands of mesophyll and bundle sheath tissue around a water body (64,163) or even a single cell that contains dimorphic plastids (186).
The basic biochemical principle of the CO2pump is similar in all C4species. CO2entering the mesophyll cells is converted into bicarbonate by carbonic anhydrases (CAs) and then reacts with PEPC, forming the C4organic acid OAA. OAA is next converted to malate and/or aspartate. Malate and/or aspartate then diffuses through plasmodesmata to the bundle sheath cells. There, decarboxylation of the C4acid generates an elevated CO2atmosphere so that the oxygenase reaction of the Rubisco is strongly reduced. The C4cycle is completed by the regeneration of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) as a substrate for PEPC by pyruvate orthophosphate dikinase (PPDK), a recycling step incurring additional energy costs.
Beside this common basic C4setup, the various C4lineages evolved distinct solutions for many C4functions and adjustment steps (133). This is particularly apparent for the decarboxylation step in bundle sheath cells that can be realized by three different enzymatic functions: the plastidial NADP-malic enzyme (NADP-ME) (Figure 1a), the mitochondrial NAD malic enzyme (NAD-ME) (Figure 1b), the cytosolic PEP carboxykinase (PEPCK), or a combination of these enzymes (25,66,141). Besides the cell-specific upregulation of the C4core enzymes, the integration of the C4cycle into the biochemistry of the leaf also requires changes in the abundance of specific transporters and the regulation and kinetics of connected pathways. In NADP-ME species, malate transports not only carbon but also reductive power from the mesophyll to the bundle sheath cells, and this has consequences for the differential setup of the energy-providing photosystems in these cells. Rubisco as the starting point for the Calvin-Benson cycle and photorespiratory cycle is active only in the bundle sheath, and all other enzymes of these pathways must adjust to the two-cell situation in the C4leaf (Figure 1). Further down, sucrose and starch metabolism as well as nitrogen assimilation would also be affected (24). In many C4species, the mesophyll bears the larger part of the light reaction and the production of ATP and reducing equivalents. This has consequences for the redox balances between the two different cell types and the distribution of reactions between the two cell types, especially the ones needing a low reduction potential (178). The differences between the light-related activities of the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells are particularly apparent in NADP-ME species, where chloroplasts of the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells show distinct ratios of the photosystems and chloroplast ultrastructure (chloroplast dimorphism).
The requirements for the regulation of the members of the pathways listed above and the currently known mechanisms are described in the following paragraphs in more detail. The regulation of cell specificity and abundance of the main players of the C4core have been investigated quite extensively and have revealed control operating on epigenetic, transcriptional, posttranscriptional, translational, posttranslational, and protein-activity levels (Table 1) (147). Many C4regulatory mechanisms are shared between members of different pathways and revert to regulatory mechanisms also operating in C3plants (28). Genes encoding C4core enzymes have, for instance, gained light- and plastid-regulated elements, allowing coordination of the C4cycle with the connected pathways, such as the Calvin-Benson cycle. Under fluctuating environmental conditions, the efficiency of C4photosynthesis will also depend on the coordination of energy balance between the mesophyll and bundle sheath localized reactions (16).
Regulatory mechanism involved in different aspects of C4
Abbreviations: ARF, ADP-ribosylation factor; bHLH, basic helix-loop-helix; BS, bundle sheath; CA, carbonic anhydrase; CBC, Calvin-Benson cycle; DOF, DNA binding with One Finger; GDCP, glycine decarboxylase system P-protein; IAA, indole-3-acetic acid; IDD, INDETERMINATE DOMAIN; MEM, mesophyll-enhancing molecule; mRNA, messenger RNA; NAD-ME, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide malic enzyme; NADP-ME, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate malic enzyme; PEPC, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase; PPDK, pyruvate orthophosphate dikinase; PR, photorespiratory pathway; pTAC, tac-promoter; RbcSSU, Rubisco small subunit; SCR-like, SCARECROW-like; SCR/SHR, SCARECROW/SHORT ROOT; TF, transcription factor; TRM, tissue resident memory T; UTR, untranslated region.

All currently known elements required for the C4pathway have also been found in their ancestral C3relatives, and this might be one of the reasons why the C4cycle could evolve so many times and in such distant plant groups as, for instance, the grasses, the Asteraceae, and the Cleomaceae (155). However, the multiple cases of parallel but independent evolution are also surprising since the evolution of C4entails complex changes to the whole leaf biochemistry and architecture. In some branches of the plant kingdom, such as the Brassicaceae and the monocot clade containing the Bambusoideae, Ehrhartoideae, and Pooideae (BEP), C4species are absent (155). The evolution of the C4cycle is therefore dependent on the co-occurrence of external factors such as favorable climate conditions as well as internal factors such as genetic, architectural, and biochemical preconditions.
The repression of the photorespiratory oxygenase reaction in C4plants is particularly advantageous under high light and temperature but low CO2conditions (16). The drop in atmospheric CO2pressure starting around 30 Mya is therefore thought to represent an important ecological driver for the evolution of C4photosynthesis (53). More recent modeling approaches showed, however, that even under higher CO2concentration, arid conditions causing the closure of stomata could have promoted C4evolution (207). Under these conditions, nitrogen availability and allocation within the plant could have contributed to the evolution and expansion of C4plants (19,207). After the establishment of the C4pathway, C4grasses were also able to adapt to colder climate zones and new ecological niches (194).
The absence of C4species from wide parts of the plant kingdom, however, indicates that internal preconditions are also essential for the evolution of C4photosynthesis. So far, primarily architectural limitations concerning the site and metabolic potential of the bundle sheath cells have been identified as limiting factors (34). For species with advantageous anatomical preconditions, the implementation of a basic C4cycle could possibly be achieved by a few changes in the abundance and cell specificity of the core C4enzymes (113). The speciesAlloteropsis semialata, for instance, includes very closely related congeners with C3, C3-C4intermediates, and C4photosynthesis (112). However, for an efficient C4shuttle in a highly productive leaf, numerous small adjustments of whole leaf metabolism are necessary (77,133,153,198).
The complex trait of C4photosynthesis evolved not in a single step but via intermediate stages (77,112,153,198). Beyond anatomical changes, such as the amplification of organelle numbers and their positioning in bundle sheath cells, a key initial step involves a pronounced change in the distribution pattern of the glycine decarboxylating reaction in the photorespiratory pathway, from ubiquitous toward exclusive localization in the bundle sheath (125,145,146). The absence of a functional glycine decarboxylase system in the mesophyll would lead to an accumulation of photorespiratory glycine and the formation of a concentration gradient from mesophyll to bundle sheath, which drives transport of glycine to the bundle sheath. There, the enhanced activity of the decarboxylation step would generate an increased CO2concentration around the bundle sheath Rubisco (125). Plant species displaying such a glycine pump have been found in close phylogenetic proximity to C4species in the generaFlaveria(121),Heliotropium(128,184),Neurachne(37),Alloteropsis(112),Homolepis(92),Anticharis(91),Blepharis(61), andSalsoleae(163,187), but also in groups without any C4relatives (e.g.,Moricandia,Diplotaxis) (155). Species with an active glycine pump are often termed as C3-C4intermediates or C2photosynthesis species. Gas exchange measurements showed that the limited CO2concentrating effect generated by glycine decarboxylation in the bundle sheath results in a decreased CO2compensation point, which is below typical values for C3but above that of C4species in these intermediates (160,184). Furthermore, these intermediates were also characterized by increased organelle numbers and changes in the organization of the bundle sheath organelles.
A complete relocation of the glycine decarboxylase reaction to the bundle sheath cells requires additional adjustments within the metabolic network of the leaf. In the glycine decarboxylase reaction, two molecules of glycine are converted into one molecule each of serine, CO2, NH3, and NADH. Transport of photorespiratory glycine from the mesophyll to the bundle sheath will therefore transport not only net carbon, but also nitrogen and reducing equivalents. Balancing of the nitrogen metabolism between the two cell types will require back transport of nitrogen-containing metabolites. Computational modeling of C3-C4intermediate metabolism identified shuttles of glutamate/OAA, alanine/pyruvate, and aspartate/malate, as well as the associated enzyme activities as the most likely candidates for the mediation of nitrogen balance between the mesophyll and bundle sheath in these intermediate species (115). The predicted increases in the transport of these metabolites would therefore put pressure on reactions that are also involved in the C4pathways. Hence, the evolution of a glycine pump would push the metabolism between the mesophyll and bundle sheath toward a C4-like metabolite exchange. Any increase in the decarboxylation reaction in the bundle sheath and of PEPC activity in the mesophyll would enhance the metabolite exchange, and in the end the increase and optimization of the flux through this cycle would result in a C4pump (115). Thus, the evolution of the glycine pump opens the path toward the evolution of a bona fide C4cycle (50,115). The existence of species with an active glycine pump but without any C4relatives (e.g.,Moricandia,Mollugo), however, indicates that the intermediate stages can be stable evolutionary end points in their own right (35).
The evolution of a complete C4shuttle, even at a basic level, requires changes in the abundance and cell specificity of multiple genes. Most of the core C4enzymes are encoded by multigene families (11), but the expression patterns of the gene copies available in the different C3ancestral species could vary greatly, thus facilitating or constraining C4evolution (127). In monocot species, preferences for specific gene lineages of several C4enzymes could be observed, indicating their particular suitability for C4photosynthesis (33). Gene lineages co-opted into C4usually show already high expression levels in the C3ancestors (127). Gene duplication could have enabled the C4-favorable changes in some enzymes (7,21,55). The absence of a particular gene lineage in the C3background could, however, demand additional adjustments or alternative solutions for the fulfilment of a specific C4function (159). A recent analysis of the grass family showed that genes with new attributes could also be acquired by lateral gene transfer. InA. semialata, a C4-optimized PEPCK was acquired by a horizontal gene transfer from a distantly related C4grass (49).
After the installation of the core C4shuttle, efficient C4photosynthesis also depends on multiple adjustment steps in the C4leaf metabolism (77). The importance of numerous optimizations within the C4pathway is supported by the identification of multiple regulatory mechanisms on many different levels of the C4core shuttle and related pathways in advanced C4species (133) (see Section 3). A large-scale genome-wide scan for positive selection identified 88 sites connected to the evolution of C4photosynthesis inZea mays,Sorghum bicolor, andSetaria italica. Besides C4shuttle enzymes and transporters, positive selection sites were also found in genes of the Calvin-Benson cycle and photorespiratory pathway (82)—two pathways that are split between the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells in C4species. Additionally, new C4candidate genes connected, for instance, to architectural features could be identified (82). Changes in the expression patterns of C4genes could also often be connected to the recruitment ofciselements that are already present in the C3background (28,149). The timing in evolution of these C4development and optimization steps can thereby vary between the different lineages (198). Further support for the smooth transition from C3to C4comes from computational modeling (77), which described a Mount Fuji landscape consisting of numerous adjustments that could be fixed due to their contribution to plant fitness. Accumulation of C4-favorable mutations in a population could also allow for larger fitness gains via hybridization.
Relocation of the photorespiratory glycine decarboxylase activity exclusively to bundle sheath cells establishes the glycine-based CO2pump in C3-C4intermediates and represents a key step in the evolutionary path from C3to C4photosynthesis. Bundle sheath-specific localization of the P protein of the glycine decarboxylase system has been found in all C3-C4intermediates investigated so far, includingMoricandia arvensis,Moricandia nitens,Moricandia sinaica,Moricandia suffruticosa,Panicum milioides,Flaveria floridana,Flaveria linearis,Mollugo verticillata(84),Diplotaxis tenuifolia(180),Brassica gravinae(179),Euphorbia acuta(157),Portulaca cryptopetala(188),Heliotropium convolvulaceum,Heliotropium greggii(128),Homolepis aturensis,Steinchisma hians, andNeurachne minor(92). The mechanisms underpinning this decisive change in the expression pattern of a metabolic enzyme are therefore particularly interesting and have been studied in more detail in the generaMoricandia(2) andFlaveria(162).
InFlaveria, the C3ancestors possess two copies of the glycine decarboxylase P (GLDP) protein-encoding gene; one is ubiquitously expressed in the leaf tissue (GLDPB) and the other one exclusively in the bundle sheath (GLDPA) (162). A gradual decrease in expression and finally pseudogenization of the ubiquitously expressedGLDPBcopy during C4evolution eventually restricted glycine decarboxylase activity to bundle sheath-specific expression.
The genusMoricandiais closely related toArabidopsis, which possesses two copies of theGLDPgene. The promoter region of theAtGLDP1gene containscis-regulatory elements that govern expression in the mesophyll (M-box) and in the vasculature (V-box), respectively (1). Loss of the mesophyll element leads to a vein and bundle sheath-specific expression pattern of theAtGLDP1. The promoter of the secondAtGLDP2gene contains an M-box but no V-box. Loss of the M-box inAtGLDP1would still be compensated by the function ofAtGLDP2inArabidopsis(1). However, in the subgroup of the Brassicaceae containing multiple C3-C4evolutionary lineages in the generaMoricandia,Diplotaxis, andBrassica, theGLDP2gene copy was apparently lost (160). The promoter of the C3species in this Brassicaceae branch, e.g.,Moricandia moricandioides, still contains both regulatory elements (i.e., the V- and M-box), but the M-box element was lost from theGLDP1promoter of the C3-C4intermediate speciesM. nitensandM. arvensis, resulting in bundle sheath-specific localization of the corresponding protein (1,2).
These two examples show that in two phylogenetically distant plant families, C3relatives already contained a bundle sheath-specificcis-regulatory element in the promoter of theGLDPgene, thus facilitating the establishment of a glycine pump between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells in these lineages.
In the basic C3-C4intermediateM. arvensis, strong bundle sheath specificity is apparently limited to the glycine decarboxylase P-protein (145). Other enzymes, such as the other subunits of the glycine decarboxylase system and serine hydroxymethyl transferase, are still present in the mesophyll. Serine, as the end product of the glycine decarboxylase reaction, could therefore be transported back to the mesophyll for further metabolization. In fully optimized C4species, all of the Rubisco resides in the bundle sheath, and the glycine shuttle is completely replaced by the more efficient C4pump.
Photorespiratory 2PG generation in C4plants is relatively low and also limited to the bundle sheath. In fully developed C4species, transcripts and proteins of the photorespiratory pathway are predominantly or exclusively found in the bundle sheath fraction. The only exception to this pattern is the last enzyme of the pathway, glycerate kinase, which is confined to the mesophyll cells in C4species of all decarboxylation types (Figure 2) (47,182). Glycerate kinase catalyzes the conversion of glycerate to 3PGA and interconnects the photorespiratory pathway with the mesophyll part of the Calvin-Benson cycle. Due to the higher reductive power in the mesophyll cells, the reduction steps of the Calvin-Benson cycle are localized to the mesophyll cells connected to the bundle sheath part of the cycle by a 3PGA/trioseP shuttle (94,129).

Figure 2Click to view


In contrast to C3and most other C4species, the glycerate kinase protein of maize carries a small C-terminal extension that is only present in Andropogonae C4species. It includes two cysteine residues that must be reduced for the activation of the enzyme in a light-dependent manner (15). Besides maize, thiol-mediated regulation of glycerate kinase was also found in the NADP-ME species sorghum but not in the NADP-ME dicotFlaveria bidentis(15). In the mesophyll cells of Andropogonae NADP-ME monocots, glycerate might therefore also serve as a carbon pool in the darkened leaf. At dawn, the activation of glycerate kinase would lead to the conversion of glycerate to 3PGA and thereby contribute to the buildup of the concentration gradients that drive the Calvin-Benson cycle intercellular shuttle (15).
Although the photorespiratory pathway runs at much lower rates in C4compared to C3species, the enzymes of the photorespiratory pathway are still essential (108,205), and they need to be controlled in coordination with other pathways such as the Calvin-Benson cycle and nitrogen metabolism and need to adjust to the division of labor between the two cell types.
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) catalyzes the irreversible reaction between bicarbonate and PEP, forming OAA and inorganic Pi. Once a photorespiratory glycine pump has evolved, any increases in the activity of PEPC in the mesophyll cells would enforce the production of the typical C4metabolites and intensify the exchange of metabolites between the cells (77,115). This was convincingly demonstrated by increases in PEPC transcripts in leaves from differentFlaveriaspecies ranging from C3over different intermediate stages to the full C4pathway (56). C4leaves are generally characterized by very high activities of PEPC, and this activity is localized to the mesophyll cell cytosol. The abundance and cell specificity of the PEPC are particularly well-studied and have been found to happen on the epigenetic, transcriptional, and enzyme kinetic levels. Furthermore, PEPC and many other C4enzymes have co-opted regulatory mechanisms for the integration of their transcription into existing light- and plastid-regulated networks (28). Plant PEPCs are encoded by a small gene family, and certain gene copies have been preferred for integration into the C4pathway in the C4monocots (36). In the eudicots, two paralogous PEPC clades exist, and genes from both clades have been recruited to C4photosynthesis (151). Detailed sequence analyses showed that common sites of positive selection could be found in many of the C4PEPC genes, but that not all observed amino acid substitutions are essential for the C4pathway (151).
On the epigenetic level, PEPC expression is regulated by histone modifications and DNA methylation. High trimethylation of histone H3K4 confers increased transcription activity and has been associated specifically with regions in theC4-Pepcpromoter in the mesophyll cells of the C4speciesZ. mays,S. bicolor, andS. italica(78). Similar cell-specific histone codes could also be found in other C4cycle genes, a mesophyll-specific modification of CA (C4-Ca) and PPDK (C4-Ppdk), and a bundle sheath-specific modification of NADP-ME (C4-Me) and PEPCK (C4-Pepck) (78). Additionally, mesophyll-specific accumulation of PEPC-encoding transcripts could be correlated to methylation sites in the promoter in maize (105). Gene transcription is further regulated byciselements in the promoter that can be controlled by specific transcription factors. In the promoter region of the PEPC-encoding gene fromFlaveria trinervia, two regions mediating mesophyll-specific expression could be identified, and one of these regions could be narrowed to a mesophyll-enhancing module (MEM1), with the tetranucleotide CACT as the key element (72). InFlaveria bidentis, interacting zinc finger-homeodomain (ZF-HD) homeobox proteins binding to the PEPC promoter region were identified (200). In maize, the transcription factor DOF1 seems to promote PEPC transcription throughout the leaf, while DOF2 specifically represses PEPC transcription in the bundle sheath (202). Also in maize, a 600-bp-long promoter region is sufficient to drive strong and light-activated expression in the mesophyll cells (117). Two transcription factors with antagonistic effects interact with this promoter region in maize. ZmbHLH90 activates while ZmbHLH80 represses expression of the PEPC-encoding gene, and the differential expression of thesetrans-factors contributes to the cell specificity of PEPC accumulation in maize (69).
On the metabolic level, PEPC activity is controlled by the availability of its substrates, bicarbonate and PEP. PEP availability is controlled by PPDK activity but also the interconversion between PEP and 3PGA (10,45). Compared with C3PEPCs, enzymes from C4species require higher concentrations of the PEP substrate, and they are much less sensitive to inhibition by malate and aspartate (85), thus being adapted to the conditions in the C4mesophyll that contains high concentrations of PEP and malate or aspartate (56). The relaxation of the inhibitory effect of malate could be narrowed down to the exchange of a single amino acid. Close to the inhibitor binding site, C3species possess a bulky, positively charged arginine residue that is replaced by an uncharged and small glycine residue in C4species from very different plant groups, such as the dicotFlaveriaand the grasses maize, sugarcane, and sorghum (139). InFlaveriathe C4-specific changes in PEP saturation kinetics also could be associated with a specific, single amino acid exchange in the carboxyl terminal part of the enzyme (18). In C4Flaveriaspecies, PEPC shows a clear diurnal activity pattern in close coordination with the pattern for the PEPC kinase (4). The PEPC kinase itself is regulated on the transcriptional level and by protein synthesis/turnover (4).
CAs catalyze the conversion of CO2to bicarbonate and thus provide the substrate for the PEPC reaction. Members of the β-CA family therefore also show high activity in the cytosol of mesophyll cells of C4species. In C3plants, β-CAs are usually active in the plastids. Integration into the C4pathways is therefore dependent on increases in the activity as well as changes in localization toward the cytosol. InFlaveria, this is realized by the loss of the plastid targeting signal so that the C4-specific CA becomes expressed in the cytoplasm (111). InGynandropsis gynandra, C4-related CA activity was realized by a membrane-bound CA, indicating that a different ancestral CA isoform was recruited to C4inFlaveria(24,111). In C4monocot species such as maize, C4-related cytosolic CA activity was suggested to have evolved from ancestral plastidial forms by gene duplication, gene fusion, and changes in the chloroplast targeting signal (111). In addition, recruitment of CA into the C4pump was also accompanied by changes in the histone codes and integration into the light- and plastid-controlled signaling network. InFlaveria, mesophyll cell-specific expression was apparently realized by a structurally similar motif (MEM1) upstream of the transcription start site for CA and PEPC, indicating that high coordination for the presence of both initial C4enzymes is achieved inFlaveria(73). While a reduction of CA activity strongly reduced photosystem activity in C4Flaveria(185), even a 97% reduction of CA activity in maize resulted in a rather mild phenotype under ambient CO2conditions (172). Only under low CO2conditions that probably existed during C4evolution did the CA antisense maize display an appreciable growth phenotype (172).
PPDK provides the PEP for the PEPC reaction in the mesophyll cells of C4plants. The reaction is dependent on the provision of ATP and represents a rate-limiting step in the C4pathway (51). The ATP supply for the PPDK reaction is provided by enhanced cyclic electron flow in C4leaves (24,71). During the PPDK reaction, ATP is cleaved into AMP and PPi. The regeneration into ADP and Pi is realized by AMP kinase and pyrophosphorylase, respectively. In C3as well as C4species the PPDK gene produces a cytosolic and plastidial form by using two different promoters; the promoter for the shorter cytosolic is situated in the first intron of the longer plastidial transcript (166). In C4plants, the plastidial PPDK is upregulated in the mesophyll cells. In maize andFlaveria,cis-acting promoter elements promote mesophyll-specific expression of the PPDK (118,150). The sensitivity of PPDK to low temperatures was suggested as one explanation for the restriction of the majority of C4species to warmer climates. The chilling-tolerant C4speciesMiscanthus × giganteusdisplays significantly increased PPDK content and activity under low temperatures, thus stabilizing the C4pathway under these conditions (189). PPDK activity is controlled in a light-dependent manner by the PPDK regulatory protein (31). In maize, two copies of the PPDK regulatory protein with distinct function and cellular distribution exist. The bundle sheath-specific copy lacks PPDK-activating phosphotransferase activity, thus contributing to cell-specific PPDK activity (30).
For the transport of pyruvate into the mesophyll plastid, different mechanisms have been recruited into the C4cycle in different C4lineages. The majority of C4species use a BASS2/NHD/PPT transport system, which combines the exchange of pyruvate with sodium, sodium against protons, and phosphate against PEP (67). The Andropogonae, such as maize and sorghum, have been reported to exchange pyruvate for protons directly, without the involvement of a sodium gradient (8).
All C4lineages use CA, PEPC, and PPDK for the prefixation of atmospheric CO2. The following reactions in the C4cycle, however, can vary and are mainly connected to the preferential decarboxylation type in the bundle sheath. In NADP-ME species, the OAA produced in the PEPC reaction is converted to malate by the plastidial NADP-MDH; malate diffuses to the bundle sheath chloroplast where it is decarboxylated by the NADP-ME-producing pyruvate, which needs to diffuse back to the mesophyll cell for regeneration of PEP. In NAD-ME species, OAA is transaminated into aspartate by the aspartate aminotransferase (AspAT). The reaction usually takes place in the cytosol of the mesophyll cell, but transcript data fromG. gynandraindicate a mitochondrial localization of the enzyme (Figure 1b) (159,169). Aspartate diffuses to the bundle sheath where it enters the mitochondria and is transaminated back to OAA by the mitochondrial AspAT, followed by conversion into malate by the mitochondrial NAD-MDH. Malate is decarboxylated in the mitochondria by NAD-ME; the pyruvate generated in the reaction is transaminated to pyruvate by the alanine aminotransferase (AlaAT) into alanine. The transport of alanine back to the mesophyll cell rebalances the nitrogen metabolism between the cells and can be reconverted back by the AlaAT to pyruvate for the regeneration of PEP. In the PEPCK subtype, the transport metabolites malate and aspartate are generated in the mesophyll cell as described above. After diffusion into the bundle sheath, the aspartate is transaminated by the cytosolic AspAT into OAA, followed by decarboxylation by the cytosolic PEPCK into PEP. The reaction is accompanied by the conversion of ATP to ADP and Pi. PEP can be transported back directly to the mesophyll cell where it can be used directly by PEPC. In order to balance the nitrogen metabolism between the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, a second cycle is usually active in PEPCK species. Parallel to the aspartate, malate diffuses from the mesophyll to the bundle sheath cell where it is transported into the mitochondria for decarboxylation by NAD-ME. The produced pyruvate is transaminated by the AlaAT into alanine, which diffuses back into the mesophyll cell. Besides this combined PEPCK/NAD-ME system, considerable PEPCK activity has also been found in species with dominating NAD-ME or NADP-ME activity (141,169). In the NADP-ME species maize, the PEPCK-related shuttle caries 10–14% of the carbon into the bundle sheath (10), and for the dicot NADP-MEFlaveriaspecies, aspartate labeling of 30–40% has been estimated (122).
The transport of the shuttle metabolites between the mesophyll and bundle sheath cell depends on high metabolite concentrations to drive the diffusion. Estimations of the cell-specific metabolite pools in maize leaves yielded gradients in the expected directions with higher concentrations for malate, aspartate, and trioseP in the mesophyll cells and higher pools for alanine and 3PGA in the bundle sheath cells. Only for pyruvate did the estimated gradient not show the expected pattern. It is, however, possible that the buildup of the pyruvate gradient relies on subcellular compartmentation that was not accounted for in the analysis (10). The presence of multiple shuttles, such as the parallel malate and aspartate shuttles in maize, possibly increases the robustness of the C4shuttle because it permits the maintenance of photosynthesis at lower concentrations of each individual metabolite, especially under fluctuating environmental conditions (10,141).
The C4bundle sheath metabolism is largely influenced by the type and localization of the decarboxylating enzyme. The reasons for the recruitment of a particular decarboxylating enzyme into the C4metabolism of different lineages are not yet clear. It is possible that transcript abundance or enzyme kinetics played a role in the recruitment into C4(23). Comparisons of the physiology in grasses of the three different carboxylation types showed that NAD-ME species are more sensitive to low light conditions than NADP-ME and PEPCK species (170). NADP-ME species also seem to have higher nitrogen-use efficiencies than the other two subtypes (142). Modeling approaches indicated that light availability and distribution within the leaf could play important roles in the evolutionary choice of the decarboxylation type (19).
Individual C4lineages have acquired diverse control mechanisms for their decarboxylating enzymes. Sequence analysis of the NADP-ME encoding genes in two C4Flaveriaspecies (F. bidentis,F. trinervia) revealed different regulatory mechanisms for the closely related but independently evolved C4lineages (102). In maize and sorghum, the C4NADP-ME encoding genes seem to have acquired increased binding capacity for a specific bHLH transcription factor byciselement duplication (21). In maize, duplication of these C4-related bHLH transcription factors possibly contributed to the refined regulation of the enzyme (21). Additionally, NADP-ME was optimized for the C4environment by amino acid sequence modifications conferring changes in the catalytic activity, tetrameric structure, and pH-dependent inhibition by its substrate malate (7).
In the NAD-ME and PEPCK subtypes, aspartate and alanine are shuttled between the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, and depending on the contribution of PEPCK, this type of shuttle is also active in the NADP-ME species. Recruitment of the AspAT to C4metabolism was thereby connected to the biochemical subtype. A plastidial AspAT was enhanced in the NADP-ME species, while mitochondrial and cytosolic isoforms were increased in NAD-ME lines. Predominant PEPCK decarboxylation was accompanied only by high cytosolic AspAT abundance (159). For the AlaAT, a cytosolic copy was upregulated in the monocot species. Since the branch encoding cytosolic AlaAT in monocots is missing in eudicots, C4photosynthesis recruited a gene copy from a mitochondrial branch (159).
The organellar localization of many C4enzymes requires cell- and metabolite-specific transport activities for completion of the C4cycle, but not all of the transport steps of the responsible proteins have been identified (161). In maize, the DiT1 chloroplast transporter facilitating malate export showed higher abundance in the mesophyll cells, while the malate-importing DiT2 transporter was enhanced in the bundle sheath fraction (114).
CO2enrichment in the bundle sheath of C4species allows a high carboxylation efficiency of Rubisco, and C4leaves contain significantly lower amounts of Rubisco, as compared to C3species. C4Rubisco has a higher catalytic turnover, and due to the high CO2environment it can work with lower CO2binding affinity (165). The changes in the expression pattern of Rubisco in C4species require coordination of the transcription of the nucleus-encoded genes for small subunits and the chloroplast-encoded large subunit genes. In C3plants Rubisco expression is already strongly influenced by developmental and environmental factors, especially light (17,80). During very early stages of leaf development, genes for the Rubisco subunits are usually still expressed in both cell types. The subsequent restriction of Rubisco activity to the bundle sheath in C4species is then controlled on multiple, mainly posttranscriptional levels (17). In maize, cell-type-specific expression of therbcS-m3gene seems to be dependent on light signaling (143). A zinc finger protein (TRM1) is then involved in the mesophyll-specific repression of the ZmRbcSm3 protein (201). In C4dicots, such asAmaranthus hypochondriacusandF. bidentis, sequences in the untranslated regions of the genes (AhRbcS1andFbRbcS1) seem to be important for the stability of the corresponding mRNA in the mesophyll cells (137,138). The half-life of the plastid-encodedrbcLmRNA is generally connected to the presence of nucleus-encoded S1 domain RNA binding protein (RLSB), and during transition from C3to C4inFlaveriaspecies, they were strongly coregulated (203).
The enzymatic complement of the Calvin-Benson cycle is the same in C3and C4species, but in C4species the Calvin-Benson cycle is split between the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells. Enzymes of the fixation and ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate regeneration phase are preferentially found in the bundle sheath. Only the reduction of 3PGA to trioseP that is catalyzed by the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and the triose phosphate isomerase is preferentially localized to the mesophyll in all C4subtypes (114) (Figure 2). C4-specific modifications have also been detected in the Calvin-Benson cycle enzymes fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) and fructose 1,6-bisphosphate phosphatase (FBP) (82). In the maize leaf, two copies ofGAPDHexist, and whileGAPDH-Awas equally distributed between both cell types,GAPDH-Bpreferentially accumulated in the mesophyll cells (114). The differential accumulation of Calvin-Benson cycle enzymes has been shown at the protein levels by separation of mesophyll and bundle sheath chloroplasts (65) as well as on the transcript level by differential analysis of mesophyll and bundle sheath transcriptomes in leaves of the NADP-ME species maize (29,44,109,176),S. bicolor(47), andS. italica(86), and in the NAD-ME speciesPanicum virgatum(144) andG. gynandra(12). Division of the Calvin-Benson cycle between the two cell types also requires the enhanced operation of the trioseP transporter (TPT) across the chloroplast membrane. Its transcripts are upregulated in both cell types, and compared to C3species, the transporters show modifications in their kinetics (114,136).
Recently, an unbiased comparison of the Calvin-Benson cycle metabolite abundances in different C3and C4species clearly distinguished specific Calvin-Benson cycle metabolite patterns in the different photosynthesis types (9). The C4species had lower amounts of most Calvin-Benson cycle intermediates, especially ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. However, 3PGA and trioseP were enhanced in the C4leaves, especially in the monocot species, and this could be connected to the high demand of these metabolites for the buildup of the metabolite gradient between the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells that are driving the metabolite exchange by diffusion (9).
The flux trough the trioseP/3PGA shuttle is connected to the specific ATP/NADPH demand in the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells and could be subtype and lineage specific (129). In the NADP-ME species maize, NADPH in the mesophyll chloroplasts is needed for the reduction of OAA to malate. In the bundle sheath chloroplast, NADPH is released during oxidative decarboxylation of malate by NADP-ME. Demand for NADPH production is therefore low in bundle sheath cells of pure NADP-ME species (88). In the NADP-ME speciesFlaveria, the larger contribution of aspartate to the C4shuttle likely also requires some NADPH production by linear electron flow in the bundle sheath cells. In NAD-ME species, the C4shuttle is realized completely by aspartate, and the C4shuttle therefore does not contribute to the exchange of reducing power between the two cell types (122,129). In PEPCK-type C4metabolism, the ATP/NADPH demand does not increase considerably (129).
Energy and reducing equivalents are provided in the leaf by light-driven electron transport through the photosystems. The linear electron flow through photosystem I and photosystem II provides ATP and NADPH, and the cyclic electron flow around photosystem I and the NADH dehydrogenase-like complex (NDH) or the proton regulation pathway (PRG5-PRGL1) contributes to ATP production without accumulation of NADPH. The demand for different ratios of ATP/NADPH can be adjusted by control of electron transport through the two photosystems.
In NADP-ME species, high abundance of photosystem I and photosystem II in the mesophyll cells provides ATP and NADPH by linear electron transport. The bundle sheath chloroplasts, however, are specialized for cyclic electron transport around photosystem I, producing only ATP. Maize bundle sheath chloroplasts show high accumulation of photosystem I and the NDH complex, but low accumulation of photosystem II and a very low degree of thylakoid membrane appression (granal stacking) (65,98,173). The distribution of photosystem-related transcripts shows clear preference for photosystem II in the mesophyll cells. The electron flow from photosystem I to either the ferredoxin:NADP(H) oxidoreductase (FNR) in the linear electron transport chain or the flow back to the membrane complexes in the cyclic electron flow is mediated by ferredoxins (Fds) (70). In maize leaves, different forms of Fds are present in the different cell types, and FdI could be associated with linear electron flow in the mesophyll cells, while FdII seems to almost exclusively transfer electrons in cyclic flow (70).
In NAD-ME species, NADH produced by the decarboxylation of malate in the bundle sheath mitochondria is regenerated to NAD+by the reduction of OAA to malate in the same compartment. That is, no net transfer of redox power from mesophyll to bundle sheath cell occurs in this C4type. The chloroplasts in the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells contain both photosystems, indicating that both linear and cyclic electron transport are active. Thylakoid membrane appression is equally distributed between both cell types or even lower in the mesophyll cells (52). The photosystem-related transcripts are much more evenly distributed between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells in the examined NAD-ME species (Figure 1b).
Coordination of leaf development and metabolism, especially under fluctuating environmental conditions, is mediated via signaling networks depending on reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and protein redox status. In C4leaves, the ROS and redox status can differ considerably in the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, and cell-specific adjustments of these regulatory systems are needed (178). In the NADP-ME species maize, the mesophyll-specific localization of photosystem II complexes and the linear electron transport chain correlated with the accumulation of ROS detoxification systems in the mesophyll cells, including tocopherol biosynthesis, glutathione reductase, ascorbate peroxidase, dehydroascorbate reductase, and thiol peroxidases (65). Lower ROS production could also be responsible for the comparatively reduced DNA damage found in the DNA of bundle sheath cell organelles (100).
The ROS status is related to the redox status of thioredoxins (TRXs), a group of proteins that can transfer redox signals to target proteins by modification of cysteine residues. In the plastids, the reduction of TRX is mediated either by NADPH-Trx reductases (NTRCs) receiving reducing power from NADPH or via electron transport from reduced Fds through the Fdx-Trx reductases (FTRs), thereby receiving reducing power directly from photosynthesis. Both systems apparently interact in the regulation of enzymes of the central cellular metabolism. In maize leaves, most members of the TRX signaling system show preferential accumulation in the mesophyll cells (178). The bundle sheath cells, however, seem to be depleted of components from both TRX systems and other TRX-like proteins and glutathiones, including NTRCs, FTRs, and many TRXs (178).
The lack of many redox regulatory components in the bundle sheath cells is particularly puzzling because several redox-regulated Calvin-Benson cycle proteins are localized in the bundle sheath cells (131). GAPDH, phosphoribulokinase (PRK), FBPase, and SBPase are directly redox-activated by TRX, and further control of the Calvin-Benson cycle is mediated by the redox modulation of CP12 and Rubisco activase. More recently, all other enzymes of the Calvin-Benson cycle were identified as possible targets of TRX signaling, indicating that the fine-tuning of Calvin-Benson cycle control is much more complicated than described so far (123). Beside the Calvin-Benson cycle proteins, other bundle sheath-localized enzymes, such as ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase), a key enzyme for starch synthesis, are also regulated by the redox signaling system. In the bundle sheath cells of the NADP-ME species, the C4cycle would also require activity of the redox-regulated NADP-MDH in the bundle sheath chloroplast. It is so far unknown whether the regulatory mechanisms for these proteins are the same in C3and in the bundle sheath cells of NADP-ME C4species. Bundle sheath cells contain an m-type TRX that could be sufficient for enzyme activation in light; additionally, the TRX-like CDSP32 and ascorbate peroxidase may contribute to redox signaling in the bundle sheath cells (131,178).
The fine-tuning of the C4reactions in the CO2pump in the mesophyll cells and carbon reduction in the bundle sheath cells are particularly important under fluctuating environmental conditions (96). The rate of CO2fixation by PEPC must exceed the rate of the Rubisco reaction because a part of the CO2generated by decarboxylation in bundle sheath cells will leak out again and would need to be fixed in a second PEPC reaction, costing additional ATP for PEP regeneration. Environmental fluctuations, such as light and temperature changes, drought, or nitrogen availability, could also cause imbalances between the pathways (48). The integrations of the C4shuttle into the regulatory network of the underlying C3metabolism are achieved by recruitment of light-dependent and plastid-signal-mediated regulatory elements into the C4shuttle genes, including the transporters TPT, DCT, BASS2, NHD, and PPT as well as the enzymes CA, NAD-ME, AspAT, and pyrophosphorylase (28). More problematic could be short-term acclimation to rapid fluctuations of light intensity. Comparisons between C3and C4species under fluctuating light conditions showed that C4photosynthesis was more affected than C3under these conditions (97). Activation of the Calvin-Benson cycle enzymes upon transition from dark to light or from low to high light conditions is highly dependent on the redox signaling system (132), and it is currently unclear how rapid light activation of bundle sheath-localized enzymes works in C4species. Additionally, the pools of C4cycle intermediates must build up to allow the C4shuttle to work at sufficient turnover rates (181).
Because the concentrations of ATP, reducing equivalents, and other metabolites considerably differ between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, all cellular processes need to be adjusted. Cell-specific preferences have been found for the reaction of sucrose and starch synthesis, of tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA), and of nitrogen and sulfur fixation.
The Calvin-Benson cycle provides the substrate for the synthesis of sucrose and starch. Proteins and transcripts of the starch metabolism have all shown higher abundances in the bundle sheath, although under high CO2conditions starch accumulation was also observed in mesophyll cells of C4Panicum, indicating that mesophyll cells are in principle capable of accumulating transitory starch (177). Starch accumulation has also been observed in the bundle sheath of young leaves in many C3species, where it is thought to function as storage of energy and carbon for further growth (124). The ability to accumulate starch in the bundle sheath is supposed to be favorable for the evolution of C4photosynthesis. In the C4leaf, the Calvin-Benson cycle reactions producing the substrate for starch synthesis are localized in the bundle sheath. High concentrations of 3PGA in the bundle sheath would also allosterically activate the AGPase, one of the key enzymes for starch synthesis (68). Transcripts for sucrose metabolism are preferentially found in the mesophyll cells. TrioseP, the substrate for sucrose synthesis, is produced by the mesophyll-localized Calvin-Benson cycle reactions, but considerable parts of the trioseP must be returned to the bundle sheath for ribulose 1,5-biphosphate regeneration (106). Sucrose synthesis in the C4mesophyll cells should therefore be under tight control. Indeed, it was found that the affinity of maize FBPase for trioseP is one order of magnitude lower than in C3species, which contributes to allowing the buildup of the TrioseP concentration gradient (171). Differences between C3and C4grasses were recently also detected for sucrose transport from the bundle sheath into the veins. In contrast to the connection between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, the plasmodesmata density is low between bundle sheath and phloem cells, and it was suggested that the SWEET13 transporter contributes to the apoplastic transport of sucrose between these cell types (55).
In the NAD-ME and also PEPCK species, the C4cycle continually generates pyruvate that needs to be prevented from entering the TCA cycle (25). The mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex can be inhibited by reversible phosphorylation via the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) kinase. In NAD-ME species, expression of the PDH kinase is enhanced (25) and shows bundle sheath specificity inPanicum virgatumandG. gynandra, but this does not seem to be the case in the NADP-ME species. Labeling experiments showed very low leakage of C4metabolites into the respiratory metabolism in illuminated maize leaves (10).
Nitrogen metabolism of the leaf is closely connected to photorespiration in C3species. An increase in environmental CO2resulted in the expected reduction of photorespiration but also a reduction in nitrogen assimilation in C3(20). It is thus expected that in the C4leaf, nitrogen metabolism needs to be adjusted to the low photorespiratory rates. Assimilation of nitrate requires reducing power and enzymatic activities. Transcripts for nitrate reductase, nitrite reductase, and the Fd-GOGAT, as well as one copy of the GS1, are preferentially found in the mesophyll cells (65,126) (Figure 2), where photosynthetic linear electron transport provides the reducing power. A second copy of GS1 with similarly high expression levels but bundle sheath-specific accumulation was found in the tested C4species. Because photorespiration, albeit at a low rate, is present in the C4bundle sheath and the expression of the glycine decarboxylase system is restricted to this cell type, ammonium assimilation would be required in the bundle sheath to cope with ammonia release from photorespiration.
In contrast to nitrogen metabolism, the first steps of sulphate assimilation, including ATP sulphurylase, APS reductase, and sulphite reductase, take place in the bundle sheath cells of C4species (29,65,95). The sulphide is incorporated into cysteine and transported into the mesophyll cell for the synthesis of glutathione (65,195). The preference for sulphate reduction in the bundle sheath is not simple to explain since reducing power, especially in the NADP-ME species, is mainly supplied by the C4shuttle (195). The bundle sheath-specific localization of sulphur assimilation, however, might predate the evolution of C4, and bundle sheath specificity in the pathways has also been found in C3species such asArabidopsis(13). Bundle sheath-specific elements have recently been identified in the promoter of a low-affinity sulphur transporter (SULTR2;2) ofArabidopsis, and these elements were also active in the C4AsteraceaeF. bidentis, showing that bundle sheath cells even in C3species are more specialized than previously assumed and that existing bundle sheath expression systems can be integrated into C4species during evolution (93).
The evolution of the biochemical C4pathways is strongly connected to changes in the anatomy of the leaf (for a recent review, see164). The anatomy of the C4leaf provides the structural basis for separation of the PEPC and Rubsico fixation reactions while allowing for high fluxes of metabolite exchange. Variation exists also among the Kranz anatomy of different C4species regarding the number of bundle sheath layers around a vein, presence or absence of a mestome sheath, formation of a suberin layer, chloroplast positioning, and chloroplast dimorphism (164). Besides Kranz anatomy, specific forms of C4anatomy have been found in succulent species of the Chenopodiaceae where bands of mesophyll and bundle sheath cells are arranged around a central water storage and vein tissue (52). The leaves of single-cell C4species are characterized by very large cells with dimorphic plastids. These plastids harbor either primary or secondary CO2fixation reactions and are arranged at opposite cell sides or at the outer border of the cell versus the central compartment of the cell (186).
In the large majority of C4species, leaf anatomy is characterized by two concentric layers of mesophyll and bundle sheath cells around the leaf vasculature. This leads to high vein density and a stereotypical leaf architecture consisting of vein-bundle sheath cell-mesophyll cell-mesophyll cell-bundle sheath cell-vein (V-BS-M-M-BS-V). Hence, every mesophyll cell is in physical contact with a bundle sheath cell, an absolute requirement for the function of efficient C4biochemistry. In comparison to C3leaves, bundle sheath cells in C4species occupy a larger share of the leaf cross-sectional area, they contain more chloroplasts and other organelles, and their cell walls are often thickened. It has long been suggested that certain architectural preconditions are necessary in C3leaves for the evolution of C4biochemistry (156). Among the grasses, two large clades can be distinguished: the BEP (Bambusoideae, Ehrhartoideae, and Pooideae) and the PACMAD (Panicoideae, Arundinoideae, Chloridoideae, Micrairoideae, Aristidoideae and Danthonioideae) clade. While C4evolution had been frequent within the PACMAD clade, to our knowledge it is absent from the BEP clade. Large-scale analysis of leaf anatomy traits showed that high rates of C4evolution could be associated with a high proportion of bundle sheath tissue in the leaves resulting from short distances between the bundle sheath and a large cross-sectional area of bundle sheath cells (34). These results support the hypothesis that anatomic enablers can promote or prevent C4evolution in certain plant groups.
As shown above, C4biochemistry requires high fluxes of metabolites between the mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, including the C4-related carbon shuttle, the 3PGA/trioseP shuttle of the Calvin-Benson cycle, and translocation of glycerate from the photorespiratory pathway. Recent advances in the development of new clearing techniques together with three-dimensional immunolabeling confocal microscopy allowed detailed comparisons of the symplastic connectivity between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells in C3and C4grasses. Plasmodesmata density at the mesophyll-bundle sheath interface was up to nine times higher in C4grasses compared to C4leaves (41). This was due to increases in the number of plasmodesmata per pitfield area, as well as increased pitfield density at the interfaces in NADP-ME and PEPCK species. In NAD-ME grasses, plasmodesmata density was increased by larger pitfield area only (42). Also noticeable was the increased bundle sheath surface area to leaf area ratio in all C4leaves (42). Recent work with aSetaria viridisline displaying reduced PEPC activity showed increased stomata density between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, and it has been speculated that the plasmodesmata density is actually responsive to changes in the C4photosynthetic flux (6).
The key proteins involved in C4biochemistry could be identified due to their high activity and their high protein and transcript abundance in the leaf tissue. The identification of factors that control the C4specific architecture is much more difficult. Forward genetics screening resulted in only a handful of interesting mutants, indicating that the construction of C4anatomy is highly complex and possibly characterized by redundancy (103). In maize, two mutants with bundle sheath-specific defects could be identified. In thebsd1mutant, the G2 transcription factor is lost (76,104), and thebsd2mutant was affected in the assembly and stabilization of bundle sheath Rubisco (27,152). In thehigh chlorophyll fluorescence mutant 136(hcf136), disturbance in the stabilization of the photosystem II caused mesophyll-specific defects (39). In rice, mutants with increased vein density could be isolated. They displayed enhanced photosynthetic rates, but the molecular mechanisms behind the architectural changes were not identified (59).
Early anatomical studies had already recognized some similarities between the endodermis of the root and the bundle sheath of the leaf. C4-related features, such as high activities of decarboxylating enzymes, were also detected in the cells surrounding the vein in C3tobacco (81). The GRAS transcription factors SCARECROW (SCR) and SHORT ROOT (SHR) regulating the organization of the root endodermis were therefore tested for their possible involvement in the control in C4bundle sheath structure (63,103,168). Genes encoding both transcription factors are upregulated during vascular development in maize leaves (192), and mutation in theScrgene resulted in disturbed bundle sheath chloroplast development, vein disorientation, and reduced vein density in maize leaves (168). Recent work in maize, however, identified a second copy of theZmSCR1gene (ZmSCR1h), and analysis of the single and doubleZmscrmutants indicates a role of the transcription factor in mesophyll cell development (83).
Genome-wide transcriptome sequencing experiments were recently applied to the search for regulators of C4-specific anatomical features. In contrast to the genes for C4biochemistry, developmental regulators are expressed in low abundance and often only at specific stages and in specific cells. Their identification is therefore much more difficult than that of abundant enzymes in C4biochemistry. The transcriptome pattern along a developmental gradient (Supplemental Table 1) had been investigated in the NADP-ME speciesZ. mays(44,109,141,176,192,204) andFlaveria(101,115), as well as the NAD-ME speciesG. gynandra(12,99). Mesophyll- and bundle sheath-specific transcriptomes have been investigated in the NADP-ME grasses maize (29,44,109,176),S. bicolor(47), andS. italica(86) and the NAD-ME speciesP. virgatum(144) andG. gynandra(12). The transcript comparisons identified candidate regulators with transcript patterns associated with certain developmental stages, cell-type specific expression, or other C4-related processes.
InG. gynandra, the differentiation of enlarged bundle sheath cells in the mature leaf could be associated with changes in the transcript pattern of cell cycle genes. In comparison with the leaf development in the related C3speciesTarenaya hassleriana, the differentiation of mesophyll and bundle sheath cells was generally retarded in the C4leaf. An inhibitor of endoreduplication (GTL1) was expressed more highly at the later stages of leaf development in C4but not in C3species, indicating that endoreduplication was less suppressed in the mature leaf of C4species. In the same developmental stages, a bundle sheath-specific increase in nucleus size and increases in cells with high ploidy level could be detected in theG. gynandraleaf (99).
The most detailed data sets of leaf developmental transcriptome patterns exist for maize. Besides the developmental stages along the mature leaf, transcriptome patterns have also been studied in leaf primordia of foliar and husk leaves (192). In contrast to foliar leaves, husk leaves surrounding the female inflorescences are characterized by increased mesophyll cell numbers between the veins. All of these studies resulted in lists of genes, mainly transcription factors, with predicted function in the setup of Kranz anatomy. The overlap between the candidate lists from different experiments had been limited, but transcription factors with potential mesophyll- or bundle sheath-specific activity could be identified in multiple studies (Supplemental Table 2). From the list of Wang and colleagues (192), 60 transcription factors with possible positive regulatory function toward Kranz anatomy have been tested by transformation into rice, but none of these genes were individually sufficient to induce C4-like anatomy into rice (191). A large group of the candidate regulators had no phenotype; others affected the leaf hormone metabolism or perturbed the root/shoot development or cell formation (191). The most promising results have been obtained from overexpression of the maize G2-like (GLK) transcription factors in rice (193). GLK transcription factors also regulate chloroplast development in C3monocot and dicot species (12), but overexpression of theOsGLK1gene in rice influenced chloroplast development only at the young seedling stage (130). Constitutive expression of theZmGLKgenes in rice now induced chloroplast and mitochondria development in the cells surrounding the veins, but not in the mesophyll cells. The increased organelle volume was accompanied by an increased number of plasmodesmata between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells. The results show thattrans-regulation of several C4-like features is possible (193). Large-scale analysis of transcript patterns along early maize seedling development was recently used for the identification ofciselements in groups of coexpressed genes and the prediction of their interaction with coexpressed transcription factors (204). The engineering of C4pathways into C3species will largely depend on the ability to understand and implement the regulatory elements conferring C4-like leaf anatomy.




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany's Excellence Strategy EXC-2048/1, Project ID 390686111, and ERA-CAPS project C4BREED (WE 2231/20-1). We dedicate this review to the memory of Udo Gowik.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...

DownloadSupplemental Tables 1-2(PDF).

Literature Cited


