We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Proteins are intimately involved in executing and controlling virtually all cellular processes. To understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie plant phenotypes, it is essential to investigate protein expression, interactions, and modifications, to name a few. The proteome is highly dynamic in time and space, and a plethora of protein modifications, protein interactions, and network constellations are at play under specific conditions and developmental stages. Analysis of proteomes aims to characterize the entire protein complement of a particular cell type, tissue, or organism—a challenging task, given the dynamic nature of the proteome. Modern mass spectrometry–based proteomics technology can be used to address this complexity at a system-wide scale by the global identification and quantification of thousands of proteins. In this review, we present current methods and technologies employed in mass spectrometry–based proteomics and provide examples of dynamic changes in the plant proteome elucidated by proteomic approaches.
Article metrics loading...
Proteins are intimately involved in executing and controlling virtually all cellular processes. To understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie plant phenotypes, it is essential to investigate protein expression, interactions, and modifications, to name a few. The proteome is highly dynamic in time and space, and a plethora of protein modifications, protein interactions, and network constellations are at play under specific conditions and developmental stages. Analysis of proteomes aims to characterize the entire protein complement of a particular cell type, tissue, or organism—a challenging task, given the dynamic nature of the proteome. Modern mass spectrometry–based proteomics technology can be used to address this complexity at a system-wide scale by the global identification and quantification of thousands of proteins. In this review, we present current methods and technologies employed in mass spectrometry–based proteomics and provide examples of dynamic changes in the plant proteome elucidated by proteomic approaches.
The plant body represents a complex network of structurally different organs and tissue types with specialized functions. At the molecular level, plants, like other organisms, are built from cells, which serve as basic structural units. Each cell is composed of a mixture of biomolecules that, via their intricate interplay, enable all processes of life, such as growth, propagation, or response to stimuli, to name a few. The major molecular classes that govern these processes are nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and metabolites. DNA contains the genetic instructions that are necessary to create an organism. Information from the DNA level is copied to RNA intermediates, which, among other roles, function as templates for the production of proteins, the key functional entities of the cell. Alternative transcriptional start sites and posttranscriptional RNA processing, including splicing, give rise to different protein sequences from the same underlying gene, and a plethora of posttranslational protein modifications further diversify the properties of proteins (13) (Figure 1). Each step in this process constitutes a level of biological regulation and offers the opportunity to create functional diversity from a limited set of genes. The different protein products that are produced from a single gene in this way have been termed proteoforms (118). These molecules do not act in isolation: All of them create biological networks that are highly dynamic in time and space and enable the vast variety of cellular forms and functions that make up the phenotype of a plant organism.

Figure 1Click to view


To bring order in such networks, cells have evolved several layers of organization, including protein interactions (with DNA, RNA, proteins, or metabolites), protein complexes, biophysical phenomena such as phase transitions, or membrane-enclosed organelles. Proteins play major roles at all of these levels and, therefore, proteomic technologies today aim to measure proteins in all of these scenarios both qualitatively and quantitatively. Recent advances in the understanding of the proteome have been driven, to a large extent, by improvements in technology, notably chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry (MS) and associated informatics (150). Particular attractions of MS-based proteomics are that it does not require any specialized reagents (such as antibodies) for detection and that complex mixtures can be analyzed with high quantitative precision and dynamic range. With the ability to analyze thousands of proteins in a single experiment, proteomic technology has matured to a level where it can be routinely applied in any well-founded laboratory, akin to other molecular profiling techniques such as transcriptomics or ribosome profiling in the study of gene expression profiles. For a long time, researchers have argued that plant proteomics is much more complicated than, for example, mammalian proteomics. But as we discuss below, this gap is rapidly closing and may indeed disappear entirely over the next few years.
Proteomic workflows start with extracting proteins from plant tissues, and the selection of an efficient protein extraction method is essential for any successful proteomic experiment. Ideally, the method should reproducibly capture the most comprehensive collection of the proteome, and, at the same time, minimize the amount of substances that may interfere with the downstream analysis. There are several challenges that need addressing in the area of sample preparation, such as efficient tissue lysis or the extraction of membrane proteins. Particularly for plants, protein extraction methods have focused perhaps for too long on workflows compatible with two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE gel) optimized to avoid gel streaking and smearing to increase the number of detectable protein spots (146). As liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) outperforms 2-DE gels in almost all aspects today (proteome coverage, sensitivity, quantitative accuracy, etc.), attention in sample preparation is shifting to more comprehensive one-size-fits-all approaches.
Compared to animals or bacteria, plant cells have a relatively low protein-to-volume ratio since a large portion of the cell is made up of the cell wall and the vacuole (146). This means that larger quantities of starting material are generally required to obtain sufficient protein amounts. The two most commonly used methods to break up the rigid plant cell wall are the pulverization of plant material frozen in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle (low throughput) or by bead-beating technologies (medium throughput). Keeping the plant material in a frozen state during cell breakup also diminishes the degree of unwanted protein proteolysis and chemical protein modification that may occur during tissue disruption (146). Both the cell wall and vacuole contain high amounts of substances that can interfere with protein sample preparation. These include phenolic compounds, proteolytic and oxidative enzymes, terpenes, pigments, and carbohydrates. The composition of such primary and secondary metabolites in plant tissues is highly plant-specific and varies between not only species but also organs, age, and developmental stage (146). Adult green tissues, for example, contain high levels of secondary metabolites, while nucleic acids are more abundant in rapidly dividing meristematic cells.
Substances that can potentially interfere with protein solubilization, digestion into peptides, and cleanup before LC-MS/MS analysis need to be removed during the sample preparation workflow (61). This can be quite efficiently accomplished for a variety of different plant tissues by combining protein precipitation and metabolite extraction using trichloroacetic acid/acetone, phenol, or chloroform (36). A disadvantage of protein precipitation is the often encountered considerable loss of sample due to inefficient resolubilization of the protein pellet. Concomitantly, variability in the sample preparation process can also lead to difficulties in making quantitative comparisons. Recently, the above challenges have been largely overcome by the use of strong detergents or chaotropes for solubilizing proteins from cells or resolubilizing proteins after precipitation. Examples of methods originally developed for mammalian systems and adapted for plants include filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), protein suspension trapping (S-Trap), in-gel protein digestion (GeLC-MS), and single-pot-solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) (7,55,82,115,119,145,154). These methods all use detergents [sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 3-((3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio)-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), sodium deoxycholate (SDC)], chaotropes (urea, thiourea), reducing agents [dithiothreitol (DTT)], or combinations thereof with the aim to maximize protein solubilization (20). A particularly important step forward was the ability to use SDS. It is probably the most efficient protein solubilization and denaturation agent and makes even the notoriously difficult multipass transmembrane proteins accessible to proteome analysis. Working with SDS upstream of LC-MS/MS analysis has long been difficult because even traces of SDS can obscure peptide signals. The recently developed SP3 method elegantly solved that issue by precipitating proteins on beads and keeping SDS in solution using solvents of high organic content. The subsequent digestion of proteins on the beads also makes the method scalable to 96-well format (increasing throughput and reproducibility) and allows handling very small input amounts (increasing sensitivity) (55). SP3 digestion has been successfully applied toArabidopsisleaf tissues and has considerable future potential for many tissue types and plant species (82).
Once proteins are extracted, most of the proteomic sample preparation steps are identical for all organisms (Figure 2). This particularly concerns the digestion of proteins into peptides, peptide separation, enrichment of posttranslationally modified peptides, and online reversed-phase LC-MS/MS. We note here that while the analysis of mixtures of intact proteins (so-called top-down analysis) is increasingly explored, the prevailing approach today is the analysis of protease-digested proteomes (bottom-up analysis) (32). This is because intact proteins are difficult to separate by chromatography, and MS/tandem MS is far less sensitive for intact proteins than for peptides. For bottom-up analysis, protein extracts are digested with a protease of highly selective cleavage specificity, most frequently trypsin and Lys-C and combinations thereof. This generates peptide mixtures with a charge and length distribution well-suited for liquid chromatography separation and mass spectrometric analysis. As most species use most amino acids in similar proportions to build proteins, the peptide mixtures created in the proteomic workflow from different organisms behave similarly, and established protocols from the mammalian field can be readily applied to plant systems. Because peptide mixtures representing entire proteomes often overwhelm even the most modern LC-MS/MS systems, these mixtures are frequently off-line fractionated by liquid chromatography using a number of modalities (ion exchange or high-pH reversed-phase being the most common). Each fraction is then measured separately to increase the overall analytical peak capacity of the analytical system (9). Alternatively, long online-LC gradients or microflow LC systems with narrow peak width are increasingly popular to allow proteome analysis in a single shot (12). These advances have led to the ability to measure >100,000 peptides representing >10,000 proteins in a quantitative fashion in practically any tissue or species.

Figure 2Click to view


The global identification of diverse posttranslational modifications (PTMs) is another stronghold of MS-based proteomics because PTMs almost invariably change the mass of a peptide. However, because most modified peptides exist in substoichiometric amounts, comprehensive PTM analysis typically requires the enrichment of specific PTM subpopulations (83). Enrichment methods include antibody-based affinity enrichment [e.g.,AcLys,GlyGlyLys (21,136)], chemical derivatization [e.g.,O-GlcNAc modifications (63)], chelation [e.g., phospho-IMAC (133)], or PTM-specific enzymes for affinity enrichment or cleavage [e.g., Ubi-TUBES (62)]. Apart from well-established workflows leading to the identification of tens of thousands of phosphorylation (using IMAC or TiO2) or ubiquitylation sites (GlyGlyLys) and hundreds to thousands of acetylation sites (AcLys), there is a great need for the development of further efficient enrichment tools for the many less studied PTMs found in plants.
Peptide samples prepared by any of the steps covered above are eventually analyzed byLC-MS/MSto create peptide sequence–specific spectra from which the peptide and corresponding protein can be identified (see Section 2.3). We do not cover this aspect in detail here, but multiple good reviews are available on the subject. Briefly, the three prevailing data acquisition approaches are data-dependent acquisition (DDA), where the mass spectrometer picks the most abundant peptide signals for fragmentation at random; data-independent acquisition (DIA), where the goal is to capture all peptides and their fragment ions along the chromatographic timescale; and so-called targeted acquisition [including multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)], where the mass spectrometer is tuned to analyze a preselected set of relatively few peptides only (32). For DDA, the acquired tandem mass spectra (MS/MS spectra) are matched to theoretical fragment ion spectra of peptides generated by an in silico digested protein sequence database. For DIA, the experimental MS/MS spectra are matched to a prerecorded library of MS/MS spectra obtained in separate experiments for the same organism (32,97). Recently, these approaches have been refined to include the prediction of peptide retention times and fragment ion intensities using machine-learning algorithms, which boost both the number of peptide identifications as well as their quality (44). In the last step, the obtained qualitative and quantitative peptide information is aggregated to the protein level prior to further bioinformatics data analysis.
High-throughput proteomics as performed today would not be possible at all without the tremendous success of genomics and bioinformatics, which identify the protein-coding regions of potential genes. Any current proteomic approach relies on such sequence information because the recorded MS/MS spectra are matched to candidate peptide sequences for identification (see Section 2.2). In other words, the ability to perform proteomic studies on a particular (plant) organism relies on the availability and quality of annotated genome information. This requirement is the main reason why large-scale proteomic studies of plants have so far been restricted to a small number of well-studied model and reference species with well-curated and annotated genome information. However, this situation may change rapidly in the next few years. At the time of writing, the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) website lists 883 plants with complete or partially sequenced genomes (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/browse#!/overview/).
Compared to studying those of the animal kingdom, studying plant genomes has been challenging due to the large range of genome sizes and the prevalence of polyploidy and genome duplications. While the genome of the widely used model plantArabidopsisis diploid and only 125 MB (4), other plant species have much larger and more complex genomes. Examples include the crop plants bread wheat [Triticum aestivum, hexaploid, 16 GB (56)] or rapeseed [Brassica napus, tetraploid, 11 GB (18)]. Modern sequencing technology provides the necessary throughput to sequence such large genomes. However, the assembly of such vast and often repetitive data still remains difficult (80). Bread wheat, for example, encompasses three separate subgenomes (ABD) with a high number of repetitive elements (56). Following genome assembly, gene annotation pipelines use prediction tools to identify gene-coding regions and thus potential protein sequences (59). Albeit powerful, candidate gene models for proteins derived in this way need to be validated by other means. On this end, modern transcriptomics approaches such as RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) and ribosome sequencing (Ribo-Seq) have emerged as powerful tools for the rapid and comprehensive annotation of protein-coding genes, either in support of or even replacing traditional annotation pipelines (37). MS data are another essential component in the validation of gene expression because they confirm the actual existence of a protein rather than a transcript. In addition, searching MS/MS spectra against established or predicted protein sequences, sequence variants, or, in fact, six-frame translations of entire genomes or parts thereof can improve gene annotations further or identify genes missed by the computational or RNA-based methods (90). This area of proteomics, called proteogenomics, has already been successfully employed in plants and has the potential to markedly increase gene annotation efforts in plant species, thus paving the way for a broader use of proteomics in plant sciences (19,103,136).
Experience from proteomic investigations in animals and microorganisms has shown that quantitative proteome expression andPTMprofiling data are valuable informational resources, and increasing efforts are being made to provide comprehensive catalogs of the protein complement of the genomes of many diverse organisms (85). Such maps of proteomes are useful to investigate, for example, which genes exist as proteins, where these proteins are expressed in an organism, and in which approximate quantities they are expressed. However, proteome expression profiles do not necessarily provide direct biological or mechanistic insights into the function or functional context of the respective proteins.
Over the last 14 years, a rising number of deep proteome studies in plant species have laid the groundwork for proteome maps of the major plant organs (Figure 3a,b). Baerenfaller et al. (6) provided the first broad proteome study for the model plantArabidopsiswith six tissue-specific proteomes covering a total of 13,029 proteins. Recently, three studies reported proteome expression information for 23, 30, and 10Arabidopsistissues and developmental stages, respectively (7,78,153). Interestingly, all three studies quantified a broadly similar number of proteins (15,926; 18,210; and 15,514, respectively) with 12,736 proteins quantified in all studies despite differences in tissue selection and proteomic workflows. In combination, these studies provide protein-level evidence for more than 70% of all annotated protein-coding genes inArabidopsis. Small proteins that presumably produce few peptides amenable to MS detection, as well as genes with low transcript abundance or highly specific expression patterns, are still underrepresented in these global studies (6,7,78). Targeted analyses and enrichment of specific protein subtypes or proteins only expressed under particular circumstances will be necessary to eventually cover the entire proteome. Examples of comprehensive proteome profiling of other plant species include a proteome atlas of 23 maize tissues covering 17,862 protein groups (135). Another example is the proteome of the legume speciesMedicago truncatulain combination with its symbiontSinorhizobium meliloti. This work quantified 19,679 plant and 3,334 symbiont proteins across a selection of seven tissue stages (75). Other large proteome reference maps are available for bread wheat (15,779 proteins from 24 tissues) (30), tomato fruit (7,738 proteins) (124), and the woody perennial model plant poplar (11,689 proteins from four tissues) representing 25% of the anticipated poplar protein space (2).

Figure 3Click to view


Large-scale tissue proteome maps may be used to infer protein function on the basis of coexpression analysis. However, since tissues are typically composed of multiple cell types and most current proteome expression maps only represent the average of the constituent cell types in a tissue, the unique biological functions and properties of individual cell types are masked (69,73) (Figure 3c). Cell type–specific proteome studies are more challenging because of the substantial technical effort involved in isolating a sufficient quantity and quality of homogeneous cell populations from tissue structures (137). Work in this area has, therefore, mainly been confined to cells that are free structures (e.g., pollen) that can be easily extracted using macro- or micromanipulation of plant tissues or separated from protoplast mixtures after the enzymatic removal of the cell wall and connecting tissue matrix. Such cell types frequently serve as models for specific functions such as plant reproduction (pollen, egg cell), gas exchange (leaf epidermal cells), and nutrient uptake (root hair cells) (26).
Pollen proteomes comprise the largest selection of available cell type proteomic studies and have provided a rich resource for studying the molecular changes during pollen development and germination (155). Many of these do not technically cover the proteome of a single cell type but that of the pollen grain, encompassing vegetative and reproductive cells to a depth of more than 10,000 quantified proteins (78). Unlike pollen grains, plant egg cells are embedded in the surrounding tissue of the ovule and need to be isolated by micromanipulation. This limits the number of cells available for biochemical analysis and proteomic profiling and has thus far only been applied to comparatively large egg cells, such as in a study using rice that identified 2,138 proteins (1). Svozil et al. (123) used mechanical separation and sequential protoplast generation steps to study molecular differences of the ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS) in several leaf tissue layers. Glandular trichomes are epidermal outgrowths on the leaf surface and pose an interesting field of study for combined metabolomics and proteomic analyses due to their specialized secondary metabolism pathways as demonstrated in a study inCannabis sativathat identified more than 1,200 proteins in glandular head isolates (24). Petricka et al. (101), in an elegant study, expressed cell lineage–specific green fluorescent protein (GFP)-fusion proteins inArabidopsisroots and used fluorescence-activated single-cell sorting (FACS) after protoplast generation to obtain six distinct cell-type populations with a total of 1,995 identified unique proteins. Laser capture microdissection (LCM) selects specific cells or cell populations from frozen or fixed tissue sections under the microscope prior to harvesting them with a laser beam (27). Zhu et al. (156) used LCM to isolate epidermal and cortical cells from tomato roots and identified 1,313 and 744 proteins for each cell type, respectively. Collecting the necessary amount of input material, however, is often time consuming and requiresLC-MS/MSworkflow adjustments for sample preparation automation and limited input material. We note that many of the aforementioned reports are rather dated. In light of the advancements made in analytical technology, these systems should be revisited, as a much larger proteome coverage and/or sensitivity should be obtainable today. The latter was recently illustrated by Liang et al. (72) who successfully combined LCM with nanodroplet processing in one pot for trace samples (nanoPOTS) and identified, on average, 422 proteins from as few as 15 tomato fruit pericarp parenchyma cells. The field of single-cell type, and even single-cell, proteomics is still in its infancy but is a rapidly growing area with significant improvements made over recent years (25). We expect it to provide a powerful tool for the detailed study of molecular mechanisms in various cell types and organisms in the future.
Protein functions are closely connected to their localization within the plant cell, and mapping the subcellular proteome has long been a major interest in plant proteomics (3) (Figure 3d,e). Traditional methods to study the proteome composition of organelles and subcellular structures exploit density, size, or surface properties. More recently, proximity tagging of the protein subpopulation surrounding a target protein has substantially added to the repertoire of methods for this purpose (84,148). Organelle isolation techniques need to facilitate the efficient enrichment of the specific organelle type and removal of any contaminating structures at the same time, making sample preparation quality the limiting factor in defining distinct organelle subproteomes. Detailed methods for subcellular fractionation of the more abundant, easy-to-isolate, and homogeneous compartments have enabled subproteome characterization of plastids, mitochondria, and nuclei (11,45,105). Organelle substructures such as the nucleolus, chloroplast membranes, and plasmodesmata have also been investigated (39,98,117). Studying the transient protein complement of intracellular membrane systems including the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and plasma membrane is far more challenging because the density of these compartments is quite similar. A method to address compartments that are not amenable to efficient isolation is protein correlation profiling. The idea behind this approach is the systematic quantification of proteins in consecutive fractions of, for example, gradient centrifugation preparations. If any group of proteins show the same distribution of quantity across the fractions (and as available marker proteins), they may indeed be constituents of the same subcellular structure. Dunkley et al. (31) applied such a method, called localization of organelle proteins by isotope tagging (LOPIT), to discriminate proteins localized to the Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum, plasma membrane, or mitochondria and plastids inArabidopsiscallus samples. Since then, LOPIT has been further refined to make use of the multiplexing capacity of stable isotope labeling, notably tandem mass tags (TMT), in the methods hyperLOPIT and LOPIT-DC (42). As mentioned above, given the developments in MS technology in recent years, subcellular proteome studies of plant tissues should be revisited to make use of the improved sensitivity and measurement speed that are available today. When combined with tried and tested biochemical methods, such screening efforts should very significantly improve the number of plant proteins that can be annotated for cellular localization.
Due to its importance, the plastid proteome is among the best-characterized plant organelles (3). The manual curation of more than 150 published proteomic studies assembled 1,564 and 1,559 proteins as the reference plastid proteomes of maize andArabidopsis, respectively, and more than 3,000 proteins have been linked to the plastid compartment in theArabidopsisSubcellular Localization Database (SUBA) (https://suba.live/) (50,53). Fuchs et al. (40) estimated the protein composition within a single average mitochondrion and found that about half of the total protein content is involved in adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production and transport. Despite the outstanding importance of the nucleus, comparatively few comprehensive nuclear proteomes of plants have been reported to date. A study using FACS-sorted G1, S, and G2 phase nuclei identified 803 proteins in barley (102), and, more recently, Goto et al. (45) used sequential extraction buffers to map the protein complement ofArabidopsisnuclei. As expected, published plasma membrane proteomic studies show a high enrichment for signaling proteins and transporters (120). Measurement of Golgi membranes isolated by floating centrifugation followed by free-flow electrophoresis separation provided a catalog of 2,030 proteins, of which 230 have known functions in cell wall synthesis and metabolism (93). Several proteomic studies showed a high overlap in the proteomes of different plant peroxisome subtypes (96). Pan et al. (96) therefore proposed a uniform description of these subtypes as peroxisomes instead of glyoxysomes (seed, germinating seedlings) or gerontosomes (senescent tissues). Plant vacuoles can occupy up to 90% of the cell lumen and mainly function as lytic or storage compartments. Schulze et al. (112) investigated vacuole transport processes by measuring the protein abundance of 778 tonoplast proteins inArabidopsisleaves in response to cold acclimation. Very few proteomic studies have specifically addressed the cytosol, and fewer than 2,000 proteins have so far been assigned to this compartment on the basis of MS evidence in theArabidopsisSUBA database. Since the cell wall lies outside the plasma membrane, it is technically a part of the extracellular space together with the intercellular space and the apoplastic fluid, all of which are involved in cell recognition and stress response (47). Calderan-Rodrigues et al. (17) performed a comparative study of the cell wall proteomes of three monocot species and identified 1,159 proteins. A compilation of plant cell wall proteomic studies is available on the WallProtDB website (http://www.polebio.lrsv.ups-tlse.fr/WallProtDB/index.php) (110). Several proteomic studies on apoplastic fluid and phloem sap found a high presence of signaling and defense proteins in contrast to xylem sap, which contains a high proportion of proteins involved in vasculature maintenance (104).
Protein localization within the cell is not always static, and many proteins are translocated from the place of synthesis to their target organelles or shuttle between different compartments as part of signaling events. Changes in posttranslational modifications or protein interactions or conformation, for example, can modulate localization signals under different conditions (8). Protein translocation can also be mediated by means of transit peptide sequences that target proteins to a specific location or alternative pathways. These transit peptide sequences can be used to computationally predict the subcellular localization of proteins and have been described for proteins of the secretory pathway as well as for proteins localized to chloroplasts, mitochondria, or the nucleus (10,16,34).
Cell–cell communication in plants is governed by different hormones, including small polypeptides that function in plant development, growth, and stress response (22). Signaling peptides are mainly produced as precursor proteins with a target sequence for entry into the secretory pathway (15). Proteolytic cleavage, often in combination with posttranslational modifications, then produce the mature peptides that interact with plasma membrane–localized receptor-like kinases (RLKs) for signaling pathway activation (15). Signaling peptides are classified into two main groups: posttranslationally modified peptides of usually 5 to 20 amino acids and cysteine-rich polypeptides of about 50 amino acids (15). Some of these signaling peptides have been shown to travel long distances between plant tissues, such as a root-derived CLV/ESR-related glycopeptide, CLE-RS2, in lotus that induces a signaling response in the shoot (92). As a whole, the plant peptidome is quite difficult to characterize due to the short sequences, posttranslational modifications, and often unspecific cleavage patterns, all of which can impair the identification of such peptides using current database search algorithms (15). Wang et al. (141) recently used molecular cutoff filters and in silico six-frame-translated sequence databases to screen for nonconventional peptides in maize andArabidopsisand identified 1,993 and 1,860 potential peptide species, respectively.
Simple study designs merely provide a snapshot of the proteome in time and space. This may be a particular developmental stage of the plant at the time of sampling or a particular organ, tissue, or cell type at physiological steady-state conditions. However, the proteome is in constant flux. Internal growth programs, external stimuli, or a combination of both lead to changes in the proteome along different timescales. Monitoring such fluctuations can provide insights into the molecular mechanisms and complex signaling cascades that underlie phenotypic changes.
In a typical flowering plant life cycle, meiosis followed by mitotic division in the flower organs generates the female megagametophyte and the male microgametophyte (Figure 4a). Double fertilization produces the diploid embryo and triploid endosperm that serve as nutritive tissue to support the embryo after dispersion from the parent. During the vegetative growth stage, the embryo develops into the mature sporophyte. After the switch to reproductive growth, the flower organs develop and the cycle begins anew (134). Specialized organs and tissues develop throughout the life cycle, grow, and finally undergo senescence and die. Organs grow by increasing cell numbers by cell division as well as by increasing the volume of differentiated cells, mostly by water uptake into the vacuole. This combination of cell division and cell expansion regulates organ size and shape and has been studied in detail for plant leaves (86). Omidbakhshfard et al. (94) monitored the proteome on six consecutive days in the third true leaf ofArabidopsisseedlings and found a clear switch between early proliferating and later expansion stages. The observed protein changes showed correlation with changes at the transcriptome level but were frequently delayed due to the lag time associated with translation or posttranslational regulatory mechanisms. With progressing senescence, the composition of the proteome changes in addition to the decrease in total protein content such that chlorophyll and starch biosynthesis decrease and defense-associated and catabolic process–associated proteins increase in abundance (125).

Figure 4Click to view


External signals such as day length and temperature induce the development of floral organs (157). Protein profiling of different flower stages provides a gradual picture of the changing proportion of individual flower parts as well as developmental changes within those organs (79). Devani et al. (28) screened for developmental changes in the proteome of male and femaleCoccinia grandisflower buds. This dioecious system allows a separate investigation of male and female flower components without extensive tissue dissection. Tomato is a commonly used model system for fleshy fruit development and ripening. Szymanski et al. (124) investigated the proteomic changes in two tomato fruit tissues over five developmental time points and showed a progression from biomass accumulation to ripening for both tissue types. In a study in apple, the combination of proteomics and metabolomics linked protein expression changes with the production of important fruit quality marker metabolites (71). The switch from quiescent status to rapid growth during seed germination encompasses the mobilization of storage reserves and an extensive remodeling of the seed proteome (126). Interestingly, early seed development turned out to be largely independent of transcription, since stored messenger RNAs (mRNAs) allow for an instant start of protein biosynthesis in response to favorable environmental conditions (111). In a proteome study in rice, Han et al. (48) described 852 proteins with significant changes in expression levels between 6 and 48 h after seed imbibition. Cells undergo repeated cycles of cell divisions and progress from pluripotent meristem cells into differentiated cell types. The study of temporal changes at the cellular or subcellular level, however, is presently difficult due to the comparatively fast time frame (hours) and technical limitations in sufficient sample preparation quantity and quality for MS-based proteomics of single cells (see Section 3.1).
Plants maintain homeostasis and adapt their growth in response to environmental changes including fluctuations in temperature, water, nutrients, and light (65). Growth responses can range in time frames from minutes (e.g., stomatal closure in response to drought) to years (e.g., shade avoidance of trees). Photoperiod perception throughout the year triggers specific growth responses to prepare plants for predictable environmental changes in geographic regions with seasonal changes. On a shorter timescale, day length affects the dynamics and organization of plant metabolism to balance carbon allocation and leads to increased growth rates under long photoperiods (122). Seaton et al. (113) screened the proteome inArabidopsisleaves grown under four different photoperiods and found 1,781 proteins with significantly changed abundance due to changes in the night-day cycle. The diurnal regulation of cellular processes leads to repetitive temporal fluctuations of transcript, protein,PTM, and metabolite levels (128). Proteomic studies in such dynamic systems provide a more accurate overview of protein dynamics than transcriptomic studies do, since posttranscriptional and posttranslational regulation cause asynchronous or delayed abundance peaks between transcripts and their corresponding proteins (128).
Since plants are sessile, they have developed sophisticated mechanisms to cope with environmental conditions that deviate from optimal growth requirements (Figure 4b). These adaptations to the local environment include escape (e.g., seasonal timing), avoidance (e.g., water storage reservoirs), and resistance or tolerance strategies (e.g., tissue adaptations) (130). Proteomic studies have addressed how stress affects subcellular compartments, such as the plant cell wall and apoplast, as the major sites for signaling during stress response or in mitochondria as the key location of respiration (116). Drought leads to decreased water uptake by roots, resulting in a number of profound changes at the molecular and physiological levels including stomata closure and disturbance in carbon assimilation (65). Recent proteomic studies identified significant changes in the reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging system and lignin and fatty acid synthesis in a drought-tolerant maize variety and stress-treated tea plants (46,151). Salvato et al. (109) used isolated nuclei to screen for changes in the abundance of transcription factors upon drought stress in sugarcane leaves. A detailed investigation of protein homeostasis inArabidopsisplants also showed different effects of drought stress in various subcellular compartments (51). Heat stress leads to an enhanced risk of protein misfolding, upregulation of heat shock proteins, and inhibition of photosynthesis (52). More than 500 heat-responsive proteins involved in photosynthesis and signaling have been identified in proteomic studies from several plant species (143). Echevarría-Zomeño et al. (33) investigated the proteome dynamics during heat acclimation to elucidate factors that target a plant for survival or death in response to heat. Acclimation-responsive proteins were associated with ROS regulation and protein translation, while commitment to cell death was linked to changes in secondary metabolism and defense (33). Conversely, cold stress affects membrane fluidics and enzyme activity. Plants typically respond with the synthesis of osmolytic molecules and protective proteins such as LATE EMBRYOGENESIS ABUNDANT (LEA) proteins, ANTIFREEZE PROTEINS (AFPs), and COLD SHOCK PROTEINS (CSPs) as well as remodeling of the plasma membrane (29). Miki et al. (81) recently identified plasma membrane proteins involved in short- and long-term cold acclimation, supporting the central role of the membrane system in cold stress response.
Salt stress also leads to a perturbation of the osmolytic balance in plant cells and causes water stress, excessive ion uptake, and nutritional imbalance (5). Ten years ago, a review listed more than 2,000 salt-responsive proteins from proteomic studies in various organ types from 34 plant species (152). A recent study by Tang et al. (127) reported upregulation of sucrose and volatile aromatic metabolism proteins as well as increased fruit firmness. Investigation of both transcript- and protein-level changes upon salt treatment showed concomitant effects on pathways such as phosphatidylinositol signaling, tryptophan metabolism, protein degradation, and pathogen response (99). Other proteins involved in photosynthesis exhibited opposite changes, hinting at posttranslational regulatory effects (99). Flooding diminishes gas exchange and light availability, causing energy and carbohydrate deficits in submerged plant tissues (41). Proteomic analysis of submergence treatment of wheat seeds showed specific effects on starch and sucrose metabolism compared to drought and salinity (147). Among the major agricultural crops, soybean is particularly sensitive to flooding, and a number of proteomic studies have investigated the molecular mechanisms associated with flood and flood tolerance in soybean roots (142).
Biotic stress is caused by pests and pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, nematodes, insects, and other herbivores (Figure 4b). Plants have developed complex mechanisms to identify and counter these attacks (107). Proteomic and metabolomic studies showed that plant response mechanisms, such as, for example, photosynthesis regulation, differ depending on the feeding style of the pathogen (131). By contrast, increased ROS and phytohormone signaling is a common mechanism in plant defense. Exosomes are extracellular vesicles with functions in intercellular signaling and pathogen response. Rutter & Innes (106) found increased exosome secretion in response to infection withPseudomonas syringae, while the protein content of exosomes from treated and untreatedArabidopsisplants did not change. Ogden et al. (91) recently investigated the added effect of tobacco mosaic virus transmitted through whitefly feeding on tomato leaves and detected additional virus effects at later stages of infection. A proteomic study usingArabidopsiswild-type and autophagy mutant roots infected with the fungal pathogenVerticillium dahliaefound an impact of autophagy throughout the defense process, including repression of elicitor peptides and receptors, ROS signaling, and cell wall modifications in the mutant plants (138). In addition, signaling peptides play a strong role in mediating plant defense reactions and harbor great potential for increased understanding of plant immunity signaling (see Section 3.4).
Maintaining protein homeostasis is a central task of a cell in order to maintain physiology. Protein turnover describes the net result of protein synthesis and its degradation, including the constant recycling of the cellular protein pool to maintain steady-state conditions (88) (Figure 4c). Proteins can have very different half-lives (minutes to months), and protein abundance can be regulated through changes in synthesis rate, degradation rate, or both. The amount of a protein in a cell is strongly correlated with the underlying mRNA abundance, but other factors, such as codon usage as an indicator of translation efficiency, also play an important role (60). Protein degradation is mostly mediated by targeting proteins to the proteasome via the UPS or the lytic compartment (64,114). A combination of protein localization and protein modifications as well as interaction with proteins and cofactors influences protein stability (89).
Studying global protein turnover dynamics in plants is not trivial but has recently been strongly facilitated by the use of stable isotope labeling to enable time-resolved quantitative measurement in the increase or decline of isotopic labeled protein populations (54). Turnover studies in animal cell culture systems frequently employ metabolic stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), where a cell population is grown in medium containing heavy amino acids that are gradually incorporated into all cellular proteins (95). Plants are autotrophic and thus independent of external amino acid sources. As a result, SILAC often leads to suboptimal labeling efficiencies. While Lewandowska et al. (70) achieved acceptable labeling efficiency (95%) in 23-day-old seedlings germinated and grown in SILAC medium, this system is not suited for processes occurring along much faster time lines. Other labeling methods used in plant systems include supply with13CO2(57),2H2O,18O (149), or15NH4+/15NO3−salts (38). The downside of using labeled small molecules over amino acids is that each protein incorporates a different number of such isotopes, also leading to a different number of stable isotopes in each peptide. This, in turn, complicates data analysis. SILAC does not suffer from this challenge, but any label incorporation into the amino acid metabolism in plant systems can be slow, thus posing a challenge for data interpretation of fast label chase studies (57). Fan et al. (38) measured 1,762 proteins from soluble, organellar, and microsomalArabidopsisroot tissue fractions using15NH4/15NO3labeling and were able to assign half-lives to 251. For some proteins, such as the ATP synthase β subunits, turnover rates were comparable in the different fractions. Conversely, β-GLUCOSIDASE 23 was measured with a longer half-life in the soluble fraction (55 h) compared to the organelle and microsomal fractions (35 h, 33 h). To deal with the issue of slow label incorporation due to amino acid recycling in plant tissues, the authors developed a special algorithm (ProteinTurnover) to calculate meaningful protein half-lives from measured peptide isotope distributions (38) (Figure 4d). Nelson et al. (87) used15N labeling to measure turnover rates of 508 proteins in barley leaves with a particular focus on chloroplast pathways and protein complexes. The shortest half-lives were predicted for THIAMINE THIAZOLE SYNTHASE 1 (THI1) and the magnesium-chelatase GENOMES UNCOUPLED 5 (GUN5) with 1.8 and 1.9 h, respectively. In general, cell wall–associated proteins showed the slowest turnover rate, while pigment and cofactor biosynthesis enzymes showed the fastest rate. More recently, the technique was also applied to study the turnover of the rather long-lived (3–5 days) cytosolic 80S ribosome components inArabidopsis(108).
PTMsalter chemical properties of the nascent polypeptide chain through the introduction of functional chemical groups, carbohydrates, lipids, or even the covalent attachment of small protein modifiers (83) (Figure 5a). This provides a molecular toolbox to the cell to expand the functional repertoire of protein-coding genes. It also provides a means for the fast and dynamic regulation of molecular processes. PTMs can influence protein function via changes in activity, protein interactions, localization, or stability. MS-based proteomics allows for the global and system-wide characterization of protein modifications because PTMs cause a defined mass shift that can be measured with great accuracy by MS (23). This allows both the identification and localization of the respective modification. The Plant PTM Viewer (https://www.psb.ugent.be/webtools/ptm-viewer/) provides an overview of experimentally detected PTMs and metadata information from studies from five plant species (Arabidopsis thaliana,Chlamydomonas reinhardtii,Oryza sativassp.japonica,T. aestivum,Zea mays) (144). The repository currently covers 24 PTM types and lists 437,318 PTMs for 103,975 proteins. About three-quarters of the PTM sites are phosphorylation sites (326,848 sites/89,022 proteins), followed by lysine acetylation (21,235 sites/10,518 proteins), lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (19,256 sites/4,554 proteins), and lysine ubiquitylation (15,912 sites/7,560 proteins).

Figure 5Click to view


While technical advances in sample preparation, MS, and proteomics informatics routinely allow the identification and quantification of thousands of protein modification sites, their functional characterization lags far behind. Site mutations are often used to investigate biological effects of specific PTMs. However, these studies require substantial experimental effort and are not always conclusive. A promising strategy to elucidate phosphorylation site functions is to monitor phosphoproteome changes in response to specific treatments. Wang et al. (140) performed a large-scale phosphoproteomic analysis using abscisic acid (ABA)-treatedArabidopsisseedlings and identified a total of 37,387 phosphorylation sites. They specifically focused on changes in PYR1-LIKE PROTEIN (PYL) ABA receptor family phosphorylation and identified TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN (TOR) kinase as the modulating enzyme. In addition to the lack of functional annotations for most PTM sites, there is also often little if any information regarding the upstream modifying enzymes. Sequence motifs are frequently used to predict or group PTM sites, such as phosphorylation sites (129). Given the sparse knowledge about kinase target specificity in plants, this approach to match respective enzyme-substrate pairs is currently very limited. Still, in an effort to characterize kinase-substrate relationships, a recent study employed in vitro phosphorylation of native peptide mixtures and 12 stress-responsive kinases to map more than 5,000 such candidates (139). In another approach, He et al. (49) applied a deubiquitylase inhibitor to screen for ubiquitylated proteins involved in rice seed germination and identified significant changes in 1,419 out of 2,576 detected ubiquitylation sites. In the future, more knockout mutants of modifying enzymes (e.g., kinases and phosphatases for phosphorylation, F-box proteins and deubiquitinases for ubiquitylation, acetyltransferases and deacetylases for acetylation) or time-resolved enzyme-inhibitor or protein-degrader studies will be necessary in order to improve our understanding of enzyme-substrate relationships and to place the large set of functionally orphan modification sites into a biological context. The interplay between multiple PTM types and their co-occurrence on the same protein molecule are additional areas that need to be addressed more comprehensively in the future (83).
Protein–protein interactions assemble single proteins into molecular machineries, complexes, and dynamic signaling networks. Together with the proteoform variation introduced by PTMs, the flexible network of protein interaction options allows a limited number of genes to fulfill the diverse array of molecular functions throughout the plant life cycle. Interactome studies employ techniques such as yeast two-hybrid screening, affinity-purification MS, fluorescence imaging, computational tools, or coexpression profiling to establish binary connections and complex network topologies (121). Like the proteome itself, protein networks are not static but react dynamically in response to developmental changes or external stimuli. In contrast to binary test methods that screen a predefined range of protein partners, MS-based techniques allow a more unbiased investigation of potential interacting proteins (14). Gemperline et al. (43) used affinity purification of flag-tagged proteasome complex proteins and identified a range of potential new interactors involved in particle assembly, activity, and/or regulation. Stable protein complexes are particularly amenable to detection via affinity-purification MS. Transient interactions such as enzyme-substrate reactions are, however, far more difficult to detect and require careful optimization of the biochemical workflow or alternative experimental techniques (Figure 5b). Mair et al. (74), for example, used proximity labeling to screen for interactors of the transcription factor FAMA. Protein complex composition and dynamics are also studied using protein correlation profiling (66). Here, native protein complexes are separated based on size on a gel or liquid chromatography system. The protein complements in consecutive fractions are subsequently measured by MS, and proteins with matching elution profiles are assigned to the same complex (76,78). The resolution of the elution profiles determines how well complexes with similar molecular weights can be differentiated. To rule out coincidental coelution, McWhite et al. (77) performed complex profiling in 13 different plant species and 2 complementary biochemical fractionation methods. After ortholog mapping and application of a probabilistic scoring model, they provided confident data for many known complexes including the proteasome, chaperonin, and ribosome as well as several new interaction assemblies involved in vernalization regulation and pathogen defense (77).
This guilt-by-association concept is also applied in coexpression analysis to identify proteins involved in the same biological pathway or complex. Shared regulation of protein levels across different tissues, developmental states, or treatment conditions indicates a similar functional role of the coexpressed genes. However, this method of hypothesis generation does not universally apply because correlations do not necessarily imply causality, leading to the need to verify interactions by other means. Together,PTMsand protein interactions expand the proteome functionality, making it greater than the sum of its parts. A nice example for the diverse interplay of protein complexes, transient interactions, and PTMs is the regulatory network of plant hormone perception that relies on phosphorylation signaling cascades (e.g., ABA, brassinosteroid, ethylene) or hormone-dependent protein degradation through the UPS (e.g., auxin, jasmonic acid, strigolactone) (Figure 5c).
Protein functions and their interactions and activity depend on the protein sequence and the resulting physiochemical properties, structural motifs, and the three-dimensional conformation (67). A comparative overview of multiple physiochemical and secondary structural parameters for six plant species is available in the Plant-PrAS database (http://plant-pras.riken.jp/) (68). To investigate protein fold stability and to gain insights into biophysical properties of proteins, Volkening et al. (132) performed thermal proteome profiling and assessed the melting behavior of more than 1,700Arabidopsisproteins. Comparative thermal profiling across different parts of the tree of life showed correlation of melting stability with optimal growth temperature and included 3,074 proteins from the plant speciesArabidopsis(58). Another method to generate structural protein fingerprints and investigate, for example, protein–small molecule interactions is limited proteolysis (100). The underlying concept is that structurally less-well-defined regions of a protein are more amenable to proteolysis than protein parts in folded domains. These differences can be measured by monitoring the quantities of peptides of protease-treated or untreated proteomes. Akin to what is increasingly done in mammalian drug discovery, both thermal proteome profiling and limited proteolysis can also be employed to elucidate the molecular targets of herbicides. Parts of a protein's structure can be sensitive to changes in cellular states. The intrinsically disordered LEA proteins, for example, are associated with desiccation tolerance in plant seeds. Applying proteomic approaches to probe the structural properties of proteins may further help to investigate unresolved topics such as the mechanism of phase separation and the formation of membraneless cellular compartments (35).
Over the past decade, proteomic technology has matured to an extent that it can be considered part of the collection of mainstream technologies for the study of complex biological systems. As a result, proteomics is also increasingly used in plants. Perhaps the most outstanding value of MS-based proteomics for the plant sciences is that it overcomes the need to create antibodies against proteins and modification sites. It is currently inconceivable that antibody reagents will ever become available for plants to the extent that they are available for human proteins. MS-based proteomics offers global as well as targeted analysis options that are scalable from a single protein or peptide to >10,000 proteins in a single sample. The sensitivity of MS is also superior to most antibody detection systems and does not require more material than western blotting or gel electrophoresis. Advances in sample preparation automation and MS instrument speed now also support high-throughput experiments within reasonable time frames. In turn, the systematic screening of plant proteomes in the near future can be realistically envisaged. This may include comparative analysis of different plant species, populations, or cells of the same species at steady state or under dynamic biological, pathological, or chemical perturbations. Such differential analyses are necessary to take our understanding of system-wide molecular mechanisms to the next level (Figure 6). While the future of plant proteomics looks very bright, particular challenges that need to be tackled in order to make full use of the capabilities of the technology lie in the annotation of genomes for protein-coding regions. Data sharing and data mining infrastructure also have to be put in place to harness the full potential of proteomic data collected from plants. Access toLC-MS/MSinstrumentation also needs improvement in many places. Here we note that while the cost of equipment is substantial, other expenses incurred for proteomic experiments are actually very low. As a result, proteome analysis is already highly competitive with most genomic or transcriptomic profiling methods and, indeed, more cost effective than even traditional methods such as 1-DE/2-DE gelor western blotting that require expensive dyes or antibodies for detecting a small number of proteins. When capturing the strong synergies provided by economy of scale, there is no reason why plant proteomics should not become mainstream in the near future. Because of the outstanding importance of plants for human society and the planet, there are countless scientific and economic arguments supporting a push toward substantially increased efforts in plant research in general and plant proteomics in particular.

Figure 6Click to view




B.K. is cofounder and shareholder of OmicScouts and MSAID, which operate in the field of proteomics. He has no operational role in either company.
Work by the authors was funded in part by the German Science Foundation (DFG, SFB924).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


