We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
For millennia, humans have used plants for food, raw materials, and medicines, but only within the past two centuries have we begun to connect particular plant metabolites with specific properties and utilities. Since the utility of classical molecular genetics beyond model species is limited, the vast specialized metabolic systems present in the Earth's flora remain largely unstudied. With an explosion in genomics resources and a rapidly expanding toolbox over the past decade, exploration of plant specialized metabolism in nonmodel species is becoming more feasible than ever before. We review the state-of-the-art tools that have enabled this rapid progress. We present recent examples of de novo biosynthetic pathway discovery that employ various innovative approaches. We also draw attention to the higher-order organization of plant specialized metabolism at subcellular, cellular, tissue, interorgan, and interspecies levels, which will have important implications for the future design of comprehensive metabolic engineering strategies.
Article metrics loading...
For millennia, humans have used plants for food, raw materials, and medicines, but only within the past two centuries have we begun to connect particular plant metabolites with specific properties and utilities. Since the utility of classical molecular genetics beyond model species is limited, the vast specialized metabolic systems present in the Earth's flora remain largely unstudied. With an explosion in genomics resources and a rapidly expanding toolbox over the past decade, exploration of plant specialized metabolism in nonmodel species is becoming more feasible than ever before. We review the state-of-the-art tools that have enabled this rapid progress. We present recent examples of de novo biosynthetic pathway discovery that employ various innovative approaches. We also draw attention to the higher-order organization of plant specialized metabolism at subcellular, cellular, tissue, interorgan, and interspecies levels, which will have important implications for the future design of comprehensive metabolic engineering strategies.
The early establishment and subsequent radiation of plant life on land were among the most significant developments in the geological history of Earth (78). To survive harsh terrestrial environments and defend against coevolving animals and microorganisms, land plants opted for a unique adaptive strategy by greatly expanding their metabolic systems, which led to the production of a myriad of chemicals not present in their aquatic ancestors. The continuous evolution of these so-called specialized metabolites in land plants is so extensive that metabolic profiles vary significantly even between closely related species. In this review, we define specialized metabolites as those that are not essential for survival but enhance the reproductive success of the host organism under specific environmental conditions. Specialized metabolism has played a paramount role in land plants’ colonization of nearly all types of terrestrial habitats on planet Earth.
For millennia, humans have tapped intoplant specialized metabolismfor food, raw materials, and traditional herbal medicines (97). In the past two centuries, the arrival of modern science and technology has revealed the chemical nature of a growing list of plant specialized metabolites, which in turn has expanded their utilities. For example, plant natural products have been pivotal in developing modern medicines to fight cancer, bacterial infections, parasites, and more (111). Emergingsynthetic biologyapproaches have opened new avenues to produce high-value plant natural products in alternative chassis organisms (117). Plant specialized metabolism will continue to serve as an important source of basic scientific discoveries as well as technological innovations that advance human health, renewable energy, and sustainable green chemistry.
This review is intended to acquaint readers with recent developments in the field of plant specialized metabolism; some historical aspects and background information are also provided for novices to the field. We discuss the emerging tools that have greatly facilitated the rapid progress in plant specialized metabolism research. We present examples of de novo biosynthetic pathway elucidation that employ innovative approaches. Finally, we draw attention to the higher-order organization of metabolic systems in native plant hosts, which is key to the plants’ ability to achieve remarkable throughput in producing certain metabolites.
Since prehistoric times, humans have discovered plants with specific medicinal properties to combat maladies. Around the world, these traditional treatments were passed down through oral traditions and/or compiled into medical texts by ancient physicians. For instance, the classical Chinese medical textPrescriptions for Emergencies, authored by Ge Hong (283–343ce), documented the treatment of fever by cold water extract of sweet wormwood (Artemisia annua). This 1,600-year-old text later inspired the discovery of the antimalarial medicine artemisinin from sweet wormwood by Youyou Tu (165) in the 1970s, which saved millions of lives and also earned her the 2015 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Although the efficacy of mosttraditional herbal remedieshas not been verified through stringent modern-day clinical trials, these traditions were formed on the basis of very long term trials on real human patients, some of which have already demonstrated enormous value for development of new medicines (97).
With the recognition that discrete plant natural products are linked to specific biological activities, much effort in the twentieth century has been devoted to the field of phytochemistry (123). A great deal of knowledge about plant chemistry has been accumulated through the general workflow of compound isolation followed by small-molecule structural elucidation. Drug screening using these isolated plant natural products also led to the development of a number of important clinical drugs (111). One prominent example is paclitaxel, which is a phenolic terpene initially isolated from the bark of the Pacific yew tree (Taxus brevifolia) (168). Paclitaxel is widely used as a highly effective, broad-spectrum first-line chemotherapy medication, but is also one of the most expensive drugs to manufacture. The initial practice of purifying low quantities of paclitaxel from yew bark quickly became unsustainable (108). Although academic labs had demonstrated total synthesis of paclitaxel by the 1990s (62,63,113), the reported synthetic schemes were prohibitively costly to scale up for industrial production. An alternative semisynthetic approach was subsequently adopted to produce paclitaxel from 10-deacetylbaccatin, a relatively abundant precursor compound extractable from the needles of European yew (Taxus baccata). This semisynthetic approach was recently superseded by aTaxuscell culture system, which enabled paclitaxel production without the need for raw materials from yew trees. The paclitaxel story is a triumph of modern medicine, but it also illustrates several common bottlenecks that have limited the clinical potential of many otherwise highly promising plant natural products: low purification efficiency and yield, slow-growing or even endangered source plants, infeasible total synthesis, and lack of flexibility to explore additional structural analogs (63,113).
A biosynthetic approach toward access to valuable plant natural products holds tremendous promise to resolve the abovementioned bottlenecks. However, most plant natural product biosynthetic pathways remain unresolved, and de novo elucidation of unknown biosynthetic pathways in plants is no easy task. In the early twentieth century, pioneers in the field explored the uncharted biosynthetic routes for several major classes of plant specialized metabolites, mostly through classical radiolabeled tracing experiments and activity-guided enzyme purification from the host plant followed by kinetic characterization (9,21,31,42,70). Starting in the 1980s, the adoption of several model plants (e.g.,Arabidopsis, rice, maize) with the power of molecular genetics has led to tremendous progress in uncovering the genetic basis of various specialized metabolic pathways, some of which, including pathways for lignin, flavonoids, and carotenoids, turned out to be conserved throughout land plants (13,37,159). Others are restricted to certain taxa but are represented by specific model plants, such as the pathways for benzoxazinoids, thalianol, and glucosinolates (48,50,151). However, the molecular genetics approach cannot be readily applied to the study of nonmodel plants, leaving the lion's share of plant chemodiversity embodied by the entirety of Earth's flora essentially untapped. Over the past decade, this barrier has been significantly lowered thanks to burgeoning techniques from the fields of next-generation sequencing, analytical chemistry, systems biology, and synthetic biology. Along with greatly extended and accelerated discoveries of specialized metabolic systems in diverse nonmodel plants, metabolic engineering using knowledge learned from these systems has begun to realize the vision of accessing high-value plant natural products through total biosynthesis (100,104,137).
Specialized metabolism branches from various precursors in primary metabolism (174). Major classes of plant specialized metabolites discussed in this review include phenylpropanoids, terpenoids, alkaloids, and peptides (Figure 1). Enormous diversity of structure and function exists within each class, and additional chemical diversity can be achieved by joining structural moieties from two or more of these classes (e.g., paclitaxel is a terpene alkaloid with phenylpropanoid acyl moieties).

Figure 1Click to view


Phenylpropanoid metabolism comprises a major branch of plant specialized metabolism derived from phenylalanine. In addition to the dazzling array of low-molecular-weight phenylpropanoids known to date, some phenylpropanoids polymerize to yield important plant phenolic polymers, such as lignin and condensed tannin. Many plant-specific enzymes have evolved to produce unique phenylpropanoidscaffolds(57). For example, type III polyketide synthases (PKSs) iteratively condense malonyl-CoA and CoA-thioesters of hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives to produce various phenylpropanoid backbone structures, such as flavonoid and curcuminoid scaffolds (47,84,87). These phenolic polyketide scaffolds are then further diversified by many additional tailoring enzymes. For instance, icariin, a natural phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitor found in theEpimediumgenus, is a glycosylated, methylated, and prenylated flavonol (36). Lignans and coumarins are two other important classes of phenylpropanoids. Whereas lignans are dimers of monolignols, coumarins are derived from lactonization ofortho-hydroxylatedcis-hydroxycinnamic acid (34,131,167). Finally, phenylpropanoids may themselves be appended to other small-molecule scaffolds by enzymes such as BAHD acyltransferases or serine-carboxypeptidase-like enzymes (148,183).
Terpenoids are a structurally diverse class of lipids. Terpenoids are initially formed by synthesizing the isomeric five-carbon dimethylallylpyrophosphate (DMAPP) or isopentenylpyrophosphate (IPP), which are ubiquitous primary metabolites. In plants, both DMAPP and IPP are produced by two evolutionarily distinct pathways: the mevalonic acid (MVA) pathway and the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway (157). The MVA pathway is thought to be localized to the cytosol, although there is some evidence that it may be peroxisomal (144). In contrast, the MEP pathway is localized to plastids (38,139). DMAPP and IPP are then condensed into long, linear prenyl diphosphate chains by a variety of prenyl transferases. The lengths of the prenyl chains come in multiples of five carbons, depending on the number of isoprenoid units. For example, geranyl diphosphate produces C10 terpenes, farnesyl diphosphate produces C15 sesquiterpenes, geranylgeranyl diphosphate produces C20 diterpenes, geranylfarnesyl diphosphate produces C25 sesterterpenes, and so forth. The linear prenyl diphosphates are then converted into a variety of cyclic or acyclic terpenes by terpene synthases.
Terpenes likely represent the richest diversity of scaffold structures among all known plant metabolites. This diversity is produced by the divergent active sites of terpene synthases, which guide the cyclization of linear precursors into a huge array of ring structures (178). A significant example is the diterpene taxadiene, which is produced from geranylgeranyl diphosphate by taxadiene synthase and serves as the precursor for taxol biosynthesis (102). Linear terpenes without diphosphates may also be cyclized. Perhaps most notably, oxidosqualene cyclases use 2,3-oxidosqualene as the precursor to produce diverse triterpene backbones, including sterols such as lanosterol and cycloartenol (155,179).
Alkaloids are natural products containing nitrogen. They are typically derived from amino acids or nucleotides and adopt highly variable structures. Important examples of alkaloids include tryptophan-derived monoterpenoid indole alkaloids or bisindole alkaloids (BIAs) and arginine-derived tropane alkaloids (121,128,152). Nucleotide-derived alkaloids are also important—the most notable is caffeine. Caffeine is derived from guanine and is arguably the most widely consumed psychoactive plant natural product in the world (46).
Nitrogen is a limiting resource for plant growth. As such, plants that engage in symbiotic relationships with nitrogen-fixing bacteria appear to have relaxed constraints on the amount and diversity of alkaloids they produce. Legumes, which form symbioses with N2-fixing bacteria, produce a number of interesting alkaloids, such as pyrrolizidine alkaloids (175,176). Nitrogen limitation may be an important consideration when choosing chassis organisms for engineering alkaloid production.
Peptide natural products are small molecules composed of amino acids linked primarily by amide bonds, which are categorized separately from alkaloids by convention. Moreover, peptide natural products are distinct from proteins in that they are often posttranslationally modified in ways that are different from those observed for proteins. In recent years, peptides have been increasingly appreciated as signaling molecules in plants, and a few structural classes have also been recognized for medicinal properties (118). In general, peptide natural products are either ribosomally synthesized or biosynthesized by nonribosomal peptide synthetases followed by extensive modifications (132). All plant peptides studied thus far are ribosomally synthesized and posttranslationally modified peptides (RiPPs). Important examples of plant RiPPs include lyciumins, cyclotides, and orbitides (20,53,80,140).
Many other structural types of plant metabolites exist that may not fall into the classes discussed above. For example, fatty acid–derived oxylipins serve as defense and signal compounds in plants (56). Modified fatty acids are also found as monomeric components of the protective polymers cutin, suberin, and sporopollenin or deposited onto plant surfaces as wax (101). Some plant fatty acid–derived lipids, such as acetylenic lipids, were reported to contain anticancer and antifungal activities (71). A few known plant metabolites are halogenated. Halogenation is common among bacterial and marine natural products but is rare in plants. Acutumine is a chloroalkaloid found inMenispermumthat has been reported to inhibit T cell proliferation (160,184). Additionally, chlorinated auxin derivatives have been identified in numerous legume species (158). In these cases, halogenation may originate from the metabolic activities of microbial symbionts. This is indeed the case for maytansine, a macrolide isolated from plants of the genusMaytenus, which is biosynthesized by root-associated bacteria and accumulated in plant roots (89).
Sulfur-containing metabolites have also been identified in plants. Plants of theTagetesgenus exude thiophenes from their roots that act as potent antibacterials (35). Another fatty acid–derived thiophene-containing metabolite, arctinone A, is produced in edible burdock (71). Thiarubrine A is a heterocyclic organosulfur-containing molecule derived from fatty acids that displays antibiotic activity and is produced by plants of theAspiliagenus (138).
Over the past decade, innovations in the fields of genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, analytical chemistry, andsynthetic biologyhave generated many new tools at the disposal of modern-day biologists. Collectively, these tools have made de novo biosynthetic pathway discovery in nonmodel species much more feasible than ever before (162). In this section, we review the tools that have had a transformative impact onplant specialized metabolismresearch in recent years.
With one or a group of structurally related plant natural products in mind, researchers typically first hypothesize putative biosynthetic pathway(s) starting from feasible primary metabolite precursors and, through a series of chemical transformations, arriving at the final product(s). Researchers then try to identify the genes encoding enzymes that catalyze the predicted chemical transformations. Next-generation sequencing technology represents a major inroad toward pathway discovery. Massively parallel RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) can be used to generate de novo transcriptomes of the producer plants, from which comprehensive gene lists can be derived. If necessary, reference-quality genome sequences of the producer plant can also be obtained with relative ease using new technologies such as PacBio's single-molecule, real-time sequencing technology (135) and 10× Genomics’ linked-read sequencing technology (120), followed by de novo genome assembly.
With an extensive gene list in hand, researchers select candidate genes on the basis of their biosynthetic proposal(s) (also discussed in Section 3). Candidate enzymes can be produced heterologously in a variety of microbial hosts, includingEscherichia coli,Pichia pastoris, andSaccharomyces cerevisiae, for in vitro and in vivo functional characterization (117). Functional testing of plant biosynthetic genes has recently been facilitated by the development of theNicotiana benthamianatransient expression system (141).N. benthamianais a close relative of tobacco. The leaves ofN. benthamianacan be conveniently infected by syringe infiltration with a culture ofAgrobacteriumthat harbors binary vectors designed to transiently express candidate genes of interest in the leaf tissue (Figure 2) (141). This technology has been instrumental to plant biochemists for several reasons. First,N. benthamianaprovides a cellular context that is more similar to the native host plant than are other microbial hosts for heterologous expression (133). This increases the likelihood that the encoded protein is properly folded and targeted to the correct subcellular compartment.N. benthamiananaturally possesses many precursor substrates and cofactors that may be useful for reconstituting the tested enzymatic activity. Second, candidate gene expression is rapid—expression peaks around 5 days postinfiltration, which is significantly shorter than the turnaround time for generating stable transgenic plants. Third,Agrobacteriumcultures can be combined to express multiple genes and coinfiltrated with any substrates that may not be naturally present inN. benthamiana. This has enabled pooled testing, in which many candidates can be combined into a single experiment. If the pooled candidates produce the product of interest, the gene list can be further narrowed to identify the minimal gene set required to produce the final product (28). Coexpression of multiple genes has also enabled the reconstitution of an entire biosynthetic pathway in a single, rapid experiment (130).

Figure 2Click to view


To complement the gain-of-function experiment enabled by theN. benthamianatransient expression system, plant biochemists have adopted the virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) method (105). In VIGS, the RNA-based antiviral defense of a plant is used to target the knockdown of an endogenous gene (Figure 2). VIGS has been used to demonstrate the necessity of enzymes in various natural product biosynthetic pathways in diverse nonmodel plants, including the morphine andvincaalkaloid biosynthetic pathways (26,51,99,127,142).
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS)has become the most commonly used analytical method to identify potential biosynthetic intermediates in the host plant and to characterize candidate enzyme activities. Although LC-MS technology has existed for decades, recent developments have produced substantially more sensitive, precise and versatile instruments, which greatly enhance our ability to identify and quantify low-abundance compounds even from very complex mixtures. High-resolution MS has also largely replaced the need for radioisotopic labeling. Instead, plants can be fed with stable isotopic precursors, and the isotopes carried by the derived metabolic products can be monitored by high-resolution LC-MS to help delineate unknown pathways and form sensible biosynthetic proposals (29,171).
Historically, it has been very challenging to gain structural information of small molecules by MS data alone. However, recent advances in both MS hardware (e.g., greatly improved resolution and the new MSnfragmentation capability) and data analysis software now facilitate MS-based small-molecule structure elucidation. Computational fragment analysis algorithms, such as SIRIUS (40), have greatly improved the quality of molecular formula and putative structure prediction from MS spectral data (40). Moreover, several public metabolomics spectral databases have been established over the past few years, which allow researchers to upload, search, and compare MS data sets (54,58,170). Complementing MS-based analyses, NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) spectroscopy is an essential tried-and-true method for structure elucidation in plant metabolism research. Recent developments in NMR hardware, such as new cryoprobes and stronger 1–1.2-GHz magnetic field NMRs, have resulted in substantial enhancements of the sensitivity and resolution of NMR experiments, which will likely aid NMR-based metabolomics in the future (81,128). Ongoing efforts also seek to integrate LC-MS and NMR into a single pipeline for rapid structure elucidation, thus combining the strengths of these two technologies (12). Solid-state NMR technology has also advanced with the development of high-resolution magic-angle spinning (HRMAS) NMR. In HRMAS NMR experiments, the sample is rapidly rotated along an axis oriented at the so-called magic angle with respect to the direction of the magnetic field, which dramatically increases data resolution (60). HRMAS NMR has been useful for structural elucidation of plant biopolymers such as sporopollenin and cell wall polysaccharides (96,172).
In addition to NMR, the elucidation of the exact stereochemistry of natural products at extremely low quantities has been facilitated by new developments in the field of analytical chemistry. For instance, the crystalline sponge method bypasses the need for analyte crystallization by using a preformed porous crystalline metal-organic framework that absorbs nanogram quantities of analyte into its cavities prior to X-ray diffraction analysis (68). The crystalline sponge method recently played a key role in defining the functions of two newly discovered terpene cyclases from red algae (79) andEmericellafungi (107). This method was also used to resolve the absolute structure of a dihydroxycholesterol intermediate that ultimately led to the elucidation of the plant diosgenin biosynthetic pathway (28). In addition to the crystalline sponge method, the recently developed electron cryo-microscopy method microcrystal electron diffraction enables absolute structure determination from small-molecule nanocrystals (composed of femtogram quantities of the analyte) (73). Both methods will serve as powerful tools for natural product structural elucidation, a key component of plant metabolism research.
Computational tools play an increasingly important role in organizing massive numbers of plant multiomics data sets and deriving useful predictive insights from them. Moore et al. (110) recently developed a machine learning algorithm to predict whether or not a gene may be involved in primary or specialized metabolism based on a variety of factors. Relative to primary metabolic enzymes, specialized metabolic genes were found to be more frequent in tandemly duplicated gene clusters and are more likely to be coexpressed with their paralogs. Moreover, specialized metabolic genes tend to exhibit specific spatial expression patterns, less sequence conservation, and low connectivity to gene networks of primary metabolism. Together, these observations show that machine learning of known metabolic pathways has generated a prediction model that can robustly identify specialized metabolic genes in unstudied systems.
It is now appreciated that many plant biosynthetic pathways exhibit some degree ofgene clusteringin the genome (24,83). To systematically utilize this information for pathway discovery, several tools have been designed to identify gene clustering and predict specialized metabolic genes on the basis of their positions in plant genomes (5,49,77,146,161).
Given the existing knowledge base of plant metabolism, common chemical transformations often reappear in diverse pathways and are catalyzed by members of several large enzyme families, including but not limited to cytochrome P450s, iron/2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases (Fe/2OGs), UDP-sugar glycosyltransferases (UGTs), BAHD and serine-carboxypeptidase-like acyltransferases, methyltransferases, NADH/NADPH-dependent reductases, type III PKSs, terpene synthases, and acyl-CoA ligases (174). In plants, most of these enzyme families have undergone extensive expansion (24). Although genes belonging to these families can be automatically identified by standard transcriptome annotation pipelines, the main challenge is to prioritize candidate genes to test on the basis of other sources of indications. Moreover, some plant natural products contain structural moieties that necessitate unprecedented enzymatic activities. In such cases, a homology-based candidate gene approach alone may not suffice. Additional hints are therefore necessary to identify genes underlying those novel enzymatic activities. In this section, we discuss recent research that explored innovative approaches to overcome hurdles in de novo elucidation of plant specialized metabolic pathways (Table 1).
Summary of approaches to overcome hurdles in de novo elucidation of plant specialized metabolic pathways
Abbreviations: GWAS, genome-wide association study; QTL, quantitative trait locus.

Under selection, the expression of genes in a particular plant specialized metabolic pathway sometimes evolved to be highly correlated with one another in a spatial and temporal manner. Moreover, RNA-seq has made it easy to profile global gene expression in multiple tissue types, across developmental stages, or under elicitation by various stimuli (Figure 2). As a result,coexpression analysishas become one of the most powerful approaches for candidate biosynthetic gene identification in nonmodel plants. For example, by employing coexpression analysis in Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) along with a well-thought-out chemical proposal, Caputi et al. (22) identified four new enzymes, namely precondylocarpine acetate synthase, dihydroprecondylocarpine acetate synthase, tabersonine synthase, and catharanthine synthase, that work in concert to produce tabersonine and catharanthinescaffoldsfrom stemmadenine acetate, resolving the last missing steps in vinblastine biosynthesis. Particularly useful for this analysis was the fact that methyl jasmonate induces vinblastine biosynthetic genes in Madagascar periwinkle hairy root culture, including the genes encoding these four enzymes. Similarly, Lau & Sattely (93) elucidated podophyllotoxin biosynthesis in mayapple by examining genes that correlate with podophyllotoxin accumulation in the rhizome, stem, and leaf. These authors took advantage of the fact that podophyllotoxin biosynthesis is highly inducible—this time upon tissue damage. Among the six podophyllotoxin biosynthetic enzymes identified, a Fe/2OG was found to catalyze closure of the core cyclohexane ring of the aryltetralin scaffold, which is an unprecedented activity for Fe/2OGs. A similar coexpression-based approach was recently employed to elucidate the biosynthesis of falcarindiol, an acetylenic lipid found in tomato, carrot, and ginseng (71). Falcarindiol production was induced with different fungal and bacterial pathogens or elicitors, and the accumulation of falcarindiol was carefully correlated with transcriptomics data. This analysis uncovered a novel gene cluster controlling falcarindiol biosynthesis and identified ACET1a/b, which possesses rare acetylenase activity.
The elucidation ofvincaalkaloid, podophyllotoxin, and falcarindiol biosynthesis in these three exemplary studies illustrates the utility of coexpression analysis for de novo biosynthetic pathway discovery in nonmodel plants. These successes depended on the correlation of biosynthetic genes with their respective natural product and with one another in planta. Although this is certainly true in many cases, this approach will not be effective if the site of biosynthesis differs from the site of metabolite accumulation. Moreover, this approach may also be limited if intermediates are produced in one part of the plant and transported to a distal part of the plant, where biosynthesis is completed.
In addition to coexpression analysis, other correlation-based approaches have found use inplant specialized metabolismresearch. Genome-wide association study (GWAS) and quantitative trait locus analyses have leveraged growing genomic resources to uncover associations between genetic polymorphisms and variations in specialized metabolic traits in plants, leading to the discovery of new specialized metabolic genes. Compared with other types of agricultural traits, metabolic traits tend to be controlled by relatively few loci with large effects, making this approach particularly effective for identifying major contributors to the underlying pathways (44). For example, a novel secondary metabolite,N-malonyl-d-alloisoleucine, and ad-amino acid, racemase, involved in its biosynthesis were discovered through correlation of untargeted metabolomic profiling data with single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across 440 natural accessions inArabidopsis thaliana(154). Similarly, two spermidine hydroxycinnamoyl transferases were identified by GWAS correlation of natural variation of hydroxycinnamoyl spermidine levels with SNPs in 156 accessions of rice (39). It is foreseeable that the GWAS approach can be further extended to study specialized metabolic traits in nonmodel plants in the near future. Instead of using SNPs found in reference genome sequences, next-generation shotgun genome or transcriptome sequences could be generated from natural accessions of a nonmodel plant species, from which k-mers derived from the raw sequencing reads can be used to correlate with categorical metabolic traits to arrive at informative genotype-to-phenotype associations (129).
Correlation-based analyses are often insufficient to narrow down the candidate pool to a manageable number that can be tested within a reasonable time frame. This is especially true for extremely large plant enzyme families such as P450s and UGTs. In these cases, phylogenetic analyses can provide additional evolutionary information to further guide candidate gene selection (Figure 2). For example, the specific UGT responsible for salidroside biosynthesis in golden root (Rhodiola rosea) was recently identified from 113 candidate UGT genes present in the sequenced transcriptomes (164). Many of the candidate UGTs showed correlated gene expression with salidroside accumulation in the roots. To further narrow down the number of candidate UGTs, Torrens-Spence and colleagues (124) employed a coarse-grained phylogenetic approach, wherein 34 UGTs were selected for functional testing that represent all major clades revealed by the transcriptome-wide UGT phylogenetic analysis. Among the clades tested, one showed the desirable tyrosol:UDP-glucose 8-O-glucosyltransferase (T8GT) activity. Further in-depth characterization of UGTs within this clade identified a single UGT with the maximal specific T8GT activity. Phylogenetic analysis was also recently employed to help identify two styrylpyrone synthases (SPSs), which are neofunctionalized type III PKSs that establish the styrylpyrone scaffold in kavalactone biosynthesis in kava (Piper methysticum). The PKS phylogeny clearly indicates that kava SPSs are evolutionarily derived from chalcone synthases through duplication events that occurred only in kava but not in closely relatedPiperspecies that do not accumulate kavalactones. In a third study, researchers identified CYP71BQ5 and CYP71CD2 as key oxidases in the biosynthesis of azadirachtin, a potent insecticidal compound produced byAzadirachta indica(61). Key to this finding was the use of phylogenetic analysis, which narrowed down these P450s to a clade comprising onlyA. indicasequences, suggesting their involvement in this lineage-specific pathway.
Homology-guided approaches no longer work when a pathway step entails unprecedented biochemistry. In these cases, classicalactivity-guided fractionationmay be employed to identify enzymes with proposed activities. In an activity-guided fractionation experiment, the enzymatic activity must first be observed in crude protein extract, after which the protein extract is subjected to one or more chromatographic separation steps to enrich the target enzymatic activity (Figure 2). Although this classical approach may have fallen out of favor in the postgenomic era of plant metabolism research, it remains a very powerful approach for identifying novel enzymes in plants. New transcriptomics and proteomics tools have also made target enzyme identification from active fractions much easier than before. The activity-guided approach was recently used to identify thebaine synthase in opiate alkaloid biosynthesis in opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) (26). Thebaine synthase belongs to a poorly understood gene family called pathogenesis-related 10 (PR10) proteins. Although other PR10 members have been identified as enzymes, such as norcoclaurine synthase in benzylisoquinoline alkaloid biosynthesis, it would be nearly impossible to predict the function of thebaine synthase on the basis of sequence alone. A similar approach was taken to identify papain-like cysteine proteases fromN. benthamianathat catalyze the N-terminal proteolysis of the cyclotide kalata B1 (kB1) (134). Since many enzyme families are capable of catalyzing hydrolysis chemistry, it would have been very difficult to identify papain-like cysteine proteases involved in kB1 biosynthesis simply by a candidate-based approach.
Thus far, we have discussed the challenge of identifying the genes responsible for unknown biosynthetic steps of a known plant natural product. In some cases, the sequence of the gene itself provides structural information about the metabolite it synthesizes, facilitating pathway elucidation. This is best seen in the field of peptide natural products. Kersten & Weng (80) recently employed a gene-guided approach to explore the biogenesis of a class of branched cyclic peptides known as lyciumins. Lyciumins were originally isolated from the roots of goji berry (Lycium barbarum) and are the bioactive principles of this Chinese medicinal plant traditionally used to treat hypertension (180). Transcriptome mining of goji berry roots identified a gene that encodes a precursor peptide containing repetitive motifs matching the lyciumin core peptide sequences. Transgenic expression of this gene inN. benthamianawas sufficient to reconstitute lyciumin biosynthesis. Additional lyciumin precursor genes that harbor 71 distinct core peptide sequences were identified in 21 of the 116 sequenced plant genomes, suggesting that lyciumin genotypes are widespread and constitute substantial, previously unrecognized chemodiversity in the plant kingdom. Similar workflows have been applied to the study of plant cyclotides, which feature head-to-tail cyclization and a unique cystine knot topology (173). To date, a tremendous diversity of cyclotides has been discovered in the Poaceae, Violaceae, Rubiaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Fabaceae, and Solanaceae families (85,112,126).
Mechanistic understanding of the structure-function relationships within an enzyme family sometimes enables prediction of enzymatic products on the basis of signature sequences. For example, aromatic amino acid decarboxylases (AAADs) are capable of catalyzing either decarboxylation or aldehyde synthase chemistry to produce primary amine or aldehyde products, respectively (163). A recent study found that a residue on the big catalytic loop, which can be either a tyrosine or a phenylalanine, dictates decarboxylase or aldehyde synthase activity, respectively (163). This information was used to resolve the function of an AAAD in salidroside biosynthesis that was previously thought to be a tyrosine decarboxylate but was instead shown to directly convert tyrosine to 4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (164).
Natural selection has propelled many plants to become highly efficient producers of specific natural products. In addition to the burgeoning metabolic enzymes that continuously extend new boundaries of plant biosynthetic pathways, metabolic adaptation can occur at the subcellular, cellular, tissue, interorgan, and interspecies levels of biology. Some plants possess specialized tissues or organs, such as glandular trichomes,laticifers, resin ducts, and nectaries, which are dedicated to producing and/or storing specialized metabolites. Our understanding of the higher-order organizations ofplant specialized metabolismhas not kept pace with our ability to elucidate biochemical pathways, but this information will be useful for devising comprehensive strategies to engineer natural product production in heterologous hosts. In this section, we hope to draw attention to this understudied area of plant specialized metabolism.
One of the most common approaches employed by metabolic engineers to boost product yield is to adjust the native metabolic network of the chassis organism. For instance, researchers may overexpress specific primary metabolic genes to redirect flux toward the engineered heterologous pathway or downregulate genes in other pathways that compete with the heterologous pathway. Evolution has adopted similar approaches to enhance natural product biosynthesis in native producer plants (3). MS technologies such as imaging MS and single-cell MS have enabled metabolic profiling at single-cell resolution in diverse plants, includingArabidopsis, Madagascar periwinkle,Glycyrrhiza glabra, andPelargonium zonale(95,103,109,156,181). Emerging single-cell RNA-seq and laser microdissection techniques are revealing further molecular insights into metabolic specialization in those natural product–producing cells (23,149).
Many primary metabolic pathways contain feedback inhibition mechanisms that ensure tight regulation of metabolic flux (88). These mechanisms are key to maintain appropriate steady-state levels of important metabolite pools. Several recent studies have shown that the ancestral feedback inhibition mechanisms on certain upstream enzymes have been lost to allow accumulation of downstream specialized metabolites at high levels. For example, IPMS3 is a leucine biosynthetic enzyme that is typically subject to feedback inhibition by leucine. Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) possesses a trichome-specific version of IPMS3 that has lost its inhibition domain and therefore permits the overaccumulation of leucine-derived acylsugars (114). Similarly, anthranilate synthase α (ASα) is an enzyme involved in tryptophan biosynthesis that converts chorismate to anthranilate and is typically inhibited by tryptophan. Common rue (Ruta graveolens) possesses an ASα isoenzyme that is tryptophan insensitive, allowing common rue to rapidly biosynthesize anthranilate-derived defense compounds specifically upon fungal infection (11). Furthermore, tyrosine is typically synthesized in the plastid via a pathway that is feedback inhibited by tyrosine. However, legumes possess an alternative, cytosolic pathway for tyrosine biosynthesis that is not subject to feedback inhibition; this pathway is thought to support the biosynthesis of diverse tyrosine-derived natural products (145). Feedback-insensitive 3‐deoxy‐d‐arabino‐heptulosonate 7‐phosphate synthase fromE. coliwas engineered intoArabidopsis, which resulted in higher flux through shikimate metabolism and increased yields of multiple shikimate-derived natural products (166). Future engineering efforts may similarly employ feedback-insensitive precursor metabolism to drive desired product accumulation.
Compartmentalization is a ubiquitous aspect of eukaryotic cellular metabolism. Many primary metabolic pathways are partitioned to particular organelles, while metabolites can be shuttled between cellular compartments. This is also the case for many specialized metabolic pathways. For example, most core terpenoid biosynthetic enzymes are targeted to the plastid, where the isoprene precursor substrates are produced (86). Plants have also evolved a number of specialized membrane-bound compartments that facilitate biosynthesis, such as tapetosomes or the specialized oil bodies of liverworts (59,64). Phenyloplasts and tannosomes are two newly described plant metabolic compartments that are the sites of production and storage for phenolics and condensed tannins, respectively (15,16). It is likely that additional specialized compartments with metabolic functions have yet to be discovered in plants. Moreover, new tools are being developed to probe organelle biology. An affinity-based method was recently employed to rapidly isolate mitochondria for metabolite profiling before their contents diffuse into the surroundings (25). These methods can be adapted to probe the metabolite composition of plant biosynthetic organelles.
Compartmentalization can be leveraged to boost the productivity of engineered organisms. Several research groups have examined the effect of different enzyme localizations on metabolite yields. Targeting heterologously expressed patchoulol synthase and farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase to tobacco plastids resulted in 100–1,000-fold-higher accumulation of patchoulol than did targeting these enzymes to the cytosol (177). Interestingly, the localization of a promiscuous enzyme can dictate its metabolic output. The bifunctional linalool/nerolidol synthase from strawberry can convert either geranyl diphosphate to linalool or farnesyl diphosphate to nerolidol (2). Targeting linalool/nerolidol synthase to either the plastid or the mitochondria favors either linalool or nerolidol production, respectively (76). Plastid engineering and transformation are also emerging as a convenient tool for metabolic engineering. Plastid engineering is advantageous for a variety of reasons, including the amenability of biosynthetic pathways to be stacked in bacteria-like operons (106). However, plastid engineering has traditionally been restricted to the relatively few plants whose plastid genomes can be transformed. Recent studies, however, have shown that plastid genomes can be inherited horizontally via graft junctions, greatly expanding the potential for plastid engineering (106,153).
The physical interaction and organization of enzymes in the cell are intriguing phenomena for some metabolic systems. So far, they have been studied mostly in the context of metabolons, which are complexes of sequential enzymes in a pathway that interact noncovalently (Figure 3). The physical organization is thought to channel the product of one enzyme into the active site of a sequential enzyme (66,182). Numerous primary and specialized metabolic pathways are reported to organize in metabolons in both plants and animals (7). These pathways include phenylpropanoids, lignin, sporopollenin, flavonoids, isoflavonoids, and dhurrin in plants (1,8,18,33,75,90). Cytochrome P450s and cytochrome P450 oxidoreductases are proposed to serve as major organizers for some metabolons on the cytosolic face of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (7). For instance, in the lignin metabolon, transgenic expression ofP-COUMAROYLSHIKIMATE 3′-HYDROXYLASE(C3′H) relocalizes the cytosolic HYDROXYCINNAMOYL TRANSFERASE and 4-COUMAROYL-COA LIGASE to the ER membrane (8). These interactions may also be scaffolded by additional proteins, such asArabidopsismembrane steroid binding proteins, which were recently found to provide additionalscaffoldinteractions between the P450s C3′H, CINNAMIC ACID 4-HYDROXYLASE, and FERULATE 5-HYDROXYLASE in monolignol biosynthesis (52). Similarly, noncatalytic chalcone isomerases play a role in the β-bitter acid metabolon in hops (Humulus lupulus) by binding to and activating chalcone synthase (6,98). In the dhurrin metabolon, UGT85B1 interacts with CYP79A1 and CYP71E1 to channel flux toward dhurrin biosynthesis (92). Compared with metabolons of primary metabolism, specialized metabolons appear to be characterized by weak protein-protein interactions that make the isolation of metabolons and in vitro reconstitution of metabolon interactions challenging. Metabolons tend to dissociate if conventional detergents are used to solubilize them from membrane fractions. Styrene maleic acid (SMA) polymer has recently been used to isolate and study active metabolons (92). The SMA polymer integrates into membranes and enables the extraction of intact protein complexes that are surrounded by native lipids (94).

Figure 3Click to view


Eukaryotic cells contain various membrane-less compartments that display liquid-like properties (67). Classical examples of membrane-less bodies include nucleoli, Cajal bodies, and P granules (14,45). Recent studies have suggested an important role of liquid-liquidphase separationin many cellular processes, including concentration of transcriptional machinery (125), heat shock response (136), and DNA damage response (150). The formation of these phase-separated condensates is driven by multivalent nonspecific interactions between low-complexity domains or intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) contained within the participating proteins (147). Phase separation also likely plays a role in metabolic processes (Figure 3). For example, phase-separated glycolytic bodies (G bodies) form under hypoxic conditions inS. cerevisiae(72). As in the case of metabolons, the formation of phase-separated metabolic condensates may also facilitate product channeling. While cases of phase-separated metabolic condensates have yet to be clearly defined in plant biology, the principal idea has already been used for metabolic engineering. Researchers recently achieved significantly improved overall yield and product specificity for deoxyviolacein production in yeast by using a light-inducible phase-separation system that entails fusing deoxyviolacein biosynthetic enzymes to the IDR of the mammalian RNA binding protein FUS andArabidopsisCRY2 (186).
Although plants may accumulate natural products in a particular tissue or organ, the site of accumulation is not always the site of synthesis. For example, BIAs (e.g., morphine) accumulate in thelaticifersof opium poppy (10). However, there is a division of labor among various cell types in the biosynthesis of morphine (Figure 4). While most morphine biosynthetic enzymes accumulate in the sieve elements, the genes are transcribed and translated in the neighboring companion cells (143). Thus, the enzymes must be shuttled to the sieve elements. Pathway intermediates are synthesized in the sieve elements before being transported to the laticifers, where the final biosynthetic steps are completed to yield the final products (119). A similar scheme is employed by Madagascar periwinkle, which divides alkaloid biosynthesis among internal phloem-associated parenchyma, epidermal cells, laticifers, andidioblasts(55). InArabidopsisglucosinolate biosynthesis, glucosinolates accumulate mostly in laticifer-like S cells as well as in epidermal cells, but they are actually synthesized in nearby vasculature parenchyma (115). Moreover, aliphatic and indole glucosinolates exhibit distinct but overlapping sites of biosynthesis. Aliphatic glucosinolate biosynthesis occurs mostly in phloem and xylem parenchyma, whereas indole glucosinolate biosynthesis is restricted to phloem parenchyma (115).

Figure 4Click to view


In some instances, plant metabolites might be transported long distances from their site of synthesis, that is, from source to sink. This is perhaps best shown for glucosinolates, which are produced in leaf and silique tissues before being transported to the seeds (17). Glucosinolate transport depends on two proton-dependent transporters, GLUCOSINOLATE TRANSPORTER 1 and 2 (116). Long-distance transport has also been demonstrated for nicotine, which is produced in the roots and transported to the shoots of tobacco plants (4). Alternatively, cyanogenic glucosides are produced in the leaves of cassava and transported to the roots (Figure 4) (74).
Interspecies interactions and metabolite transport may also play important roles inplant specialized metabolism, which have been only sporadically examined. For instance, theCrotalarialegume synthesizes pyrrolizidine alkaloids in the nodules only when engaged in active rhizobial symbiosis (69). It was also recently discovered that symbiotic arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi lack the genes necessary for fatty acid biosynthesis but are compensated for by lipid transfer from the host plant (82). Although this is an example from primary metabolism, it hints that interspecies cooperation might play a role in specialized metabolism as well. This seems to be true for maytansine, which accumulates in the roots of plants of thePutterlickiagenus but is actually synthesized by endophytic bacteria (89).
As we learn more about where plant metabolism occurs, it is becoming clear that many specialized metabolites are not produced by a single cell type—rather, multiple cell types are coordinated in the biosynthesis and storage of metabolites. Although techniques such as in situ hybridization and immunostaining can be readily applied to nonmodel plants to localize gene expression and protein accumulation, respectively, these techniques have not been broadly applied to plant biosynthetic systems. Understanding more about where the biosynthesis is occurring and how the relevant cell types are specialized for their particular functions would greatly benefit engineering exercises. For instance, the division principle of biosynthetic pathways across different cell types in plants may be replicated in heterologous microbial cocultures. High titers of resveratrol production were recently achieved using anE. colicoculture system composed of onep-coumarate-producing strain and a second strain that convertsp-coumarate to resveratrol (19). A similarE. coli–S. cerevisiaecoculture approach was also applied to produce naringenin (185).
Metabolite storage is important for insulating end products from interfering with active biosynthetic machinery and mitigating any cytotoxic effects that may be associated with the metabolites. Plants have evolved several strategies for metabolite storage, especially for hydrophobic or toxic natural products. Some plants store toxic compounds in a nontoxic form that may be activated at the appropriate time, such as glucosinolates, which are inactive until they are activated by myrosinase upon herbivore attack (65). Moreover, while many hydrophilic metabolites are stored in the vacuole, hydrophobic natural products present a particular challenge. Many plants accumulate large amounts of hydrophobic compounds in the subcuticular space of glandular trichomes (43). For instance, artemisinin accumulates in the subcuticular space in the glandular trichomes of sweet wormwood (41). Oil bodies are also frequently used to store large amounts of hydrophobic compounds, as inColeus forskohlii, which stores forskolin-related diterpenoids in specialized oil bodies (122). Alternatively, the hydrophobic extracellular polymer suberin has been posited as a site for accumulation of triterpenoids inTripterygiumroots (91).
Recently, it has been suggested that new solvent systems known as natural deep eutectic solvents (NADES) may allow plants to store large amounts of hydrophobic compounds (32). NADES are solvents composed of high concentrations of organic acids, salts, and sugars, which occur naturally in cells at very high concentrations. Although NADES have never been conclusively demonstrated to play a role in metabolite storage, many hydrophobic natural products exhibit dramatically increased solubility in NADES. For instance, quercetin is ∼400,000 times more soluble in NADES composed of xylitol, choline, chloride, and water than in water alone (32). Although enzymes are not typically active in NADES, their activity may be recovered upon dilution in water, suggesting that NADES may also play a role in pathway regulation (27). Although this hypothesis is intriguing, more research will be required to determine if NADES are indeed used by plants for metabolite storage.
Overall, plants have devised many metabolite-storage strategies that appear to contribute significantly to the fitness of the hosts that evolved to synthesize large quantities of specialized metabolites. Without effective storage mechanisms, high-abundance end products may interfere with normal cellular processes and thereby limit the extent of production. Similar problems might have confounded the engineering of these pathways in heterologous hosts (169). Thus, we may achieve better metabolic engineering by learning more about natural product storage in native plants and incorporating these strategies into chassis organisms.
While humans have been making use of plant specialized metabolism for millennia, our mechanistic understanding of how plants manufacture natural products of diverse forms and functions has advanced significantly within the past few decades. What began with the assignment of specific observable properties of plants to discrete chemical structures has grown into a blossoming field of research that explores entirely uncharted specialized metabolic pathways from almost any plant of interest. As technologies develop, the list of elucidated pathways will continue to expand, and at a faster pace. We highlight the higher-order organization of specific metabolic processes employed by plants to perfect natural product production. Future advances in this aspect of plant metabolism will inform the design of more comprehensive metabolic engineering strategies. Harnessing the metabolic ingenuity of plants, arguably the most successful and self-sustaining kingdom of life, is a valuable gateway toward new technologies that will ensure a prosperous and sustainable human civilization on planet Earth.


J.K.W. is a cofounder, a member of the Scientific Advisory Board, and a shareholder of DoubleRainbow Biosciences, which develops biotechnologies related to natural products.
The writing of this review was supported by grants from the Keck Foundation, the Family Larsson-Rosenquist Foundation, and the National Science Foundation (CHE-1709616). J.R.J. was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (1122374). J.K.W. was supported by the Beckman Young Investigator Program, the Pew Scholars Program in the Biomedical Sciences, and the Searle Scholars Program.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


