We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Bryophytes occupy a basal position in the monophyletic evolution of land plants and have a life cycle in which the gametophyte generation dominates over the sporophyte generation, offering a significant advantage in conducting genetics. Owing to its low genetic redundancy and the availability of an array of versatile molecular tools, including efficient genome editing, the liverwortMarchantia polymorphahas become a model organism of choice that provides clues to the mechanisms underlying eco-evo-devo biology in plants. Recent analyses of developmental mutants have revealed that key genes in developmental processes are functionally well conserved in plants, despite their morphological differences, and that lineage-specific evolution occurred by neo/subfunctionalization of common ancestral genes. We suggest thatM. polymorphais an excellent platform to uncover the conserved and diversified mechanisms underlying land plant development.
Article metrics loading...
Bryophytes occupy a basal position in the monophyletic evolution of land plants and have a life cycle in which the gametophyte generation dominates over the sporophyte generation, offering a significant advantage in conducting genetics. Owing to its low genetic redundancy and the availability of an array of versatile molecular tools, including efficient genome editing, the liverwortMarchantia polymorphahas become a model organism of choice that provides clues to the mechanisms underlying eco-evo-devo biology in plants. Recent analyses of developmental mutants have revealed that key genes in developmental processes are functionally well conserved in plants, despite their morphological differences, and that lineage-specific evolution occurred by neo/subfunctionalization of common ancestral genes. We suggest thatM. polymorphais an excellent platform to uncover the conserved and diversified mechanisms underlying land plant development.
Alternation of generations is a key feature of the life cycle of land plants. Fertilization and meiosis are essential processes associated with sexual reproduction. The life of Charophycean algae is haplobiontic, with a multicellular haploid phase and a diploid zygote cell that immediately undergoes meiosis. One major innovation in monophyletic land plants was the evolution of the embryo (sporophyte, 2n). Bryophytes, the earliest-diverged group of land plants, have a life cycle in which the photoautotrophic gametophyte generation is dominant over the dependent sporophyte generation, and with 22,000 species out of 330,000 land plant species, they still occupy a large part of the present ecosystem (21). The common liverwort,Marchantia polymorphaL. ssp.ruderalis, is a member of the bryophytes and has historically contributed to plant biology through its use as a model species, including in development, physiology, and genetics, as comprehensively reviewed by Bowman (12). Details of the anatomy and taxonomy ofM. polymorphaare well documented by Shimamura (122).
Figure 1illustrates the life cycle ofM. polymorpha. The gametophyte generation begins with spores that actively divide to produce thalli via sporelings.M. polymorphapropagates asexually through gemmae.M. polymorphais dioicous and produces sex-specific gametangiophores in which gametangia develop: broken umbrella-like archegoniophores with archegonia in the female and disc-shape antheridiophores with antheridia in the male. With the aid of water,spermare released from antheridia and swim to eggs in archegonia. The sporophyte generation begins with a zygote produced by the fusion of two gametes (egg and sperm) and terminates with spores produced from the spore mother cells by meiosis. The sporophyte generation comprises only the embryo, depending on the maternal bodies in the gametophyte generation. A single sporangium can have more than 300,000 spores, and a single archegoniophore can even have 7,000,000 (104). Such productivity of the haploid progeny is advantageous for genetic analysis.

Figure 1Click to view


M. polymorphahas unique structures containing various differentiated cells, such asoil body cells(74,115), smooth and pegged rhizoids, and elaters, and specialized organs, such as the ventral scale, air chambers, gemmae, and gemma cups (Figure 1; see also Sections 2−4). Considering the monophyly of land plants, an incredible variety of developmental patterns exist among them, yet most of them share the same developmental principles, which are well represented inM. polymorpha. This is one reason whyM. polymorphahas been used as a favorable model to address fundamental questions in plant developmental biology. In addition to the compilation of molecular tools (70) (see the sidebar titled Molecular Tools and Genetic Transformation) and genome information (13,96) (see the sidebar titled Genome), its low genetic redundancy and dominance of the gametophyte generation are particularly advantageous. In this review, recent molecular genetic studies related to development inM. polymorphaare described, with an emphasis on the genetic and mechanistic conservation and diversification during evolution. Gene names and abbreviations used in this review are listed inSupplemental Table 1. Images for various stages ofM. polymorphadevelopment are available inSupplemental Figure 1andSupplemental Video 1.
MOLECULAR TOOLS AND GENETIC TRANSFORMATION
Genetic transformation ofMarchantia polymorphais simple and efficient.Agrobacterium-mediated transformation has been well established (66), with some improvements (84,137). A growing number of convenient vectors are available for various types of experiments: an array of Gateway vectors for complementation, promoter assays, protein localization analysis (69,91), conditional gene expression and/or deletion (102), genome editing (126,127), and gene targeting (67), many of which are deposited at Addgene (http://www.addgene.org/). Transformants can be stably cryopreserved in the form of gemma (133) or sperm (135). Particle bombardment is also efficient, not only for the nuclear genome (19,131) but also for the plastid genome (20). For genome resources, see the list of Related Resources.
Notably, for transformation,M. polymorphaandArabidopsisshare growth conditions (temperature and light intensity), promoter (CaMV 35S, but not NOS), and selection antibiotics (e.g., hygromycin and chlorsulfuron), making it easier forArabidopsisusers to start research usingM. polymorpha(see 70 for details).

Spore germination begins with an asymmetric cell division (Figure 1). While the small cell undergoes terminal differentiation into a rhizoid for substrate attachment, the large cell continues to proliferate and forms a sporeling. Sporeling morphology can drastically vary, depending on the light conditions. Under sufficient light intensity, cells are round and divide vigorously, whereas under low light, cells divide less frequently and form protonema-like cell chains with rare branching (103).
GENOME
Marchantia polymorphahas nine chromosomes, with eight autosomes and a single sex chromosome. TheM. polymorphagenome was first sequenced for a female line (226 Mb) (13), and then a chromosome-level assembly was built for a male genome (219 Mb) (96). The genome carries 19,267 autosomal, 154 V-chromosomal, and 74 U-chromosomal protein-coding genes. The most characteristic feature of theM. polymorphagenome is the low redundancy of regulatory genes, such as those encoding the photoreceptors phytochrome, cryptochrome, and phototropin. They are single-copy genes inM. polymorpha. In contrast, other land plants, such asPhyscomitrium patensandArabidopsis, possess multiple paralogs for each photoreceptor. The number of paralogs for transcription factors is also low, implying thatM. polymorpharetains an elementary regulatory network. Since terrestrialization, land plants have evolved their complexity and diversity by expanding an ancestral, minimal set of genes. Whole-genome duplication, and the subsequent neo- and/or subfunctionalization of the duplicated genes, is one of the evolutionary events that caused the expansion of gene families in many plant lineages, but there is no obvious evidence of whole-genome duplication inM. polymorpha, which partly explains its relatively low genetic redundancy, suggesting thatM. polymorpharetains a minimal number of regulatory genes similar to that of the ancestor of land plants.
AUXIN BIOSYNTHETIC ENZYMES
Like angiosperms,Marchantia polymorphaproduces both indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) and phenylacetic acid (PAA) as natural auxin compounds (121,128). The major IAA biosynthetic pathway, which starts from tryptophan for the production of indole-3-pyruvic acid by TRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE OF ARABIDOPSIS (TAA) followed by the conversion to IAA by YUCCA (YUC) (93,124,125), is conserved inM. polymorpha(32). Its genome contains a single gene for TAA (MpTAA) and five YUC-encoding genes (MpYUC1to MpYUC5) (13,32). While MpTAAand MpYUC2are expressed in both vegetative and reproductive phases, the other YUC genes are expressed only in sporophytes. A recent study revealed phosphorylation-dependent regulation of the enzymatic activity of MpTAA, suggesting the existence of a negative self-regulatory loop for auxin biosynthesis similar to that inArabidopsis(141).

One innovation of land plants is three-dimensional (3D) growth. While stem cells in green algae divide in one or two dimensions, those in land plants have three or more cutting faces (48,97). This transition is recapitulated during the development from sporeling to thallus. During the sporeling stage, a stem cell, termed apical cell, is defined. Initially, the apical cell cuts off daughter cells only in two directions, left and right, forming a one-cell-layer-thick structure, the so-called prothallus (12,122) (Figure 1). Later, the apical cell acquires two more cutting faces, dorsal and ventral, and directs 3D thallus development. Apical cell establishment in sporelings appears to require the phytohormone auxin. In the sporeling stage, targeted knockout of MpTAAencoding an auxin biosynthetic enzyme (see the sidebar titled Auxin Biosynthetic Enzymes) results in callus-like cell clumps, which can be partially rescued by exogenous auxin application (32). Overexpression of a bacterial auxin-conjugating enzyme produced a similar morphological defect (37). How auxin acts to define the apical cell remains an open question.
In a thallus lobe, a cuneate-shaped apical cell is located in the center of a concave structure, termed the apical notch (Figure 2). The apical cell repetitively cuts off four daughter cells in parallel to the dorsal, ventral, and two lateral surfaces, which then proliferate to give rise to clonal cell groups, termedmerophytes(28,44,82,122).

Figure 2Click to view


Lateral daughter cells resemble their parental apical cell in shape as well as division patterns and are termed subapical cells (68,122) (Figure 2). They likely function as transit-amplifying cells for the proliferation of future differentiating cells, initial cells for individual merophyte lineages, or both. Thus, the outermost array in which the apical and subapical cells reside can be defined as the stem cell zone (SCZ) (Figure 2). Actively dividing cells are distributed centrifugally from the SCZ and begin to differentiate into dorsal and ventral organs, such as air pores and scales (see Section 2.3 for details). This dividing and differentiating cell zone (DDCZ) and the SCZ comprise the meristem ofM. polymorpha(Figure 2).
During the vegetative phase, the thallus grows through periodical dichotomous branching by bifurcating apical notches (123), which is accompanied with replications of the apical cell. It remains an open question how two new apical cells are established. In monopodial and sympodial branching, which are dominant in flowering plants, two branches are not equivalent, and new stem cells are not specified directly from primary daughter cells of the original stem cells but from their early descendants (16). It would be intriguing to clarify whether stem cell amplification mechanisms are conserved or not among various branching patterns.
Stem cells in flowering plants are maintained by cell-cell communication mediated by peptide hormone ligands and their receptors. The CLAVATA3/EMBRYO SURROUNDING REGION–related (CLE) family of peptide hormones [CLV3-containing R-type and TRACHEARY ELEMENT DIFFERENTIATION INHIBITORY FACTOR (TDIF)-containing H-type] as well as the CLAVATA1 (CLV1)/BARELY ANY MERISTEM (BAM) clade and the TDIF RECEPTOR/PHLOEM INTERCALATED WITH XYLEM (TDR/PXY) clade of leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLKs) are central to this regulation (35,54). It is noteworthy that the CLE and the LRR-RLK gene families are expanded in the genomes of land plants compared with those of charophyte algae (27) and, thus, possibly contributed to terrestrial adaptation.M. polymorphahas one homolog for each of CLV3 (MpCLE2), TDIF (MpCLE1), CLV1/BAM (MpCLV1), and TDR/PXY (MpTDR) (13,17). Hirakawa et al. (55) demonstrated that exogenous application of synthetic MpCLE1 peptides or overexpression of MpCLE1resulted in a reduction of the proliferative region in the meristem, and, conversely, knockout of MpCLE1resulted in an enlarged proliferative region. MpCLE1is expressed in a small area containing the apical cell and MpTDRin a broader region on the dorsal side of the meristem, with partial overlap. Thus, signaling by the MpCLE1 and MpTDR pair is likely to occur in the DDCZ to negatively regulate its size (Figure 2). In contrast, inArabidopsis, the TDIF/TDR pair positively regulates meristem activity (53). The CLV3 peptide signaling pathway via CLV1/BAM receptors negatively regulates meristem activity inArabidopsisand therefore resembles the MpCLE1/MpTDR signaling pathway. However, these pathways are essentially different in that the former restricts the size of the stem cell population, whereas the latter restricts the size of the DDCZ, the periphery of stem cells. It is likely that a rewiring of signaling pathways and their target cells or tissues occurred during the transition from a gametophyte-dominant to a sporophyte-dominant life cycle.
Hirakawa et al. (52) recently demonstrated that application of the other CLE peptide hormone MpCLE2 enlarged the SCZ via MpCLV1 and that mutations in MpCLE2or MpCLV1caused a reduction of the SCZ, indicating positive regulation of the stem cell population by the MpCLE2/MpCLV1 pair (Figure 2). Remarkably, removal of the peptide after pretreatment resulted in the formation of multiple apical meristems from the enlarged SCZ, leading to multichotomous branching. MpCLE2promoter activity was detected exclusively in the DDCZ, whereas the MpCLV1promoter was active in both the DDCZ and the SCZ within the core of the meristem. This indicates the existence of cell-cell communication between the two zones for controlling the size of the SCZ. Again, this regulatory system is essentially different from its counterparts in flowering plants, where, for instance, the CLV3/CLV1 pathway inArabidopsisnegatively regulates the stem cell pool, which serves as another case for the rewiring of the stem cell regulation systems during the evolution of land plants. In addition, in the mossPhyscomitrium patens, the CLV pathway was shown to regulate cell division planes for stem cells during the transition from two-dimensional protonemal growth to 3D gametophore development (143). Whether the two distinct functions of regulation of the stem cell population and of division plane orientation are related is currently unknown. In any case, both functions have been retained during land plant evolution.
Auxin has been shown to regulate meristem activity. Treatment with an auxin biosynthesis inhibitor reduces the branching frequency, whereas overexpression of the activator-type MpARF1 (see the sidebar titled Nuclear Auxin Signaling) increases it (37). Knockout of MpARF1results in growth and developmental defects (77), and conditional knockout of MpARF2arrests growth (78). Accumulation of antagonizing MpARF1 and MpARF2 proteins around the meristem (78) (Figure 2) suggests that its functions are regulated by fine-tuning of auxin signaling.
Thus,M. polymorphaprovides a simple platform for analyzing the regulatory mechanisms of stem cells and the meristem by important factors, such as peptide ligands and phytohormones, that are commonly utilized in land plants.
The mature gametophytic plant body, i.e., the thallus, undergoes indeterminate planar growth in the form of a flattened mat of tissue. The central part of the thallus on the extension line from the apical notch is termed the midrib region. The thallus has distinct dorsiventrality; air chambers and gemma cups develop on the dorsal side, while rhizoids and scales are developed on the ventral side (Figure 2).
NUCLEAR AUXIN SIGNALING
Auxins are perceived by coreceptor complexes of an F-box-bearing TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 1 (TIR1)/AUXIN-SIGNALING F-BOX (AFB) protein and an AUXIN/INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (Aux/IAA) transcriptional repressor (25,80,132) and promote degradation of Aux/IAA (45), which leads to the liberation of AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF) transcription factors (phylogenetically categorized into classes A−C) for positive or negative regulation of their target genes (139).M. polymorphapossesses one gene for each of the factors in this nuclear auxin signaling pathway: MpTIR1for TIR1/AFB; MpIAAfor Aux/IAA; and MpARF1, MpARF2, and MpARF3for class-A, -B, and -C ARFs, respectively (37,76). MpARF1 acts as a transcriptional activator and MpARF2 as a repressor (76). Given the minimal set of auxin signaling components inM. polymorpha, the principle of auxin signaling could be elucidated. MpARF3 is irrelevant to auxin-dependent transcriptional regulation (38,39,78,99). MpARF1 and MpARF2 antagonistically regulate common target genes with comparable binding affinities to aciselement (78). MpARF2 binds directly to the corepressor MpTPL via a conserved LFG motif (78). Thus, the ratio of class-A to class-B ARFs and the auxin concentration gradient define the output level of auxin signaling.

The ventral surface of the thallus is covered by many leaf-like scales and tubular cells, known as rhizoids. Ventral scales cover the rhizoid bundles that run along the underside of the thallus and facilitate water and nutrient transport over the ventral thallus surface (Figure 2). InM. polymorpha, the ventral scales are of single-cell thickness and develop on the left and right sides of the apical cell on the ventral surface in the apical notch of the thallus. These characteristics of theM. polymorphascales resemble those of the leaves in leafy liverworts (122).
MpLOS1, a member of theArabidopsisLIGHT-DEPENDENT SHORT HYPOCOTYLS 1 and Oryza G1 (ALOG) family of transcription factors, is preferentially expressed in the ventral scales and regulates their development inM. polymorpha(101) (Figure 2). A mutation in MpLOS1resulted in abnormal green outgrowths from the ventral thallus instead of ventral scales. These outgrowths consisted of multiple layers of cells with differentiated chloroplasts. These observations indicated a negative role of MpLOS1 in cell division and chloroplast differentiation in ventral scale development. Interestingly, although MpLOS1 expression was not detected in apical cells, MpLOS1 activity is also required for the maintenance of meristem activity. The Mplos1mutant showed a lower cell division rate at the apical notch than the wild type, leading to defective separation of apical notches, resulting in a higher density of gemma cups and apical notches in the thallus. Taken together, in addition to regulating ventral scale development cell-autonomously, MpLOS1 also regulates apical meristem maintenance noncell-autonomously in the vegetative thallus. The roles of ALOG proteins in meristem maintenance and negative regulation of lateral organ growth seem to be conserved in angiosperms, such as rice and tomato (90,130,145,151).
Rhizoids inM. polymorphaare unicellular hair-like protrusions that develop from ventral epidermal cells or ventral scales by tip growth (122).M. polymorphahas two different types of rhizoids: the smooth rhizoid has a smooth cell wall and the pegged rhizoid has peg-like cell wall thickenings (Figure 2). Smooth rhizoids are thicker and grow down to the substrate to anchor the plant. Pegged rhizoids are oriented parallel to the ventral surface of the thallus and function as an external water-conducting system by capillary action (30). InM. polymorpha, a basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, MpRSL1, is essential for rhizoid development (113) (Figure 2). MpRSL1 also functions in the formation of other epidermally derived structures, including gemmae. Members of the RSL proteins are required for rhizoid development in the mossP. patensand root hair development in the angiospermArabidopsis(72,95). Introduction of MpRSL1complemented impaired root hair development in theArabidopsis rhd6 rsl1double mutant, indicating the conserved molecular function of RSL proteins despite the more than 400 million years of divergence ofM. polymorphaandArabidopsisfrom their common ancestor. In addition, aM. polymorphahomolog of a root hair regulator in angiosperms, bHLH transcription factor MpLRL, seems to have a positive role in rhizoid development (14). MpFRH1, a microRNA targeting MpRSL1, has a role in the lateral inhibition of rhizoid development via suppression of MpRSL1in surrounding cells. Thus far, this mechanism of lateral inhibition is specific to liverworts, having not been identified in other lineages of land plants (59,134) (Figure 2).
Using 336,000 transfer DNA (T-DNA)-mutagenizedM. polymorphalines, Honkanen et al. (59) identified 33 genes required for the proper growth of rhizoid cells. Most genes required for the tip growth of rhizoids were found to be orthologous to those for angiosperm root hairs and pollen tubes, suggesting that they are controlled by common underlying mechanisms. In addition, an independent study demonstrated that the never in mitosis A (NIMA)-related protein kinase (NEK), MpNEK, controls microtubule organization in rhizoid cells and the directional growth of rhizoids inM. polymorpha(107) (Figure 2).
The air chambers inM. polymorphacontain a large intercellular space with chloroplast-rich filaments developed from the subepidermis, and the intercellular space is connected with the external atmosphere through air pores formed in the epidermis at the center of the chamber (Figure 2). The development of air pores and air chambers inM. polymorphabegins with the formation of schizogenous intercellular spaces, termed initial apertures (Figure 2), between the anticlinal walls of protodermal cells in the apical region of the thallus (6,7,68). By coordinating the rates of expansion and cell division of protodermal and subprotodermal cells surrounding the initial aperture, the intercellular space expands, leading to the formation of an air chamber (7). Clonal analysis involving random low-frequency induction of a constitutively expressed fluorescent protein marker has suggested that air pores and air chambers are formed in response to local positional cues and independently ofmerophytecell lineages (129). In a mutant defective in air chamber formation,nopperabo1(nop1), the initial aperture formation resulting from cell wall separation is impaired (68). The causal gene, MpNOP1, encodes a plant U-box E3-ubiquitin ligase protein that carries tandem ARMADILLO repeats in the C terminus and localizes on the plasma membrane (68). MpNOP1 may catalyze the ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of regulatory factor(s) that suppress cell wall separation in the initial stage of air chamber development (65) (Figure 2). Schizogenous origins of intercellular spaces are also observed in leaf mesophyll formation in vascular plants and in roots and stems of wetland plants that grow in hypoxic soils; however, little is known about the molecular mechanisms governing the formation of these intercellular spaces (65). Further investigation of MpNOP1’s role in intercellular space formation may provide insights into possible common mechanisms for schizogenous intercellular space formation in vascular plants.
The air pore complex inM. polymorphais a 16-cell barrel-shaped structure surrounding the pore (opening). The promoter of MpWIP, encoding a WIP zinc-finger protein family, is active in the developing air pore complex and is involved in air pore and air chamber development (73) (Figure 2). Knockdown of MpWIPby artificial microRNA resulted in delayed or abolished air chamber formation and abnormal morphology of the air pore complex. InArabidopsis, members of the WIP family are required for the development of various multicellular structures, such as the replum, which facilitates dehiscence and seed dispersal from the fruits (92), roots (23), and leaf veins (108). Thus, the WIP family proteins may play an essential role in the morphogenesis of the multicellular structures via transcriptional regulation (73).
In the vegetative phase, the thallus generates specialized cup-shaped organs on the dorsal side for asexual reproduction, termed gemma cups. Gemmae with two apical meristems develop from the floor of the epidermis in the gemma cups (Figure 2). Clonal analysis has revealed that a gemma cup comprises three independent cell lineages: the dorsal progeny of the apical cell and lateral merophytes on both of its sides (129). In the floor region, periclinal cell divisions that generate protodermal and subprotodermal cell layers of the air chamber are suppressed, and, instead, consecutive epidermal cells are observed. These cells undergo repeated anticlinal divisions to enlarge the area of the gemma cup floor, thus making necessary room for gemmae to develop. The gemma cup and gemmae develop and mature simultaneously, with some cup floor cells initiating the process of gemma production at the early stage of cup expansion (8,79).
Gemma cup development can be separated into two phases: establishment of the basal floor cells of the gemma cup and formation of the cup structure. Recently, an R2R3-MYB transcription factor, MpGCAM1, was identified as the essential regulator of gemma cup initiation (149) (Figure 2). MpGCAM1is preferentially expressed in developing gemma cups, and Mpgcam1knockout mutants cannot initiate gemma cup formation. Conversely, overexpression of MpGCAM1conferred ectopic proliferation of undifferentiated cells. These results demonstrate that MpGCAM1 functions in the establishment and maintenance of the undifferentiated state in the floor epidermal cells, which may be a prerequisite for gemma cup initiation. Although gemma cups are a characteristic gametophytic organ for asexual reproduction in taxonomically restricted groups of liverwort species, phylogenetic and interspecific complementation analyses supported the orthologous relationship of MpGCAM1with regulatory factors of axillary meristem formation, e.g.,ArabidopsisREGULATOR OF AXILLARY MERISTEMs (RAXs) and tomato Blind, in angiosperm sporophytes (149). In angiosperms, axillary meristems are initiated from the boundary region between a leaf primordium and the shoot apical meristem (140). Given that gemma cup floor cells maintain pluripotency and produce gemmae with two apical meristems, the gemma cup floor cells and boundary regions of the leaf axil seem to have similar cellular status and functions. Recent studies inM. polymorpharevealed that cytokinin also plays significant roles in gemma cup development. A reduction in endogenous cytokinin levels through overexpression of cytokinin oxidase (MpCKX2) decreased the number of gemma cups per thallus unit area (4).M. polymorphatype-A and type-B RESPONSE REGULATOR proteins (MpRRA and MpRRB) regulate cytokinin responses negatively and positively, respectively. Overexpression of MpRRA reduced the number of gemma cups, and Mprraknockout mutants produced more gemma cups than the wild type. In contrast, Mprrbknockdown or knockout mutants generated no gemma cups (4,36) (Figure 2). How cytokinin and MpGCAM1 may be related remains to be solved.
Gemma development starts with the protrusion of a gemma cup floor cell followed by transverse cell division to produce an initial gemma cell (Figure 2). The initial gemma cell undergoes another transverse division to form proximal and distal cells. The proximal cell does not undergo further cell division and differentiates into a stalk cell that connects the gemma primordium to the floor. The distal cell continues to divide to form the gemma body. In the flattened early gemma, two apical cells appear on opposite sides of the disk. In the later stage of gemma development, each apical cell is divided into two in the future dorsiventral axis (i.e., the thickness direction of the gemma), and either of the resultant two adjacent cells serves as an apical cell of a new single thallus lobe with dorsiventrality (122).
The above-mentioned MpFRH1-MpRSL1pathway regulates the development of multiple epidermally derived tissues: not only rhizoid formation in the ventral epidermis, but also gemma development in the gemma cup floor epidermis (60,113) (Figure 2). Gemma and rhizoids have in common that they are formed from a single epidermal cell. A RopGEF-mediated Rho of plants (ROP) signaling pathway functions specifically in gemma initiation. ROP is a plant-specific family of Rho-type small GTPases (34) that is converted from a GDP-bound inactive state into a GTP-bound active state by a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) (9). TheM. polymorphagenome encodes only one PRONE-type RopGEF, named KARAPPO (MpKAR). Mpkarloss-of-function mutants do not produce gemma primordia (58) (Figure 2). This suggests that optimal activation of ROP GTPase by MpKAR is essential for the protrusion or subsequent asymmetric cell divisions of the gemma initials. TheArabidopsisgenome encodes 14 RopGEFs, and ROP signaling mediated by RopGEF is involved in the control of polar cell growth of pollen tubes and root hairs (29,153). This polar cell growth involves polarized production of reactive oxygen species and the coordination of cytoskeleton organization and vesicular trafficking (18,22). ROP signaling is involved in the asymmetric division for side branch formation in the mossP. patens(150) and that of the stomata mother cell in the monocotZea maysby controlling cytoskeletal scaffolds and nuclear positioning (33,61). RopGEF-mediated ROP signaling seems to have been acquired in the common ancestor of land plants after the emergence of charophycean algae. The ROP-driven control of cell polarity and subsequent asymmetric cell division could be the key innovation for the development of a multicellular body, and the mechanism may have been co-opted to regulate numerous physiological and developmental processes in the course of land plant evolution.
After the establishment of a gemma initial cell, auxin plays a significant role in subsequent gemma development. An auxin-responsive GH3-GUS reporter construct showed high activity in the floor of the gemma cup, suggesting the involvement of auxin in gemma development (71). Inhibition of auxin biosynthesis or induction of nondegradable MpIAA protein impaired gemma development in the early stages (32,37,76). Furthermore, Mparf1loss-of-function mutants show an abnormal cell division pattern from a very early stage in gemma development. The basal cell produced by the first transverse cell division of the gemma initial cell undergoes ectopic division, which is never observed in the wild type. In the later stage, the numbers and positions of apical notches are unstable in Mparf1mutants (77) (Figure 2). These studies suggest that auxin has a role in the formation of the gemma developmental axis.
The vegetative organs and tissues ofM. polymorpha, i.e., rhizoids, ventral scales, and gemma cups, are gametophytic and specific tobryophytes, thalloid liverworts, or Marchantiales species. Therefore, they are not homologous to any sporophytic organs in angiosperms. However, the aforementioned molecular genetic studies of vegetative organs inM. polymorphahave revealed shared mechanisms at the cellular level in the development of vegetative organs between bryophytes and angiosperms. Further studies focusing on vegetative organs and tissues inM. polymorphawill reveal fundamental developmental mechanisms that have already been acquired in the common ancestor of land plants and their diversification in the course of evolution.
M. polymorphais adioicousliverwort that develops multiple archegonia and antheridia in a Marchantiales-specific stalked receptacle (gametangiophore) in female and male individuals, respectively (Figure 1). Under long-day conditions supplemented with far-red light (FR) (see Section 5),M. polymorphadifferentiates gametangium initial cells from the meristematic regions of the thallus and changes the developmental mode of the thallus meristem from vegetative to reproductive to form primordia of gametangiophores. In male plants, the developing antheridiophore differentiates multiple antheridium initial cells from the peripheral epidermal cells. The initial cells undergo multiple cell divisions to form a spindle-shaped antheridium primordium, which then undergoes periclinal divisions and differentiation to form inner spermatogenous cells and an outer layer of jacket cells. The spermatogenous cells subsequently undergo multiple synchronous cell divisions to increase the volume of the antheridium. Each spermatogenous cell then differentiates into a cuboidal-shaped spermatid mother cell, which divides diagonally to form a pair of triangular immaturespermcells termed spermatids. Finally, both spermatids dramatically change their morphology to form a pair of biflagellate sperms (31,122) (Figure 3a). In female plants, the developing archegoniophore expands 9 to 11 finger-like structures to form a highly lobed receptacle. The archegonium initial cells differentiate from the epidermal cells at the root of the finger-like structures and undergo multiple divisions to form three peripheral cells and a single central cell. The peripheral cells develop into the outer layer of the archegonium. The central cell divides transversely, and the daughter cell proximal to the thallus epidermis, termed the primary central cell, undergoes further divisions and differentiations to form the central cell row of the archegonium, consisting of a single egg, a ventral canal cell, and four neck canal cells. The ventral and neck canal cells finally degenerate to form a path for sperm to reach the egg (31,122) (Figure 3b).

Figure 3Click to view


The initiation of reproductive development inM. polymorphainvolves an evolutionarily conserved module consisting of the SQUAMOSA PROMOTER-BINDING-PROTEIN-LIKE (SPL) class of transcription factors and specific microRNAs. In angiosperms, the SPL transcription factors, which are negatively regulated by the miR156 family of microRNAs, accelerate the reproductive transition (110) (Figure 4). Tsuzuki et al. (138) found that miR529c, a microRNA closely related to the angiosperm miR156, targets MpSPL2, encoding an SPL ortholog inM. polymorpha. Knockout of MpMIR529cby genome editing as well as expression of a miR529-resistant version of MpSPL2led to ectopic gametangia formation under noninductive conditions. However, knockout of MpSPL2did not have a major impact on gametogenesis and fertilization. These findings suggest that the MpSPL2-miR529c module contributes to but is not essential for the regulation of reproductive development inM. polymorpha(138) (Figures 1and4). The light and age control of miR156 expression inArabidopsissuggests thatM. polymorphamay also use such signals to regulate reproductive development through the MpSPL2-miR529c module (138).

Figure 4Click to view


Another transcriptional module consisting of the class-C ARF MpARF3 and its repressor microRNA MpmiR160 is also implicated in the transition to reproductive development. This module influences, independently of auxin, many aspects of plant growth and development, including thallus regeneration, gemmae development, air chamber formation, and rhizoid and scale development (38,99). Knockout of MpMIR160inhibited gametangiophore development under inductive light conditions, suggesting that MpARF3inhibits the transition to reproductive development (38) (Figure 1). A combination of differential gene expression and coexpression analyses suggested that genes downregulated by auxin are substantially expressed in gametangiophores, suggesting that repression of auxin signaling plays a role in the reproductive transition inM. polymorpha(39).
A molecular genetic study of a mutant that constantly forms gametangiophores under noninductive conditions (147) revealed that both archegonium and antheridium initial cell differentiation are controlled by MpBNB, the soleM. polymorphamember of the bHLH subfamily VIIIa of transcription factors. MpBNB is mainly expressed in the gametangium initial cell nuclei in a FR-dependent manner and is also detected in egg precursor cells and spermatogenous cells but diminishes in the maturing archegonium and antheridium (Figure 3). Knockout of MpBNBabolished gametangiophore development, whereas artificial activation of MpBNB using a glucocorticoid receptor fusion protein was sufficient for gametangiophore development even under noninductive light conditions, suggesting that MpBNB is a master regulator, controlling gametangium initial cell differentiation and subsequent gametangiophore development, and works downstream of light signaling (146) (Figures 3and4).
The core function of BNB in gametogenesis is likely conserved among land plants. Phylogenetic analyses have shown that subfamily VIIIa bHLHs are specifically found in land plants, including lycophytes, gymnosperms, and angiosperms (13,109,136,146). TheArabidopsis thalianagenome encodes three VIIIa bHLH genes, two of which likely have been duplicated during evolution. These two genes,BNB1andBNB2, are redundantly required for generative cell specification during pollen formation; after meiosis,bnb1 bnb2double mutant microspore is able to undergo the initial asymmetric cell division, but the smaller daughter cell fails to differentiate into a generative cell and is eventually excluded from mature pollen. This phenotype could be complemented by either of theBNB1orBNB2transgenes as well as by MpBNBunder theArabidopsis BNB2promoter (146). The generative cell is the precursor of sperm cells and is differentiated from a microspore, a male gametophytic cell in angiosperms. These studies suggest that BNB is an evolutionarily conserved core regulator of the differentiation of germline cells from haploid gametophytic cells (146).
The sex ofM. polymorphadepends on the segregation of an as-yet-unidentified sex determinant gene located on the sex chromosomes during sporogenesis (see the sidebar titled Sex Chromosomes) (13). A recent study revealed a sex differentiation process downstream of the sex determinant gene (see the sidebar titled Feminizer). By transcriptome analysis of archegonia, Hisanaga et al. (57) identified MpFGMYB, an autosomal gene encoding a MYB-type transcription factor highly related to MYB64, MYB98, and MYB119, which are key regulators of female gametophyte development inArabidopsis(Figures 1and4). Loss of function of MpFGMYBcaused a striking female-to-male conversion phenotype; Mpfgmybknockout mutant plants carrying the female sex chromosome, i.e., genetically female plants, developed morphologically normal antheridiophores. Genetically male Mpfgmybmutant plants carrying the male sex chromosome also developed antheridiophores that were morphologically indistinguishable from those of wild-type male plants. The genetically female Mpfgmybmutant plants produced sperm but with abnormal nuclear and flagellar structures and a lack of motility. This is likely due to the expression of the autosomal genes implicated in sperm morphogenesis in this mutant and the absence of the male sex chromosome genes required for functional sperm (57). Further analysis of the MpFGMYBlocus revealed male-specific expression ofSUF, a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) encoded in the antisense strand. Genome-edited deletion of the putative transcription start site ofSUFwithout affecting the MpFGMYB-coding sequence in the presence of the male sex chromosome led to MpFGMYBexpression and formation of archegonia and archegoniophores, the opposite phenotype of the genetically female Mpfgmybmutant. The mutant archegonia did not produce eggs, suggesting that the female sex chromosome encodes genes required for egg formation. This suggested thatSUFsuppresses MpFGMYBexpression to advance the default male genetic program. Together, these studies suggested that MpFGMYBandSUFconstitute a bidirectional transcription switch that controls sex differentiation inM. polymorpha(57) (Figures 1and4).
SEX CHROMOSOMES
Approximately half of all bryophyte species are dioicous (144). Plant sex chromosomes were first found in the dioicous liverwortSphaerocarpos(5), and later inMarchantia polymorpha(49). Being haploid, or a gametophyte, eachM. polymorphaplant has only one sex chromosome; U for female or V for male (previously referred to as X and Y, respectively). This makes the sex chromosome system in bryophytes, where sex differentiation occurs in the haploid/gametophyte generation, distinct from that in dioecious angiosperms, where sex differentiation occurs in the diploid/sporophyte generation. Each of the U and V chromosomes ofM. polymorphacarries a large cluster of unique repetitive sequences (40,105), which is characteristic to nonrecombining sex chromosomes in general. In addition to U- or V-specific genes, they have several homologous genes in common (13,148), which are expressed constitutively. The presence of such gametologs (42) indicates the common origin of the sex chromosomes inM. polymorphaand the subsequent preservation of essential genes in a haploid system, as predicted by Bull (15).

RWP-RK proteins, a land plant–specific family of transcription factors, are known to be involved in plant germ cell formation and reproductive processes. Among them, the RWP-RK DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN (RKD) subfamily genes are expressed in reproductive cells, including eggs and female gametophytic cells of angiosperms. Ectopic expression ofArabidopsis RKD1andRKD2induced an egg cell–like gene expression program (83). TheM. polymorphagenome harbors four RWP-RK genes, one of which belongs to the RKD subfamily. This gene, MpRKD, is preferentially expressed in maturing egg (Figure 3b) and spermatogenous cells (Figure 3a). Knockout of MpRKDaborted egg formation and prolonged the division of egg precursors, suggesting that MpRKD regulates egg cell differentiation and quiescence maintenance (81,117). In addition, Mprkdknockout plants showed asynchronous spermatogenous cell divisions and differentiation, suggesting that MpRKD is also required forspermcell formation (81). Together, these findings indicate that the RKD proteins are evolutionarily conserved factors that regulate germ cell differentiation in land plants (81,117).
FEMINIZER
Sex inMarchantia polymorphais genetically determined by the sex chromosomes: Individuals with the U chromosome form female gametangiophores, and those harboring the V chromosome produce male gametangiophores. Individuals with both U and V chromosomes morphologically appear as female but are sterile (49), indicating that the U chromosome has a dominant female-determining gene, which has been termedFeminizer. Although the genetic identity of theFeminizersex determinant is under intensive investigation, its downstream genetic switching module, MpFGMYB/SUF, has been uncovered, as described in Section 3.2. There are a few reports on male-determining genes on the male-specific chromosome of dioecious angiosperm species (1,2,46,98).

During egg and sperm cell formation,M. polymorphadramatically changes its epigenetic landscape. Tissue-specific methylome analyses have revealed that the genomes of gametes and sporophytes are highly methylated compared to those of vegetative tissues, suggesting that extensive epigenetic reprogramming occurs during gametogenesis (120).
In the final stage of male gametophyte development,bryophytesproduce flagellated motile sperm, while angiosperms produce immotile sperm cells. The MYB transcription factor DUO POLLEN 1 (DUO1) is the master regulator controlling sperm cell differentiation inArabidopsis. Knockout ofDUO1aborted G2-to-M transition of the generative cell followed by differentiation of two sperm cells (10,116). DUO1 and its downstream targets DUO1-ACTIVATED ZINC FINGER 1 (DAZ1) and DAZ2 regulate various factors for sperm formation and function (11). InM. polymorpha, many homologs of genes required for pollen development and function, includingDUO1(MpDUO1) andDAZ1/2(MpDAZ1), are expressed in developing antheridia (51) (Figure 3a). Higo et al. (50) further showed that MpDUO1is required for sperm morphogenesis (Figure 3a). However, it is not a perfect counterpart ofArabidopsisDUO1; knockout of MpDUO1had no impact on the diagonal division of the spermatid mother cell, which is developmentally equivalent to the second pollen mitosis, but aborted subsequent sperm differentiation, including nuclear condensation and flagella formation (Figure 3a).DUO1transgenes fromM. polymorphaandArabidopsispartially complement each other'sduo1mutant phenotype. These findings suggest that DUO1 has played a conserved role in spermatogenesis since the early stage of land plant evolution (50).
Changes in DUO1 target genes may have driven the evolution of flagellated motile sperm into immotile sperm cells. MpDUO1 does not target the orthologs ofArabidopsisDUO1 target genes but instead regulates the expression of genes encoding the major components of the flagellum and motility apparatus and protamine-like proteins presumably involved in chromatin compaction and nuclear morphogenesis (50).
What is the origin of the DUO1 transcription factor family? During plant evolution, the flagellated motile sperm was acquired in ancestral charophyte algae. The basal lineages of extant charophytes,MesostigmaandKlebsormidium, do not form sperm, whereas stoneworts (Charophyceae) produce flagellated sperm similar to those of liverworts (94). The conjugating green algae (Zygnematales), the closest relatives to land plants, undergo sexual reproduction by conjugation between two different mating types without differentiating sperms and eggs (154). A DUO1 ortholog from the stonewortChara brauniipossesses the MYB-type DNA-binding domain that can bind to the typical DUO1 target DNA sequence found in other species. In the conjugating green algae, the MYB domains of the DUO1 orthologs are mutated and have lost the ability to bind to the target sequence motif. Together, these findings suggest that DUO1 arose in the ancestral stoneworts and has maintained DNA-binding specificity and function during evolution, while its activity was lost in the lineage of conjugating green algae (50).
Bryophytes, pteridophytes, and some gymnosperm species develop motile sperms for fertilization. Each sperm of bryophytes has two flagella, which generate propulsion to swim in water. Upon contact with water, the antheridia release sperms into the water. At the time of release, sperms are encapsulated in cell wall remnants and remain motionless. After exposure to external water, the flagella initiate a beating movement, allowing the sperm to rotate inside its capsule. As the flagellar beating becomes vigorous, sperms finally break out of their capsules and hatch. Released sperms reach female plants by swimming or by being passively delivered by water splashes or streams. After arriving at an archegoniophore, the sperms navigate themselves into the archegonia. The tip of a mature archegonium opens upon contact with water, and the ventral and neck canal cells inside are subsequently discharged from the opening to create a canal leading to the egg. Sperm approach and enter the archegonium to find the egg by detecting an attractant released from the egg itself or its surrounding cells. Although some proteins and salts have been reported to attractM. polymorphasperm (3,88), they are unlikely to be the true attractant, whose chemical identity remains to be elucidated.
The molecular mechanism underlying the chemotactic behavior of plant sperm is mostly unknown. In animals, it is well accepted that Ca2+and cyclic nucleotides (cAMP or cGMP) play critical roles in sperm chemotaxis, and several proteins involved in the process have been identified (152). GLUTAMATE RECEPTOR-LIKE ofP. patenshas been shown to conduct Ca2+and to be essential for sperm chemotaxis (106), which suggests that a Ca2+-mediated navigation system is also present in land plants. InM. polymorpha, a unique membrane protein, MpCAPE, which has both adenylyl cyclase and cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase domains, was identified (75). The facts that the MpCAPE expression is limited to the antheridia and the distribution of its orthologs is limited to basal land plants and charophytes that produce sperms suggest its participation in chemotactic signaling in sperms (Figure 1). Functional identification of other components is essential to elucidate the navigation system of bryophyte sperms.
By fertilization, plants shift their life cycle phase from haploid to diploid, and this transition involves two classes of homeodomain proteins: KNOX and BELL. In the unicellular green algaChlamydomonas reinhardtii, minus and plus gametes express KNOX and BELL proteins, respectively. When the gametes fuse, these two proteins heterodimerize to activate diploid genetic programs (86). In the mossP. patens, KNOX1 is required for the proliferation and differentiation of the diploid body (119). During diploid development, KNOX2 suppresses the haploid genetic programs (118). These twoKNOXgenes are also expressed in the egg during gamete formation (118,119). TheM. polymorphagenome harbors fourKNOXand fiveBELLgenes. MpKNOX1is specifically expressed in egg and is required for karyogamy. MpBELL3and MpBELL4are also required for karyogamy and for the localization of MpKNOX1 protein to the pronuclei after fertilization. MpBELL2 is also involved in this process (Figure 1). These findings suggest that sperm-derived MpBELLs heterodimerize with egg-derived MpKNOX1 and activate the zygotic genetic program, including genes required for karyogamy (26,56). MpKNOX1is also required for postzygotic embryo development, together with MpKNOX2and MpBELL1. MpKNOX1expression is likely regulated by an antisense lncRNA, MpSUK1, whereas MpKNOX2and MpBELL1are epigenetically regulated by polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) (26). These findings suggest that theKNOXandBELLgenes are evolutionarily conserved regulators that define gametophyte and sporophyte stages in the life cycle ofM. polymorpha(26,56).
After fertilization, the zygote takes a few days to undergo a single cell division transverse to the archegonial axis. The resultant embryonic cell proximal to the archegonial stalk is the initial cell of the foot and seta, which are the connective tissues between haploid and diploid bodies (Figure 1). The distal embryonic cell develops into a structure containing the archesporial tissue, which consists of elater mother cells and sporogenous cells. The sporogenous cells further divide and differentiate into sporocytes, which undergo meiosis to produce four spores. The elater mother cells differentiate into elaters, which support spore scattering (Figure 1). These processes of sporophyte development inM. polymorphado not include meristematic tissue formation, in contrast to those in other liverworts and mosses (122).
Sessile land plants resiliently adapt their growth and development to various ambient conditions, such as light, temperature, water availability, and minerals. As photosynthetic organisms, light plays an essential role in plants (41).M. polymorphahas major canonical photoreceptor genes and most of the downstream signaling genes (13). Among these, phytochrome has the most prominent function in the environmental regulation of development. Li et al. (87) reported that the canonical land plant phytochromes were established in a common ancestor of streptophytes and were duplicated independently in mosses, lycopods, ferns, and seed plants, although liverworts and hornworts possess a single gene.Arabidopsishas five molecular species, phyA to phyE (see114for phytochrome nomenclature), that are grouped into type I and type II and are responsible for different modes of actions, such as typical red-light (R)-FR photoreversiblelow fluence response (LFR),high irradiance response (HIR), andvery low fluence response (VLFR). AlthoughM. polymorphahas only one phytochrome gene (MpPHY), it shows LFR and FR-HIR (62,63). Gemma germination and most cell divisions throughout the life cycle are LFRs (63,103) (Figure 1). FR-HIR inM. polymorphaincludes gametangiophore formation (62) (Figure 1). Interestingly, both LFR and FR-HIR are mediated by a common signaling module composed of Mpphy-MpPIF inM. polymorpha. Mpphy shares molecular characteristics with both type I and type II phytochromes. Mpphy is located in the cytosol in the dark and is transported to the nucleus upon both R and FR, similar to type I phytochromes. This similarity is also supported by the presence of MpFHY1, the ortholog of which inArabidopsisfunctions in nuclear translocation of phyA. Mpphy is expressed constitutively and accumulated in light and dark conditions, similar to type II phytochromes. The expression and stability of Mpphy suggest that VLFR is not present inM. polymorpha, as the high accumulation of phyA in the dark followed by R-dependent degradation is responsible for VLFR inArabidopsis. Comparative studies usingM. polymorpha,P. patens, and angiosperms revealed that phytochrome signaling is a typical case of the subfunctionalization and neofunctionalization that propelled evolution (64,111,112).
The induction of gametangiophore formation also depends on the day length, which was reported in 1925 (142), just five years after the discovery of day-length-dependent flowering (43). The plant circadian clock runs on the central oscillator that comprises multiple feedback loops under transcriptional and translational regulation (47,100). The circadian clock components, MpRVE, MpTOC1, MpPRR, MpLUX, MpELF3, and MpELF4, are encoded with no genetic redundancy inM. polymorpha, and some of the encoding genes show circadian rhythm in their expression (89). Further, the orthologous complex of GI-FKF1, which transmits the day length signal from the upstream clock to the flowering regulatory module composed of the transcription factor CONSTANS (CO) and the florigen FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) inArabidopsis, has been identified inM. polymorpha(85). Disruption of MpGIand MpFKFcompletely suppressed gametangiophore formation under inductive conditions, whereas their overexpression resulted in gametangiophore formation under noninductive short day conditions (85). Thus, the MpGI-MpFKF complex controls photoperiodic reproductive induction inM. polymorpha(Figures 1and4). Interestingly, expression of MpGIin theArabidopsis gimutant partially rescued the late-flowering phenotype, indicating that the day-length-dependent regulation of reproduction was evolutionarily conserved, although flowering is unique to flowering plants and occurs in the sporophyte generation. This difference is reflected in the downstream target genes. The two input pathways, the light quality pathway of phy-PIF and the day length pathway of the GI-FKF1 module, are integrated at CO, which regulates the expression of FT inArabidopsis, and at MpBNB, which specifies germline lineage cells inM. polymorpha(Figure 4). Considering the functions of BNB1 and BNB2 in germ cell differentiation ofArabidopsis(146), the environmental regulation of reproduction was more directly connected to sexual reproduction in the gametophyte generation in the common ancestor of land plants, compared with that of angiosperms. We postulate that environmental regulation was gradually rewired throughout evolution to include the flowering process induced by florigen, followed by floral organ development in the sporophyte generation during evolution.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We apologize to all colleagues whose work could not be included in this review due to space limitations. Research in the authors’ laboratories is funded by MEXT/JSPS KAKENHI, grants JP17H07424 and JP19H05675 to T.K., JP17H06472 and JP19K16167 to K.I., JP19H04860 and JP18K06285 to S.Y., and JP20H04884 to R.N. S.Y. is also supported by the Takeda Science Foundation. R.N. was supported by SPIRITS 2017 of Kyoto University.
MarpolBase:https://marchantia.info. An all-in-one genome browser that visually represents gene models, expression and methylation profiles, chromatin modifications, and genomic polymorphisms (96). Tools for sequence search and retrieval, guide RNA design for genome editing, guidelines and a registration system for gene nomenclature, and an archive of relevant literature are available at the website
Phytozome:https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html#!info?alias=Org_Mpolymorpha. A genome browser at JGI (13)
MarpoDB:http://marpodb.io. A gene-centric resource of a United Kingdom laboratory line, Cambridge-1 (24)
Marchantia.org:https://marchantia.org. A collection of images and drawings ofM. polymorphaalong with introductory descriptions and laboratory protocols
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...

Supplemental Video 1: Growth ofMarchantia polymorpha(female). Pictures were taken for 50 days, 1 picture/hour, starting from 28-day-old thalli. The whole sequence was compressed to 25 sec. Far-red light was added to 56-day-old thalli, which appears as ‘jumping’ at the tips of thalli. Female sexual organs (archegoniophores) grow upward after irradiation of far-red light. (Video produced by R. Nishihama and T. Kohchi, Kyoto University)

DownloadSupplemental Table 1(XLSX).
DownloadSupplemental Figure 1(PDF).

Literature Cited


