We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Salicylic acid (SA) is an essential plant defense hormone that promotes immunity against biotrophic and semibiotrophic pathogens. It plays crucial roles in basal defense and the amplification of local immune responses, as well as the establishment of systemic acquired resistance. During the past three decades, immense progress has been made in understanding the biosynthesis, homeostasis, perception, and functions of SA. This review summarizes the current knowledge regarding SA in plant immunity and other biological processes. We highlight recent breakthroughs that substantially advanced our understanding of how SA is biosynthesized from isochorismate, how it is perceived, and how SA receptors regulate different aspects of plant immunity. Some key questions in SA biosynthesis and signaling, such as how SA is produced via another intermediate, benzoic acid, and how SA affects the activities of its receptors in the transcriptional regulation of defense genes, remain to be addressed.
Article metrics loading...
afn1*These authors contributed equally to this article
Salicylic acid (SA) is an essential plant defense hormone that promotes immunity against biotrophic and semibiotrophic pathogens. It plays crucial roles in basal defense and the amplification of local immune responses, as well as the establishment of systemic acquired resistance. During the past three decades, immense progress has been made in understanding the biosynthesis, homeostasis, perception, and functions of SA. This review summarizes the current knowledge regarding SA in plant immunity and other biological processes. We highlight recent breakthroughs that substantially advanced our understanding of how SA is biosynthesized from isochorismate, how it is perceived, and how SA receptors regulate different aspects of plant immunity. Some key questions in SA biosynthesis and signaling, such as how SA is produced via another intermediate, benzoic acid, and how SA affects the activities of its receptors in the transcriptional regulation of defense genes, remain to be addressed.
Upon infection, plant immune receptors recognize diverse pathogen molecules, leading to activation of immune responses at the infection site (163). Plasma membrane–localized pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) can detect widely conserved components of microbes, turning onpattern-triggered immunity (PTI)(79). Adapted pathogens possess evolutionarily less-conserved effectors, many of which are involved in suppressing PTI and promoting virulence. During the evolutionary arms race, additional immune receptors, mostly in the nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat receptor (NLR) family, evolved to detect the secreted pathogen effectors and activateeffector-triggered immunity (ETI)(126). Both PTI and ETI can lead to common downstream events, including Ca2+influx, mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation, defense hormone synthesis, and upregulation of defense genes (92). Local PTI and ETI responses can further induce systemic immunity in distal tissue, a mechanism termed systemic acquired resistance (SAR). SAR provides protection against a broad range ofbiotrophic pathogens.
One of the first reports on the involvement of salicylic acid (SA) in plant immunity was published half a century ago. Tobacco plants treated with SA showed enhanced resistance against tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) (138). Meanwhile, endogenous SA levels in tobacco and cucumber plants increased dramatically following pathogen infections (68,76,97). Most importantly, tobacco plants expressing the bacterial salicylate hydroxylase NahG, which converts SA to catechol, failed to accumulate SA and establish SAR, suggesting that SA is essential for SAR (34). Later studies onArabidopsis thaliana(Arabidopsis) mutants deficient in SA biosynthesis or perception further revealed that SA is also important for PTI and ETI in local tissue (155). Furthermore, recent research uncovered how pathogen-induced SA is produced from its precursor, isochorismate; how SA levels are controlled through regulation of SA biosynthesis as well as metabolism; and how SA is perceived by its receptorsNONEXPRESSER OF PR GENES 1 (NPR1)and NPR3 or NPR4 inArabidopsis.
In plants, SA is produced from chorismate via two independent pathways (25,45) throughisochorismate synthase (ICS)(Figure 1a) andphenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL)(Figure 1b).

Figure 1Click to view


In some bacteria, ICS converts chorismate to isochorismate, which serves as a precursor of SA (75). Analysis ofArabidopsisSA-deficient mutants revealed that pathogen-induced SA is mainly produced via the ICS pathway (139). In theArabidopsisgenome, there are two isochorismate synthase genes,ICS1andICS2, but onlyICS1is induced by pathogen infection. Mutations inICS1, which were identified inSA-deficient 2(sid2) mutants, block SA accumulation upon pathogen infection (139). A small effect ofICS2on SA levels is only observed in theics1 ics2double mutant, suggesting thatICS1is responsible for most of the SA production via isochorismate during pathogen defense (36).
In bacteria, isochorismate is directly converted to SA by isochorismate pyruvate lyase (IPL) (75). Because no IPL homologs are found in plants, it was a mystery how SA is produced from isochorismate. Meanwhile, AvrPphB Susceptible 3 (PBS3) was long known to be required for pathogen-induced SA accumulation (49,57,87), but its role in SA biosynthesis was unclear. Two recent studies revealed that isochorismate is converted to SA by PBS3 via a completely different mechanism than that in bacteria (100,121) (Figure 1a). PBS3 serves as an amidotransferase, which catalyzes the conjugation of isochorismate to glutamate to produce isochorismate-9-glutamate (IC-9-Glu), a key SA biosynthetic intermediate. IC-9-Glu can spontaneously decay into SA (100) or be converted to SA by ENHANCED PSEUDOMONAS SUSCEPTIBILITY 1 (EPS1) (121). Although EPS1 enhances the conversion of IC-9-Glu to SA in vitro, loss of EPS1 function has limited effect on SA levels (162), suggesting that it plays an auxiliary role in SA biosynthesis.
Both ICS1 and ICS2 are localized to the chloroplasts (36), whereas PBS3 is in the cytosol (100). Thus, isochorismate must be transported from the plastids to the cytosol to complete SA production. The MATE transporter ENHANCED DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY 5 (EDS5), which is required for pathogen-induced SA accumulation and localizes to the chloroplast envelope, was originally thought to be involved in SA transport (83,84,108). However, EDS5 was recently shown to be involved in transporting isochorismate to cytosol during SA biosynthesis, as coexpression of ICS1 and an engineered chloroplast-targeted PBS3 could restore SA biosynthesis in theeds5-3mutant (100). Interestingly, fungal pathogensPhytophthora sojaeandVerticillium dahliaesecrete isochorismatases to the cytosol of plant cells to suppress SA-mediated immunity (63). These enzymes likely promote virulence by degrading the cytosolic isochorismate and inhibiting pathogen-induced SA biosynthesis.
Although pathogen-induced SA biosynthesis is dramatically reduced when the ICS pathway is blocked, there is still a small amount of SA in theics1 ics2double mutant (36). Studies using PAL-deficient mutants or a PAL-specific inhibitor suggest that the PAL pathway also contributes to SA biosynthesis inArabidopsis(42,73). In a quadruple mutant ofArabidopsis PALgenes that only retains 10% PAL activity, the basal SA level was reduced by about 75%, while the pathogen-induced SA level was reduced to half (42). Such an unexpected larger reduction of pathogen-induced SA level indicates that SA produced from the PAL pathway may be involved in stimulating SA production from the ICS pathway during pathogen infection.
The intermediates for SA biosynthesis in the PAL pathway were identified by isotope tracing experiments in tobacco.Trans-cinnamic acid (t-CA) is first synthesized from phenylalanine (Phe), and then converted to SA via benzoic acid (BA) (142) (Figure 1b). The conversion of Phe tot-CA by PAL is one of the rate-determining steps in SA biosynthesis.
Abnormal Inflorescence Meristem 1 (AIM1) functions in the β-oxidation of fatty acids (101) and is required for BA production inArabidopsisseeds (6). Although BA-2-hydroxylase (BA2H) activity was shown to be strongly induced in tobacco by BA application and TMV infection (58), the identity of the BA2H is still unknown. The BA2H catalyzing the hydroxylation of BA to SA might be a cytochrome P450 (58).
After the identification of ICS1 as a key enzyme for pathogen-induced SA biosynthesis inArabidopsis, researchers believed that the ICS pathway plays the predominant role in production of SA during plant defense. However, in TMV-infected tobacco plants, the expression ofPALand the corresponding PAL enzymatic activity increased dramatically, whereas no ICS activity or induction of theICSgene were observed, suggesting that SA is mainly produced through the PAL pathway in tobacco during TMV infection (89). In contrast, rice plants accumulate high levels of SA in the absence of pathogen infection. A transfer DNA knockout mutant ofOsPAL6showed about 60% decrease in basal root SA level and exhibited increased susceptibility to the fungal pathogenMagnaporthe oryzae(30). SilencingOsPALs also resulted in reduced SA levels and compromised resistance to brown planthopper, suggesting that SA produced from the PAL pathway contributes to insect resistance in rice (41). AIM1 was shown to be required for the oxidation of cinnamic acid side chain to produce BA for SA biosynthesis in rice (141). Interestingly, both the ICS and PAL pathways were shown to contribute to pathogen-induced SA biosynthesis in soybean. Silencing of eitherICSorPALgenes led to severe reduction of SA accumulation during infection byPseudomonas syringaepv. glycinea(Psg) orP. sojae(110). These findings indicate that there are significant variations in the contributions of the two SA biosynthesis pathways to SA levels in different plant species.
BothICSandPALgenes are present in all sequenced plant genomes. However, having anICSor aPALgene in a plant species does not guarantee the existence of an SA biosynthesis pathway that utilizes it. Isochorismate produced by ICS is also a precursor for phylloquinone, which serves as an electron acceptor in the chloroplast electron transport chain. Because no clear orthologs of PBS3 or EPS1 can be found in most plant species outside the Brassicaceae family (45), the extent to which the ICS pathway is used for SA biosynthesis in different plants needs to be carefully analyzed in the future. Similarly,PALgenes are also involved in the production of many secondary metabolites unrelated to SA. To better understand the evolution of the PAL pathway, it is essential to identify the BA2H enzyme involved in converting BA to SA.
Most plants maintain relatively low SA levels during normal growth and development. Pathogen infections usually lead to a rapid increase in SA levels. The dynamic changes in SA levels are a result of tight regulation of SA production and metabolism.
Arabidopsisplants have low basal SA levels. Upon pathogen infection, the expression ofICS1is rapidly induced, and SA levels increase dramatically. As discussed in two recent reviews (45,155), a large number of positive and negative regulators have been implicated in transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation ofICS1(Table 1). In addition toICS1,EDS5andPBS3are also strongly induced during infection. Transcription of these three SA biosynthetic genes is coordinately regulated by SAR-DEFICIENT 1 (SARD1) and CALMODULIN-BINDING PROTEIN 60-LIKE.g (CBP60g) (Figure 2), two transcription factors in the CBP60 family (118,132,157). The expression ofEDS5is also negatively regulated by the atypical E2F transcriptional repressor DEL1 (12).
Arabidopsisproteins involved in salicylic acid biosynthesis and signaling
Abbreviations: SA, salicylic acid;t-CA,trans-cinnamic acid.

Figure 2Click to view


SARD1 and CBP60g are recruited to the promoters ofICS1,EDS5, andPBS3during infection by the bacterial pathogenP. syringaepv.maculicola(Psm) ES4326 (118). Insard1 cbp60gmutant plants, induction ofICS1,EDS5, andPBS3byPsmES4326 is almost completely blocked, suggesting that SARD1 and CBP60g are key regulators of SA biosynthetic genes in the ICS pathway (118,132,157). Interestingly, a key virulence factor from the fungal pathogenV. dahlia, VdSCP41, directly targets SARD1 and CBP60g to inhibit their transcriptional activity and attenuate plant immunity (94).
Consistent with reduced expression of SA biosynthetic genes,PsmES4326-induced SA accumulation is almost completely blocked in thesard1 cbp60gdouble mutant (132,157). Similarly, induction of SA by the avirulent bacterial strainPsmES4326avrBis also abolished insard1 cbp60g(157), suggesting that SARD1 and CBP60g are critical forETI-induced SA biosynthesis. In addition, SA levels are much lower insard1 cbp60gthan in wild type after treatment with the bacterial elicitor flg22, indicating that SARD1 and CBP60g are required for the activation of SA biosynthesis duringPTI(132). Furthermore, induction ofICS1and SA accumulation in the distal leaves duringSARare also dependent on SARD1 and CBP60g (157). These findings highlight the crucial roles of SARD1 and CBP60g in the activation of SA biosynthesis during different stages of plant immunity.
The importance of SARD1 and CBP60g in promoting SA biosynthesis during plant defense is further confirmed by epistasis analysis using autoimmune mutants such assuppressor of npr1-1, constitutive(snc) 2-1Dandsnc1.snc2-1Dcarries a gain-of-function mutation in the receptor-like protein SNC2 (158), whereassnc1contains a gain-of-function mutation in the Toll/Interleukin-1 Receptor (TIR)-type NLR (TNL) protein SNC1 (154). The elevatedICS1and SA levels insnc2-1Dare completely blocked in thesnc2-1D sard1 cbp60gtriple mutant (118). In contrast, in thesnc1 sard1 cbp60gtriple mutant, bothICS1expression and SA level are considerably lower than insnc1but still higher than in wild type (117), suggesting that upregulation ofICS1and SA biosynthesis insnc1involves other transcription factor(s) in addition to SARD1 and CBP60g.
TheMediatorcomponent CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 8 (CDK8) was recently shown to positively regulate basal SA accumulation by promoting the expression ofICS1andEDS5(43). The function of CDK8 in immunity is dependent on its kinase activity. However, CDK8 does not seem to directly interact with SARD1 and CBP60g, suggesting that the positive roles of CDK8 inICS1andEDS5transcription probably occur through phosphorylating other transcription factors involved in regulating basalICS1andEDS5expression or by increasing RNA polymerase II (Pol II)–dependent messenger RNA elongation ofICS1andEDS5.
The expression of bothSARD1andCBP60gis strongly induced by pathogen infection (131,157). Several transcription factors promote SA biosynthesis by modulating the expression levels of these two master transcription factors (Figure 2). Loss of two partially redundant transcription factors TGACG-BINDING FACTOR 1 (TGA1) and TGA4 leads to reducedSARD1andCBP60gexpression and SA levels during early stages of pathogen infection (115). However, onlySARD1is a direct target of TGA1, suggesting that TGA1 and TGA4 promote the expression ofSARD1directly and modulate the expression ofCBP60gin an indirect manner. Another transcription factor GT2-LIKE1 (GTL1) binds to the promoter ofCBP60gand contributes to its induction during bacterial infection (127).
Conversely, three calmodulin (CaM)-binding transcription activators (CAMTAs) are involved in the negative regulation ofSARD1andCBP60gexpression and SA biosynthesis. In thecamta1 camta2 camta3triple mutant, the expression levels ofSARD1andCBP60gare dramatically increased, leading to higher SA levels (52). Although CAMTA3 was shown to be guarded by the TNLs DSC1 and DSC2 (65), blocking TIR signaling via theeds1-2mutation only partially affects the constitutive defense responses incamta1 camta2 camta3(43). In contrast, the autoimmune phenotypes ofcamta1 camta2 camta3are almost completely suppressed by mutants deficient in SA biosynthesis or signaling (116). In addition, the gain-of-functioncamta3-3Dmutant exhibits reducedSARD1andCBP60gexpression and lower SA accumulation following flg22 treatment or infection byPsmES4326 (48,116). CAMTA3 was shown to bind the promoter ofCBP60gbut notSARD1, suggesting that it directly regulatesCBP60gexpression (116). The regulation ofSARD1by the CAMTAs may be indirect and likely involves other factors. Furthermore, another transcription factor,WRKY70, directly binds to a GACTTTT motif in theSARD1promoter and was implicated in the repression ofSARD1in the absence of pathogens (164).
How the defense signal is transduced from various plant immune receptors toSARD1andCBP60gis not fully understood. Downstream of TNLs, EDS1 and PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT 4 (PAD4) are involved in the activation ofSARD1andCBP60gexpression (21), but the mechanism is unknown. Two redundant receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases, PCRK1 and PCRK2, act downstream of PRRs to promoteSARD1andCBP60gexpression and SA biosynthesis during PTI (55). How they activateSARD1andCBP60gtranscription remains to be determined. The induction ofSARD1andCBP60gduring SAR is mediated byN-hydroxypipecolic acid (NHP), a recently identified long-distance signal for SAR (18,40). However, how NHP activatesSARD1andCBP60gtranscription is still a mystery.
In addition to transcriptional regulation, CBP60g is also regulated by calcium. CBP60g, but not SARD1, carries an N-terminal CaM-binding motif, which is required for its functions in promoting SA biosynthesis and disease resistance (131). Elevated Ca2+levels during ETI and PTI may be critical for CBP60g activation. In addition, Ca2+could influence the transcription ofSARD1andCBP60gby modulating the activities of CAMTA transcription factors (29).
Currently, very little is known on the regulation of SA biosynthesis from thePALpathway.PALgenes from different plant species have been shown to be induced by pathogen infection (149), but how they are regulated during plant defense is unclear. Recently, the MYB protein OsMYB30 was shown to bind the AC-like elements on the promoters ofOsPAL6andOsPAL8and promote their expression in rice (41). Similar toOsPALRNA interference lines, theosmyb30mutant showed lower SA content and reduced resistance to brown planthopper (41).
SA can undergo multiple chemical modifications, including hydroxylation, glycosylation, meth-ylation, and amino acid conjugation, which contribute to the dynamics of SA levels in plants and play important roles in SA homeostasis control. To promote their virulence, pathogens can also modify SA. Some bacterial and fungal pathogens possess SA hydroxylases (e.g., NahG) for inactivating SA (93). SA can also be converted to gentisic acid and further degraded into fumarate and pyruvate by the bacterial pathogenRalstonia solanacearum(66).
In the absence of pathogen infection, the majority of SA inArabidopsisis converted to 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (2,5-DHBA). 2,5-DHBA levels in five-week-oldArabidopsisplants are about 15-fold higher than SA levels (159). The conversion of SA to 2,5-DHBA is catalyzed by SALICYLIC ACID 5-HYDROXYLASE (S5H, also known as DMR6) (159).dmr6/s5hmutant plants accumulate higher levels of SA and exhibit constitutive defense responses and dwarf morphology (147,159), suggesting that S5H plays a critical role in keeping basal SA levels low to maintain a balance between growth and immunity.
During senescence, SA is metabolized into 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid (2,3-DHBA) in a process catalyzed by the SALICYLIC ACID 3-HYDROXYLASE (S3H) (148). Loss of S3H has no effect on SA levels in young plants but results in increased SA accumulation in old plants. In thes3h s5hdouble mutant, SA levels are further increased compared to thes3hands5hsingle mutants, suggesting that S3H and S5H function cooperatively in regulating SA homeostasis (159). On the other hand, UGT76D1, which catalyzes the glycosylation of 2,3-DHBA and 2,5-DHBA, also contributes to SA accumulation and pathogen resistance (46). LikeS3HandS5H,UGT76D1is upregulated by SA and pathogen infection. Interestingly, bothICS1expression and SA levels duringP. syringaepv.tomato(Pto) DC3000 infection are reduced inugt76d1mutants, suggesting that the glycosylation of DHBAs may be involved infeedback regulationof SA biosynthesis (46).
During pathogen infection, a large portion of the newly synthesized SA is converted to SA 2-O-β-d-glucose (SAG). InArabidopsis, SAG levels are usually about 5–10-fold higher than those of free SA. TwoArabidopsisUDP-glycosyltransferases, UGT74F1 and UGT76B1, exhibit high in vitro activity in converting SA to SAG (88). Inugt74f1andugt76b1mutants, SAG levels are reduced, whereas free SA levels are elevated compared to wild-type plants, suggesting that UGT74F1 and UGT76B1 are required for SA glycosylation in planta (88). SA can also be converted to SA glucose ester (SGE), but its relative contribution to SA homeostasis is unclear. UGT74F2 is the key glycosyltransferase involved in SGE formation inArabidopsis(22). Inugt74f2mutant plants, SGE formation is completely abolished.
SA can also be methylated to produce methyl SA (MeSA), which is volatile and can be released by plants. Only a small fraction of SA is converted to MeSA, as the amount of MeSA produced is much lower than the amount of SAG and DHBAs inArabidopsis(2). Blocking MeSA production has no clear effect on basal SA levels and pathogen-induced SA accumulation (2). MeSA can be converted back to SA by the esterase SA-BINDING PROTEIN 2 (SABP2) in tobacco, and it was suggested to be a long-distance signaling molecule forSAR(91). However, loss of SALICYLIC ACID/BENZOIC ACID CARBOXYL METHYLTRANSFERASE (BSMT1) abolishes MeSA production but has no effect on systemic SA accumulation or SAR, indicating that MeSA is not required for SAR inArabidopsis(2). MeSA was recently shown to be glycosylated by UGT71C3 inArabidopsis, which reduces the accumulation of MeSA and SA, revealing another way SA homeostasis is regulated (16).
Conjugation of SA to the amino acid aspartate (Asp) is yet another SA modification identified in planta. InArabidopsis, the formation of SA-Asp is catalyzed by the acyl acid amido synthetase GH3.5/WES1 (17,67), which is also involved in the conjugation of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) to Asp (90). SA-Asp is much less active in inducingPR1expression than SA, suggesting that the conjugation of Asp to SA may be used to attenuate SA-mediated defense responses (17). As the amount of SA-Asp produced in plants is unknown, its relative contribution to SA homeostasis remains to be determined.
SA was also shown to be sulfonated in vitro by the sulphotransferase AtSOT12 (3). However,sot12knockout mutant plants accumulated less SA, whereas the AtSOT12-overexpressing lines accumulated more SA compared to the wild type. How AtSOT12 affects SA accumulation and whether sulfonation of SA occurs in planta remain to be determined.
To identify components required for SA signaling, several independent forward genetic screens were carried out to search for SA-insensitive mutants inArabidopsis(8,10,23,109)Notably, most of the mutants isolated were alleles ofnpr1, suggesting thatNPR1plays a key role in connecting SA and downstream responses. NPR1 contains a Broad-complex, Tramtrack, and Bric-à-brac/poxvirus and zinc finger (BTB/POZ) domain; a central Ankyrin repeat (ANK) region; and a C-terminal transactivation domain (11,104). The BTB-POZ domain is involved in the homo-dimerization of NPR1 protein (140), whereas the ANKs interact with the redundant TGACG-binding transcription factors TGA2, TGA5, and TGA6 (153). Increasing evidence supports the theory that NPR1 serves as an SA receptor.
Ligand binding is a typical feature of receptor proteins. Recombinant NPR1 was shown to have high affinity for SA [dissociation constant (Kd)around 200 nmol] in several studies (28,69,140). An R432Q substitution in the predicted SA-binding pocket of NPR1 abolishes SA binding (28,133). Importantly, the expression of the NPR1R432Qmutant protein in thenpr1-1mutant could not complement its SA-insensitive mutant phenotype, suggesting that SA binding is required for the activation of SA-responsive defense genes by NPR1 (28).
Since NPR1 lacks a DNA-binding domain, it exerts its regulatory role through TGA2, TGA5, and TGA6, which function redundantly in promoting SA-inducedPRgene expression (156). In vivo transcription assays showed that NPR1 functions as a transcriptional activator (32,104). It complexes with TGAs and the CBP/p300-family histone acetyltransferases HAC1 and HAC5 to stimulate SA-inducedPR1expression (50). Several components of theMediatorcomplex, including MED14, MED15, MED16, and MED19a, are required for the induction ofPRgenes by SA or its analog BTH (7,9,150,151), suggesting that this complex is involved in connecting the NPR1-TGA complex with Pol II during the activation of SA-responsive genes (Figure 3a). Notably, the oomycete pathogenHyaloperonospora arabidopsidis(Hpa) effector HaRxL44 attenuates SA-mediated immunity by interacting with MED19a to promote its degradation via the proteasome (7). How SA stimulates the transcriptional activator activity of NPR1 is currently unknown. The recruitment of NPR1 to thePR1promoter was shown to be unaffected by SA treatment (104). It will be interesting to test whether SA stimulates interactions between NPR1 and components of the Mediator complex.

Figure 3Click to view


While most studies on SA signaling focus on the function of NPR1 in the nucleus, there is some evidence suggesting that NPR1 also plays roles in the cytoplasm to regulate SA-dependent processes. For example, NPR1 that has been targeted to cytosol by fusing it with the hormone-binding domain of a rat glucocorticoid receptor can restore SA-mediated suppression of jasmonic acid (JA)-inducedPDF1.2expression but not the SA-inducedPR1expression, indicating that cytosolic NPR1 is able to modulate the crosstalk between SA and JA signaling pathways (112).
A recent study by Zavaliev et al. (146) showed that exogenous SA application induces NPR1 condensates and promotes NPR1–Cullin 3 (CUL3) interaction in the cytosol. Treatment with 5 mmol of SA promotes the formation of cytosolic NPR1 condensates, whereas 1 mmol of SA is sufficient to induce condensate formation by npr1sim3, asumoylation-deficient mutant of NPR1 that is predominantly localized to the cytosol upon SA treatment. As the concentrations of SA applied in this study are much higher than the physiological SA levels, the biological significance of the NPR1 condensate remains to be determined. Upon treatment with 1 mmol of SA, NPR1/npr1sim3and CUL3 were shown to interact in the cytosolic condensates using bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays. Immunoprecipitation performed on npr1sim3-GFP in mock- and SA-treated plants identified 171 proteins that showed more than twofold enrichment in SA-treated samples compared to mock-treated samples. These proteins were designated as components of SA-induced NPR1 condensates. Among them, there is an overrepresentation of defense- and stress-associated proteins. However, considering that the expression of the genes encoding many of these proteins (e.g., PR1) is highly induced by SA, their enrichment in the SA-treated samples could be reflecting merely the increase in their protein levels rather than a true interaction with npr1sim3-GFP. It remains to be determined how many of these proteins actually associate with NPR1.
NPR3andNPR4encode two closely relatedNPR1paralogs that have a similar domain structure as NPR1. However, in contrast to NPR1, they serve as redundant negative regulators of immunity (152).npr3 npr4double mutants display elevated basalPRgene expression along with enhanced basal resistance (152), whereas the gain-of-functionnpr4-4Dmutant exhibits compromised SA-induced defense gene expression and disease resistance, similar tonpr1mutants (28). Unlike NPR1, NPR3 and NPR4 function as transcriptional repressors of SA-responsive genes when the SA level is low (28) (Figure 3a). They also interact with and function through TGA2, TGA5, and TGA6 to regulate their target genes (28,152). NPR3 binds to SA with similar affinity as NPR1, whereas NPR4’s affinity with SA is about five times higher than that of NPR1 (28,33). SA inhibits the transcriptional repression activities of NPR3 and NPR4 to release the repression of their target genes (28). The R419Q substitution in the NPR4-4D mutant protein abolishes the SA-binding ability of NPR4, leading to constitutive repression of SA-responsive genes regardless of SA levels (28).
The ligand-bound crystal structure of theArabidopsisNPR4-SA-binding core (SBC) consisting of the region between amino acids 373 and 516 was reported recently (133). In the NPR4-SBC, there are five closely packed α-helices, and the SA-binding site is located in the C-terminal four-helix bundle-like fold. Surprisingly, the SA-binding pocket is buried in the hydrophobic core of the NPR4-SBC, with no opening for the entry of the ligand in the structure. Because the SA-contacting residues should be accessible for SA in the unbound state, a conformational change likely occurs upon SA binding. There are 14 amino acids directly in contact with SA. Remarkably, all of them are conserved in NPR1, suggesting that the SA-binding pocket is similar in NPR4 and NPR1. One of the key residues required for SA binding is R419, which was mutated innpr4-4D. R419 neutralizes the carboxyl group in SA via a salt bridge and hydrogen bond, and the R419Q substitution disrupts this interaction and abolishes SA binding.
SA does not affect the interactions between NPR3/NPR4 and TGAs (28). Consistently, binding of NPR3 and NPR4 to the promoters of their target genes is not affected by SA treatment (28). How SA inhibits the transcriptional repression activity of NPR3 and NPR4 is still unknown. In the C-terminal domain of NPR3 and NPR4, but not NPR1, there is a conserved ethylene-responsive element binding factor–associated amphiphilic repression (EAR)-like motif required for the transcriptional repressor activity (28), which might facilitate the interaction between NPR3/NPR4 and an unknown putative corepressor involved in blocking the access of Pol II to the promoters of the target genes (Figure 3a). In the SA-bound SBC structure, the EAR motif is located in a disorganized loop linking α-helices 2 and 3 (133). It would be interesting to determine whether SA induces a conformational change in the region around the EAR motif, leading to disruption of the interaction between NPR3/NPR4 and the putative transcriptional corepressor(s).
Perception of SA by two groups of receptors with opposite functions allows for the repression of defense responses when SA levels are low and immune activation as SA levels increase (Figure 3a). Although recombinant NPR1 and NPR4 proteins have been shown to interact in vitro (133), genetic evidence suggests that NPR1 and NPR3/NPR4 function independently in two parallel SA signaling pathways (28). Loss of NPR1 function does not affect the constitutive expression of defense-related genes in thenpr3 npr4double mutant (28). In addition,npr1-1andnpr4-4Dgenerally have additive effects on SA-induced defense gene expression as well as resistance to pathogens (28). The biological significance of the interactions between NPR1 and NPR4 remains to be determined in the future.
In addition to NPR1 and NPR3/NPR4, a large number of plant SABPs with varied affinities to SA were identified by biochemical approaches (53). Although the biological significance of SA binding by most SABPs under physiological concentrations of SA is unknown, some of them may be involved in sensing SA in biological processes other than plant immunity. For example, SA-mediated inhibition of H2O2detoxifying enzymes such as catalase and ascorbate peroxidase is implicated in regulating redox homeostasis in plants (19,31). In addition, inhibition of Phosphatase 2A (PP2A) activity by SA affects auxin transport and root growth (120).
An early study in tobacco identified SABP1 as a catalase involved in H2O2scavenging (19). The activity of SABP1 is inhibited by SA (Kd= 14 μmol) but not its biologically inactive analogs. SA also inhibits the enzyme activity ofArabidopsisCATALASE 2 (CAT2), which was implicated in SA-mediated repression of auxin accumulation and JA biosynthesis during plant defense (145). Loss of CAT2 activity leads to increased accumulation of H2O2, resulting in the sulfenylation of tryptophan synthetase β subunit 1 to inhibit its activity and reduced production of the auxin biosynthetic precursor tryptophan. CAT2 also promotes JA production by interacting with and stimulating the activities of the JA biosynthetic enzymes ACYL-COA OXIDASE 2 (ACX2) and ACX3. High concentrations of SA inhibit the interaction between CAT2 and ACX2/ACX3, reducing ACX2/ACX3 activity and JA biosynthesis.
Phosphatase 2A subunit A1 (PP2AA1) was originally identified as a candidate SABP in a high-throughput screen (69). The binding of SA with aKdaround 3.6 μmol using the surface plasmon resonance method was recently confirmed (120). PP2A negatively regulates phosphorylation of the auxin efflux carrier PIN2 in plants, and this activity is inhibited by SA, most likely through the interaction between SA and PP2AA1 (120). Accordingly, SA treatment enhances the phosphorylation of PIN2 and inhibits auxin transport, leading to attenuated root growth and development.
Fine-tuning of SA signaling is critical in plant immunity. On one hand, the amplification of SA-mediated immune signaling is required for effective defense against pathogens. On the other hand, SA signaling needs to be controlled to prevent overactivation of the immune response, which is harmful to plant growth. Both transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation of SA receptors were shown to contribute to the balancing of SA signal output (Figure 3).
Pathogen infection induces the transcription ofNPR1(15,105,151) andNPR3/NPR4(152). In addition, exogenous application of SA or its analogs induces the expression ofNPR1,NPR3, andNPR4(15,105,152). As overexpression ofArabidopsis NPR1confers enhanced disease resistance (11), upregulation ofNPR1expression likely plays an important role in plant defense. Several W-box sequences in the promoter ofNPR1are required for the induction ofNPR1as well as its function in SA signaling, indicating that regulation ofNPR1transcription, likely by theWRKYs, is crucial in SA-mediated defense responses (144). It is worth mentioning that the expression ofNPR1andNPR3/NPR4is significantly induced by treatment with theNHPprecursor pipecolic acid (40), suggesting that NHP is also involved in regulating SA signaling output, in parallel with promoting SA biosynthesis.
NPR1is among the target genes of the master immune transcription factors SARD1 and CBP60g; its induction by pathogen infection is partially dependent on SARD1 and CBP60g (118). A recent study showed thatNPR1is required for its own induction by SA (15). As theMediatorcomplex facilitates the communication between transcriptional activators and Pol II, it is not surprising that some Mediator components are involved in the transcriptional regulation ofNPR1andNPR3/NPR4. The CDK8 kinase module was shown to positively regulate SA-inducedNPR1expression (15). Another subunit of Mediator, MED14, is required for the induction ofNPR1andNPR3/NPR4during infection byPtoDC3000avrRpt2(151). The transcription factors activatingNPR3andNPR4are currently unknown.
Considering that basal SA levels inArabidopsis(∼1.4 μmol) are much higher than theKds of recombinantNPR1and NPR3/NPR4 proteins, whereas SA-responsive genes are not activated by basal levels of SA, posttranslational modifications of NPR1 and NPR3/NPR4 proteins may affect their affinity to SA in planta (28). Most studies of posttranslational regulation of SA receptors have been on NPR1. When SA levels are low, NPR1 is shown to exist mostly in oligomers formed through intermolecular disulfide bonds (81). NPR1 oligomers are reduced to monomers in response to redox changes induced by increased SA accumulation during pathogen infection (81). However, in light of a recent report that NPR1 oligomerization occurs in vitro during sample preparations under nonreducing conditions (47), the biological significance of NPR1 oligomerization may need to be reevaluated. NPR1 is also subjected to several other modifications, includingS-nitrosylation,sumoylation,ubiquitination, and phosphorylation (56,106,113,119). Interestingly, thePseudomonaseffector AvrPtoB targets NPR1 for polyubiquitination and degradation via the 26S proteasome to suppress SA-mediated immunity (13). Although no posttranscriptional regulation of NPR3 or NPR4 has been reported, some of the amino acid residues that are subjected to posttranslational modifications in NPR1 are conserved, and may also be modified, in NPR3 and NPR4.
Two residues in NPR1, C82 and C216, are involved in oligomerization through intermolecular disulfide bonds, as mutations in C82 and C216 cause increased monomerization and nuclear accumulation of NPR1 (81). In addition,S-nitrosylation at C156 byS-nitrosoglutathione was also reported to facilitate NPR1 oligomerization (119). The conversion of NPR1 oligomers to monomers is catalyzed by thioredoxins (119). As previously discussed (155), since SA-induced redox change occurs much later than SA-induced defense gene expression, SA-induced monomerization of NPR1 is unlikely to be involved in the initial activation of SA response. Rather, it may serve as a positive feedback mechanism to increase the amount of active NPR1 protein (47) (Figure 3b).
Proteasome-mediated degradation plays an important role in the turnover of NPR1 inArabidopsis(Figure 3b). NPR1 was shown to be degraded in the nucleus in a CUL3-dependent process (113). In thecul3a cul3bdouble mutant, increased NPR1 accumulation leads to elevated basalPRgene expression. NPR1 turnover was found to be promoted by the phytohormone abscisic acid in a CUL3-dependent manner (27). A recent study showed that the E4 ubiquitin ligase UBE4/MUSE3 also contributes to proteasome-mediated degradation of NPR1, whereas UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 6 (UBP6) and UBP7 deubiquitinate NPR1 to increase its stability (111). SA-inducedPR1expression is modestly reduced in thecul3a cul3bdouble mutant but is significantly higher in theube4mutant, suggesting that the initial ubiquitination of NPR1 may contribute to its activation before it is further ubiquitinated and degraded (111).
NPR3 and NPR4 were shown to interact with NPR1 and CUL3 in vitro and were suggested as the adaptors of the CUL3 ubiquitin E3 ligase involved in NPR1 degradation (33). However, no interaction between CUL3 and NPR3/NPR4 was detected in planta (28). Innpr3 npr4double mutant plants, NPR1 protein levels are higher than in the wild type (33), which could be due to increased NPR1 transcript levels or reduced NPR1 turnover facilitated by E3 ligase(s) regulated by NPR3 and NPR4. Considering that NPR3 and NPR4 have been shown to act as transcriptional repressors in an NPR1-independent manner, reconstituted ubiquitination assays need to be carried out to test whether NPR3 and NPR4 indeed have E3 ligase activity toward NPR1.
In addition to ubiquitination, sumoylation is similarly involved in the regulation of NPR1 turnover. NPR1 is sumoylated by SMALL UBIQUITIN-LIKE MODIFIER 3 (SUMO3), and NPR1 sumoylation is required for its degradation (106). Interestingly, a lower concentration of SA is required for inducing the formation of cytosolic condensate by the sumoylation-deficient npr1sim3mutant compared to the wild-type NPR1(146), although the biological significance of such condensate remains to be elucidated.
Phosphorylation is also involved in regulating the stability of NPR1. For example, phosphorylation at S11 and S15 of NPR1 is required for its ubiquitination and degradation (113). When the sumoylation site on NPR1 was mutated, phosphorylation could not be detected at S11 and S15, suggesting that sumoylation is a prerequisite for S11 and S15 phosphorylation (106). In addition, phosphorylation of NPR1 on S55 and S59 was detected in planta, which inhibits NPR1 sumoylation and increases its stability (106). NPR1 could also be phosphorylated at S589 and potentially at T373 by SNF1-RELATED PROTEIN KINASE 2.8. The phosphorylation of T373 and S589 may be important for nuclear translocation of NPR1 during infection (56).
Multiple mechanisms are involved in the positive feedback amplification of SA-mediated immune responses (Figure 3). In addition to inducing the transcription ofNPR1and monomerization of NPR1 protein, SA also promotes its own biosynthesis. It strongly induces the expression ofSARD1andCBP60g(28), which, in turn, upregulate the expression ofICS1, EDS5,PBS3, andNPR1to enhance SA biosynthesis and perception (118).
Aside from positivefeedback regulation, SA also negatively regulates its own accumulation through its receptors (Figure 3b). The expression of SA modification genesDMR6andUGT76B1is directly regulated by NPR1 and NPR4 (64). SA strongly induces the expression ofDMR6andUGT76B1in wild type but not in thenpr1-1 npr4-4Ddouble mutant. Consistent with the expression ofDMR6andUGT76B1, accumulation of 2,5-DHBA and SAG duringPtoDC3000AvrRpt2infection is dramatically reduced innpr1-1 npr4-4D, suggesting that SA stimulates its own conversion to the inactive 2,5-DHBA and SAG through its receptors to attenuate SA signaling (64). In addition, the NPR1 and NPR3/NPR4 target geneWRKY70is involved in the negative regulation of SA biosynthesis (28,128). Mutations inWRKY70and its close homologWRKY54result in elevatedICS1expression and SA levels before and after pathogen infection (128). Induction ofWRKY70andWRKY54by SA likely plays a critical role in negative feedback regulation of SA-mediated defense responses.
In addition toNPR3andNPR4, the expression ofNIM1-INTERACTING 1(NIMIN1), which encodes another negative regulator of SA signaling, is also strongly induced by SA (137). NIMIN1 interacts with NPR1 to negatively regulate NPR1-mediated immune responses (137). Knocking outNIMIN1results in stronger SA-inducedPR1expression, whereasNIMIN1overexpression causes phenotypes similar tonpr1mutants, including reduced SA-inducedPR1expression, compromised SAR, and SA intolerance inArabidopsis(78,137). In contrast, overexpression of a NIMIN1 mutant protein that is unable to interact with NPR1 has no effect on SA responses and SAR, indicating that the suppression of plant defense by NIMIN1 requires its interaction with NPR1 (137). The concerted induction of negative regulators of SA-responsive genes such asNIMIN1andNPR3/NPR4by SA is likely an important mechanism for negative feedback regulation to prevent overactivation of SA-mediated immune responses (Figure 3).
SA is a well-established signaling molecule forSAR. How SA signaling contributes to SAR was unclear until recently. A study by Liu et al. (64) showed that upregulation of NHP biosynthetic genesAGD2-LIKE DEFENSE RESPONSE PROTEIN 1(ALD1),SAR-DEFICIENT 4(SARD4), andFLAVIN-DEPENDENT MONOOXYGENASE 1(FMO1) is abolished in the primary leaves ofnpr1-1 npr4-4Ddouble mutant plants infected byPsmES4326. Accordingly, local production of NHP is blocked, suggesting that perception of SA is required for the activation of NHP biosynthesis in locally infected tissue (64). Considering that NHP serves as an essential long-distance signal for SAR (18,40), a major contribution of SA to SAR is to stimulate the production of the mobile signal in local tissue. SA perception activates the expression ofSARD1andCBP60g(28), which is required for inducing NHP biosynthetic genes and NHP production during pathogen infection (116,118), suggesting that regulation of NHP production by SA is mediated by SARD1 and CBP60g.
In addition to promoting NHP biosynthesis, SA also functions downstream of NHP in SAR. SAR that is induced by exogenous NHP treatment is blocked innpr1-1andnpr4-4Dmutant plants, suggesting that the activation of SA signaling is required for NHP-induced immunity (64). Similarly, constitutive defense responses in theFMO1-3Dmutant due to overexpression ofFMO1can be suppressed by mutations innpr1-1andnpr4-4D(64). Considering that treatment with NHP or its precursor, pipecolic acid, induces the expression ofSARD1andCBP60gas well as SA biosynthetic genes, NHP most likely activates plant immune responses by stimulating SA production (18,40). Together, SA and NHP form a mutual amplification loop to promote SAR (Figure 4).

Figure 4Click to view


The critical role of SA in basal resistance was originally shown usingArabidopsis NahGtransgenic plants. Blocking SA accumulation by NahG results in increased growth of the virulent bacterial pathogenPtoDC3000 and oomycete pathogenHpaNoco2 inArabidopsisplants (24). The importance of SA in basal resistance was further confirmed by the enhanced susceptibility to bacterial and oomycete pathogens insid2,eds5,npr1, andnpr4-4Dmutants (10,28,84). In wild-typeArabidopsisplants, treatment withPtoDC3000 (or SA) induces rapid stomatal closure, but this effect was absent in thesid2mutant andNahGtransgenic plants, suggesting that SA promotes closure of stomata to limit bacterial entry (72,74). SA also induces closure of plasmodesmata (135), which may reduce the spread of viral pathogens.
SA signaling is also required forPTI.sid2plants support higher growth of the type III secretion-deficientPtoDC3000hrcCand display reduced flg22- or elf18-induced resistance againstPtoDC3000 than wild-type plants (122,123).npr1-1andnpr4-4Dsingle mutant plants also support higher growth ofPstDC3000hrcCand display compromised flg22-induced protection againstPtoDC3000 (28,64). Thenpr1-1 npr4-4Ddouble mutant supports even higher growth ofPtoDC3000hrcCand exhibits further reduced flg22-induced resistance againstPtoDC3000, suggesting that perception of SA by bothNPR1and NPR4 is important for PTI (28,64). Following SA treatment, the expression of many genes encoding PRRs and PTI signaling components is rapidly induced, which may play critical roles in the amplification of PTI responses (28).
Early studies usingArabidopsisNahG transgenic plants showed thatETIis also severely compromised when pathogen-induced SA accumulation is blocked (24). However, mutations inEDS5andSID2were later found to have only small effects on the growth of the avirulent bacteriaPtoDC3000avrRpt2(84). Nevertheless, a recent study showed that perception of SA by NPR1 and NPR4 plays essential roles in ETI (64). Althoughnpr1-1andnpr4-4Dsingle mutants support only slightly higher growth ofPtoDC3000avrRpt2andPtoDC3000avrRps4than wild type, growth of the two avirulent bacterial strains is dramatically increased in thenpr1-1 npr4-4Ddouble mutant, suggesting that perception of SA by both NPR1 and NPR4 contributes to ETI (64). A large number of NLR genes and ETI signaling components are rapidly induced after treatment with SA (28). Their induction may be critical for amplification of ETI responses.
SA signaling is also involved in controlling the magnitude of cell death during ETI (95). In wild-typeArabidopsisplants, pretreatment with SA blocks cell death induced by theavirulent pathogenPsmES4326avrRpm1(26). In contrast, cell death induced by the same bacterial strain is significantly increased in thenpr1-1mutant compared with wild type (98). Similarly, ion leakage induced byPtoDC3000avrRpt2is enhanced ineds5-3andnpr1-1 npr4-4Dmutants, whereas constitutive activation of SA signaling innpr3 npr4mutant plants results in the suppression of cell death activated by AvrRpt2 (95). These findings suggest that SA plays a crucial role in restricting cell death in ETI, most likely through the induction of components involved in negative feedback regulation of cell death.
Immune responses insid2mutants were traditionally considered to constitute SA-independent defense. However, a recent study showed that both ETI and PTI are more severely compromised in thenpr1-1 npr4-4Ddouble mutant than insid2-1, suggesting that residual levels of SA insid2mutant plants can be perceived by NPR1 and NPR4, which still contribute to plant immunity (64). It will be interesting to identify the target genes regulated by basal SA and determine how they affect plant defense against microbial pathogens.
While SA promotes resistance againstbiotrophic pathogens, JA contributes to immunity againstnecrotrophic pathogens. Interestingly, SA and JA antagonize each other in these processes (37) (Figure 4). On the one hand, JA has been shown to inhibit SA accumulation in plants. In the JA-insensitiveArabidopsis coi1andjin1mutants, SA accumulates to higher levels than in the wild type (54,86). Coronatine (COR), a phytotoxin produced by variousP. syringaestrains, mimics JA-Ile, the active form of JA (114). COR promotes bacterial entry by stimulating the reopening of stomata closed by PTI activation (74). COR prevents SA accumulation by activating the expression of the SA methyltransferaseBSMT1and inhibits SA biosynthesis by activating the expression of three related NAC transcription factors that negatively regulateICS1expression (160). In contrast, SA inhibits JA accumulation during pathogen infection. Pretreatment with SA inArabidopsiscauses a small but significant reduction of JA accumulation induced by the necrotrophic fungal pathogenBotrytis cinerea(145). In thesid2-1mutant andNahGtransgenic plants, the reduced SA accumulation results in a dramatic increase in JA levels during infection byPtoDC3000 (112,145). InNicotiana attenuate, silencingNPR1leads to increased SA biosynthesis and reduced JA levels as well as compromised JA‐elicited defense against herbivore attack (99).
SA also negatively regulates the expression of JA-responsive genes (112). Two SA-inducedWRKYtranscription factors, WRKY70 and WRKY62, are involved in this process. In transgenic plants overexpressingWRKY70, the expression of the JA-responsive genePLANT DEFENSIN 1.2(PDF1.2) is reduced, and resistance to the necrotrophic pathogenAlternaria brassicicolais compromised (59,60). In contrast, loss of WRKY70 function results in increased expression ofPDF1.2and enhanced resistance toA. brassicicola(59). Similarly, induction of the JA-responsive genesLOX2andVSP2by methyl JA is reduced inWRKY62overexpression lines and increased inwrky62mutant plants (70). Additionally, GRX480, a member of the glutaredoxin family, is also involved in the repression of JA-responsive gene expression.GRX480is rapidly induced by SA, and its overexpression leads to the suppression of MeJA-inducedPDF1.2expression (85). GRX480 interacts with the TGA transcription factors, and the repression ofPDF1.2by overexpression of GRX480 is dependent on TGA2, TGA5, and TGA6, suggesting the involvement of the TGAs in the repression of JA-responsive genes (85).
We should bear in mind that the interactions between SA and JA are not always antagonistic. Both JA and SA contribute to RPS2-mediated ETI (62,123). While prolonged treatment or treatment with higher concentrations of SA and JA results in antagonism, application of low concentrations (10–100 μmol) of SA and JA together leads to a transient synergistic enhancement in the expression of JA-responsive genes such asPDF1.2inArabidopsisand the SA-responsivePR1a-GUSreporter gene in tobacco (82).
SA plays an important role in growth–defense tradeoff. Exogenous application of SA has various effects on growth and development depending on the plant species, the stage of development, and the concentration of SA used (102). Although treatment with low concentrations of SA stimulates growth in some plant species, high levels of SA almost always negatively impact plant growth. For example, application of 1 mmol of SA leads to severe growth retardation inArabidopsisseedlings (96). Blocking SA hydroxylation also results in severe dwarfism due to SA overaccumulation (147,159). Similarly, autoimmune mutants with constitutively high levels of SA often exhibit dwarfism (125). The reduced stature of some of the autoimmune mutants, such assnc1andsnc2-1D, can be alleviated by blocking SA biosynthesis or SA signaling (28,154). Meanwhile, increased biomass and seed yield were observed insid2mutant andNahGtransgenic plants, further supporting the theory that endogenous SA inhibits growth inArabidopsis(1).
Growth inhibition by SA happens partly through the attenuation of auxin signaling (Figure 4). Transcriptome analysis revealed that the expression of 21 genes involved in auxin signaling is suppressed by treatment with the SA analog BTH (129). Consistently, 1-naphthaleneacetic-acid-induced expression of the auxin-responsive marker geneDR5inArabidopsisseedlings is suppressed by SA treatment (129). SA also suppresses auxin production indirectly by inhibiting CAT2 activity (145) and negatively affects auxin transport by modulating the phosphorylation of PIN2 through inhibiting protein phosphatase 2A activity inArabidopsis(120), as discussed in Section 4.3. Because auxin negatively impacts resistance to pathogens (90,129), SA-induced reduction of auxin signaling may play a critical role for plant immunity.
Given the trade-off between plant immunity and growth, it is not surprising that SA also contributes to heterosis or hybrid vigor in some cases. In a study involving theArabidopsisC24 ecotype, which retains high SA levels, the F1 hybrids of C24/Ler and C24/Col were found to have lower SA levels and expression of SA-responsive genes than C24 had, as well as increased vegetative growth compared to the parental lines, suggesting a correlation between decreased SA concentration and heterosis in C24 hybrids (38). In a separate study, enhanced activation of SA biosynthesis was observed in someArabidopsishybrids, which most likely accounts for the enhanced resistance toPtoDC3000 in the hybrids (143).
SA and ethylene (ET) can play mutually inhibitory roles in defense response and in plant development (Figure 4). ET regulates apical hook formation of etiolated seedlings through transcription factors ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE 3/EIN3-LIKE 1 (EIN3/EIL1), which activate the expression of a central regulator of hook developmentHOOKLESS1(HLS1) (136). A recent study showed that the exogenous application of SA suppresses the apical hook formation and ET-inducedHLS1expression in a partiallyNPR1-dependent manner (44). Further analysis revealed that NPR1 interacts with EIN3 to inhibit its binding to the promoter ofHLS1. In contrast, ET inhibits the production of SA. Excessive ET accumulation leads to lower SA levels inethylene overproducer 1(61), whereas the ET-insensitiveein3-1 eil1-1double mutant exhibits elevatedICS1expression and SA levels (14).
In an early study, SA treatment was shown to induce flowering in both the short-day (SD) plantLemna paucicostataand long-day (LD) plantLemna gibba, indicating that SA could be a regulator of flowering time (20). InArabidopsis eds5andsid2mutants andNahGtransgenic plants, severely delayed flowering was observed under SD conditions (71). Consistently, the SA overaccumulating mutantsap and miz1 domain-containing ligase1-2(siz1-2) displays an early flowering phenotype that can be suppressed byNahGexpression (51). These findings suggest that SA is a positive regulator for floral transition (Figure 4).
However,win3-1, a loss-of-function mutant ofPBS3/WIN3, flowers earlier than wild type under LD conditions (130). Considering that PBS3/WIN3 catalyzes the conversion of isochorismate to IC-9-Glu in SA biosynthesis (100), it will be important to determine whether it is the reduced SA level or increased accumulation of its precursor isochorismate inwin3-1that contributes to the early flowering phenotype.
SA is also involved in regulating senescence in plants (Figure 4). SA levels inArabidopsisleaf tissue increase during senescence and the transcript levels of several senescence-induced genes are reduced innpr1mutant andNahGtransgenic plants, suggesting a correlation between senescence and SA levels (80). Transcriptome analysis revealed that about 19% of genes upregulated during senescence showed at least a two-fold reduction inNahGtransgenic plants (5). Consistent with the gene expression data, leaf senescence is delayed insid2mutant andNahGtransgenic plants (1,5). Furthermore,S3H, which is responsible for converting SA to 2,3-DHBA, is upregulated during senescence (148).s3hknockout mutants accumulate high levels of SA and display precocious senescence, whereas transgenic lines overexpressingS3Hexhibit reduced SA levels and delayed leaf senescence (148).
The mechanism for how SA regulates senescence is unclear. Several SA-induced WRKY transcription factors, including WRKY6, WRKY53, and WRKY75, were reported as positive regulators of senescence (39,77,103). WRKY75 was also found to promote SA synthesis by targeting the promoter ofSID2/ICS1(39). The SA levels are elevated inWRKY75overexpression lines, and blocking SA synthesis can inhibit accelerated senescence inWRKY75overexpression lines, suggesting a mutual amplification between SA and senescence (39).
Most of the studies on SA in regard to plant growth and development were carried out using mutants affecting SA levels or NPR1-dependent SA signaling. In light of the discovery that NPR3 and NPR4 serve as SA-responsive transcriptional repressors, it will be interesting to determine whether and how NPR3/NPR4-mediated SA signaling contributes to plant growth and development regulation. The recent identification of the SABP PP2AA1 as a critical component in the SA-mediated inhibition of auxin transport also raises the question whether other SABPs are also involved in regulating plant growth and development in response to SA.
Research from the past three decades usingArabidopsisas a model has led to great progress on our understanding of SA biosynthesis and signaling. With the completion of theICSpathway inArabidopsis, a better picture has emerged of how genes involved in pathogen-induced SA biosynthesis are coordinately regulated by the transcription factors SARD1 and CBP60g. The evolution of the ICS pathway and its contribution to SA biosynthesis outside the Brassicaceae family still need to be analyzed. Studies of various plant enzymes involved in SA modification showed that SA homeostasis is under the control of complex mechanisms. The identification of NPR1 and NPR3/NPR4 as SA receptors addressed a longstanding question of how SA is perceived during plant defense and provided new tools for analyzing the roles of SA in plant immunity. It also raised new questions on how SA affects the transcriptional activities of the receptors to promote defense gene expression, which need to be addressed in future studies.




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We apologize to colleagues whose work was not included in this review due to space constraints. We thank Kevin Ao and Karen Thulasi Devendrakumar for suggestions and careful reading of the manuscript, and we thank the NSERC-Discovery program for financial support.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


