We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Zhi-Hong Xu is a plant physiologist who studied botany at Peking University (1959–1965). He joined the Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology (SIPP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), as a graduate student in 1965. He recalls what has happened for the institute, during the Cultural Revolution, and he witnessed the spring of science eventually coming to China. Xu was a visiting scholar at the John Innes Institute and in the Department of Botany at Nottingham University in the United Kingdom (1979–1981). He became deputy director of SIPP in 1983 and director in 1991; he also chaired the State Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics SIPP (1988–1996). He worked as a visiting scientist in the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore, for three months each year (1989–1992). He served as vice president of CAS (1992–2002) and as president of Peking University (1999–2008). Over these periods he was heavily involved in the design and implementation of major scientific projects in life sciences and agriculture in China. He is an academician of CAS and member of the Academy of Sciences for the Developing World. His scientific contributions mainly cover plant tissue culture, hormone mechanism in development, as well as plant developmental response to environment. Xu, as a scientist and leader who has made an impact in the community, called up a lot of excellent young scientists returning to China. His efforts have promoted the fast development of China's plant and agricultural sciences.
Article metrics loading...
Zhi-Hong Xu is a plant physiologist who studied botany at Peking University (1959–1965). He joined the Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology (SIPP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), as a graduate student in 1965. He recalls what has happened for the institute, during the Cultural Revolution, and he witnessed the spring of science eventually coming to China. Xu was a visiting scholar at the John Innes Institute and in the Department of Botany at Nottingham University in the United Kingdom (1979–1981). He became deputy director of SIPP in 1983 and director in 1991; he also chaired the State Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics SIPP (1988–1996). He worked as a visiting scientist in the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore, for three months each year (1989–1992). He served as vice president of CAS (1992–2002) and as president of Peking University (1999–2008). Over these periods he was heavily involved in the design and implementation of major scientific projects in life sciences and agriculture in China. He is an academician of CAS and member of the Academy of Sciences for the Developing World. His scientific contributions mainly cover plant tissue culture, hormone mechanism in development, as well as plant developmental response to environment. Xu, as a scientist and leader who has made an impact in the community, called up a lot of excellent young scientists returning to China. His efforts have promoted the fast development of China's plant and agricultural sciences.
In October 1942, during the Japanese occupation of China, I was born to a family of merchant employees in Wuxi, Jiangsu Province. My family had lived in Jiangyin on the bank of the Yangtze River for generations. Due to family difficulties, my father finished primary school and only one year of middle school with the help of relatives. In 1925, at the age of 14, my father left home for Wuxi to work as an apprentice in a shop to learn business. Later, he became an assistant accountant at a rice mill, and then worked as an accountant for another mill.
Just as the family conditions began to improve, the Anti-Japanese War broke out on July 7, 1937, and the Japanese army attacked Shanghai on August 13. The war was getting closer and closer to Jiangyin. My father rushed back to Jiangyin to bring my grandmother, mother, younger uncle, and elder brother to escape to a small town, Nanfangquan, by Taihu Lake in Wuxi for a short time, and then they escaped to Shanghai and took refuge in the Foreign Concession for a couple of months, since my grandfather worked in Shanghai at that time. Eventually, my family settled in Wuxi in June of 1938 after a hard journey. My mother has given birth to eight children; three died, and five sons survived. I'm the second son.
Wuxi, a very beautiful and historical city with green hills and clear waters, is located on the shore of the endless Taihu Lake, with the ancient Grand Canal, built starting in 500 BC, passing through the city.
In the fall of 1947, I entered a primary school located not far away from my home. The school was on a very small lane, and the classroom was converted from an ancestral temple where the family of Qian offered sacrifices to ancestors. I lived in Wuxi until I graduated from Wuxi No. 2 Senior High School in 1959.
As a child, I enjoyed mountain climbing, and playing by Taihu Lake with several friends of similar age in my neighborhood. I liked catching crickets and grasshoppers, picking mulberry leaves to feed silkworms, fishing and raising goldfish, which brought me a lot of fun and, accidentally, curiosity towards the colorful world of life. I liked the wildfields very much. Nature always has a lot to attract me and make me linger in her broad and magnificent embrace.
When I was in junior high school, I met a good biology teacher who taught me both zoology and botany as well as how to do experiments. There was no laboratory then, but I still remember observing the scales on butterfly wings and the trichomes of plant leaves under a dissecting microscope in his office. That was my first contact with the micro world. For me, the world of life that is not clearly visible to the naked eye is so magical and full of attraction. We also conducted the seed germination test to observe the growth process of seedlings. It was through my teacher's inspiration that my interest in biology increased day by day.
When I was in senior high school, biology was no longer part of the curriculum, and there was only a one-semester physiological hygiene course. The catchphrase among students at that time was, “math, physics, and chemistry are the strongest power to the world.” It was also clear to me that I was not suitable for studying liberal arts by nature because I didn't like reciting texts and I was not good at remembering historical dates. But my grades in science courses were good. My high school was next door to the famous Donglin Academy, founded in AD 1111 in the Northern Song Dynasty. Its couplet was this: “In my ears are the sounds of wind, rain and reading. To my concern are the affairs of family, state and the world.” This reflected the Chinese literati's style and spirit and inspired me to study hard and serve our motherland in the future. In senior high school, I had enough spare time to go to the library to borrow books I was interested in. I had the opportunity to read Darwin'sOn the Origin of Species, though only superficially. Darwin traveled around the world to investigate, collect specimens, and do research. Such a life was so attractive that it became my ideal. I also admired the famous horticulturists Burbank, from the United States, and Michurin, from the former Soviet Union, who bred a large number of horticultural varieties and sparked my interest in horticulture. After reading a lot of books on horticulture and fruit science, I also started to grow plants at home, including bitter gourd, morning glory, garden balsam, and chrysanthemums. I dreamed of becoming a horticulturist, too.
The beautiful scenery of my hometown made me intoxicated with the natural world. I looked forward to more in-depth exploration of the mysteries of life in the future.
In the spring of 1959, I prepared for the college entrance examination during the last semester of senior high school. My head teacher in senior high school taught chemistry. She advised me to major in chemistry or mathematics. But my interest was not in these two majors. Due to my great interest in biology and horticulture, I decided to apply for biology and agriculture specialties. At that time, one could apply for ten specialties, but I only filled out five. My first choice was the Department of Biology at Peking University, my second and third choices were the horticulture and vegetable specialties at the Peking Agricultural University (now China Agricultural University), and my fourth and fifth choices were the genetics and microbiology specialties at Fudan University in Shanghai. In my impression, the entrance examination was not too difficult. Soon after I took it, I received the acceptance letter from Peking University—I was accepted by my first choice. Only then did my family know that I was going to Beijing. My mother said only that it was so far away from home, but the whole family was very excited to see that I would study at Peking University as the first college student in my family. Going to Beijing was also my first long journey away from home. When I boarded the train at Wuxi Station and watched my parents through the window as I left my hometown, I could no longer hold back the tears. The train at that time ran very slowly, taking a day and a night for the whole trip. I was so excited that I couldn't sleep at all. I kept looking out of the window at the scenery along the way. With the train going north across the Yangtze River and the Yellow River, I embarked on the journey of learning life sciences.
I entered Peking University in the autumn of 1959, together with more than 120 other enrolled undergraduates in the Department of Biology. In that year, undergraduate education in science at Peking University had just been changed from a four-year to a six-year curriculum. We were told that the extension was to cultivate high-quality talents and enable graduates to reach the graduate level. Of course, we were proud to hear that.
The undergraduate courses at Peking University put great emphasis on laying a solid foundation. Students in the first and second year spent a lot of time taking broad and basic courses, such as advanced mathematics, physics, radiology, and chemistry. In the Department of Biology, all students had to study cytogenetics, cytology, physiology, biochemistry, and evolution.
There were 34 students in the area of plant physiology and botany. For the first three years, we attended almost all classes together. After the fourth year, students majoring in plant physiology took more courses in plant physiology, while students like me majored in botany, which placed more emphasis on the plant tissue and cell structure and morphogenesis. Key courses for botany included plant morphology and anatomy, plant physiology, plant systematics, plant embryology, and plant ecology. The firm foundation laid in my undergraduate botany courses indeed helped me a lot in my later research career in plant science.
With in-depth study in the field, I became increasingly interested in the mechanisms of plant development and morphogenesis in particular. How did apical meristem cells form different tissues and organs during development? How did a fertilized egg cell form an embryo and then grow into a plant? I took several courses in this particular area, including plant reproductive physiology, taught by Tsung-hsun Tsao; comparative morphology of vascular plants, taught by C.L. Lee; plant embryology, taught by Shi-Yi Hu; and plant hormones, taught by Cheng Tsui of Nankai University.
I was even more amazed by the hypothesis of plant cell totipotency, proposed by G. Haberlandt (23), a German botanist, in 1902. Later, when I read a paper published in 1958 by F.C. Steward (47), an American plant physiologist, and J. Reinert (45), a German botanist, on the regeneration of complete plants from carrot somatic cells—the first experimental evidence to prove the totipotency of plant cells—I felt that Haberlandt was a genius and that his idea really was amazing!
Professors at Peking University in those days seldom used general textbooks; they preferred to offer temporary handouts, which had been a tradition of the old Peking University, even when I was studying there in the 1960s. I still keep several biology professors’ handouts, all of which were engraved with steel plates and printed on very poor quality paper during that period of hard times. However, from these handouts, we could see the professors’ efforts in preparing those lessons, trying to present the latest research results to us. Although each professor had a different teaching style, we were deeply impressed by their earnest attitude toward teaching, their strict demands on students, and their honesty.
In addition to classroom studies, I had the chance to read a lot of books on plant biology on the side. My motivation for reading was simple: interest and curiosity. For example, I found great appeal inMorphogenesis in Plants, by C.W. Wardlaw (54);Apical Meristems, by F.A.L. Clowes (15); andPlant Growth Substances, by L.S. Audus (2). These books greatly enriched my knowledge. In my spare time, I also read classical fiction and Chinese poems.
By the end of my fourth year, most of my courses were completed, and in my fifth year, I spent most of my time in the laboratory doing experiments and writing my thesis.
To cultivate students’ scientific research capacity, Peking University provided solid experimental training. In addition to experimental courses, an important course was the semester thesis, which was equivalent to a literature review for the graduation thesis. To do research in certain fields, we first learned how to search and read literature extensively, how to analyze and sort out ideas, how to find problems that could be studied, and then how to write a review of the cited literature. The preparation phase of the semester thesis was very important training for me. In our sixth year, we spent nearly a full year doing experiments and writing the graduation thesis.
Besides plant morphogenesis and cell totipotency, another scientific problem attracting me at that moment was how plant hormones function in controlling growth, development, and flowering. Hoping to find a connection between these two problems, I decided to choose this as my research direction.
Tissue culture is an important tool to study plant cell totipotency and morphogenesis and the role of plant hormones. In the 1960s, there were not many laboratories conducting plant tissue culture research in China. Tsung-hsun Tsao from the Laboratory of Plant Physiology in the Department of Biology was studying the effects of plant hormones on in vitro formation of male and female flowers in cucumber. C.L. Lee from the Laboratory of Botany was one of the few botanists at the time using plant tissue culture technology to study plant morphogenesis in China, and he taught probably the first plant tissue culture course in the country. He studied the experimental morphogenesis ofPinus koraiensisembryos and the stem tips ofStachys sieboldiiby using in vitro culture. He later became the tutor for my graduation thesis. He had a senior assistant, Xin-Ying Zhang, who was responsible for helping him guide senior students like me to perform experiments and write papers. I was lucky to communicate a lot that year with these two individuals.
They also devoted a lot of energy to improving students’ writing. At that time, most students learned Russian as their foreign language in senior high school, then studied it for another two years at university. We began to learn English from fourth year as our second foreign language. After studying Russian for such a long time, it was not so difficult for me to read English scientific books and papers, as many scientific terms are similar in Russian and English.
Since there were no computers during that time, writing was tedious and very time-consuming. Students needed to revise on paper many times on the basis of suggestions given by teachers. Furthermore, the graduation thesis needed to be handwritten using a Song Dynasty–style typeface after the manuscript was finalized, which took even more time.
Under the guidance of my two tutors, I completed my fifth-year thesis (a review paper), “Embryo Culture of Gymnosperms,” and sixth-year graduation thesis, “Effects of Maleic Hydrazide on In Vitro Embryo Culture ofPinus tabuliformis.”
During my six-year undergraduate studies at Peking University, the country entered its three-year difficult economic period, from 1959 to 1961. Luckily, the government guaranteed every student in the universities in Beijing 16.25 kg of staples per month. However, because of the extreme lack of fat, meat, eggs, and vegetables, and because students were still physically developing, most of my classmates, including me, suffered from hunger. Due to malnutrition, some students developed edema and hepatitis. Small pieces of land were assigned to each class to grow vegetables for our department's student canteen. As biology students, we even collected water grasses from Weiming Lake, on campus, to eat. We also collected fallen leaves on campus in autumn and tried to extract proteins from them. At a student meeting convened by the department leaders, we were asked to calculate the ATP amounts in the food we ate every day, to reduce physical exercise, and to pay more attention to rest. Some of our classmates dropped out of school for health reasons, but the library and reading room of Peking University were still full of students every day.
The teaching plan at Peking University was mostly based on the model of the former Soviet Union universities, and field practice was an essential component for students majoring in plant physiology and botany. I had two field practice courses at the Beijing Botanical Garden of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). In the first one, arranged before summer vacation of my fourth year, I learned from teachers in the fruit tree research group how to graft apples and pears.
I was very excited to observe the survival of fruit trees two or three weeks after grafting. I remembered that my teacher told us the effects of a rootstock variety cannot be judged in a year or two—it may take decades to clearly know the effects of rootstock varieties on the character of grafted varieties. Only then did I realize how difficult it was to study the effects of fruit tree grafting. The dedication and persistence of these fruit breeders were truly admirable!
I also learned grape breeding. I followed the instructions of a grape breeding expert, Sheng-Chen Li, who was working on cold tolerance of grapes. One of the common grape varieties in Northern China was Muscat Hamburg. This variety and many others suffered from insufficient tolerance to cold. So every year before winter, growers had to remove grape vines from their trellises and cover them with soil, and every year in spring they had to remove the soil and place the grape vines back on the trellises; this took a lot of labor and time. Li and his team were trying to cross Muscat Hamburg with a wild grape (Vitis amurensis) found in northeastern Changbai Mountain, which is able to withstand a low temperature of −40°C, to develop new varieties that can survive the cold winters in Beijing. This idea was really attractive to me!
The emasculation required to perform the breeding is a tedious and hard job due to the small grape flowers and the very hot sun even in early summer in Beijing. But I was full of interest, and dedicated myself to it without hesitation. Notably, it was only a few years ago, when I was involved in evaluating the agricultural projects of CAS in Ningxia, among which there were cold-tolerant grapes, that I knew my tutor's research on cold-resistant grape cultivation at the Beijing botanical garden had finally been successful. It took over 50 years from the hybridization to the cultivation of new varieties!
In the fifth summer of my college life, I started my internship at the same botanical garden to study the orchids in the greenhouse and to perform comparative anatomical observation of leaves of different species ofCymbidium. It was a totally different experience when compared with grafting and breeding fruit trees. Ying-Xiang Wu, my tutor, was a famous orchid expert in China. He, together with an assistant, taught several internship students, including me, the characteristics of different orchid species in the greenhouse. We then collected samples and performed paraffin sections, and we compared the leaf structure of different orchids. When I worked in the greenhouse, I could see diverse and colorful plant species and enjoyed memorizing their Chinese and Latin names when passing through every day.
In addition, Jinwu Wang, a plant taxonomist at Peking University, brought us to Jinshan Wildlife Experimental Station in the suburbs of Beijing to learn the local plant species. He also took students to learn plants at Yan Garden on the Peking University campus. The campus has more than 300 plant species, belonging to over 90 families. Years later, when I retired from my position as president of Peking University, I and my colleague Hongya Gu served as chief editors of the bookPlants of Yan Garden, published in 2011. The book is appreciated by Peking University teachers, students, and alumni.
In the same year, I spent over a month working on the farm at Beijing Four-Season People's Commune, together with some of my classmates. By that time, we had finished all the plant-related courses in the curriculum. We followed instructions from experienced farmers to learn how to grow different vegetables such as cucumber, eggplant, tomato, garlic, and green pepper and used this opportunity to obtain practical experience. I learned to grow cucumber and tomato and observed their growth and development.
During my six years of study at Peking University, I spent about a year on field practice and internships in the countryside and botanical gardens. The field practice and the skills I learned during that period were useful in the research I did later. These experiences, including college life in the starvation age, benefited me a lot though they were full of hardships. In my opinion, people should make full use of opportunities to learn and to grow in every possible environment. Such capacity is crucial for the long-term development of a person.
Toward the end of my college life, I intended to pursue postgraduate studies for further exploration and a career in the study of plant tissue culture and morphogenesis. I told C.L. Lee about this idea. He liked it very much and asked me if I wanted to stay at Peking University. Although it would have been good to stay with a familiar laboratory and professors, I had been at Peking University for six years already and wanted to make a change. Then he told me that one of the best scholars in the plant tissue culture area in China was Shih-Wei Loo of the Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology (SIPP), who had been working on plant tissue culture since the mid-1930s. After the founding of the New China, he served as the director of the Teaching and Research Laboratory of Plant Physiology at Peking University and later went to SIPP to serve as director of the Laboratory of Plant Growth and Development. He also established and served as director of the Plant Hormone Research Laboratory. Shih-Wei Loo and C.L. Lee are old friends. Lee recommended me to Loo.
CAS by that time had already been recognized as the leading research institution in China, with a large number of outstanding scientists and fancy equipment. I learned later that there were two research directions in the Plant Hormone Research Laboratory of SIPP: plant hormones and tissue culture.
In the winter of my sixth year of college at Peking University, I took the entrance examination for CAS graduate students. I applied for the plant tissue culture position in Loo's lab, and he recruited me.
In the summer of 1965, I finished my undergraduate study and obtained the diploma from Peking University. The solid knowledge foundation, strict professional training, and rich practical experience I gained there were invaluable treasures in my later career development. I am very grateful to the university.
At the beginning of 1966, I went to SIPP, located along with three other CAS research institutes (Institute of Biochemistry, Institute of Experimental Biology, and Institute of Physiology) in Shanghai in a building built by the Japanese during the occupation. After the victory in the Anti-Japanese War, some biological research institutions of the Academia Sinica were established there during the Kuomintang Government period. After the founding of the New China, the four CAS institutes reorganized at this location—plus the neighboring Institute of Materia Medica—which became the location most representative of modern life sciences in China.
At that time, Tsung-Le Loo served as director of SIPP. He studied in Japan in his early years under Sakamura Tetsu, a famous Japanese plant physiologist at Hokkaido University, and received his doctoral degree. He specialized in mineral nutrition of plants and also served as director of the Laboratory of Plant Radiation Physiology. He is the founding president of the Chinese Society of Plant Physiology. At that time, SIPP had two deputy director scientists: Hung-Chang Yin (photosynthesis) and San-Chiun Shen (microbial molecular genetics). At that time, the main research work of the institute included photosynthesis and carbon assimilation, plant metabolism, plant growth and development, plant hormones, plant nutrition, water and stress physiology, radiation physiology, and microbiology.
When I arrived at SIPP, the institute had just gone through a political movement called Four Cleanups. Most basic research stopped. Researchers were arranged to go to people's communes in Songjiang and Jiading, Shanghai, to execute applied research projects related to main crops. My tutor, Shih-Wei Loo, went to the Malu Commune in Jiading, where rice and cotton were grown in the summer and rapeseed, barley, and wheat in the winter. I went with him a few days after my arrival in Shanghai. Malu Commune treated Loo well and provided us a separate room, instead of having us sleep in a big room with more than 20 people. The room was about seven to eight square meters, with two wooden beds and one small table tightly packed together. It took us 20 minutes to walk from this room to the Malu Chemical Plant, where we worked.
Shih-Wei Loo proposed a field experiment using the plant hormone gibberellic acid (GA) to promote crop growth and development to see whether it had the potential to increase the crop yield. At that time, GA could be produced through industrial fermentation, but the cost was relatively high. In order to reduce the cost, we intended to produce GA using the strain ofGibberella fujikuroithrough large-scale open solid fermentation in the chemical plant. By following the protocol developed in Loo's laboratory in 1958, I explored the production method myself. The fluorescence determination of GA concentration in the water extract was carried out at SIPP.
The field experiment was conducted by using a crude GA extract. The cadres of the commune showed great interest in whether GA could increase the yield of major field crops such as rice, wheat, and rapeseed, but I had my suspicions, based on the experiments conducted by Loo's laboratory in the late 1950s, that GA had positive effects only in certain vegetables, such as celery. Fortunately, soon after the Cultural Revolution began, Loo was called back to SIPP, and this work was temporarily suspended. Later on, unexpectedly, Shanghai set off another wave of large-scale application of GA, unilaterally publicizing its yield-increasing effect, which to a certain degree damaged its reputation. But since it has been found that in rice GA efficiently overcomes the panicle enclosure problem of male sterile lines and promotes the elongation of the uppermost internode of the rice restorer line, which helps efficient pollination, promoting hybrid seed production, GA has been widely used in the production of hybrid rice seed in China.
At that time, Loo was almost 60 years old, 35 years older than me. Due to criticism, his mental state was not very good. He worked hard and meticulously and didn't talk much outside of work.
After I returned to the dormitory one evening, I said to Loo, “I have applied to be your graduate student to study plant tissue culture. I am still very interested in this direction. Do you have any suggestions on how to pursue the work in the future?” He didn't answer immediately and sat quietly. After a few minutes, he sighed and said, “I suffered from the tissue culture all my life!”
Shih-Wei Loo began to tell me about his experience. As one of the earliest scholars engaged in plant tissue culture in China, he hoped that tissue culture could be used to study the growth and differentiation of cultured cells and to breed new crops and produce medicinal plant products of great value. However, during the Four Cleanups movement, Loo was criticized for his tissue culture work and was forced to throw away all the tissues and cells cultivated in bottles and jars. The tissue culture research was also interrupted. He felt bitterly disappointed. I still didn't understand after hearing his words. I never thought that a scientist could be deemed to have made a big mistake due to engagement in tissue culture. That was the first time I felt that a highly respected intellectual could suffer a great setback in a political movement because of academic rather than political issues.
Nonetheless, with an interest in tissue culture, I told Loo at the time, “I would still love to do research on tissue culture.” He answered me, “If you really insist on doing research in this field, I recommend some books and articles to you!” He wrote me a list of documents later, and I borrowed these materials from the CAS Shanghai Branch Library and studied them carefully after returning to Shanghai. I recall that this occurred in early March 1966, when it snowed heavily once.
By May 1966, the activities of the Cultural Revolution had become more and more intense. Since the posting of the first big-character poster by several people at the Peking University, universities and research institutions had become involved in the turbulent waves of the Cultural Revolution, ranging from Beijing to all parts of the country, and the institutes of CAS were not spared.
Big-character posters criticizing the academic authority were also posted on the wall of Malu Town. Soon, Loo was also implicated. Before long, those senior scientists were instructed to return to the institute to participate in the Cultural Revolution, and colleagues working in the countryside also went back.
After Loo returned to the institute, I continued working in the countryside because the Malu Commune was eager to build a mushroom strain factory to promote the cultivation of mushrooms. I had never learned mushroom strain and mushroom cultivation, so I asked Loo for help.
At that time, Loo was already in adversity. He wrote a letter and asked me to go to the Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences to contact Mei-Peng Chen, director of the Edible Fungi Research Institute, who is a fellow-townsman of Shih-Wei Loo. He studied in France in his early years and is an authority engaged in edible fungi research in China. When I contacted Chen, I learned that he had been criticized, too, but he received me very warmly, gave me several books and materials, and explained some points in the cultivation of mushroom strains. In this way, I and two young locals practiced while reading and studying and set up the first mushroom strain plant in the Malu Commune. Later, I felt sincerely happy to see that they were able to operate the strain plant on their own.
If primary school and high school bring people interest and enlightenment, universities should lay a solid foundation of knowledge and provide the ability to learn, think, and work independently; explore and overcome difficulties; and solve problems. When students leave campus, whatever they do, these foundations can enable them to further expand, learn, and grow. I always adhered to this idea, even when I returned to Peking University as president many years later.
During the Cultural Revolution, the research order at SIPP was greatly damaged. Researchers spent most of their time on political studies, writing big-character posters, and participating in criticism meetings. At the beginning, the leaders of the institute were criticized; no one among our directors and party secretaries was spared. In the second stage, it was primarily the so-called bourgeois reactionary academic authority that was criticized. The criticism was sometimes ridiculous. For example, Hung-Chang Yin, the deputy director, was criticized for instilling bourgeois academic thought into colleagues and young researchers by recommending the bookThe Art of Scientific Investigation, written by the British scientist Beveridge (7). Then I read the Chinese translation and found it a good introduction to young scholars who had just entered the scientific research hall. The Red Guards ran into old leaders’ and senior professors’ yards to search their houses and confiscate their property; some of them were regarded as “the monsters and freaks,” meaning class enemies, and they were forced to wear high hats on their heads or hang tags around their necks to get fierce criticism. In 1968, the workers’ propaganda team and the People's Liberation Army propaganda team were stationed at SIPP to master the management power jointly with the revolutionary committee of SIPP. In March 1968, the “cleanup of class ranks” started, that is, the personnel investigation aiming to dig out hidden counter-revolutionaries. A storm swept through SIPP. One prominent member of the Shanghai Municipal Revolutionary Committee even claimed that SIPP was a special agents’ nest, and some senior researchers in the institute were suspected as special agents and severely persecuted due to having worked in the Academia Sinica during the Kuomintang period or studied abroad. The criticism became increasingly fierce and violent. Even so, there were still many colleagues who expressed their sympathy for the criticized in silent language. At that time, there were 348 employees at SIPP, and at most 142 were subject to isolation review sometimes. Personal freedom for those in isolation review was restricted. During that period, 305 out of 348 employees of the institute were required to live day and night in the institute (the other 43 left and took full rest), making everyone feel insecure. Several researchers committed or attempted suicide due to the physical and mental stress (52).
In August 1968, according to a notice from the Revolutionary Committee of CAS, all CAS graduate students had to go to the army farm to receive reeducation. We followed a militarized regime during the reeducation period. The male graduate students of the Shanghai Institutes of Life Sciences plus several other institutes in Nanjing and Qingdao were assigned to the army farm in Gegu, Tianjin, which was originally a reed beach of littoral wetland, and then was converted to a paddy field. Besides the political learning and meetings, the daily work mainly included planting rice and vegetables and raising pigs to meet the demands of the entire army farm. It was my first time observing the entire growth and development cycle of rice. I didn't expect that this would benefit my later rice research projects. I did learn a lot from this experience. Just before departure, the CAS Revolutionary Committee, which was the CAS authority during the Cultural Revolution, also gave the order that no foreign language or scientific books should be brought with us; onlySelected Works of Mao Tse-Tungand some political books were permitted. I thought to myself that if I forgot English, how could I do research in the future? Several of my classmates shared the same idea with me, so we decided to take the English versions ofQuotations from Chairman Mao Tse-TungandSelected Works of Mao Tse-Tung—nobody could prohibit us from bringing these books! In this way, we could read the English versions of these books in our downtime from labor for a year and a half before we left Tianjin in early 1970.
At the beginning of 1970, I and other graduate students returned to Shanghai after reeducation at the Tianjin army farm. Some of us were arranged to participate in “the review work of clean up of class ranks.” Because the superiors were already aware of the serious problems with SIPP, the original workers’ propaganda team and People's Liberation Army propaganda team were withdrawn and replaced with new ones. At that time, I was joining the review work for filing the confession materials of several old professors in our research laboratory, including the director of our institute, S.L. Loo, and my supervisor, Shih-Wei Loo. I read with a heavy heart the so-called confession materials that they were forced to write when they were reviewed. I can hardly imagine the torture and inexplicable crimes that those senior researchers experienced during that period. In the end, it was concluded that there was no political problem in those materials; all the wrong conclusions originally given were denied!
After the review, the situation of our institute gradually improved, and the pressure on the old professors was reduced. After Deng Xiaoping and some of the old leaders of the Chinese government resumed their positions in 1973, the institute could conduct some applied research, although it was still difficult to conduct basic research. Each laboratory was divided into small teams to go to the countryside, and the senior scientists also joined us. I participated in the Chinese medicinal group and studied problems in the cultivation ofFritillaria thunbergii(a traditional Chinese medicinal plant) with Shih-Wei Loo. I went to the state-run Xinhai Farm and Changzheng Farm on Chongming Island, Shanghai, to work on herbicides in paddy rice and cotton fields. I went there for several months in each of two years. In the later part of the Cultural Revolution, people realized that tissue culture technology could be used for breeding, and it was no longer criticized. The use of anther culture for haploid inbreeding was vigorously developed throughout the country, and we restarted the research on tissue culture. My colleagues and I were invited to run training courses on plant tissue culture for grassroot and technical personnel and to help Nanhui Agricultural Research Institute and Qingpu Agricultural Research Institute, Shanghai, to run laboratories for anther culture and haploid breeding work. But soon the country began to criticize Deng Xiaoping's “resurgence of the bourgeoisie line,” and the institute once again set off another tide of criticism. I remembered that a big-character poster of the workers’ propaganda team criticized the research on seedless watermelons conducted by the laboratory of Shih-Wei Loo, asking, what does it matter for the working people to spit out a few seeds when they are eating watermelon? That means what is the use of studying seedless watermelons—it is valueless!
After the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976, I received a postgraduate diploma from CAS. The period of postgraduate study was based on the current four-year system, from 1965 to 1969. To be honest, as a product of that particular era, the diploma didn't have much academic value. From admission to the acquisition of a master's degree, I attended only one semester of regular study and then went back to Shanghai to do a lot of applied work, spending most of my time in the Cultural Revolution. At that time, there were no academic papers except for work reports, let alone true systematic research. I worked at SIPP after obtaining the graduate diploma.
After returning to Shanghai from the army farm in early 1970, I married Qihua Li. Then we had two sons (Figure 1). The two children brought a lot of happiness to the family, although life was quite hard. The institute rented me a room of 8.9 square meters. There was no desk at home, and I used the dinner table as my desk for reading and writing after supper. I didn't have too much leisure time in the daytime because of a lot of political meetings. I had to borrow some journals and books from the library and read at night. In the 1970s, research in plant molecular biology and genetics in Western countries developed rapidly and kept making breakthroughs. Due to the Cultural Revolution, we had enlarged the gap with the international academic community. Working hard was the only way to catch up with the progress of science. In the evening, I took notes while reading. In order not to affect the sleep of my wife and children, I covered the lampshade with a towel to make the light dimmer. I still keep a thick pile of reading notes made during that special period.

Figure 1Click to view


I was grateful that I never completely stopped my professional studies during the Cultural Revolution. Although tissue culture research was under pressure, I held onto the idea of doing research in this field and barely wavered. During the political movement, although reading professional books was not strictly prohibited, there were few people in the library. Fortunately, at the time, the CAS-Shanghai Branch Library still had some international academic journals; though subscriptions often lagged behind by several months or even a year, it was enough for me to know the basic progress of life sciences in the world.
My motivations to persist in learning came from my long-term interest in scientific research and my intention to know the latest research progress in the world, as well as my expectations for the future. That is, even in extremely difficult situations, I still believed that China's situation would change and the value of science would not be changed for political reasons.
In October 1976, the crackdown of the Gang of Four marked the end of the ten-year Cultural Revolution, and the spring of science anticipated by scientists eventually came. In October 1977, Hung-Chang Yin and San-Chiun Shen (two deputy directors of SIPP), Weinan Huang (director the Section of Science and Technology of SIPP), and I went to Beijing to participate in the National Natural Science Planning Conference, during which thoughts on the development of plant physiology in China were discussed. Deng Xiaoping attended the National Science Conference held in February 1978. The Chinese Society of Plant Physiology resumed activities and the publication of the academic journals it sponsored. SIPP was adjusted to form research laboratories studying photosynthesis, molecular genetics, cell physiology, plant hormones, microbiology, developmental physiology, environmental physiology, biological nitrogen fixation, and plant mineral nutrition, and a phytotron was in use. The order of scientific research has gradually recovered.
In June 1976, at the invitation of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, CAS asked our institute to arrange for two people to visit Hungary. SIPP decided to let Weinan Huang and me make this very rare visit before the end of the Cultural Revolution. Huang was in charge of scientific research at SIPP, and he used to study in the Soviet Union. It was my first visit abroad. We visited the Institute of Plant Physiology, Institute of Genetics, and Institute of Biophysics at the Center for Biological Sciences of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences in Szeged. We also visited the Institute of Agronomy in Martonvasar. The Szeged Research Center in particular left a deep impression on me.
After the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976, CAS gradually resumed exchanges with the international academic community by organizing international conferences, sending visiting scholars abroad, and inviting international scholars to visit China. I was fortunate to participate in several international academic exchanges.
From May 25 to 28, 1978, CAS and the Australian Academy of Sciences jointly held the Sino-Australian Symposium on Plant Tissue Culture in Beijing (50) (Figure 2). It was the first large-scale international academic conference held by CAS after the end of the Cultural Revolution. In addition to Chinese and Australian scholars, researchers from the United Kingdom, France, Canada, Japan, Finland, North Korea, and Romania also attended this conference. At that time, I was still a small potato, and I attended this conference with Shih-Wei Loo. This symposium was the first international conference attended by many young Chinese researchers, including me. We were a bit restrained because we had to speak in English. Shih-Wei Loo and Tsung-Hsun Tsao from Peking University helped young people to correct their pronunciation and revise their talks to be presented.

Figure 2Click to view


At the conference, Chinese scholars made a lot of reports on anther culture and protoplast culture, arousing substantial repercussions among their international counterparts. Haploid pollen plants regenerated from anther culture were first discovered accidentally by the Indian botanists Guha and Mahashwari in anther culture ofDatura(19,20). Beginning in the early 1970s, anther culture was quite popular in China, and many universities and research institutes in China, including grassroots agricultural institutes, began to work on anther culture to obtain haploid pollen plants for breeding, mainly by using rice, wheat, maize, rapeseed, and some species of vegetables (50). At that time, the foreign scholars visiting China often wondered why haploid breeding with anther culture was conducted all over China. In fact, this was the only technology widely acceptable as applied research under the special circumstances of the Cultural Revolution in China. Objectively speaking, the popularity of plant tissue culture technology laid the foundation for the widespread application of this technology later, especially for clonal propagation by tissue culture (30,36).
It was this conference that provided me with a chance to meet E.C. Cocking and N. Sunderland from the United Kingdom. After the conference, CAS arranged for these foreign guests to visit various places in China, and SIPP was their first stop.
Shortly after the Beijing conference, the Fourth International Congress of Plant Tissue and Cell Culture, organized by the International Association for Plant Tissue Culture (IAPTC), was held in August 1978 at the University of Calgary, Canada. H.E. Street of the United Kingdom, the founding chairman of IAPTC, had just passed away in 1977. CAS sent its first delegation to attend the congress (Figure 3). The delegation was led by Guo-Chang Zheng, from Lanzhou University, and consisted of eight people. I was the youngest one in the delegation (unfortunately, six of them have since passed away). At that time, there was no direct flight from Beijing to Canada, and we needed to transfer in Paris. When I first saw Paris, a Western metropolis, everything seemed fresh. On the way, we visited the phytotron in Gif-sur-Yvette, near Paris, and visited C. Nitsch, whose laboratory achieved excellent results on pollen culture and organogenesis in the culture of thin cell layers.

Figure 3Click to view


In Canada, O.L. Gamburg (Prairie Regional Laboratory, National Research Council of Canada, Saskatoon), who had attended the Beijing Plant Tissue Conference, and T.A. Thorpe, chairman of the Calgary congress, made careful arrangements for our participation at the meeting and the visits after the congress. Because it was summer vacation at the time, we lived in the student dormitory of the campus. Colleagues from Taiwan of China lived on the same floor with us, and we would meet when washing every morning. Because it was the first time we met with our counterparts from Taiwan, we were somewhat reserved at first, but after a few days’ overlap, we were very familiar with one another. More than a decade later, I led the delegates from the mainland to Taipei to visit the Forest Department of Taiwan University and the Institute of Botany, Academia Sinica, to participate in the Cross-Strait Forest Ecology and Biotechnology Conference, and all sorts of feelings welled up in my mind when remembering the visit to Canada.
After the conference, we went to the Prairie Regional Laboratory in Saskatoon and visited the laboratories of O.L. Gamborg, K.N. Kao, and several others for protoplast culture and bioreactor-by-suspension culture. Then we visited K.J. Kasha at the University of Guelph for barley haploid production with the diploid barleyHordeum vulgareas the female parent crossed with diploidHordeum bulbosum. The Calgary conference and visit broadened our horizons and allowed us to further establish a good relationship with our international counterparts.
IAPTC changed its name to International Association for Plant Tissue Culture and Biotechnology (IAPTC&B) in 1998 at the Ninth Congress, held in Jerusalem. Four years later, when I, together with Yongbiao Xue and Kang Chong, was invited by IAPTC&B President Indra K. Vasil to attend the Tenth Congress in Orlando, Florida, in 2002, I was elected president of IAPTC&B for 2002–2006, and Beijing became the host city of the Eleventh IAPTC&B Congress in 2006 (Figure 4). At the congress in Beijing, IAPTC&B changed its name to International Association for Plant Biotechnology (IAPB), which reflected the changes and trends occurring in plant tissue culture and biotechnology now that so many scientists working on plant molecular biology, genomics, and functional genomics attended the congress, making more progress in genetically modified crops and molecular breeding (72).

Figure 4Click to view


In 1979, facilitated by the cooperation agreement signed by CAS and the British Royal Society, ten people were sent to the United Kingdom as visiting scholars, with their travel and living expenses paid by CAS. Because this was the first batch of young Chinese researchers to be sent to the United Kingdom after the Cultural Revolution, CAS was cautious about personnel selection. The applicants were first evaluated by the academic committee of the institute and then reported to CAS for selection. With the recommendation of Shih-Wei Loo, I became the first one at SIPP to be sent to the United Kingdom as a visiting scientist.
In August 1979, because there was also no direct flight from Beijing to London at that time, we, a total of ten people, first arrived in Paris and then flew to London to start a two-year study tour in the United Kingdom. In the first year, I worked in the Department of Applied Genetics at the John Innes Institute (JII) in Norwich, under the direction of Norman Sunderland (Figure 5). In the second year, I went to the Department of Botany, University of Nottingham, and conducted research in the laboratory of E.C. Cocking. Both professors met Shih-Wei Loo and me at the Sino-Australian Symposium on Plant Tissue Culture, after which they both visited SIPP. Later, when Loo wrote a letter recommending me to study with them, they were both willing to accept me.

Figure 5Click to view


The predecessor of JII was the John Innes Horticulture Research Institute, founded in 1910. Its first director was William Bateson, the founder of genetics. In 1994, it was integrated with the Plant Breeding Institute at Cambridge and the Nitrogen Fixation Laboratory at Sussex into the current John Innes Centre (JIC). When I went there, the director of JII was H.W. Woolhouse, and it consisted of four departments: applied genetics (head and deputy director, D.R. Davies), genetics (head, D.A. Hopwood), cell biology (head, K. Roberts), and virus research (head, J.W. Davies). The director himself led the photosynthesis group.
At that time, I was the first visiting scholar working at JII after the founding of the People's Republic of China. The JII secretary arranged for me to live in the home of the Williamses on Gurney Lane, not far away from JII, affording me a one-year experience of living in a typical British family. Every day, I went home after work and had dinner with them. I made a fool of myself on the first day. Before dinner, the hostess, Ellis, called, “come in, good boy!” I thought they had a boy, but a dog came in. Of course, we became good friends later. The other strange thing to me was when a plate of raw mung bean sprouts was placed in front of everyone. It turned out that they ate the raw sprouts with dressing as salad, but in China they would have been cooked. Then, I gradually got used to the customs of the English family, and I was happy to become a member of the family. I spent one year working on barley anther/pollen culture with Norman Sunderland (Figure 6). He focused on cytological observations of androgenesis and factors related to efficiency in anther culture at that time.

Figure 6Click to view


It was already known that cold pretreatment of immature flower buds or spikes could enhance anther productivity in subsequent anther cultures in several species including barley, but the mechanism of temperature pretreatment was unclear. So I used DNA microphotometry to determine the DNA value of barley microspores and found that DNA synthesis still proceeded during the cold pretreatment but that its rate was remarkably reduced. For the anther containing mid-uninucleate pollen, increasing pollen DNA content from the 1C to 2C level at 7°C required about 14 days, which was in accord with the fact that the best pollen callus formation in anther culture usually appeared with the anthers from spikes that had been cold pretreated for 14 days. We suggested that the slow DNA synthesis completed during cold pretreatment might be an important factor for pollen to divide rapidly and synchronously and to acquire the potential to develop as a sporophytic structure in the subsequent cultures (76).
DNA determination of pollen one by one at that time was a very boring job. I needed a lot of data from different treatments and repeats. Fortunately, the technician of the laboratory for DNA microphotometry was Ellis Marks, a Welshman with a typical gentleman's manner. He frequently told me stories about JII and local history with a British sense of humor. I loved a cartoon on the wall in his room, showing a scientist observing small living things under microscope and saying, “Sex and violence, everywhere!”
As a plant physiologist, I noticed that inoculation density in anther culture had been generally neglected in the past. The researchers generally cultivate about 50–100 anthers in about 50 mL of medium in a glass flask; that makes it difficult to do density experiments to find if there is a density effect, because it is unrealistic to expect to get the thousands of anthers needed for each experiment. In the laboratory of JII, I found that there is a sort of small plastic dish (30 × 10 mm) that makes it possible to carry out a systematic study on density effects on anther culture with the barley cultivarSabarlis. Anthers from the pretreated spikes were floated on the surface of 1 mL liquid medium in such small dishes, at different densities. The results showed that high inoculation densities of 60 anthers per milliliter are needed for high yields of pollen calli (75). It really surprised Norman when I took the dishes from the density experiments to his office and showed the results to him. It is supposed that a discrete conditioning factor (CF) or anther factor (AF) leaches from the anthers floating in liquid medium. Further, the conditioning effect of the medium can be examined by using the conditioned medium, that is, the medium previously conditioned by anthers or other tissues. The culture of anthers in such a conditioned medium resulted in a tremendous increase of anther response and pollen callus production. The beneficial effect of conditioned medium could be destroyed by heat, suggesting that CF is thermolabile (71).
I am very satisfied with my work at JII. J.M. Dunwell was working on his PhD at that time, and Bin Huang, a PhD student from the Institute of Genetics, came to JII just one month after my arrival. We all were working on anther culture with Norman. Over the past 20 years, whenever I visit the United Kingdom, I always try to find time to go to Norwich to visit JII and my friends there. When I attended the honorary doctorate degree ceremony at the University of East Anglia in June 2008, I was so moved when I saw that many of my colleagues and friends had come to congratulate me. I also have been very pleased to see so many Chinese PhD students and postdoctoral fellows working at JIC and UEA. Many of them (about 100) have now returned to China and have become excellent professors or senior scientists in the universities and academic institutes. They play an important role, like a bridge, to promote collaboration, academic exchanges, and friendship. The CAS-JIC Centre for Excellence in Plant and Microbial Science, established in 2014, is a mark of the scientific link and collaboration between the United Kingdom and China. It is the first joint research center for crop improvement and natural products in CAS.
In the second year of my stay in the United Kingdom, I moved to the Department of Botany, University of Nottingham (Figure 7). The director of the department was E.C. Cocking, who is famous for his pioneering work on plant protoplast isolation by cellulase in 1960. His laboratory at that time focused on protoplast culture, somatic hybridization by protoplast fusion, and protoplast transformation. I joined his laboratory and worked with M. Davey. Since I had never touched protoplast work before, I started with protoplast isolation and culture by using tobacco. Then I was mainly working on protoplast culture of grain legumes andBrassica, and I found that the young roots from the geminated seeds are good material for isolating protoplasts that is readily induced to start cell division and colony formation (69,70). The technique I learned at Nottingham was very helpful when I returned to Shanghai to work on important grain legume crops and woody plants. I did love the campus of the university, especially in spring when you could see so many rhododendron trees starting to flower.

Figure 7Click to view


The two-year visit time was very tight and soon came to an end. Loo wrote to ask me to return as soon as possible. There was a lot of work to do in the Chinese laboratory. Also, I hadn't been home for two years already. I went to the laboratory the day after I returned to Shanghai. All ten visiting scholars returned to China on time, and everyone wanted to do something as soon as possible after two years of studying and doing research abroad. Later, these people flourished, and several of them became academic leaders in their research fields.
In retrospect, two years of studying abroad in the United Kingdom was a very memorable experience. When I was in college, I thought the teachers at Peking University who came back from studying in Europe and America and even the Soviet Union after the founding of the New China were great and respectful. But for college students at the time, we never thought that we would have the opportunity to study abroad one day. One of my strong feelings in those two years was that the gap between China and the rest of the world was really too big. Due to the Cultural Revolution, our graduate students at that time could not receive training on systematic scientific research, and know the progress of international research. We lost 10 years in total! When I went abroad, I found that almost everything was fresh, but it was not easy to fill this gap in such a short time, and the only way was to work hard. I really wanted to make up the time lost during the Cultural Revolution. I worked in the laboratory every weekday, at least one full day every weekend. I felt that when I was in the United Kingdom, I really started to do meaningful research, and realized that we, Chinese scientists, can make our contributions to the development of science in China and the world.
When I returned to China in the autumn of 1981, the scientific research situation in China was becoming much better than before. The funding of CAS was more abundant than when I went abroad. Everyone wanted to carry out research projects and produce good results as soon as possible. However, our equipment still was too old. There was no DNA synthesizer and sequencer at the time, and biochemical reagents were scarce. We did not have enough foreign exchange to buy expensive endonucleases and chemical reagents used in molecular biology and genetics experiments. Some Chinese researchers, even in CAS laboratories, had to make certain endonucleases by cultivating bacterial strains and extracting the enzymes from the cultures—we joked that it was just like cooking without salt, and you had to boil seawater to obtain salt first. Several laboratories worked together to produce different enzymes and exchange with one another. For the new generation of young researchers, such conditions are probably unimaginable. Sometimes I talk to young people who can publish papers in journals such asScienceandNature; they should realize that without the step-by-step exploration of early researchers, today's developments would be impossible.
After returning to SIPP, I worked in the Laboratory of Cell Physiology, led by Shih-Wei Loo. I continued the research on protoplast culture and genetic manipulation of crops, and I tried to apply for CAS project funding. At that time, there were not many researchers in CAS who returned from overseas. The research project on genetic engineering of plant cells that I applied for was approved by CAS and granted with funding of 300,000 yuan for three years. It is not a large sum of money today, but given that the funding for each project supported by our institute at that time was only 20,000 yuan, the budget was quite big. Most of the funds were used to purchase small equipment necessary for molecular biology and genetic engineering, as well as necessary biochemical reagents.
Every Saturday afternoon, I went to the library to read books and browse new magazines to learn new developments in relevant research fields. At that time, computers were still not popular, and searching for information was far from being as convenient as today. However, CAS was already a lot better than many research organizations and universities in getting access to international publications. Later, when I became the deputy director and then the director of SIPP, I still insisted on reading the international literature every week. I also often told students that one must form a habit of keeping abreast of new trends, technologies, and methods, at least in one's own research field, no matter how busy the work is.
During that time, I became more and more aware that genetics and molecular biology were permeating every field of biology and bringing great changes to traditional plant physiology research. In fact, long before I went abroad, our former director, T.L. Loo, suggested at an informal discussion that young people should learn more about genetics and molecular biology and understand the effect of these advances on plant physiology research. In one private chat with Loo, he even suggested changing the name of our institute from the Institute of Plant Physiology to the Institute of Plant Science or Plant Biology. When I was in the United Kingdom, I gained a stronger understanding of the effects of genetics and molecular biology on plant physiology, and Loo's proposal to change the name of SIPP always came to my mind. TheAnnual Review of Plant Physiologywas later renamed as theAnnual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biologyand finally as theAnnual Review of Plant Biology. I think that is the most obvious reflection of this trend in plant physiology, and Loo was really farsighted!
Before the Cultural Revolution, everyone's research results were basically published in domestic Chinese journals in Chinese. With the reform and opening up, overseas students returning to China, and the improvement of the foreign language level of scientific researchers, we started to realize that international exchanges must be strengthened in scientific research. Domestic research began to be published in international journals. In the past decade, I also witnessed the establishment of a new journal,Molecular Plant, jointly supported by the Chinese Society of Plant Biology (CSPB) and the Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, when I was president of CSPB. Although the journal is based in Shanghai, it has become a highly respected international journal for plant scientists globally. There are also encouraging signs of revival of the old China-basedActa Botanica Sinica; Shih-Wei Loo was its first Editor-in-Chief. In the past decade, it was renamedJournal of Integrative Plant Biology.
In May 1983, I served as the deputy director of SIPP, in charge of scientific research. In 1984, the state prepared to establish a batch of state key laboratories to support fundamental research. Director Yungang Shen and I, and several other leaders, thought it was a good opportunity for SIPP.
Since there were several laboratories and research groups in SIPP working on the molecular genetics of bionitrogen fixation, bacterial plasmids and the transposable elements of rice, the genes of seed storage proteins, plant tissue culture, and genetic engineering, we decided to make a joint application with the Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry to establish a laboratory for plant molecular genetics, after repeated discussions with relevant senior researchers. In December 1984, CAS organized an expert feasibility proof meeting led by academicians C.C. Tan of Fudan University and Lu-Ji Shi of Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology and subsequently passed the “Feasible Proof Report on the Establishment of Plant Molecular Genetic Laboratory” of SIPP, drafted by me. The laboratory was named the State Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics. In June 1986, we were informed that the State Planning Commission approved the funding of the establishment of the new laboratory. After three years of preparation, the laboratory was officially opened to the public and became one of the first three state key laboratories of CAS. I was the first director of this laboratory.
In 1992, the state made the first assessment of the state key laboratories and classified them into four grades: excellent, good, medium, and poor. We received a rating of excellent. In the early 1990s, the laboratories designated as excellent were able to get two or three million yuan a year—this was a huge amount at that time. CAS had 27 state key laboratories and 57 open laboratories, and only 13 were rated as excellent then. This was an affirmation of our work.
At the end of 1992, I went to Beijing to serve as the vice president of CAS. I was no longer the laboratory director and served only as the director of the academic committee until 2016. Today's State Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics has brought together a group of overseas returnees, including the best young people in the institute, accounting for half of the institute's staff. After more than 30 years of development, the State Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics follows its mission: to reveal the molecular basis of the important life phenomena and biological processes in plants and to apply the knowledge of these molecular mechanisms to benefit agriculture. Today the main research areas cover plant molecular genetics and functional genomics, plant molecular physiology and developmental biology, molecular mechanisms of plant-environment interactions, and new technology for important agronomic plant trait design. It has become one of the most important laboratories for basic research on plant science in China, especially in plant molecular genetics and plant molecular physiology. It has made important contributions to plant science and agricultural sciences in China and has obtained a good international reputation.
Looking back on this period of history, we are successful because we seized the opportunity, identified the right research direction, and integrated research resources in different fields in SIPP.
In 1999, SIPP and the Shanghai Institute of Entomology merged into the Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology (SIPPE). Based on SIPPE and the developments described above, the CAS Centre for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, led by Bin Han, the current director of SIPPE, was established in Shanghai in 2017. The center selects talented principal investigators across CAS institutes. It has already recruited 64 principal investigators from SIPPE, the Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology and the Institute of Botany in Beijing, the Shanghai Centre for Plant Stress Biology, and other related CAS institutes. This Centre for Excellence aims to meet the national strategic needs in food security and ecological safety; the center is dedicated to doing cutting-edge basic research for plant science.
From 1983 to 1990, I served as the deputy director of SIPP for two terms. Every day I spent a lot of time on administrative work, but as long as I had time, I went back to my laboratory to carry out experiments and to hold discussions with my graduate students. I went to the tissue culture room to observe new experimental results in the culture bottle nearly every morning, as long as I was in the institute (Figure 8). I usually returned to the laboratory at lunchtime. At that time, the graduate students in the laboratory liked to come to my office. We talked about work and life, including their distress, while eating. But doing administrative work was not my first wish, and research work was inevitably affected. In 1988, I once told Director Yungang Shen that I hoped to find a place to concentrate on research for a few months when the work was not very busy; he was very openminded and agreed.

Figure 8Click to view


At that time, Nam-Hai Chua from the Rockefeller University in New York, also an old friend of mine, built a new research laboratory for plant science at the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), National University of Singapore. He invited me to go there to do collaborative research. China and Singapore had signed an intergovernmental agreement. Singapore would invite a group of Chinese experts to work in Singapore, normally for three years. Because I had an administrative position, I couldn't work in a foreign country for three years. But I was told that the contract period could be divided into three months per year, and that was fine for me.
In March 1989, my application was approved by CAS headquarters, and I went to work in Nam-Hai Chua's Singapore laboratory at IMCB. This was a temporary guest professor position.
Working with Chua (we usually called him Nam) was a good experience. He is an excellent scientist, with lots of new ideas, and is always enthusiastic. In the first year, I went along with Guangyuan Wang, one of my colleagues at SIPP. Unlike me, she worked continuously at IMCB, under my supervision, for three years. Due to some new research interests, my former master's student, Chun-Ming Liu, came to work with me at IMCB in the second year with my recommendation. The three of us formed a small team, jokingly called Les Trois Mousquetaires. Being on sabbatical at IMCB was special for me, allowing me time away from my busy schedule in China as deputy director of SIPP; I was able to use this time to do some research work at the bench level, to read a lot of papers, and to sort out research ideas in my mind. In terms of research, with the full-time dedication of Guangyuan and Chun-Ming, for the times I was in China I could set my mind at rest.
Several colleagues—Eng-Chong Pua and Mee Len Chye from Malaysia, Anil Kush from India, Shirong Jia from China, and Chun-Ming—became close friends. We built a habit of going to the university faculty club to drink cold beer together on Friday afternoons. We chatted a lot, about subjects such as science, life, food, and China. Working in a foreign laboratory always allowed me to understand the differences in various cultures. Very importantly, I learned to respect the culture differences, which affected my work later as the president of Peking University. One thing that took me a long while to adapt to is eating durian, a stinky and sweet tropical fruit that Nam loves a lot. At the end of my stay, I really loved it, eating along with friends at the roadside as a Singaporean. You really couldn't have imagined that durian would eventually become so popular in China today!
During my first visit to IMCB, I experienced the 1989 Tiananmen event from outside. It occurred at the time when I was preparing to leave from Singapore to go back to Shanghai. All flights were cancelled. After waiting for about a week, I bought a ticket for the earliest possible flight and finally returned to Shanghai. I still remember that there were very few people on board. The event did not affect my colleagues in the institute too much. Researchers in the institute were busy with their daily work, finally enjoying the ability to work on science after the ten-year-long Cultural Revolution. Thinking back now, the Tiananmen event allowed many Chinese citizens and government officers to rethink what kind of route China should take. From that point on, actually, China opened its doors step by step, and people's quality of life is getting better and better.
My personal interest in science has always focused on developmental biology. I am eager to understand how growth and differentiation are regulated, how embryos are formed, and how tissue patterns are established in plants. Over the period of visiting research at IMCB, we pursued several lines of research that later turned out to be quite important.
To decipher how a complex embryo structure is formed during zygotic embryo development, we first established an easy-to-operate, reproducible proembryo culture system using Indian mustard (Brassica junceaL.) as a material. The particular species was chosen purely by accident, as Eng-Chong was growing this plant in the lab for his microspore culture. It turned out to be the perfect sample for proembryo culture as its embryo has a very long and rigid suspensor that allows for easy dissection of embryos.
Proembryo culture is a tough job that requires dedication and patience. We aimed to culture embryos before any visible pattern formation occurred, which had never been done in any species before. Chun-Ming at that time was young, skillful, and talented in microdissection. Within that year, he must have isolated over 10,000 proembryos (with 32 cells or less) and cultured them in vitro with different media and different methods. My experience in protoplast culture helped us in developing a new culture medium and a two-layer culture system using 24-well plates. The most important factors in the culture medium are high osmotic pressure and a high concentration of glutamine that I used in barley anther culture. Pre-embryos placed in the culture are able to mimic embryogenesis in vivo, finishing their developmental program in two weeks. The culture system was later published inPlant Journal(34), and a protocol was published inPlant Tissue Culture Manual(35).
Using the culture system, we studied the role of auxin polar transport in plant embryo pattern formation and found that auxin polar transport inhibitors, with three different ones tested, were able to block the formation of two cotyledons in the dicotyledonous plants, producing trumpet-shaped embryos with radial symmetry. This suggests that auxin polar transport is critical in defining the position of these cotyledon primordia. Later we also showed that, when thePIN1gene regulating auxin polar transport was mutated, the transition of embryos from radial symmetry to bilateral symmetry was also disrupted. We accordingly proposed a hypothetical model, stating that internal auxin polar transport in the embryo allows the establishment of local accumulations of auxin in cotyledon primordia, leading to the formation of two cotyledons at positions with higher auxin concentration. The manuscript was sent toPlant Cell, a journal that was not so picky then as it is now, and was published in about four weeks (33), with a cover picture. The article was highlighted inNatureand was later documented in a classical plant physiology textbook (51).
The paper attracted a lot of attention and triggered further studies in different plant species, includingArabidopsisand tomato. Unsurprisingly, the hypothesis turned out to be correct. It was later demonstrated that auxin polar transport is critical for organ positioning in shoot apical meristems (tomato work) and in lateral root formation (46).
In parallel, we also performed extensive studies of in vitro induction of flowering in orchid (Dendrobium nobile). Usually orchids take five years or longer to go from seed to flowering. X. Wang, my colleague at SIPP, studied clonal propagation and floral bud differentiation of the orchidCymbidiumin tissue culture, but it seemed difficult to regulate (59). We established an in vitro flowering system, which has a flowering induction efficiency of more than 80%. We observed that cytokinin 6-BA and polyamine have evident effects in promoting flowering. These effects were further enhanced by pretreatment with ABA (57). The system is potentially important for speeding up orchid breeding. In addition, we also established in vitro propagation systems for several tropical orchids and flamingo flower (Anthurium andreanum) (32).
During my time in Singapore, I made many local friends, and I still maintain good contact with some of them. When I became president of Peking University, I served as a member of the international advisory committee of the Institute of Molecular Agrobiology, NUS, which later became the Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory (TLL). I also served as a member of the advisory committee of the Singapore Ministry of Education for two terms.
Plant tissue culture and biotechnology is one of the main research areas of plant science in China (36,65,66,78,81). Since I was a university student, I have maintained an interest in plant tissue culture, as described above. After coming back to SIPP from the United Kingdom, I continued to work with my colleague Zhi-Ming Wei, who came to my laboratory and worked with me for years after he moved to Shanghai from the Institute of Oceanology, CAS, in Qingdao. We made a series of advances in plant regeneration from protoplast cultures of 26 crops and woody species (60,61,79). We used immature cotyledons as material for isolating protoplasts and first reported plant regeneration from three important grain legumes: soybean, peanut, and broad bean (Vicia faba) (60,77). Considering the long cycle of breeding for woody plants, protoplasts were isolated from the leaves of the shoots in tissue culture or immature leaves from the seedlings and protoplast regenerated plants obtained from several woody species:Morus alba,Paulownia fortunei,Platanus orientalis, andPopulus tomentosa(58,62,78,79). Protoplasts from transgenic plants provided a good system to study the function of the transgene (42,78). Based on those results and the achievements obtained in this research area, we edited a book,Plant Protoplast Culture and Genetic Manipulation(78).
My PhD student Hong-Quan Yang studied the effects of specific expression of theiaaLgene in tobacco tapetum on pollen embryogenesis and found that IAA metabolism in anther tapetum is of significant importance to androgenic development in anther culture (83). Now Hong-Quan is a professor at Shanghai Normal University, working on molecular mechanisms of light regulation of plant development. Following the work done by Chun-Ming in Singapore, another of my PhD students at SIPP, Di-An Ni, further proved that the symmetrical growth of leaves in tobacco and other plants also requires auxin polar transport (40,41,43,74). Following the cloning of the PIN gene, the mechanism of auxin polar transport in organogenesis has been gradually elucidated, and it confirms the auxin interaction model we proposed (33). Recently, Yuling Jiao of the Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology further demonstrated that auxin depletion from leaf primordia contributes to organ patterning and that spatial auxin signaling controls leaf flattening (18,44).
Since endogenous signals do not play an independent role in plant development, clarifying their interaction would help us to understand the regulatory mechanism of plant development as a whole. My former graduate student Hong-Wei Xue returned to SIPP in 1999 after two years of postdoctoral work at the Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology in Potsdam, Germany, and gradually took responsibility for my laboratory at SIPP. We jointly recruit PhD students. The research team mainly studies the interaction of auxin signals and proved that in both rapeseed andArabidopsis thaliana, brassinosteroids could promote polar auxin transport and hence regulate plant tropism and root development. The possible regulatory mechanism was elucidated at the cytological level (29). This demonstrated the promoting effect of brassinosteroids on plant tropism in dicotyledonous plants. Subsequent systematic studies further identified the protein membrane steroid-binding protein 1 (MSBP1), having brassinosteroid-binding activity and demonstrated that MSBP1 negatively regulates cell elongation and participates in the regulation of brassino-steroid signaling and plant photomorphogenesis. This was the first report on the physiological functions of steroid-binding proteins in higher plants (85). The mechanism of cross regulation of lipid signaling—the interaction of auxin transport and signaling with phospholipid to regulate root and cotyledon development and blue-light-mediated morphogenesis—has been elucidated (82).
At Peking University, Tsung-Hsun Tsao had been working on unisexual flower development in cucumber for years (53). I knew cucumber work well when I was an undergraduate and was aware that the sex determination is a fundamental scientific issue. Shu-Nong Bai joined the College of Life Science at Peking University in 1998 to participate in the subproject on cucumber carried out by Tsao, who was supported by the National Climb preselected project on plant development and reproduction, hosted by me. By the end of 1999, I was appointed as the president of Peking University. Then I, too, joined them, setting up the Laboratory of Plant Organ Formation (Figure 9). During the years from 1999–2010, Shu-Nong Bai and I led the team of our laboratory to conduct systematic studies of the developmental process of the unisexual flower of cucumber.

Figure 9Click to view


Traditionally, people who study unisexual flower development used whole male and female flowers as indexes to describe the determination or differentiation of sex. Tsao had developed an experimental system of shoot tip culture to investigate the effects of plant hormones upon the ratio of male and female flowers in cucumber (53,55). Since male and female organs—i.e., stamen and carpel primordia—can be distinguished in cucumber floral bud development (1), we were curious about the developmental fate of these primordia. When we asked this question for the people working with cucumber unisexual flower development, including Tsao, the answer was “degenerated.” But as for the question of what “degenerated” meant, nobody could answer. Therefore, we decided to make a detailed description of floral organ development in both male and female cucumber flowers. By using paraffin sectioning and scanning electron microscopy, we divided the floral development into 12 stages from floral meristem initiation to flower anthesis. At stage 5, both male and female organ primordia are initiated, but from stage 6, male and female floral buds are distinguishable morphologically as in male floral buds, the ovary part of the carpal primordia stops growing, and in female floral buds, the anther part of the stamen primordia stops growing (3). It was the first clear identification of the point when the sex organs diverge from the standard developmental path. Therefore, our morphological description was used as a standard by people who study unisexual flower development in cucumber and melon (8,9,39).
To make a long story short, the data generated in our Peking University lab revealed how primordial stamens are arrested by ethylene, which induced anther-specific DNA damage (17,24,49,56,84). Follow-up work by Jin-Jing Sun, who received a PhD in our lab through the cucumber project, consistently demonstrated that the extra ethylene was produced by a series of preferentially expressed ethylene synthesis genes in carpel primordial (J.J. Sun, unpublished results), as we have predicted (48). What we found in cucumber demonstrated that plants can develop different mechanisms to regulate the formation of anthers and ovaries, eventually resulting in outcross promotion (5,6).
In addition to the unisexual flower development project, we carried out another approach to deciphering the regulatory mechanism of stamen development in parallel. In a departure from the dominant strategy of identifying mutants with abnormal stamens, which is not very efficient in dissecting the process of early stamen development, we started with molecular description of the process of early stamen development. We chose rice as our material because its anther is big enough to dissect and its genome sequence was available (37). Unexpectedly, our approach—i.e., gene expression profiling plus chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing—was rewarded with a very interesting finding. We found that during early development of rice stamen, photosynthesis has to be shut down by a MADS box protein, OsMADS58, to achieve a hypoxic status (11) that was demonstrated necessary for diploid germ cell induction (4,25). This finding paved a novel road to understanding how germ cells are induced from somatic cells in completion of the life cycle in plants.
After I moved to Beijing, another research project on development that I was involved in was the molecular mechanisms of vernalization in wheat. The vernalization-devernalization system in wheat was established in Kehui Tan's group in the Institute of Botany, CAS. They tried to explain the phenomenon that a wide range of plants, including annuals from temperate regions as well as biennials and perennials, require a long-term cold treatment for flowering. This process, termed vernalization, has been observed since 1918 and first gained wide utilization in wheat production in Russia. This study aroused my interest.
As an honorary professor in the Institute of Botany, I joined this topic of research and began jointly recruiting PhD students with Kang Chong, my first postdoctoral fellow in the Institute of Botany. Thevernalization-related genes(VERs) in wheat were first cloned and functionally identified in the 1990s by Kang Chong. With a differential screening approach on vernalization-induced gene expression, a series ofVERs were obtained. Some of them were selected for further study. For example, the function ofVER2in flowering regulation was confirmed with transgenic plant analysis (13).VER2is a gene encoding a jacalin-like lectin. The expression ofVER2is induced by vernalization, while devernalization results in the silencing of this gene. Both the overexpression and antisense expression constructs forVER2were transformed into wheat to confirm its genetic function in flowering regulation. As expected, the heading and maturation time of antisense transgenic wheat lines were delayed by six weeks compared with nontransformed plants (12). This is pioneering research in this area, andVERgenes were the initial group of genes cloned in vernalization. From then on, these studies continued for about 30 years. The molecular and genetic data indicated that VER2 binds toO-GlcNAcylated proteins during vernalization for flowering (63). Phosphorylated VER2 can interact withO-GlcNAcylated GRP2 and promote its dissociation from its target, precursor mRNA ofVRN1, to increase its expression. A hypothesis is that the duration of vernalization may be counted by the modifications of key proteins with impacts on epigenetic processes, such as phosphorylation of VER2 andO-GlcNAcylation of GRP2 (64).
In vernalization, plants sense cold environmental temperature and use long-term cold as a signal initiating the transition from vegetative growth to flowering. According to the anthocyanin theory raised in the 1930s, shoot apices are the organs responsible for cold signal perception. Further study, however, failed to technically distinguish between cold sensing in shoot meristem and in young leaves. On the contrary, with technical advances, the vernalization signal was indicated to be initially perceived in young leaves. With in situ RNA hybridization analysis of the vernalization geneVER2, we found that its expression is restricted to the marginal meristems of immature leaves in vernalized wheat seedlings. No hybridization signal was detected in the epidermal tissue and vascular bundles (86). Our results indicate that immature leaves, instead of shoot apices, are the key tissues for sensing cold temperatures during vernalization, which helps to address some misunderstandings that persisted for a long time in textbooks (64).
Molecular mechanisms of cold signal sensing are divided into two distinct patterns: short term and long term (87,88). Besides the hypothesis on cold sensing in vernalization, which is the long-term cold signal for developmental responses, plant cold sensing for defense responses, such as COLD1/RGA1, has been discovered in rice, which is sensitive to chilling stress (38). COLD1 senses cold signals and interacts with the G protein α subunit for triggering Ca2+channel and electrophysiological signal changes. Then, the responding calcium signal leads to specific defense responses (22,87,88). These findings, together with insights into the trade-off mechanism between defense and development, have great potential in improving plant cold tolerance in agriculture production (88). Of course, further study is needed in this area for a deeper understanding of cold responses and adaption mechanisms in plants.
In the 1980s, the National High-Tech R&D Program of China (863 Program) was initiated. The Biotechnology Project within the program covered agricultural biotechnology (photoperiod- and temperature-sensitive nucleate male sterility of rice, genetically modified crops and animals, biological nitrogen fixation, etc.). I was a member of the expert group for agricultural biotechnology and later worked as a member of the expert committee for the Biotechnology Project. In the 1990s, the National Key Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) was established and supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology. I have been a member of the advisory expert group, responsible for review and organization of projects in the agricultural area, for the past 15 years. Since 2008, when the National Science and Technology Project on genetically modified crops and animals was initiated, I have served as head of its advisory expert group as well.
Looking back, there is no doubt that the early 1990s was the time when the use of molecular genetics and developmental biology was rapidly rising. In 1990, at the fifth national conference of the Chinese Society of Plant Physiology, held in Wuhan, the topic of my report was “The Development of Molecular Biology and Plant Physiology: Challenges and Opportunities.” I mentioned that plant physiology would not be replaced by molecular biology and genetics, but plant physiologists should welcome such new trends in plant science. Now, all kinds of mutants had been identified inArabidopsis, and even in rice. In plant developmental biology, the ABC model of floral development really brought a paradigm shift in research on plant morphogenesis (16). In contrast, the active fields in plant development research in China were then limited to some traditional morphology, and, most prosperously, plant tissue culture, and the application of plant hormones and growth regulators. Research relevant to developmental biology in plants was severely marginalized. How were we to bridge the gap between the mainstream communities in the developed countries and in China?
In October 1994, when I was CAS vice president, CAS and the National Natural Science Foundation of China jointly organized a special workshop on developmental biology for young researchers, many from overseas. After that, considering the importance of the study of molecular mechanisms of development and reproduction in plant sciences and agriculture, I proposed to organize a Xiangshan Science Conference, which was held in April 1995. In order to provide information about progress and research trends for domestic scientists, especially for PhD students, Chun-Ming and I made a plan to edit and publish a book,Molecular Mechanism of Plant Development; most chapter authors were those excellent youngsters from abroad (73). Based on the discussions at the workshop and the conference, I submitted a proposal on the molecular mechanisms of plant development and reproduction to the Ministry of Science and Technology, which was approved as a National Climb preselected project to be supported. Several projects were selected by evaluation. They included unisexual flower development in cucumber, at Peking University; vernalization in wheat, at the Institute of Botany, CAS; photoperiod-sensitive nucleate male sterility, at several institutes; plant embryo development, at SIPP; in vitro flower-specific induction in tissue culture, at the Institute of Botany, CAS; in vitro fertilization and cell identification in fertilization, at Wuhan University; the molecular basis of self-incompatibility, by Y.B. Xue at the Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology; the molecular basis of morphological asymmetry in flower development, by Da Luo at SIPP; and biosynthesis and the function of plant hormones, by Jiayang Li at the Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology and Hongwei Xue at SIPPE. This was the first time getting those young scientists in China to work on developmental biology together (67). The project was well organized, and funding was granted in 1997.
In 2006, another Xiangshan Science Conference on plant hormones and the Green Revolution was held, proposed by me, Jiayang Li, and several other colleagues. After that, basic research on plant hormones and their molecular function was much strengthened, due to the molecular mechanism of plant hormone actions project supported by the Major State Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (26,27,80).
Subsequently, several Xiangshan Science Conferences involving plant development were held. In 2013, the topic was “Plant Development and Reproduction: Cutting-Edge Scientific Issues and Strategies,” and in 2017, the topic was “From Specialized Traits to Targeted Development in Plants.” All of these promoted research on plant sciences in China and especially attracted a lot of young scientists to join in these research areas (14,29,68).
Rice has been the most important cereal crop in China. In 1992, China initiated a rice genome program led by Guofan Hong of the Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry. For this purpose, the National Gene Research Center was established in Shanghai. In addition, there are four satellite laboratories located in the Institute of Genetics in Beijing, Huazhong Agricultural University in Wuhan, Fudan University in Shanghai, and China Rice Research Institute in Hangzhou. As vice president of CAS in charge of life sciences, I was responsible for organization and coordination of the rice genome project. In September 1997, when Hong and I attended the Fifth International Congress of Plant Molecular Biology in Singapore, we joined the International Rice Genome Sequencing Project, hosted by Japanese scientist Takuji Sasaki withOryza sativaspp.Japonicavar. Nippobare. China was responsible for sequencing of chromosome 4. Guofan Hong was in charge of the project. Bin Han returned to Shanghai from Cambridge to join the rice genome project in 1998, then CAS arranged for him to take responsibility for the rice genome in the early 2001, and the work was completed on time. The sequencing of indica rice was also initiated at almost the same time, and it was completed in 2002, too. The sequence of the rice genome laid the foundation for subsequent functional genomics and molecular breeding of rice (28,31), and provided insights into the domestication and heterosis of rice (10,21).
In 1999, based on the National Climb preselected project on the molecular mechanisms of plant development and reproduction, and considering that rice is unique as it is a reference organism as well as an important staple crop, I prepared a proposal for application of the National Major Basic Research Project (973 Project) with help from my young colleagues. The proposal focused on rice functional genomics for important agronomic traits; discovery and cloning of new genes related to fertility and hybrid vigor, grain quality, pest resistance, etc.; and application of functional genomics knowledge in rice breeding.
Before the year 2000, we had talented young people working on the molecular biology ofArabidopsisand snapdragon, but there were not many people working on the molecular biology of rice in China. I did wish some young people who were good at molecular biology and genetics would turn to rice. Indeed, they did! Yongbiao Xue, Jiayang Li, Kang Chong, and some others joined me. I remember at the project defense there was an expert attending the meeting who asked me, “For such a major project on rice, you have only a few people familiar with rice; are you sure you can do it well?” I answered that research ideas and technology are actually interlinked, and that I was sure that if the project was supported, they could do an excellent job. During review of the project, I was told that I'd move to Peking University as president, so I suggested Yongbiao Xue as principal scientist of the project. He led this project for three terms (over 15 years); now so many research fellows growing up are familiar with rice and with genomics, functional genomics, and molecular biology. FromArabidopsisto rice, Jiayang Li is the best example; now he is a famous plant molecular scientist for rice. I am especially glad to see the young people from that time have become excellent scientists today (Figure 10). They make great contributions to plant sciences and agriculture for China, and for the world (14,21,31).

Figure 10Click to view


As the project progressed, many new genes and new functions of genes were found, which provided new ideas and techniques for crop breeding. Today, more and more plant breeding scientists are beginning to collaborate with molecular biologists to use new techniques, such as molecular markers, transgenic techniques, and genome editing for crop design and speeding plant breeding. This is also the outcome of years of appeals from plant scientists.
In the past 20 years, through our joint efforts, the country has given greater support to research programs on molecular breeding for crops, poultry breeding and healthy farming, plant protection and soil fertility, grassland and forest production, and sustainable development in agriculture, and the capacity of basic research in plant sciences and agricultural sciences in China has improved significantly.
In 1993, I took over the position of chairman of the Chinese National Committee of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) Man and Biosphere Program from CAS Vice President Honglie Sun.
The Man and Biosphere Program is a large-scale intergovernmental interdisciplinary and comprehensive international collaborative research program initiated by UNESCO in 1971 to address population, resource, and environment issues facing the world. Under this program, the World Network of Biosphere Reserves has been established. Currently, there are more than 100 participating countries, and a total of 686 protected areas have joined the World Network of Biosphere Reserves.

Figure 11Click to view


An important task of the national committee is to carry out the Man and Biosphere Program and implement its core concepts in China on behalf of the Chinese government as a signatory country. At the same time, it is tasked with recommending a group of the most outstanding protected areas in China to join the World Network of Biosphere Reserves. There are more than 2,700 nature reserves in mainland China, which protect China's various typical ecosystems, unique biodiversity, and diverse ethnic cultures and community cultures. There are currently 34 nature reserves in China that have joined the World Network of Biosphere Reserves (Figure 11).
I have been fond of going to the wild since childhood. I hope to get close to nature and understand it. The wild environment is often desolate and uninhabited, sometimes with tough conditions. I have walked through 34 world protected areas and a large number of national nature reserves to conduct field inspections. In the summer of 2017, I also led a team to visit the Mount Qomolangma Nature Reserve for a ten-year assessment. The base camp is located at an altitude of more than 5,200 meters above sea level. These visits have provided me with the opportunity to go deep into the wild, seeing nature, fulfilling my dreams in a way I could never have imagined, and prompting me to think about the serious ecological problems and threats facing mankind. There are many species of wild plants that I had never seen before, such as wild tulips, camellias, etc. I am very pleased to see that plant tissue culture techniques have been very successfully used for micropropagation of those endangered plant species, including wild orchids, camellia, and some wild traditional Chinese medicinal herbs. Biodiversity is the basis of human survival. Protecting the biodiversity of the earth and promoting harmonious coexistence between man and nature are major challenges and common responsibilities facing the whole world. I think that leaving wilderness, green mountains, and a better environment to future generations is the expectation of all scientists, especially plant scientists who work in the field.
I have been in love with nature and all kinds of living creatures in nature since childhood, and I finally chose to study plants as my lifelong pursuit. I feel sincerely happy that, since the beginning of national reform and opening up, especially in the past 20 years, China's plant science research has made great progress. I am pleased to have witnessed a large number of young and outstanding scholars growing up, and many are now middle-aged and have become mainstays of different disciplines.
I have served for three terms as chairman of the Chinese Society of Plant Physiology (1990–1993, 2003–2008, and 2009–2014; the society was renamed the Chinese Society of Plant Biology in 2010). Every year, societies related to plant sciences have many academic meetings. In 2009, as chairman of the Society, I suggested that the Chinese Society of Plant Biology, the Chinese Society of Botany, the Chinese Society of Genetics, and the Chinese Society of Cell Biology should jointly hold an academic conference every year presided over by each society in turn; this has led to the Annual National Conference of Plant Biology. Later, the Chinese Society of Crop Sciences also joined in. Now these five societies take turns every year serving as the chair and setting up a joint preparatory committee. I remember that the first joint national plant biology conference was held at Nankai University in 2010 with several hundred participants. By 2018, the number of participants had reached more than 1,500. The conference attracted a large number of doctoral students and postdoctoral fellows—showing that our research team has grown very fast, and it has also promoted academic exchange and interdisciplinary research, which makes me feel very hopeful for the future of plant and agricultural sciences in China.
The development of plant sciences in China first benefited from the government's attention and funding. The Ministry of Science and Technology, the National Natural Science Foundation of China, CAS, and the Ministry of Agriculture have provided stable support due to the demand for sustainable agriculture. As a country with a population of 1.4 billion, China must vigorously develop plant science and agriculture in order to feed its residents. As a result, over the years, we have attracted many outstanding young people, many of whom have returned from overseas. In the field of plant sciences, we have a strong tradition for early returnees to help young people. At the same time, this is due to the efforts of senior scientists to organize major scientific projects [such as the National Major Basic Research Project of China (973 Program) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China Major Program], recommend outstanding young scholars to participate in such projects, and encourage excellent overseas returnees to undertake research projects and enable these researchers to exercise and develop their talents. It is only with the participation of these young generations that Chinese plant science research has achieved good results and has been recognized by our international counterparts.
On the other hand, we still have shortcomings and face problems in many areas. China has now participated in international cooperation to complete the genome sequencing of more than 30 plant species, but have we fully used these genome data to solve scientific or applied problems? Actually, not enough. Among these plant species, the best studied is rice. There have been major breakthroughs from basic research to molecular breeding in rice, as well as cucumbers and tomatoes. But for other crops, we have not made good use of the genome information that we have generated.
The real reason behind this is that, once a plant genome sequence is completed, a paper is published in a leading international journal, and overemphasis on publications in scientific evaluation means that some researchers rarely think about the cost of genome sequencing. So what we need to consider is how to better use the results we have achieved to do more meaningful work through cooperation.
I've been thinking lately that we still face several problems in achieving scientific innovation and breakthroughs.
First, basic research should be further strengthened. Over the years, China's investment in basic research has been only 5% of its total R&D investment; this figure reached 5.5% last year, which still lagged far behind the 15–20% figure for developed countries. Most of the research projects strongly supported by the state are applied, and basic research fields are not adequately supported. Basic research is the source of all innovation, and it is also an important foundation and path for cultivating innovative talents. Major breakthroughs in basic research do not depend on concentrating funds on one or two major projects, and even Nobel Prize–level research results are not achieved only with money. Important scientific issues, coupled with a free research environment, are even more important.
Second, the structure of scientific research talent in many research institutes and universities in China is unreasonable. At present, many laboratories in China are implementing the principal investigator system: One principal investigator leads one or two assistants and a group of graduate students. Sometimes, what bothers the tutors the most is that they must make sure that their students get experimental results in time so that papers can be published within the prescribed period of time to obtain a doctoral or master's degree, which has actually affected the quality of graduate students. Moreover, a considerable number of the best university graduates choose to go abroad, and the best doctoral students still go abroad to do postdoctoral research after graduation. We should consider approaches at the policy level to let more excellent doctoral and university graduates stay, so as to make our research teams more creative and energetic.
Third, I think that scientists should take time to educate the public as their social responsibility and obligation while doing their own research. As a scientist who has been engaged in plant science research for a long time, as well as leading scientific research institutes and universities, I often take advantage of spare time at meetings and visits all over the country, as well as National Science Week in May and the International Plant Day launched by European plant science counterparts, to popularize plant knowledge for teachers, students, and the public all over the country around the themes of plant and human life, biodiversity, biotechnology and modern agriculture, genetically modified crops, the challenges and prospects of China's agricultural development, etc. We can help them understand the progress of plant science, improve the scientific literacy of the public, and understand plants and the relationship between plants and humans, in order to better protect plant diversity, scientifically and rationally use plants, and cultivate in young people a love of plants and an interest in plant science.
I also like to give lectures to students. In recent years, I along with Xingwang Deng and Lei Li from Peking University's newly-established School of Advanced Agricultural Sciences have jointly taught an optional course, “A Taste of Botany,” to undergraduates at Peking University, to introduce plant knowledge through the food we eat. At China Agricultural University, I have been giving lectures to graduate students once a year for more than 20 years. I will continue to participate in teaching as long as my health permits.
Over the past 78 years, I have experienced 3 years of starvation, the 10-year storm of the Cultural Revolution, and many other difficult times. As a participant, I have also witnessed the setbacks and developments in our scientific research and education, and witnessed the arrival of the spring of science. Together, the bitter and the happy times have built my attitudes toward any challenges I have had to deal with.
The world is changing rapidly, and science is progressing constantly. Only by learning, thinking, and accumulating knowledge and talent constantly at every stage of life can we remain confident in the future and adapt to the changing environment.
I have held many positions; most of them had an impact on my research work. I have always tried my best to get all my work done well. I have always felt that more attention should be given to younger people than on people of my age, and I would like to be the ladder and springboard for their growth. After all, a person's life is limited. Only when young people do better can our country, society, and globe have a bright future.
In the past 20 years or so, I have experienced the organization, management, and decision-making of some important plant and agricultural science programs. I have devoted a lot of energy to consulting with national science and technology projects on plant sciences and sustainable agricultural development, protection of the ecological environment and biodiversity, and the applications of biotechnology projects such as genetically modified crops. In accordance with the trend of scientific development, I have organized outstanding people in the research fields that most meet the needs of the state, helping them to obtain support from the state and society and allowing them to work without too many worries. I think my role in these areas may be more important than in any specific research I did. What really satisfied me is that I have done something for plant science and agriculture, and for the country. I do hope that through the joint efforts of all of us, we can make better plant science, leaving more blue sky, white clouds, green farms, grasslands, and forests for the earth and for human beings.
The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
I am greatly indebted to Jiayang Li for his encouragement and suggestions and to Chun-ming Liu (Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences), Kang Chong (Institute of Botany, CAS), Hong-wei Xue (Shanghai Jiao Tong University), Shu-nong Bai, Li-mei Xiu and Yu-ning Li (Peking University), who helped me a lot in my preparing this manuscript. I also want to express my sincere thanks to biographer Sinie Huang, and my secretary Lu Feng who also helped me a lot, too. I also acknowledge my wife, Qihua, and my sons, Xiaochun and Xiaodong, for their love, understanding, and support during my busy schedule of working and taking care of my daily life.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


