We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Plant leaves display considerable variation in shape. Here, we introduce key aspects of leaf development, focusing on the morphogenetic basis of leaf shape diversity. We discuss the importance of the genetic control of the amount, duration, and direction of cellular growth for the emergence of leaf form. We highlight how the combined use of live imaging and computational frameworks can help conceptualize how regulated cellular growth is translated into different leaf shapes. In particular, we focus on the morphogenetic differences between simple and complex leaves and how carnivorous plants form three-dimensional insect traps. We discuss how evolution has shaped leaf diversity in the case of complex leaves, by tinkering with organ-wide growth and local growth repression, and in carnivorous plants, by modifying the relative growth of the lower and upper sides of the leaf primordium to create insect-digesting traps.
Article metrics loading...
Plant leaves display considerable variation in shape. Here, we introduce key aspects of leaf development, focusing on the morphogenetic basis of leaf shape diversity. We discuss the importance of the genetic control of the amount, duration, and direction of cellular growth for the emergence of leaf form. We highlight how the combined use of live imaging and computational frameworks can help conceptualize how regulated cellular growth is translated into different leaf shapes. In particular, we focus on the morphogenetic differences between simple and complex leaves and how carnivorous plants form three-dimensional insect traps. We discuss how evolution has shaped leaf diversity in the case of complex leaves, by tinkering with organ-wide growth and local growth repression, and in carnivorous plants, by modifying the relative growth of the lower and upper sides of the leaf primordium to create insect-digesting traps.
A fundamental question in biology is how organ form is generated and diversified during evolution. Plant leaves offer an attractive system to study this problem, as they develop a wide array of shapes while starting their development as nearly indistinguishable primordia at the shoot apex. In one of the first scientific discussions of plant diversity, 2,300 years ago, Theophrastus noted the dazzling morphological variation that exists among the leaves of seed plants (158). Much of the leaf shape diversity we see in nature reflects the geometry of leaf margins. Leaves can be simple, with either smooth margins (e.g., spinach) or repeated outgrowths of different sizes. When such outgrowths are shallow and saw-like, they are called serrations (e.g., inArabidopsis thaliana), while more pronounced outgrowths are called lobes (e.g., in rucola) (Figure 1a). Leaves can also be dissected (also referred to as compound), with their lamina divided into discrete units called leaflets. Dissected leaves can show further complexity by having leaflets on existing leaflets (e.g., tomato leaves) (Figure 1b). Leaves can also develop into complex three-dimensional (3D) forms, as seen in the cup-like traps and pitchers of carnivorous plants (Figure 1c).

Figure 1Click to view


Leaves are typically conspicuous throughout the life cycle ofangiosperms, unlike, for example, flowers, which are only visible during the reproductive phase. Consequently, leaf shape variation is a valuable complement to floral variation for the purposes of plant identification and classification (35,45,135,179). From a developmental perspective, leaves are also of considerable interest as they represent a ground state onto which developmental identities of other lateral organs, such as floral organs, are elaborated (73,120). Leaves are functionally important, as they are the primary site of photosynthesis. As leaves fix atmospheric carbon to oxygen during photosynthesis and release water during transpiration, they also play an important role in regenerating our atmosphere (58).
Here, we review the mechanisms that underlie leaf shape diversity, focusing on theeudicotlineage for which there is empirical evidence on the causes of this diversity. We first introduce the basic pathways that regulate early leaf development in the model systemsArabidopsis thalianaandCardamine hirsuta(referred to asArabidopsisandCardamine, respectively, from here on). We then discuss the genes that have been causally linked to the diversification of leaf form. Next, we discuss how interdisciplinary approaches that combine advanced imaging, genetics, and computational modeling have helped us to conceptualize the mechanisms that underlie leaf form diversity. Finally, we explain how joint consideration of two concepts in developmental biology—self-organization (SO) andpositional information (PI)—can help derive general principles on how leaves and vertebrate limbs emerge. For more detail on leaf development in different plant lineages, we refer readers to several excellent reviews (8,34,44,69,94,102,167).
All leaves arise from a pluripotent structure called theshoot apical meristem (SAM). Therefore, a key event in leaf initiation is the delimitation of leaf founder cells from those of the meri-stem. Genetic studies inArabidopsishave shown that this step is regulated by mutually repressive transcription factor interactions. Class IKNOTTED1-LIKE HOMEOBOX (KNOX1)proteins promote meristem development, while the ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1 (AS1) MYB-domain proteins and LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES (LOB)-type ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2 (AS2) proteins are required for correct leaf development. Genetic evidence indicates that the KNOX1 protein SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM) inhibitsAS1expression in the meristem, thus preventing differentiation (25). Conversely, AS1 and AS2 repress transcription of theKNOX1geneBREVIPEDICELLUS(BP) and its two paralogs,KNAT2andKNAT6, in leaves, thus excluding meristematic gene activity fromArabidopsisleaves (25,117,139) (Figure 2a). These genetic networks are at least partially conserved in seed plants, as theAS1orthologsROUGH SHEATH2(RS2) andPHANTASTICA(PHAN) [collectively referred to asARPs(159)] repressKNOX1gene transcription in maize and snapdragon, respectively. Layered onto this regulatory framework is a patterning system that specifies sites of leaf initiation by locally accumulating the indolic hormoneauxin. This accumulation is directed by cell–cell coordinated polar localization of the auxin efflux proteinPIN-FORMED 1 (PIN1)at the plasma membrane (70,115,129,130). Cells of the SAM converge their PIN1 polarities, forming a PIN1 convergence that concentrates auxin at leaf initiation sites (Figure 2a). As growth displaces the leaf primordium out from the meristem, cellsadaxialto the primordium reorient their PIN1 towards the meristem center and the next leaf initiation site (70) (Figure 2b). How do cells coordinate this process to generate such intricatepolaritypatterns? Computational modeling, use of thegenetic mosaics technique, and live-imaging have shown that auxin acts by inducing gene transcription to establish apositive feedback loopbetween auxin and its transport. This process results in PIN1 being localized towards cells that have high auxin activity, thereby generating PIN1 polarity (Figure 2d). This feedback loop lies at the heart of an iterative process that regulates leaf initiation from the meristem periphery and creates canonical phyllotactic patterns (16,82,148). The PIN1-auxin patterning system and theKNOX1/ARPfounder cell specification system appear to be functionally interconnected, as auxin is believed to repressKNOX1transcription (65,70). This link between the two systems might help synchronize cell fate specification with phyllotactic patterning at the SAM.

Figure 2Click to view


A prominent feature of most eudicot leaves, both simple and compound, is their bilateral symmetry, or dorsoventrality. Since leaves initiate from the meristem, one side faces the meristem (called dorsal or adaxial), while the other faces away (called ventral or abaxial) (149). InArabidopsis, adaxial–abaxial tissue polarity is conferred by a system of antagonistically acting transcription factors and small RNAs. This regulatory system, and the juxtaposition of adaxial and abaxial domains, is required for the lateral growth of the leaf lamina. Leaves lacking adaxial or abaxial identity develop as radialized organs without a flat lamina (46,47,88,104,105). Adaxial identity is conferred by redundantly acting CLASS III HOMEODOMAIN LEUCINE ZIPPER (HD-ZIP III) transcription factor encoding genes,REVOLUTA(REV),PHABULOSA(PHB), andPHAVOLUTA(PHV).HD-ZIP IIIgenes are also active in the SAM where they are required for meristem maintenance (46,104,105). Abaxial identity is conferred by the GARP domain transcription factor encoding genesKANADIs(KAN), together withAUXIN RESPONSE FACTORS3(ARF3) andARF4, which might serve asKANcofactors (47,88,119,145). The mutual antagonism betweenHD-ZIP IIIandKANgenes is reinforced by the microRNAsmiR165/166, which act to spatially restrict the expression ofHD-ZIP IIIgenes to the adaxial side of the leaves through posttranscriptional regulation. The disruption of thismiR165/166-mediated regulation results in leaf polarity defects (46,83,104,105). Similarly, dorsally expressedtrans-acting short interfering RNAs spatially restrict the expression ofARF3andARF4to the abaxial side (30,114,147,174).
How do initiating leaves acquire their adaxial–abaxial identities? Several studies have proposed that leaf adaxial–abaxial patterning arises from a central-peripheral prepattern created by the expression of adaxial and abaxial cell-type-specific genes within the meristem (46,60,75,88,92,105,173). Consistent with this,HD-ZIP IIIgenes are expressed more centrally in the meristem, whileKANgenes are expressed more peripherally, in concentric nonoverlapping domains. Auxin-based patterning positions new leaves at the boundary between the expression domains ofHD-ZIP IIIandKAN(Figure 2a,b). Thus, leaves inherit this prepatterned gene expression from the meristem (26,175). A key conclusion emerging from studies of adaxial–abaxial polarity is that the juxtaposition of adaxial–abaxial tissues promotes leaf growth (77,106,165). In agreement with this view, this adaxial–abaxial transcription factor system is required to localize auxin maxima in between their expression domains during leaf initiation (26). Since the meristem adaxial–abaxial boundary also continues into the leaf as its marginal domain, this juxtaposition might also help to localize the auxin response to leaf margins, thus enabling the auxin-based patterning that generates diverse leaf forms (Figure 2c; Section 4).
Symmetrically expressed factors can also influence adaxial–abaxial polarity. This was first demonstrated by studies ofPHAN, theAS1ortholog inAntirrhinum majus(snapdragon).PHANis expressed throughout the leaf primordium, yetphanmutants have abaxialized, needle-shaped leaves, indicating it promotes adaxial identity (165,166). In fact, it was an in-depth study of thephanmutants that first led to the idea that the juxtaposition of abaxial and adaxial identities is required for lateral leaf growth (165). Nonetheless, mutants of thePHANorthologs inArabidopsis(as1) and maize (rough sheath2) lack clear adaxial–abaxial tissue polarity defects and instead exhibit phenotypes associated withKNOX1misexpression, such as a transformation of more distal cell types of the leaf into more proximal ones (25,160). Thus,PHAN-like genes might not be strictly required for adaxial–abaxial tissue polarity in all plants. However, the adaxially expressedAS2can confer adaxialized phenotypes when overexpressed inArabidopsis(78,97,172). This effect depends on AS1, a likely cofactor of AS2, highlighting the potential of the AS1/AS2 system to influence tissue polarity pathways inArabidopsis.
Overall, the basis for the divergence of thearpmutant phenotypes in maize, snapdragon,Arabidopsis, and other seed plants remains unclear. One possibility is that these transcription factors have species-specific, downstream factors (or cofactors) that mediate their role in establishing abaxial polarity. Another possibility is that their role in tissue polarity is masked by redundancy in some species. For example, inArabidopsis, double mutants ofas1and eithererectaor a proteasome subunit–encoding geneasymmetric leaves enhancer(ae3) (74) can result in strongly abaxialized phenotypes (74,125) reminiscent of those of the snapdragonphanmutant. These observations indicate that species-specific genetic pathways may buffer against the consequences ofarploss of function in some species but not others. Overall, these findings reinforce the idea thatARPfunction has two facets: one involvingKNOX1repression and proximodistal (i.e., base-to-tip) axis development and the other involving adaxial–abaxial axis establishment, where the relative weight of those two facets differs between taxa. This idea is supported by several lines of genetic evidence. First, downregulation of the tomatoAS1ortholog results in strongly abaxialized leaves (reminiscent of snapdragonphanphenotypes), while also showing reduction in leaflet number and size as well as impaired leaflet positioning andKNOX1misexpression (91,182). Second, a mutant inCrispa(the pea ortholog ofAS1) shows strong proximodistal defects associated with ectopicKNOX1expression in leaves and partially abaxialized leaflets. Nonetheless, unlike tomato, the leaflets ofCrispamutants remain largely intact (157). Finally, leaves ofCardamine as1mutants are dominated byKNOX1misexpression as opposed to defects in adaxial–abaxialpolarityand also show a strong proximodistal axis compression (67,128). More comparative work is required to understand the mechanistic and quantitative differences inARP-dependent leaf development in different species.
There are two key reasons why adaxial–abaxial-specifying pathways are good candidates for mediating leaf shape diversity (54). First, evolutionary repositioning of the adaxial–abaxial boundary could influence the positioning of outgrowths at the leaf margin (Figures 2a–cand3; Section 4) (91). Second, different levels of abaxial or adaxial dominance might lead to differently shaped leaves with the dominant side overgrowing the other, a concept that appears to apply in the leaves of carnivorous plants (Section 7.2).
Following their initiation at the flanks of theSAM,eudicotleaf primordia typically emerge as simple, finger-like structures. In some species, primordia increase in complexity during development by forming repeated outgrowths (serrations, lobes, or leaflets). These outgrowths can, in turn, bear their own outgrowths, leading to repeated patterns and substantive diversity in shape. Therefore, discerning the fundamental mechanisms that pattern the leaf margin is extremely important for understanding how diverse leaf shapes arise. These mechanisms are discussed below.
Leaf development inArabidopsisis characterized by the periodic generation of serrations along the proximolateral leaf margins. A combination of genetics, imaging, and computational modeling has revealed that serration development is the morphological readout of a spatially distributed regulatory mechanism. This mechanism creates alternating activity peaks of the growth-promoting hormoneauxinand a growth-repressing transcription factor CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON2 (CUC2) (18). According to this model, the growing leaf margin is patterned via a regulatory module that consists of two feedback loops working in concert. The first loop relates the transport of auxin to its own distribution via regulation ofPIN1polarity in cells along the leaf margin. This loop generates periodic auxin maxima in a process similar to that creating phyllotactic patterns at the SAM, thus capturing the potential of auxin to generate SO patterns in diverse developmental contexts. In the second loop, CUC2 promotes the generation of PIN1-dependent auxin activity maxima while auxin repressesCUC2expression. This CUC2-dependent loop regulates the activity of the conserved auxin transport module in leaf margins to generate stable serration patterns (Figure 2e). This model is supported by a series of observations inArabidopsis: (a) Periodic PIN1 convergence points form along the leaf margin and direct localized auxin accumulation, thus marking the serration initiation sites (65,136); (b) bothpin1andcuc2mutants lack serrations and periodic auxin maxima at the leaf margin (18,65,113); (c)CUC2expression along the leaf margins precedes the establishment of auxin activity maxima (18); and (d) CUC2 is required for the formation of PIN1 convergence points (18).
How, then, are auxin, PIN1, and CUC2 integrated to generate periodic marginal patterning? According to one model (18), a local buildup of auxin drives the outgrowth of protrusions from the leaf margin while restricting CUC2 expression to the base of these protrusions. PIN1 then repolarizes towards the next serration initiation site in a CUC2-dependent manner. In addition to this, the localized downregulation of CUC2 might stabilize PIN1 convergence points, thus maintaining a stable flow of auxin that allows distinct serrations to form. CUC2 activity at the base of initiating serrations also mediates local growth repression, thereby deepening the indentations created by auxin-dependent growth. This molecular framework is evolutionarily conserved and also underlies the development of distinct leaflets in species with complex leaves likeCardamineand tomato (11,19). Thus, CUCs are proposed to play a dual role of mediating (a) the long-range organization of serration or leaflet initiation sites and (b) the local deepening of serrations in simple leaves or the separation of leaflets in compound leaves. Genetic interactions and mutant analyses indicate that this auxin-PIN1-CUCmodule is also likely to function at the SAM during leaf initiation (2,55,162). CUCs are expressed at the boundary between organ primordia and the SAM where they mediate growth repression to facilitate organ separation (23). In this way, CUCs mediate roles similar to the proteins that establish boundary domains during animal development (19,77). Recent work inArabidopsishas also helped shed light on the molecular basis ofCUC2action in regulating serration outgrowth.CUC2appears to act as a quantitative trigger for serration growth (101) by activating the expression ofCUC3and cytochromeP450 KLUH/CYP78at the leaf margin. Similar toCUC2,CUC3locally represses growth, further contributing to outgrowth separation (101,140). Notably, bothCUC3andP450 KLUH/CYP78also restrict auxin signaling to the growing tips of serrations (101), thus likely contributing to the directional outgrowth of serrations (Figure 2e).
Additional factors also help restrict auxin maxima to the tips of growing serrations. Some establish a feedback circuit involving auxin and EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTOR-LIKE2 (EPFL2)-ERECTA ligand pairs (156), as well as AUX/LAX proteins (84). Since EPFL peptides are conserved in vascular plants (155), more work is needed to determine how conserved this module is and its role in shaping diverse leaf forms. Key questions that are now emerging include (a) how CUC2 influences PIN1 polarity, and (b) whether, and how, PIN1 polarizes against the proposed activity gradient of auxin. Although up-the-gradient polarization models can readily create biological patterns in simulations and are supported by a recently identified molecular cue to polarity (16), a precise molecular framework for up-the-gradient cell polarity models remains opaque. For these reasons, more research is also needed on alternative models that link auxin and cell polarity (for a review, see1,17).
To acquire their final shape, leaves grow along both their proximodistal and mediolateral (middle-to-margin) axes. Coordination of this growth involves regulating the balance between cell proliferation and differentiation. InArabidopsis, differentiation progresses from the leaf tip toward the base, enabling the base to grow for a longer period of time. However, the precise kinetics of this progression remain debatable (6,42,111,112).
The plant-specific family of CINCINNATA (CIN)-like class II TEOSINTE BRANCHED, CYCLOIDEA, and PCF1/2 (TCP) basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are key regulators of leaf differentiation (43,100). Expression of CIN-TCPs is restricted to the leaf proliferative zone by the action of the conservedmiR319(116,118)In tomato,miR319-insensitiveCIN-TCPalleles cause leaves to differentiate precociously, reducing their size, eliminating leaflets, and resulting in a strikingly simplelanceolatephenotype (116). The loss ofCIN-TCPactivity also has noteworthy consequences: (a) It can cause excess marginal overgrowth and consequent buckling, as in thecincinnatasnapdragon mutant (111); and (b) it can increase the number of marginal outgrowths, such as serrations or leaflets (4,22,116). Another family of transcription factors regulating leaf margin differentiation are the NGATHA (NGA) proteins, which act redundantly with the CIN-TCPs (4). Higher-order loss-of-functionngatha/cin-tcpmutants inArabidopsishave deeply lobed and crinkly overgrown leaf margins with increased numbers of serrations (4).
These effects appear independently ofKNOX1-and CUC-mediated marginal patterning but instead depend onadaxial–abaxialtissue polarity and WUSCHEL-LIKE HOMEOBOX (WOX) proteins that promote cell growth at the leaf margin (4,107).WOXgenes are expressed at leaf margins and along the so-called middle leaf domain, which encompasses the adaxial–abaxial boundary (107). They influence cell identity at the leaf margins and are required for laminar widening in both simple and compound leaf species (107,110,154,161,180,181). Consequently, mutations inWOXfamily members cause loss of the characteristic elongated cells found in the leaf margin and narrow leaf defects, including reduction or elimination of the flat leaf blade. Thus, these genes are proposed to translate signals generated by adaxial–abaxial juxtaposition into mediolateral growth (107). In line with this proposition, recent findings suggest thatWOXgenes act, at least in part, by modulating auxin biosynthesis and signaling and help to coordinate cellular growth and differentiation gradients along the proximodistal and mediolateral axes of the leaf (33,178). Notably,Arabidopsis wox1 wox3double mutants also suppress the excessive proliferative growth at the leaf margin in plants where the function of differentiation-promotingCIN-TCPS/NGAgenes has been reduced by constitutive expression ofmiR319a(4). These observations also raise the possibility thatWOXgenes are part of an ancient regulatory module that was redeployed from the SAM in the leaf margins to support proliferative growth and repress differentiation (50). Consistent with this idea,WUSCHEL(WUS), the first discoveredWOXgene, is required for the maintenance of pluripotent stem cells in the SAM (103), andWOX1andWOX3genes are required forKNOX1-mediated lobe formation inArabidopsisleaf margins (4). Overall, these findings suggest that maintenance of proliferative cells and slowing down differentiation may be general aspects of WOX function. Notably, however, in species with complex leaves like tomato andMedicago, loss ofWOXactivity results in narrow leaflets but not bladeless leaves or leaflet elimination (109,154,177). This observation may suggest that in complex leaf plantsWOXgenes act downstream of pathways responsible for initiation and positioning leaflets. Future work to understand species-specific modifications ofWOXpathways should help clarify their role in interspecific variation of leaf form.
Together, these observations indicate that active repression of a potentially highly proliferative zone occurs at leaf margins. Notably, this zone coincides with the marginal competence zone that harborsauxinactivity maxima and that might have continuity with the SAM. These observations also raise the possibility that the marginal competence zone was evolutionarily derived from the SAM (Figure 3).

Figure 3Click to view


While many genes can influence the development of a trait (14,153), only a subset of them will cause its diversification. In interfertile species that can also yield fertile progeny after a genetic cross, quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis can be used to identify genes that contribute to trait diversity (24,38,41,76). However, to identify such genes in more distantly related species, the field of evolutionary developmental (evo-devo) biology needed to develop a set of criteria to determine the genetic basis of trait divergence (27) (see the sidebar titled Criteria Used to Identify Genes that Contribute to Morphological Diversity Between Species). Genes contributing to leaf shape diversity are discussed below (Figure 4).

Figure 4Click to view


KNOX1genes were the first genes found to be associated with evolutionary changes in leaf morphology. A relationship betweenKNOX1expression in leaves and the generation of dissected leaf form was originally suggested by Hareven et al. (64), who showed thatKNOX1genes are expressed in the dissected leaves of tomato. This is unlike the simple leaves ofArabidopsisand maize, which do not expressKNOX1genes in leaves (87,98). This study, and subsequent work, showed that increasedKNOX1expression in tomato results in super-dissected leaves (64,79). Thus, both gene expression data and gain-of-function studies indicated thatKNOX1expression in leaves may be associated with dissected leaf forms. This hypothesis was further strengthened by a broad phylogenetic survey, which showed thatKNOX1genes are expressed in the dissected leaves of many species but are typically not expressed in simple leaves (15). One exception to this association is a group of legumes in which leaf complexity is independent ofKNOX1expression and rather associates with the activity ofLEAFYorthologs (56,72). Overall, these data support the idea that persistentKNOX1expression (and perhaps more rarelyLEAFY-like expression) in the leaf primordia can delay differentiation, consequently prolonging the organogenic activity associated with leaflet formation. However, they did not resolve whetherKNOX1expression in leaves is required for leaflet formation and what genetic mechanisms causeKNOX1expression in the leaves of some species but not others.
Answers to these questions came from comparative genetic studies inArabidopsisand its relativeCardamine. One study showed that a reduction inSTMgene activity reduced leaflet number inCardamine, indicating thatSTMis required for leaflet formation (67). Conversely, interspecificgene transfer (IGT) experiments revealed that the introduction ofSTMandBPloci fromCardamineintoArabidopsisincreased leaf complexity (128). Thus, diversification ofKNOX1genes was likely both necessary and sufficient for the evolution of leaf complexity in crucifers (128). Such IGT-based approaches have also shown thatChBPhas a greater ability to alter leaf form when it is expressed under the control of its own regulatory sequences, relative to the ability ofChSTM. This ability is inversely related to the pleiotropic effects of each of these genes, which are higher forChSTM(128).
CRITERIA USED TO IDENTIFY GENES THAT CONTRIBUTE TO MORPHOLOGICAL DIVERSITY BETWEEN SPECIES
Here we list criteria and experimental approaches that can be used to study the genetic basis for trait diversity between species.


What is the mechanistic basis ofKNOX1action in shaping complex leaves? Does it reflect similar mechanisms to those operating at theSAM? Consistent with this possibility, KNOX1 proteins regulate similar downstream genes and pathways in both complex leaves and the SAM. Specifically, in the meristem, KNOX1 proteins promotecytokinin (CK)activity and inhibit gibberellic acid (GA) activity, establishing a hormonal regime favorable for the meristem to function (20,66,81,134). Work in tomato indicated that the deployment of the same KNOX1/GA and KNOX1/CK modules in leaves supports leaflet formation, likely by delaying differentiation (9,66,68). Notably, both modules are also involved in altering leaf shape in response to ambient temperature in the aquatic plantRorippa aquatica, indicating a potential physiological significance forKNOX1genes in this system (108). There is also considerable evidence thatKNOX1genes interact with the CUC/auxin pattern generator at the leaf margin to promote leaflet development. First, KNOX1-dependent leaflet initiation isPIN1-dependent and associated with local KNOX1 downregulation, similar to leaf initiation at the SAM (11,67). Second, inducibleKNOX1expression promotesChCUC3gene transcription, whereas reducedChCUC3activity results in decreasedKNOX1expression (19). Thus, from a molecular perspective,KNOX1genes might influence leaflet formation in two ways. First, they might increase the competency of leaf margins to respond to PIN1-directed auxin maxima (11,67). Second, a positive feedback loop betweenKNOX1andCUCgenes might strengthen the CUC-mediated growth polarization that leads to leaflet formation.
The second gene family significantly involved in leaf shape diversity includes the class I HD-ZIP-encodingREDUCED COMPLEXITY(RCO)/LATE MERISTEM IDENTITY 1(LMI1) genes.RCOwas discovered inCardamineand is expressed at the base of leaflets, where it acts to create complex leaves (163).RCOoriginated in crucifers through tandem gene duplication ofLMI1(163), a floral regulator (133). Coupledcis-regulatory divergenceand coding sequence evolution enabledRCOto acquire both a novel expression domain at the base of developing leaflets and a reduced protein stability, which likely prevented pleiotropic effects due to its altered expression domain (163,164). QTL analysis demonstrated that anRCO-type gene contributes to leaf shape changes on a shallower evolutionary scale within crucifers of theCapsellagenus (144). Here, the differences inRCO-Aexpression levels were associated with increased leaf margin dissection inCapsella grandiflora(Cg), compared to its relativeCapsella rubella(Cr) (144).
To what degree is simply the presence or absence ofRCOfrom a genome central to leaf shape diversity? The transformation ofChRCOor CrRCO/CgRCOintoArabidopsiscould make its leaves more complex, indicating thatRCOgene loss contributed to leaf simplification inArabidopsis(144,163). The outcome of these IGT experiments also indicates that the ancestral regulatory mechanisms underlying complex leaf generation, partially or wholly, still exist inArabidopsis. Increasing evidence suggests thatRCO/LMI1genes were repeatedly used by evolution to cause leaf shape diversification: (a) Copy number variation ofRCO/LMI1is statistically associated with leaf complexity in a crucifer species (89), (b) the loss of anRCOgene caused leaf simplification in the cruciferNeslia paniculata(152), and (c) altered expression of anLMI1gene in cotton underlies increased leaf lobing in the cottonokraleaf variant (5). What, then, is the cellular basis for RCO action? Through time-lapse imaging and cellular-level growth analysis, RCO has been found to repress growth locally at the base of initiating leaflets, enabling their separation into distinct units (163). This contrasts with the role ofKNOX1genes, which are thought to broadly affect the differentiation of developing leaves. Notably, inCapsellaspecies,CrRCO-Aexpression is stimulated by lower temperatures. Near-isogenic lines carrying theCgRCO-Aallele also showed temperature-dependent deep lobing of leaves, mimicking the dissected leaves ofC. rubella. This phenotypic plasticity inCapsellais exciting, as it establishes a possible link betweenRCO-dependent leaf shape development and the environment (144).
Through which molecular pathways does RCO regulate leaf complexity? Recent evidence suggests that RCO directly regulates genes involved in CK homeostasis (61). CK levels are reduced inCardamine rcomutants and increased followingRCOoverexpression. Notably, elevating CK signaling in theRCOexpression domain inArabidopsisincreased leaf complexity and mimicked the cell-level effects ofRCOaction (61). Together, these findings indicate that RCO regulates leaf form by orchestrating CK homoeostasis. RCO was also found to negatively regulate its own expression, thus limiting potentially pleiotropic effects arising from its altered expression relative toLMI1(61,164). Given thatRCOandKNOX1both appear to act through CK, an important question that emerges is how CK homeostasis can mediate the effects of these two proteins, which appear to be developmentally distinct. The answer may be that since CK mediates different growth regulatory effects at different stages of leaf development (39,146), detailed investigations of cell-level effects of CK in different tissues and developmental stages might help resolve this important issue. Notably, in tomato, mutants in the MYB transcription factor encoding geneCLAUSAhave reduced CK signaling and exhibit excessively complex leaves (7). CLAUSA also represses differentiation andKNOX1expression in the leaves (80). These findings underline the importance of regulated CK activity to underlying complex leaf development and indicate a possible feedback between KNOX1 and CK action. CK has also been implicated in tuber development, as overexpression of the CK biosynthesis geneLOG1in tomato is sufficient to cause the formation of potato-like minitubers (49). Together, these observations raise the possibility that alterations in CK homeostasis were repeatedly deployed during evolution to alter the form of different organs.
While there is less direct evidence that the diversification ofCIN-TCPshas contributed to the evolution of leaf form, there are substantial hints that this is the case. First, QTL studies in cultivated crucifers indicate thatCIN-TCPs are candidate genes for leaf shape diversity (138,176). Second, overexpression ofmiR319ainBrassica rapais associated with a characteristic kale-like phenotype that features overgrown margins, reminiscent ofcin-tcploss-of-function alleles (99,131). Third, expression levels of theCIN-TCPgeneLANCEOLATE(LA) are higher in the simple leaves of pepper compared to the complex leaves of tomato, its relative, further linking the CIN-TCP-mediated earlier differentiation to a simpler leaf form (143). These findings are particularly exciting because the modulation ofCIN-TCP-mediated differentiation has been shown to generate a large array of leaf shapes in tomato (116). It would be an interesting experiment to swapCIN-TCPloci between tomato (complex leaf) and pepper (simple leaf) and evaluate whether the activity of this single gene contributes to differences in leaf shape.
Overall, two main conclusions emerge from the above findings: (a) Genes encoding transcription factors of large effect were repeatedly deployed by evolution to cause morphological differences between species, and (b) several mechanisms, acting at multiple levels, may exist that reduce the possibility of pleiotropic effects of this redeployment. These include specific changes incis-regulatory elements (CREs)(164), evolution of autorepression (61), or allowing the less potent of two paralogs to evolve a higher capacity to cause morphological changes (128).
These findings are also congruent with findings on the evolution of form in animal systems and indicate that regulatory evolution constrained by pleiotropy is a key driver of morphological diversity in multicellular eukaryotes (123,151),
Despite the progress made in studying the genetic basis of leaf shape evolution, we are only now beginning to understand how diversification in gene activity can generate different forms. One gap in our knowledge concerns how genetic effects are translated into phenotypic differences between or within species, reflecting the inherent complexity of the underlying mechanisms. The form of an organism is determined by a cascade of developmental mechanisms operating at different levels of organization. These mechanisms generate the final morphology of an organism or organ through complex feedback loops between genetic regulation, cell proliferation, cell migration, and mechanical properties of tissues. Owing to the absence of cell migration, which distinguishes animals from plants, most plant organs arise through the genetically controlled distribution of growth. For example, differences in growth underlie the divergent morphologies of simple versus complex leaves and the 3D traps of carnivorous plants, as all of these organs originate from nearly identically shaped primordia. Understanding the complex interactions that link gene action to growth, and to different organ forms, requires the acquisition of technically challenging, quantitative data on cellular growth at high spatial and temporal resolution (3,48,59,93,122). One way to acquire such data is to use nondestructive live-imaging, which allows direct visualization and measurement of how form develops in different genetic backgrounds, while simultaneously monitoring the accompanying dynamic patterns of gene expression (12,126). However, although indispensable, such data are still inadequate to connect genetic changes with morphological divergence. This is primarily because such data are difficult to interpret (29), as local gene activity can have complex, nonlocal effects on tissue deformations, which arise through interactions between genetically specified growth and tissue mechanics (32). Therefore, the use of computational models and simulations can substantiate our understanding of the complexity of these interactions (29,124) and enable us to reconstruct a process through consideration of its constituent elements and their interactions. The constituent elements could be spatially distributed gene activities and specific parameters of cellular growth such as the amount, duration, and direction. Thus, computational models and simulations allow these interactions to be investigated in a systematic and formalized fashion.
Modeling tissue growth in a mechanically informed manner is nontrivial and computationally intensive. This is because, at every step of a simulation, the molecular interactions that locally affect growth change the mechanical state of the tissue. This generates tissue deformation that itself alters growth parameters and, ultimately, tissue growth patterns. Approaches that treat tissues as a viscoelastic material, such as the Growing Polarized Tissue (GPT) and related frameworks (86), have emerged as powerful tools to examine how growth deforms tissues to generate form. In contrast to purely geometrical models, these approaches represent tissues as a mechanical continuum using the finite element method (FEM). The FEM discretizes this continuum into a number of individual elements, such as triangles, whose numbers can increase as the tissue grows. Substances distributed throughout the virtual tissue control growth by affecting its amount and direction. The inclusion of tissue thickness in FEM models also enables exploration of 3D aspects of growth and has proven essential in the study of the developmental origin of carnivorous leaves (see Section 7.2). A key point emerging from studies using GPT-like frameworks is the distinction between specified and resultant growth. Specified growth refers to how a tissue wants to grow in response to specific genetic information, such as the spatial distribution ofauxinsignaling. Resultant growth refers to how the tissue actually grows, owing to the physical constraints imposed by neighboring tissues. Differences between specified and resultant growth reflect the mechanical forces operating between connected tissues. Thus, these forces integrate the growth of attached tissues that may grow differently to reduce distortions and ensure that the tissue does not tear itself apart during development. Nonetheless, it is important to note that this mechanical input to growth is passive, arising from the fact that different parts of the tissue are physically interconnected. It need not involve active signaling, in contrast to proposed stress-induced changes in growth direction, in which active mechanosensing plays a role (95).
As the above frameworks treat space as a continuum, cells are not explicitly considered to be mechanical entities. Nonetheless, the geometry of dividing cells can be layered onto the tissue surface, much like a dynamic net that sheaths a growing balloon. Recently, this approach was used to explore the interactions between tissue growth and cell division inArabidopsisleaves (51). A comparison of the resulting simulations to time-lapse data suggested that growth rates do not exclusively determine cell division rates or vice versa. Rather, reproducing the observed spatiotemporal distribution of cells required independent regulation of cell division and growth, with cross-connections between them. These models assumed that cells divide at a threshold size, creating a correlation between growth and division, but also indicated that this cross-coupling may involve a common upstream factor or result from a reduction in cell growth as cell size increases. Thus, this methodology helps researchers understand how the distribution of cells in growing organs may arise and predicts hypotheses for future testing.
Nevertheless, the generation of frameworks that effectively link and incorporate developmental gene action to its cell-level effects (e.g., cell wall mechanics) and tissue growth remains an important task for the field and is already underway (13,21). While promising, there are still significant methodological hurdles to overcome before mechanically faithful cell-level frameworks are formulated (37). Presently, continuum models continue to offer a considerable amount of useful information on how form and diversity emerge in specific cases (see Section 7). Abstracting cells from these models also has certain advantages for modeling tissue growth, such as computational efficiency and avoiding artifacts that might arise from making complex assumptions on cellular behaviors from a mechanical perspective. Such information includes the specific physical properties of cells at different stages of organ development, as well as the implications of cell division for tissue mechanics.
Two recent advances have been made by using the continuum models discussed above coupled with growth analysis: a conceptualization ofArabidopsisserration development in two dimensions and an exploration of the characteristic 3D geometries of carnivorous plants. These are discussed below.
The first physically based model ofArabidopsisleaf development simulated the emergence of the simple, spoon-shaped leaf form of this species. This model demonstrated that this form can be explained by combining a global tissuepolarityfield, which controls growth direction, with the distributed action of specific regulators that affect the amount of regional growth (93). The key to this model was the ability to measure growth using time-lapse imaging, which informed model construction. Further exploration of model parameters demonstrated how altering the distribution of the amount and direction of growth could generate a more lanceolate-shaped simple leaf, like that of snapdragon. Growth was then measured in snapdragon by studying marked-tissue sectors generated at different developmental stages. This approach helped validate the model predictions on how shape diversity may arise by influencing the amount and direction of growth (93).
Recently, this approach was extended to explain the genetic control of leaf diversity in Brassicaceae by comparing two relatives with different leaf shape—ArabidopsisandCardamine(90). Using time-lapse imaging, this study generated comprehensive cellular-level observations of growth, proliferation, and gene expression during the early stages of leaf development in both species, importantly including the morphogenetically significant leaf margin that had not been captured in previous studies. These observations were also obtained in backgrounds where key regulators of leaf shape (auxin, PIN1, and CUC2) were perturbed genetically or pharmacologically. These data were used to generate cell-levelfate maps(Figure 5a,b) from each background, which were then used to evaluate the contribution of equivalent tiers of cells in the primordium to the development of the differentiated leaf (Figure 5c,d). Essentially, this approach can be viewed as the developmental biology equivalent of a sequence alignment, in which growth parameters are compared in equivalent positions of an organ instead of nucleotides in a DNA strand. The resulting information combined with the organ-wide quantification of cell proliferation and anisotropy patterns showed unexpected similarities in the early growth ofCardamineandArabidopsisleaf primordia. In both species, geometric characteristics of the leaf emerged from an interplay between a conserved, tissue-dependent growth mode and the margin pattern generator involvingPIN1, CUC2, andauxin(see Section 4.1). Based on these results, aphysically based computational modelofArabidopsisleaf development was constructed, in which leaf margin geometry emerges from genetically controlled cellular behaviors (90). This approach showed the significance of growth polarity for shape emergence. It also showed that a substantial portion of the leaf lamina grows isotopically without a clear polarity, despite a possible global polarity field operating along the proximodistal axis during early leaf development. This isotropic field of growth is then modified by PIN1-dependent short-range polarity fields at the leaf margin, which support the formation of serrations inArabidopsisand leaflets inCardamine.Growth of the remainder of the leaf (the petiole and midrib area) was incorporated descriptively. Additionally, the global progression of differentiation and associated reduction in growth were assumed to proceed from the tip to the base of the leaf. Differentiation occurred as a function of the distance from the leaf base, which differentiates last. These assumptions were based on the measurement of cell proliferation and differentiation parameters. The resulting models faithfully reproduced key aspects of serrated leaf development as measured in time-lapse imaging, including the distribution of anisotropy and isotropy during development.

Figure 5Click to view


These physically based models have also provided inspiration for simpler, geometry-based models that consider developing outgrowths in combination with genetic information on leaflet development but overlook the mechanical connections of cells (18,132). Nevertheless, this approach has still proven useful in exploring the logic of leaf margin development and for conceptualizing the role of the auxin-PIN1-CUC2 module in serration formation (18,132). It has also been shown that shape diversity can be explained by the distinct effects of two homeobox genes (STMandRCO) on growth, which are active in the leaves ofCardaminebut absent inArabidopsis. Specifically, whileSTMbroadens organ-wide growth relative to CUC2-PIN1 activity, enabling leaflet emergence,RCOlocally inhibits growth around emerging leaflets, thereby accentuating the shape differences created by patterning, enabling leaflet separation (90). Experimental evidence also supports a role forRCOandSTMas key regulators of shape diversity. Their combined expression during early leaf development inArabidopsisproduced a leaf shape that closely resembles that ofCardamine(90)This study also discovered a novel, self-limiting action for both STM and auxin. Auxin promotes growth but limits its duration by promoting differentiation and the cessation of cell proliferation, while STM prolongs growth, by delaying differentiation and the time that cell proliferation ceases, but also reduces its amount. This self-limiting feature might help prevent considerable growth imbalances between parts of the leaf that need to grow differently under the influence of these potent growth regulators.
The 3D insect traps of carnivorous plants have a distinctive leaf morphology specialized for entrapping insects for consumption. Since such morphologies evolved from 2D planar leaf forms, they serve as exciting models to investigate how out-of-plane deformations evolve in nature. The leaves of the small bladderwortUtricularia gibbaare divided into leaflets, some of which form intricate 3D traps. By integrating modeling informed by growth data and transgenic perturbations using genetic mosaics (96,168),Utriculariawas developed into a model system to understand trap development and the emergence of 3D leaf forms (167).
Visualization of the expression patterns ofadaxial–abaxialpolaritygenes (see Section 3) inUtricularia, usingin situhybridizations, showed that the inner and outer regions of the trap broadly correspond to the adaxial and abaxial domains, respectively, of a planar leaf (168). The functional significance of this finding was elegantly tested by the creation of ectopic sectors of the adaxial determinantUgPHV. EctopicUgPHVexpression during early development prevented trap development and created radialized organs, mirroring the effects of ectopicPHV/PHBexpression inArabidopsis. These findings indicate that tightly regulated expression ofUgPHVis critical for trap development. Given that the adaxial–abaxial expression boundary is required for the mediolateral growth of planar leaves (see Section 3.3), the authors devised a model in which a polarity field anchored to the distribution of adaxial–abaxial gene expression directs growth. This polarity field is oriented toward the boundary between the adaxial–abaxial domains and is coupled with a field orthogonal to that operating along the proximodistal axis, similar toArabidopsisandCardaminemodels discussed in Section 7.1. When the adaxial–abaxial boundary bisects the leaf primordium, the model generates planar leaves. However, when this boundary is shifted to match observations of young traps, the model reproduces trap morphology. An elegant feature of this model is that it links previously generated information on the significance of adaxial–abaxial polarity to laminar growth and shows how relatively simple modifications to this adaxial–abaxial tissue patterning system can generate very complex shapes (see also Section 3.2). For instance,Sarracenia purpureais an independently evolved carnivorous species in which the adaxial gene activity is localized to a narrow strip, proximal to the leaf primordium (53). Simply the incorporation of this narrow adaxial domain into the above model sufficed to generateSarracenia-like leaves (168). These observations further highlight the potential of evolutionary modifications to this adaxial–abaxial genetic system for generating different leaf forms (Figure 6).

Figure 6Click to view


A different study investigated the later stages ofUtriculariatrap morphogenesis (96). At later stages, the trap grows from an almost spherical shape into a more elongated, somewhat flattened ellipsoid shape. By measuring growth through confocal microscopy snapshots and exploring computational models that treat the tissue as a continuum, the authors found that this shape change can be attributed to growth, specified by a proximodistal polarity field. This field is similar to the one proposed for theArabidopsisleaf (93), except that here it propagates through a highly curved tissue sheet, causing a change in surface curvature from spherical to ellipsoid. Such a polarity field is also consistent with the orientation of glandular hairs, which are used for nutrition and are found throughout the trap surface (96).
Together, these studies highlight the power of combining genetics, advanced imaging, and modeling to gain a predictive understanding of how biological forms develop and diversify. Specifically, they underscore the importance of polarity in generating diverse leaf shapes. In some cases, polarity fields are postulated to operate over the entire organ (93), while in other cases, polarity fields are actually relatively short-ranged (90). How can stable polarity fields be maintained over time? A possible explanation may be that organ-wide effects operate early in development, and a separate mechanism helps propagate their effects later in development. For example, earlyPIN1/auxin-mediated growth polarity across the leaf proximodistal axis might propagate to later developmental stages via the involvement of the developing vasculature (40,132), which in turn might influence the growth direction of surrounding tissues through chemical or physical means.
Notably, the above models do not consider active mechanical inputs into growth polarity, thereby highlighting how chemically based systems can generate growth polarities and form. Nevertheless, studies of mechanically oriented polarities provide additional attractive opportunities for understanding how tissue stress links to growth, since mechanosensing mechanisms have been discovered in different biological systems (63). While a detailed discussion of this lies outside the scope of this review, it is of note that the stable, stress-mediated propagation of tissue-wide growth polarities is nontrivial. For example, according to a common assumption of stress-based models, cells reinforce themselves along the direction of maximal tension to resist the forces that arise through growth. Assuming this reinforcement is in the horizontal dimension, following argumentation from Whitewoods & Coen (167), cells would grow faster in the unreinforced vertical direction, owing to the now relatively low stiffness in the vertical direction compared to that in the horizontal direction. However, reinforcement in the horizontal direction (e.g., via cellulose deposition) would decrease stress in the horizontal direction by increasing cell wall thickness, eventually causing stress in the vertical direction to exceed that in the horizontal direction. This shift in forces would thus tend to negate the original directional signal. Therefore, since growth continually feeds back to modify residual stresses and, consequently, the growth pattern, it might be difficult to create a stably oriented pattern of specified growth through a stress-based mechanism. Two possibilities have been proposed to circumvent this problem. First, stresses might be spatially averaged over the organ to provide an overall orientation of stress (71). However, it is unclear which biological or biophysical mechanisms could distinguish average stress from local stress, since cells would experience these as the same entity. Second, the directional pattern derived from stresses might become fixed during early development. This could avoid the problem of growth feeding back to modify stress patterns and thus negating its own signaling action. More research is needed in this area, and the reader is referred to relevant reviews (31,52,62).
Of the models discussed above, those comparing simple and dissected leaf development appear to be extensively rooted in genetic mechanisms. How do these genetic mechanisms relate to other postulated mechanisms of pattern formation more generally?
In the case of serrations and leaflets, this mechanism was derived by explicitly considering dynamic cell-level growth and provides a unified explanation for both the prominence and number of outgrowths, as well as the overall leaf laminar shape. According to this mechanism, leaf geometry arises from the integration of an SO patterning system at the leaf margin (the auxin-PIN1-CUC2module) with an organ-wide growth control system. The patterning system distributes local foci of genetically controlled growth anisotropy with a given periodicity and directionality. This system patterns the leaf margin, forming repeated units of serrations, lobes, or leaflets. Conversely, the growth of the bulk of the leaf can be conceptualized by aPIsystem related to differentiation (171), which proceeds from the leaf tip towards its base (85) (Figure 7a). The PI system confines cell proliferation and growth to the leaf base, while growthpolarityexists along the proximodistal axis.

Figure 7Click to view


The integration of the SO and PI systems depends on a cell's position; cells can be influenced by both or predominantly by one or the other. A key feature of the interaction of the two systems is that slowing down differentiation and prolonging growth modifies the periodicity and pattern of the emergence of marginal outgrowths, which provides a morphological readout of the SO system. Specifically, slower differentiation and a broader growth zone create more available space for the patterning system to generate growth-activatingauxinpeaks. This results in more frequent outgrowths (changed periodicity), as well as intercalation (changed directionality). Here, intercalation results from increased space between outgrowths. Furthermore, slowing down differentiation across the proximodistal axis affects the prominence of outgrowths by prolonging protrusion growth.
A notable aspect of this regulatory logic is that the SO and PI systems might have common molecular components. For example, auxin might participate in the PI system by helping to position the downstream effectors of differentiation (178). Furthermore, CUCs not only participate in the patterning but are also proposed to modulate differentiation by promotingKNOX1expression, which can delay differentiation and prolong growth (19,128).
These views also resonate well with findings in the field of animal development, where an SO system and a PI system are proposed to interact for patterning digits during mouse limb bud development (57,127). In this case, the PI is partially provided by a proximodistal gradient of FGF (fibroblast growth factor) expression, with maximum FGF expression in the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), a strip of specialized epithelium cells located in the distal region of the developing limb bud. The AER secretes FGF and directs growth along the proximodistal axis. FGFs help maintain a region of undifferentiated and proliferating cells at the distal tip. The SO system is tripartite and involves wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus integration site family (Wnt), sex-determining region Y (SRY)-box 9 (Sox9), and bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp). It distributesSox9-positive domains that give rise to digits, interspersed withWnt/Bmpexpression that marks interdigital regions (127). So how do these two systems interact during digit patterning? FGF signaling (PI system) along with the specific distalHoxgene activity helps maintain digit wavelength along the anterior-posterior axis by modulating the periodicity ofSox9expression (SO system) (127). Computer simulations show that once the digits are specified, the proximodistal FGF gradient also influences digit-patterning speed. This effect causes narrowing of digit width towards the proximal end of the limb bud and helps determine digit number (142). This leads to a coordination between patterning and growth leading to proper limb development (127) (Figure 7b). Thus, combined consideration of studies in plant and animal systems highlights how the development of repeated units of an organ is integrated with that of the organ as a whole. The broader logic of development in these instances can thus be as follows: The SO system helps to generate repeated elements (leaflets or lobes in leaves, digits in vertebrate appendages). The PI system underlies a graded response that shapes the organ as a whole by generating other aspects of the organ shape (e.g., the proximodistal axis of the vertebrate palm or the leaves), while simultaneously providing inputs into the distinct features of the repeated elements—size, proportion and number. From an evolutionary perspective, this convergence might explain how similar mechanisms have arisen to enable the growth of repeated structural subunits to be coordinated with that of the tissue that produces and bears them. However, theoretical work indicates that some SO systems includingTuring patterns, similar to the ones involved in digit patterning, often tend to lack robustness (137). It will therefore be interesting in the future to explore whether PI systems help to stabilize SO systems, for example, via interactions between growth and patterning or by providing additional regulatory inputs.
The work reviewed here highlights how in-depth biological experimentation combined with computational modeling can greatly advance our understanding of organ development and morphological diversity. It also illustrates how this interdisciplinary approach can be used to derive unifying principles that govern the evolution of form in different groups of multicellular eukaryotes. In the future, we can expect the development of more mechanically faithful, cell-level growth models that incorporate cytoskeletal dynamics, cell division and cell wall remodeling (28,36). Such models will be able to support explicit biological investigations into how different cell-level processes translate into tissue-level deformations that shape the diverse forms of leaves and other organs.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We thank Aimée Zuniga (University of Basel) for kindly reviewing the limb bud–related material, Marcus Heisler (University of Sydney) for his consent to use the graphical representation shown inFigure 2c, and Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz (University of Calgary) for helpful discussions. Work in the Tsiantis lab on leaf morphogenesis is funded by DFG FOR2581 on Plant Morphodynamics, the Max Planck Society, and The Cluster of Excellence on Plant Sciences (CEPLAS). Neha Bhatia is the recipient of European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO) Long-Term Fellowship award number 43-2019. We apologize to researchers whose work was not cited due to space limitations and thank them for their contribution to the field.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


