We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
The persistent triploid endosperms of cereal crops are the most important source of human food and animal feed. The development of cereal endosperms progresses through coenocytic nuclear division, cellularization, aleurone and starchy endosperm differentiation, and storage product accumulation. In the past few decades, the cell biological processes involved in endosperm formation in most cereals have been described. Molecular genetic studies performed in recent years led to the identification of the genes underlying endosperm differentiation, regulatory network governing storage product accumulation, and epigenetic mechanism underlying imprinted gene expression. In this article, we outline recent progress in this area and propose hypothetical models to illustrate machineries that control aleurone and starchy endosperm differentiation, sugar loading, and storage product accumulations. A future challenge in this area is to decipher the molecular mechanisms underlying coenocytic nuclear division, endosperm cellularization, and programmed cell death.
Article metrics loading...
The persistent triploid endosperms of cereal crops are the most important source of human food and animal feed. The development of cereal endosperms progresses through coenocytic nuclear division, cellularization, aleurone and starchy endosperm differentiation, and storage product accumulation. In the past few decades, the cell biological processes involved in endosperm formation in most cereals have been described. Molecular genetic studies performed in recent years led to the identification of the genes underlying endosperm differentiation, regulatory network governing storage product accumulation, and epigenetic mechanism underlying imprinted gene expression. In this article, we outline recent progress in this area and propose hypothetical models to illustrate machineries that control aleurone and starchy endosperm differentiation, sugar loading, and storage product accumulations. A future challenge in this area is to decipher the molecular mechanisms underlying coenocytic nuclear division, endosperm cellularization, and programmed cell death.
Theendospermsof cereal crops such as rice (Oryza sativaL.), maize (Zea maysL.), wheat (Triticum aestivumL.), barley (Hordeum vulgareL.), millet (Setaria italicL.), oat (Avena sativaL.), and sorghum (Sorghum bicolorL.) contribute the largest percentage of human food and animal feed, and also provide a substantial amount of raw material for manufactured goods and biofuels (74). From a developmental point of view, the early stages in the development of persistent cereal endosperms are similar to those inArabidopsis thaliana, starting from coenocytic nuclear divisions of the triploid central nucleus in the embryo sac after fertilization, and continuing with cellularization to form cell walls between individual nuclei (109). The differences begin later, with the differentiation of various tissue types, includingaleuroneandstarchy endosperm, and the rapid accumulation of storage products in cereal endosperms (11). Thus, storage products accumulated in the cereal endosperm nourish the embryo during not only embryogenesis but also seed germination, unlike in species such asArabidopsisthat have an exalbuminous seed, in which the endosperm supports embryogenesis alone. This article provides an overview of the progress made in recent decades in understanding the development of cereal endosperms and the accumulation of storage products, with primary attention given to studies performed in rice and maize.
As illustrated inFigure 1(with rice as an example), all cereal plants have a nuclear-type endosperm, and the first phase of endosperm development is coenocytic, with synchronized nuclear divisions but no intervening cytokinesis. In rice, this process takes about two days. The nuclei produced, together with their surrounding cytoplasm, are localized to the periphery, while a large vacuole occupies the central region of the embryo sac (131). Cellularization of thecoenocytic endospermstarts with the formation of a radial microtubular network from the nuclear envelopes, and then cell walls form at the periphery of the embryo sac, but without phragmoplast formation (18), in a process reminiscent of cell cleavage observed in non-vascular plant species such asChlamydomonas(33). Further cytokinesis of the endosperm proceeds with the formation of phragmoplasts in interzones between opposing radial microtubular systems, providing guidance for the deposition of cell wall materials (17). The cellularization continues through repeated cycles of nuclear division and cell wall formation, and eventually invades the entire central vacuole. In rice, this process takes about three days (184).

Figure 1Click to view


Differentiation of the cereal endosperm starts after the completion of cellularization, with the establishment of two major tissues: the outer aleurone layer and the inner starchy endosperm (Figure 1). Due to their distinct cell division patterns, cell sizes, and storage product accumulations, these two tissues are easily distinguishable (184). During thegrain-fillingstage, the starchy endosperm occupies the central region of the endosperm and accumulates mainly starch, along with a small amount of storage proteins. In most cereal crops, the starchy endosperm accounts for over 90% of the total grain weight. In rice, the accumulation of starch grains usually starts from the central region of the starchy endosperm and progresses toward the peripheral subaleurone layer that forms the starchy endosperm in mature grains (184). The aleurone layer accumulates lipids, proteins, vitamins, and minerals in most cereals but lacks visible starch grains throughout development. The aleurone in rice, maize, and wheat comprises mostly a single layer of cells, with occasional two-cell layers. In rice, the dorsal aleurone located near the dorsal vascular bundle (the main vasculature in rice caryopsis) is composed of three or five cell layers (184). Barley is the only known cereal crop with a two- to three-cell-layer aleurone (66).
Although the aleurone and starchy endosperm share the same developmental origin, they have very different cell fates. In mature cereal grains, the aleurone and embryo are live tissues, while the starchy endosperm and all maternal tissues including the pericarp and testa are dead (183,184,201). Programmed cell death (PCD) in the starchy endosperm has been reported in several cereal species. During this process, cytoplasmic membranes gradually lose their integrity (184,200,201), although DNA fragmentation as a common mark for PCD has only been detected in a few cases (200,201).
Other endosperm tissues such as the basal endosperm transfer layer (BETL) and embryo-surrounding region (ESR) have also been identified in species such as maize (Figure 2); these have proposed roles in sugar loading and embryo–endosperm interaction, respectively (8,30,107). In other species, such as rice, these tissues are not always recognizable.

Figure 2Click to view


Cerealendospermsdisplay three distinct types of cell cycle regulation: (a) coenocytic mitosis, in which mitosis is not followed by cytokinesis, resulting in the formation of a multinucleated coenocyte in a shared cytoplasm; (b) normal mitosis, leading to the proliferation of the cellular endosperm; and (c)endoreduplication, during which DNA synthesis is not followed by mitosis, leading to increased genome copies per cell. Coenocytic mitosis takes place in endosperms of most angiosperm species and resembles the early embryonic development of the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster). For some cereals, such asCoix lacryma-jobi(Job's tears), the coenocytic stage is very short, lasting only a few cell cycles (188), whereas for many other species such as rice and maize the coenocytic stage is quite long, producing several thousand nuclei (131,184). In maize, endoreduplication first occurs in the central region of thestarchy endospermand gradually progresses toward the outer regions, and the ploidy levels may reach as high as 384C (C represents the DNA content of the haploid genome per nucleus), corresponding to seven rounds of endoreduplications (10,136). However, in rice a higher ploidy level has been observed in the intermediate region between the central and peripheral regions (76). The existence of these types of cell cycle regulation at different stages of endosperm development suggests that the highly specialized checkpoint controls regulate the progression from DNA replication to mitosis and from mitosis to cytokinesis in endosperms.
Multiple key cell cycle regulators are involved in coordinating endosperm development, including the retinoblastoma-related (RBR) protein, the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)/cyclin complex, CDK-specific inhibitors, and the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) (35). Downregulation ofRBR1through RNA interference (RNAi) in maize enhances both mitosis and endoreduplication, leading to increased cell numbers and DNA contents (132). Further, cell cycle progression in cereal endosperms may involve differential expression and/or activation of specific cyclins and CDKs, while the endoreduplication of endosperm nuclei is associated with reduced proteolytic degradation of cyclin (36). In maize endosperm, inhibition of the M-phase CDK activity and activation of the S-phase CDK activity lead to nuclear endoreduplication (50). Conversely, overexpression of a dominant-negative form of A-type CDK in maize endosperm blocks endoreduplication but does not affect cell size, causing a slightly reduced accumulation of storage products (82).
Another type of cell cycle regulator acting in cereal endosperms is the Kip-related proteins (KRPs), which are CDK inhibitors that bind to a complex formed by A-type CDKs and D-type cyclins (35).OsKRP1andOsKRP2are predominantly expressed in developing rice grains, and overexpression ofOsKRP1in rice affectsgrain fillingand results in smaller grains with compromised germination, probably due to an inhibition of endosperm cell proliferation (2,6). Unexpectedly, a similar phenotype has also been observed in theoskrp2single mutant, as well as in theoskrp1 oskrp2double mutant, suggesting that steady levels of OsKRP1 and/or OsKRP2 are critical for endosperm development (2). These KRPs may regulate cell cycle progression in a stage-specific manner through interactions with CDKs (103). Further, mutations in the APC activatorsCELL CYCLE SWITCH 52A(CCS52A) andCCS52Bin rice led to reduced grain sizes. CCS52A may regulate the transition from mitosis to endoreduplication (151), whereas CCS52B may regulate cell expansion in the endosperm (150).
Additional cell cycle–related proteins are also important for cereal endosperm development (Table 1).ENDOSPERMLESS 1(ENL1) in rice encodes a sucrose nonfermenting 2 (SNF2)-type DNA helicase, which is homologous to the human Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1)-interacting checkpoint helicase. ENL1 localizes to the cytoplasm during interphase and to the chromosomes during mitosis, and anenl1mutant showed enlarged nuclei in endosperms at the coenocytic stage, due to abnormal chromosome segregation, and aborted endosperms at a later stage (54). Another helicase family protein (HeFP) is also important for cytoskeleton polymerization during mitosis and cellularization in the endosperm (213). A maternally expressed long noncoding RNA (lncRNA),MIS-SHAPEN ENDOSPERM(MISSEN), can sequester HeFP to inhibit the interaction between HeFP and tubulin, leading to abnormal cytoskeleton polymerization during endosperm development. SuppressingMISSENexpression promoted nuclear division and cellularization during early stage endosperm development, resulting in slightly enlarged seeds, whereas overexpression ofMISSENinhibited endosperm development, leading to prominent dents and bulges in the seed (213).
Genes critical for cereal endosperm development and storage product accumulation

The maize geneDEFECTIVE KERNEL 15(DEK15) encodes a cohesin-loading complex subunit, SISTER CHROMATID COHESION PROTEIN 4, which holds sister chromatids together during chromosome segregation. Mutation inDEK15causes precocious and abnormal sister chromatid separation, interrupting mitosis and DNAendoreduplication, and thus producing grains with a defective endosperm (56). In addition, the maize kinesin-14 protein VARIED KERNEL SIZE 1 (VKS1) localizes to both microtubules and nuclei and is critical for mitosis and cytokinesis in the early endosperm. Mutations ofVKS1led to abnormalities in spindle assembly, sister chromatid separation, and phragmoplast formation, resulting in smaller kernels with reduced cell proliferation (63). An ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and RAD3-related (ATR) kinase in maize, ZmATR, plays important roles in DNA repair and cell cycle checkpoint activation and is required to repress DNA endoreduplication and PCD in the endosperm. Loss of ZmATR results in a reduced kernel size, decreased protein and starch contents, and accelerated PCD in the endosperm (117). These results together suggest that distinct cell cycle checkpoint controls for DNA replication, mitosis, and cytokinesis, as well as related events such as chromosomal segregation and DNA repair, are critical for cereal endosperm development and, consequently, for grain size. The developmental and evolutionary advantages of the unusual cell cycle regulation in endosperms of most angiosperm species, whereby mitosis and cytokinesis are separated into two phases, as well as how these processes are regulated, remain largely unknown and need to be elucidated.
Thealeuroneand starchy endosperm in cereal crops have distinct cell fates and storage product reserves. The former is rich in proteins, lipids, vitamins, and micronutrients, whereas the latter is rich in starch. The differentiation of cereal endosperms starts after cellularization is completed and forms the outer aleurone layer and the inner starchy endosperm (184). Genes regulating aleurone and starchy endosperm differentiation have been identified in maize and rice (Figure 3;Table 1).CRINKLY4(CR4) encodes a receptor-like kinase, whileDEK1encodes a membrane-localized protein with an extracellular loop and a calpain-like Cys proteinase domain. Mutations of eitherCR4orDEK1in maize, and silencing of theOsCR4orDEK1orthologADAXIALIZED LEAF1in rice, cause a partial loss of the aleurone cell layer in the endosperm (12,58,89,118), suggesting that CR4 and DEK1 are positive regulators of aleurone differentiation. A similar phenotype has been observed recently in a maize mutant defective in YELLOW STRIPE-LIKE 2 (ZmYSL2), a plasma membrane–localized iron transporter (57), suggesting that proper iron distribution is important for the differentiation of the aleurone layer (Figure 3). By contrast, mutations in eitherSUPERNUMERARY ALEURONE LAYER 1(SAL1) orTHICK ALEURONE 1(THK1) in maize as well asTHICK ALEURONE 2(TA2) in rice resulted in endosperms with increased numbers of aleurone cell layers (93,138,179,197).SAL1encodes a class E vacuolar sorting protein that colocalizes with CR4 and DEK1 in endosomes of the endosperm (13,157), suggesting that SAL1 may target to, and interfere with, CR4 and DEK1 cycling in membranes.THK1encodes a homolog of NEGATIVE ON TATA-LESS1 (NOT1), and a mutation inTHK1led to the production of grains with multiple aleurone layers and aborted embryos (179,197).TA2encodes an ortholog of the DNA demethylase REPRESSOR OF SILENCING 1 (ROS1) inArabidopsis(48). Grains produced in weak mutant alleles ofta2exhibited an increased number of aleurone cell layers and improved nutritional profile (93), although a null mutant ofOsROS1is lethal (111). DNA methylation analyses revealed that theta2mutant had an increased level of genome-wide DNA methylation in the endosperm (93), suggesting that DNA demethylation plays a critical role in restricting the number of aleurone cell layers (Figure 3).

Figure 3Click to view


Several transcription factors (TFs) are also important in restricting the number of aleurone cell layers in maize and rice endosperms (Figure 3). Two duplicate genes,NAKED ENDOSPERM 1(NKD1) andNKD2, encode INDETERMINATE-domain (IDD)-containing TFs in maize, and thenkd1 nkd2double mutant exhibited an aleurone with multiple cell layers and an opaque starchy endosperm (198). These two TFs may form a dimeric complex via their IDDs to restrict the number of aleurone cell layers (49). RNAi-mediated silencing of an endosperm-specifically expressed DNA-binding with one finger (DOF) family TF ofZmDOF3led to defective kernels with reduced starch content and multiple layers of aleurone cells at local positions of the endosperm, andNKD1andNKD2expression was also reduced in endosperms of these plants, raising the possibility thatZmDOF3may act upstream ofNKD1andNKD2(121). In rice, two TFs, RICE BASIC LEUCINE ZIPPER 1 (RISBZ1) and RICE PROLAMIN-BOX BINDING FACTOR (RPBF), are involved in restricting the aleurone cell layers in the endosperm, as RNAi-mediated silencing of bothRISBZ1andRPBFled to the formation of endosperms with multiple aleurone cell layers (73). The silencing also led to reduced expressions ofOsCR4,OsDEK1, andOsSAL1, suggesting that RISBZ1 and RPBF may act upstream of those three genes (73). Interestingly, in theta2mutant mentioned above, expression levels ofRISBZ1andRPBFwere decreased in the endosperm, and the levels of DNA methylation in promoter regions ofRISBZ1andRPBFwere increased, suggesting that OsROS1 may restrict the aleurone cell layers through DNA-demethylation-mediated activation ofRISBZ1andRPBF(93).
Energy supply may play an important role in the determination of aleurone cell fate (Figure 3). OsGCD1, the rice ortholog of theArabidopsisGAMETE CELL DEFECTIVE 1, is a mitochondria-targeted protein that is required for both embryo and endosperm development. Endosperms in the loss-of-function mutant ofOsGCD1are characterized by aleurone with variable cell layers and disorganized cell patterns (62). The recently reportedTA1in rice encodes a mitochondria-targeted single-stranded DNA-binding protein, OsmtSSB1, and interacts with mitochondrial DNA recombinase A3 (RECA3) and DNA helicase TWINKLE. Mutations inTA1resulted in increased sugar content and decreased adenosine triphosphate (ATP) content in endosperms, along with a switch of subaleurone cells toward aleurone (84).
As a hypothetical model, supported by genetic evidence collected so far, we propose that the aleurone is the default and primitive state of the endosperm, whereas the starchy endosperm is an advanced feature (Figure 3). The model predicts that loss of function or mutation of genes involved in promoting starchy endosperm differentiation (for example,RISBZ1,RPBF,SAL1,THK1,ZmDOF3, andNKDs, which at the same time restrict aleurone differentiation) will allow more cells to stay in the aleurone state, resulting in an increased number of aleurone cell layers. Other genes such asCR4,DEK1, andZmYSL2are involved in maintaining and promoting the integrity of the aleurone layer, and mutation of any of these genes leads to the formation of patchy and partially formed aleurone. These two sets of genes may build a feedback regulation loop that maintains the balance between these two cell types (Figure 3). Further, energy homeostasis and DNA demethylation (as shown by functional analyses ofTA1/OsmtSSB1andTA2/OsROS1in rice) as fundamental cell biological processes play critical roles in executing starchy endosperm differentiation, consequently promoting the transition of the intermediate subaleurone cells toward starchy endosperm (84,93) (Figure 3).
Mutants such asta1andta2, with increased aleurone cell layers, showed improved nutrition profiles for vitamins and micronutrients, which could potentially be used in developing nutrient-rich cereal crops ifgrain fillingis not compromised (84,93). A nutrient-rich black rice variety of Zhongzi-1ta1has recently been developed by crossingta1with a black rice variety (84) since black rice is traditionally consumed as whole grains in Asian countries (207).
Auxin homeostasis, maintained by the combined action of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) biosynthesis, conjugation, oxidation, and transport, seems to play indispensable roles in cerealendospermdevelopment (7). Active IAA biosynthesis has been detected in rice and maize grains after fertilization. In rice, the expression levels of the IAA biosynthetic genesYUCCA1(OsYUC1),OsYUC9andOsYUC11(both encoding flavin-containing monooxygenases), andTRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE RELATED1(OsTAR1) (encoding a tryptophan aminotransferase) increase gradually during endosperm development, correlating with an increased IAA level in grains (1,208). Mutations ofOsYUC9,OsYUC11, orOsTAR1led to defective grain filling and chalky endosperm (191). In maize,Defective endosperm 18(De18) encodes an endosperm-specific OsYUC1 ortholog ZmYUC1, and thede18mutant exhibited a reduced IAA content, abnormal BETL differentiation, and small kernels (15,41). The expression ofZmYUC1is induced by sugars, and a mutant of the cell wall invertaseMINIATURE1(Mn1) exhibited decreasedZmYUC1expression levels, IAA content, and kernel weight (81), suggesting that auxin biosynthesis and sugar loading in endosperms are closely linked. Further, a major quantitative trait locus for thousand-grain weight of rice,THOUSAND-GRAIN WEIGHT 6(TGW6), encodes a novel IAA-glucose hydrolase, and a near-isogenic line carrying a loss-of-functiontgw6allele produces larger grains with significantly decreased IAA content (65). TGW6 may function in timing the transition from the coenocytic stage to cellularization by controlling the IAA supply and consequently limiting the cell number and grain length. Maize ZmEHD1, an Eps15-homology-domain-containing protein, regulates auxin homeostasis indirectly by modulating clathrin-mediated endocytosis, and a mutation inZmEHD1led to reduced IAA accumulation in grains, resulting in shrunken grains with fewer starch granules (171).
Auxin polar transport is essential to establish auxin maxima and gradients in plants. Within the maize endosperm, cells in the aleurone, BETL, and ESR accumulate higher levels of auxin than the innerstarchy endosperm, which seem to correlate with auxin polar transport mediated by PIN-FORMED 1 (ZmPIN1) (41). Maize grains treated with the auxin transport inhibitorN-1-naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA) showed aleurone with multiple cell layers, suggesting that auxin polar transport is involved in restricting the number of aleurone cell layers (41). The dominant rice mutationbig grain 1(bg1-D) results in increased grain size, and at the physiological level thebg1-Dmutant is hypersensitive to auxin and auxin transport inhibitors, showing increased basipetal auxin transport and altered auxin distribution. TheBG1gene encodes a cytoplasmic membrane-associated protein, and its expression is induced by auxin treatment, suggesting thatBG1acts as a positive regulator in auxin response during grain development (94). Whether the BG1 protein exerts its role throughout the entire grain, or specifically in the endosperm, remains to be investigated.
Cytokinin is another important hormone regulating cereal endosperm development (67). Cytokinin content is positively correlated with endosperm cell division (208), rising dramatically early in endosperm development and declining afterwards (20,208). The expression patterns of cytokinin biosynthetic genes, includingISOPENTENYL TRANSFERASE(IPT) andCYTOKININ OXIDASE(CKX), coincide with cytokinin distribution in endosperm (19,20,208). Exogenous application of cytokinin promotes endosperm cell division and grain filling, along with elevated expression of several cell cycle–related genes such asCDKs andCyclins (115). An elevated cytokinin level upon overexpression ofIPTgenes led to a partial loss of aleurone in maize endosperm, suggesting that a proper cytokinin level is critical in maintaining the aleurone cell fate (47).
Abscisic acid (ABA) is implicated in the cellularization of cereal endosperms. In barley, theshrunken endosperm genetic 8(seg8) mutant, with a reduced ABA level in grains, displayed abnormal endosperm cellularization and shrunken endosperm (146). In rice, genes related to ABA biosynthesis and signaling are upregulated at 3 days after pollination (DAP), the time point at which endosperm cellularization begins (208).DEFECTIVE GRAIN-FILLING 1(DG1) encodes a multidrug extrusion protein that functions as an efflux carrier loading ABA from leaf to caryopsis (124). After arriving at the caryopsis, ABA may activate the expression of genes for starch synthesis, storage protein accumulation, and grain filling, asdg1caryopses have a reduced ABA content and incompletely filled and floury endosperm (124).
Brassinosteroids (BRs) may also play a role in endosperm development. In rice, expression levels of BR biosynthesis and signaling genes in endosperm peak at 2–3 DAP and then decrease by 6 DAP. RiceDWARF4encodes a cytochrome P450 and is involved in BR biosynthesis. Ectopic expression ofDWARF4in rice starchy endosperm led to increased grain length and width and reduced chalkiness (208).
DNA methylation and histone modifications mediate epigenetic regulations of gene expressions in cereal endosperm development (37,203).
DNA methylation in plants generally occurs on the cytosine residues of DNA strands (CG, CHG, and CHH methylation, with H = A, C, or T), whereby one cytosine (asymmetric methylation) or two cytosines (symmetric methylation) within the CG or CHG sequences are modified (203). The most striking feature of endosperm genomes is their hypomethylation as compared with that of embryo and vegetative tissues (60,202,205). Localized hypomethylation occurs primarily on the maternal genome, especially in regions of high DNA accessibility (129,168), suggesting a potential role in regulation ofimprinted gene expressions. Imprinted genes show parent-of-origin-specific expression, in which either the maternal or the paternal copy of a gene is expressed depending on the differences in epigenetics between the maternal and paternal allele (9). In plants, imprinting occurs mainly in the endosperm, as it occurs mainly in the placenta in mammals (85). Genome-wide surveys in rice and maize have identified hundreds of imprinted genes in endosperms, mostly maternally expressed genes (MEGs) and a few paternally expressed genes (PEGs) (98,206). In general, MEGs are enriched for hypomethylation at putative promoter and terminator regions, while PEGs are hypomethylated at gene bodies (129).
Although the levels of DNA methylation are regulated by a balanced action of methylation and demethylation, results obtained from studies so far suggest that the hypomethylation of endosperm DNA is driven mainly by the DNA demethylase (116). InArabidopsis, DNA demethylase geneDEMETER(DME), which is expressed primarily in the central cell of the female gametophyte, removes DNA methylation at distinct regions of the maternal genome, causing it to become hypomethylated, which then leads to a parent-of-origin effect for some endosperm genes (28). As a paralog ofDME,ROS1inArabidopsisis expressed constitutively in all tissues, including endosperms, and functions in preventing the spread of DNA methylation (48). Orthologs ofDMEandROS1have been identified in the genomes of rice (111), maize (168), and wheat (176). RNAi-mediated silencing of the wheatDMEortholog decreases the production of the allergenic storage proteins prolamins, offering an avenue to develop new varieties for patients with celiac diseases (176). In rice, an insertion mutant ofROS1is defective in both male and female gametogenesis, and thus produces no grains (111), whereas a weak allele ofROS1,ta2(as mentioned in Section 3.2), showed an aleurone with multiple cell layers and improved nutrition (93).
Histone modification, especially histone H3 trimethylation on Lys27 (H3K27me3), also plays a crucial role in endosperm development. Forward-genetic screens conducted inArabidopsisfor development of mutants offertilization-independent endosperm/fertilization-independent seed(fie/fis) led to the discovery of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), which prevents seed and endosperm development before fertilization (51,77,96,108). The evolutionarily conserved FIS-PRC2 complex, consisting of MEDEA (MEA), FIE, FIS2, and MULTICOPY SUPPRESSOR OF IRA 1 (MSI1), catalyzes H3K27me3 inArabidopsis(90,130). Mutations in any of the genes encoding PRC2 components result in a maternally inherited gametophytic seed abortion phenotype: That is, 50% of seeds abort in a self-pollinated heterozygous mutant (51,77,96,108). Orthologous genes encoding components of the PRC2 complex have been identified in rice, maize, and barley (70,158). TwoFIEorthologs,FIE1andFIE2, are present in the rice and maize genomes (34,97). BothZmFIE1andZmFIE2are MEGs (52).ZmFIE1is expressed exclusively in endosperms from 6 DAP onwards;ZmFIE2is expressed in unfertilized embryo sac and early stage endosperms, and its paternal allele is expressed starting from 5 DAP onwards (34). By contrast,OsFIE1is a MEG, whereasOsFIE2is not an imprinted gene (97,204). Hypomethylations at theZmFIE1,ZmFIE2, andOsFIE1promoter regions occur only in their maternal, not paternal, alleles. As a consequence of these asymmetric DNA methylation patterns, the expression of the maternal allele is induced, while the paternal allele is repressed (52,204). Overexpression or knockout ofOsFIE1results in smaller grains (25,204), suggesting that a balanced level of OsFIE1 is critical for endosperm development.OsFIE2is ubiquitously expressed in both vegetative and reproductive tissues (86). Mutations inOsFIE2, generated by CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene editing, led to an impaired endosperm cellularization, and heterozygousOsFIE2/osfie2mutants showed a low frequency of autonomous endosperm development (25). Furthermore,OsEMF2a, a rice ortholog of theArabidopsispolycomb group geneEMBRYONIC FLOWER2(EMF2), is a MEG in endosperm and necessary for endosperm cellularization. Mutations ofOsEMF2ain rice caused autonomous endosperm development and delayed cellularization, as well as disordered genomic imprinting in the endosperm (26,159). Transcriptome and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analyses suggest that type-I MADS-box TF genes essential for regulating early endosperm development are downstream targets of OsEMF2a-containing PRC2 (26,159).
Analyses of genome-wide allele-specific DNA methylation and H3K27me3 modifications in maize endosperm showed that the paternal genome is hypermethylated and the maternal genome is hypomethylated compared to those in embryos or vegetative tissues (205). Among the thousands of parent-of-origin-dependent differentially methylated regions that have been identified, all are paternally hypermethylated and maternally hypomethylated (205). In general, at least a subset of MEGs is associated with DME-mediated maternal-specific DNA demethylation located in the upstream and 5′ portion of gene body regions, while a majority of PEGs are related to maternal-specific H3K27me3 modifications (104,205). It is possible that DME-mediated DNA demethylation in the central cell leads to the formation of hypomethylated regions in endosperm cells. Further, PRC2-mediated H3K27me3 modifications are preferentially localized to regions in the endosperm that are targeted by the DME, which links histone modification to DNA demethylation (104). Genomic analyses inArabidopsisand maize have shown that imprinted expression of PEGs is associated with PRC2-mediated H3K27me3 (104,205). The PRC2 complex functions as an inhibitor of the expression of maternally hypomethylated alleles of PEGs in the endosperm (104). These studies suggest that both DNA methylation and histone modification play important roles in the regulation ofimprinted gene expressionin the endosperm (see the sidebar titled Imprinted Genes in Mammals).
IMPRINTED GENES IN MAMMALS
Genes are subject to monoallelic and parent-specific gene expression, whereby either the maternal allele (from the chromosome derived from the mother) or the paternal allele (from the chromosome derived from the father) is expressed in a diploid cell. This phenomenon is termed genomic imprinting and is controlled by epigenetic marks in parental germlines without differences in the DNA sequences. In mammals, imprinted gene expression occurs for a small subset of genes, predominately in the placenta, and is believed to have evolved as a mechanism to allocate parental resources to the offspring. Imprinted gene expression is regulated epigenetically by DNA methylation, histone modifications, long noncoding RNAs, and high-order DNA structure. Genes with imprinted expression are inherited with a parent-of-origin effect.

It is interesting to note that genome-wide analyses of imprinted genes show a low degree of conservation among these species (46,98,206), although the number conserved between maize and rice is twice as high as that between maize andArabidopsis(206). Mutations in genes coding the PRC2 components such as MEA, FIE, and FIS2 inArabidopsisproduce autonomous endosperm without ever undergoing fertilization (51,96,108). By contrast, knockout ofOsFIE1resulted in small seeds that did not display autonomous endosperm development, while autonomous endosperm development was observed occasionally in grains produced in the heterozygous plants ofosfie2andosemf2amutants (25,159). Cells in the autonomous endosperms of rice accumulate both starch granules and structures similar to protein storage vacuoles (159). However, this phenomenon has not been observed in autonomous endosperms ofArabidopsis. Whether this difference reflects functional differences between persistent and nonpersistent endosperms remains to be studied.
Researchers have proposed that the occurrence of MEGs during evolution serves to ensure equal nutrient allocation across seeds produced on a mother plant (51,96,108), as the placenta does in mammals (80), but direct evidence supporting this hypothesis is still limited. ImprintedMATERNALLY EXPRESSED GENE1(MEG1) encodes a small cysteine-rich peptide and localizes to the cytoplasmic membrane and extracellular matrix of BETL in maize. MEG1 is necessary for the establishment and differentiation of BETL, and, consequently, the loading of sugar to the endosperm indeed supports this hypothesis (31) (Figure 4). However, many of those MEGs are not involved in nutrient allocation, which does not seem to support this hypothesis. As an alternative, imprinted gene expression has been proposed as a byproduct of DNA demethylation in the endosperm (45,60), which may aim to establish the efficient expression of genes involved in storage product accumulation. Further studies are needed to better understand genome imprinting in cereal endosperms.

Figure 4Click to view


The accumulation of storage products in cerealendospermsrelies on photoassimilates such as sugars and amino acids produced in leaves. Sucrose, as a nonreducing disaccharide, is used in most plant species for long-distance sugar transport through the phloem from source leaves to the sink tissue of grains (102). When they arrive in grains, maternal and filial tissues work together to facilitate the loading of sucrose and other photoassimilates into the endosperm during the grain-filling stage.
In the caryopsis of cereals (called the kernel in maize), maternal tissues including pericarp, testa, integuments, and nucellus are fused tightly together, encasing the embryo and endosperm (Figure 2). Coordinated actions of cell divisions, cell expansion, tissue differentiation, and degeneration occur in these maternal tissues before and after fertilization to generate a sophisticated structure for effective sugar loading andgrain filling(64,183). The structure, which we named the sugar-loading complex, is composed of the dorsal vascular bundle, nucellar projection, and dorsalaleuronein rice. The nucellar epidermis, with thick cell walls at the side in contact with the endosperm, forms an open gate at the sugar-loading complex to allow sugars to enter endosperms progressively through the complex (Figure 4). In maize, a similar structure, consisting of the vascular bundle, placentachalazal tissue, and BETL, is formed at the base of the kernel. The formation of transfer cells with cell wall ingrowth in BETL is regulated maternally by MEG1, as described in Section 3.4 (31) (Figure 4).
In rice,CELL WALL INVERTASE 2(CIN2)/GRAIN INCOMPLETE FILLING 1(GIF1), which is expressed specifically in the dorsal vascular bundle of the caryopsis, cleaves sucrose to glucose and fructose. Mutation inCIN2/GIF1led to compromised grain filling, producing floury endosperm (164). Similarly, in maize, the cell wall invertase Mn1, expressed exclusively in the BETL of the developing kernel, is genetically associated with over 70% of the grain weight (24,69). Mn1 is also associated with the stability of placentachalazal tissue and the formation of cell wall ingrowth in the BETL (69). These results suggest that, when sucrose arrives in the grain, it may enter directly into the endosperm or be cleaved to hexoses (glucose and fructose) before being loaded to the endosperm (4,164). At least in rice, these two routes exist in parallel in the sugar-loading complex (4).
Programmed degeneration occurs in maternal tissues such as the integuments and nucellus at specific stages, which may play a crucial role in grain filling (95,183). In particular, a Bsisterfamily MADS-box TF gene,OsMADS29, is expressed specifically in nucellus tissues and is important for the degradation of the nucellar projection. Mutation ofOsMADS29compromises grain filling in rice (199). OsMADS29 may form a homodimer, or heterodimers with other MADS-box proteins, to activate the expression of a PCD-related papain family Cys protease that may be involved in the degradation of the nucellar projection (106,199). An OsMADS29 ortholog inArabidopsis, TRANSPARENT TESTA 16 (TT16), also regulates the degradation of the nucellar tissue during endosperm development, suggesting a conserved mechanism that coordinates the degeneration of maternal tissues in monocots and dicots (190).
Cytoplasm membrane–localized sugar influx carriers such as sucrose transporters (SUTs) and monosaccharide transporters (MSTs) and sugar efflux carrier SUGARS WILL EVENTUALLY BE EXPORTED TRANSPORTERs (SWEETs) load sugars against the concentration gradient to developing endosperms (78). In barley,HvSUT1is expressed in the endosperm, vascular bundle, nucellar projection, and transfer cell layer (126); in maize,ZmSUT1is expressed in the BETL and vascular bundle in pedicel (139); in rice,OsSUT1is expressed in the aleurone and in maternal tissues including the nucellus, vascular bundle, and nucellar projection (43). RNAi-mediated silencing ofOsSUT1led to wrinkled grains with a reduced starch content (137), suggesting that OsSUT1 functions in sucrose transport from maternal tissues to the developing endosperm.NUCLEAR FACTOR Y B1(NF-YB1), encoding a member of the ancient NF-Y family TFs, is expressed specifically in the aleurone of rice, with a higher level in the dorsal aleurone, and its knockout or downregulation leads to defective grain filling, producing smaller grains with a chalky endosperm. Biochemical studies revealed that NF-YB1 binds directly to the promoter regions of the sucrose transporter genesOsSUT1,OsSUT3, andOsSUT4to activate their expressions and promotes the loading of sucrose directly to the endosperm (4).
SWEETs are membrane-localized sugar uniporters that are important for importing sugars into developing endosperms in both monocots and dicots. InArabidopsis, SWEET11, SWEET12, and SWEET15 regulate sugar efflux from seed coat to endosperm, and asweet11 sweet12 sweet15triple mutant exhibited retarded embryo development, reduced seed weight, and compromised starch accumulation in the embryo, together with an increased starch accumulation in the seed coat (22). In cereals,ZmSWEET4cis expressed in the BETL of maize, andOsSWEET4(the ortholog ofZmSWEET4c) is expressed in early stage caryopses of rice. Mutations ofZmSWEET4corOsSWEET4affect grain filling, suggesting that they have roles in delivering sugars to developing endosperms (144).ZmSWEET11is expressed in the aleurone, BETL, placentachalaza, and pedicel (139). Further, the expression ofOsSWEET11andOsSWEET15in rice increases gradually during caryopsis development, with specific expression seen in the dorsal vascular bundle, nucellar projection, nucellar epidermis, and aleurone (99,193). Theossweet15mutant showed normal caryopsis development,ossweet11exhibited defective grain filling, and theossweet11 ossweet15double mutant showed an additive phenotype, with severely defective endosperm and elevated starch accumulation in the pericarp, suggesting that OsSWEET11 and OsSWEET15 function redundantly in sugar loading from maternal tissues to the endosperm (193).OsDOF11encodes a DOF family TF and is expressed in the vascular bundles of photosynthetic organs and developing caryopses. The ricedof11mutant exhibits a semidwarf phenotype, forms fewer tillers, and has short panicles and small grains. Further characterization suggests that OsDOF11 may coordinately activate the expression of downstream genesOsSUT1,OsSWEET11, andOsSWEET14by binding directly to their promoters, since reduced expression levels of these genes were observed in various tissues of thedof11mutant (186). Exploration of the molecular machinery underlying sugar loading and grain filling may facilitate the development of crop varieties with improved yields.
In cereal endosperms, starch in the form ofd-glucose homopolymers is synthesized primarily in the starchy endosperms, not in the aleurone. Starch in plants is in two types: the linear and less branched amylose and the highly branched amylopectin (68). Starch biosynthesis in cereal endosperms is a highly regulated process that requires an active energy supply.
Starch biosynthesis involves at least five classes of enzymes: adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-glucose pyrophosphorylases (AGPases), soluble starch synthases (SSs), granule-bound starch synthases (GBSSs), starch branching enzymes (BEs), and starch debranching enzymes (DBEs) (68). AGPase is the rate-limiting enzyme that converts glucose 1-phosphate to ADP-glucose in the cytosol. The elongation of a glucan chain involves the transfer of a glucosyl unit of ADP-glucose to the chain's nonreducing end via an α-1,4-glycosidic linkage. GBSSs and SSs are responsible for the biosynthesis of amylose and amylopectin, respectively (154). One of the GBSSs, GBSSI, also called Waxy based on the name of thewaxymutants, is required primarily for the production of amylose. Cultivars harboring defectiveGBSSI/Waxygenes, with high amylopectin contents in endosperms and a sticky texture after cooking, have been identified in many cereal crops, including rice (133), maize (185), wheat (142), barley (145), foxtail millet (169), and sorghum (134). BEs catalyze the formation of α-1,6-glucosidic linkages to produce branched glucans. DBEs have two types, isoamylase (ISA) and pullulanase (PUL), which hydrolyze improper glucan branches (68). These enzymes work together to synthesize starch in an orderly manner.
TFs regulating starch biosynthesis have been identified in cereals (Table 1); most of them regulate multiple genes in the starch biosynthesis pathway. In rice, basic leucine zipper (bZIP)-type TF OsbZIP58, which is also named RISBZ1, activates the expression of at least six starch biosynthetic genes, includingADP-GLC PYROPHOSPHORYLASE LARGE SUBUNIT 3(AGPL3),GBSSI,SSIIa,BE1,BEIIb, andISA2, via direct binding to their promoters (73,167). In maize, OPAQUE2 (O2), as an OsbZIP58/RISBZ1 ortholog, interacts with a Prolamin-Box Binding Factor (PBF) family TF and activates the expression ofSSIII,PYRUVATE ORTHOPHOSPHATE DIKINASE 1(PPDK1), andPPDK2(211). A MYB family TF, ZmMYB14, and a DOF family TF, ZmDOF36, activate the expression of several starch biosynthetic genes (180,189). In barley, WRKY-type TF SUGAR SIGNALING IN BARLEY 2 (SUSIBA2), which is sugar-induced and specifically expressed in endosperm, activates the expression ofISA1by binding to its sugar-responsivecis-element (148,149). Overexpression ofHvSUSIBA2in rice led to increased starch accumulations in stems and grains and decreased carbon allocation to roots (148). bZIP-type TFs TabZIP28 of wheat and TubZIP28 of the wild einkorn wheat (Triticum urartu) promote the transcriptions ofAGPasegenes in developing endosperms (143). While the previous TFs constitute examples of transcriptional activators, a few transcriptional repressors have been identified that control the starch biosynthesis. RICE STARCH REGULATOR1 (RSR1) is an APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AP2/EREBP) family TF that negatively regulates the expression of multiple starch biosynthetic genes in endosperms. A transfer DNA (T-DNA) insertional mutant ofRSR1displayed elevated expression of starch biosynthetic genes, along with increased amylose content, grain size, and grain weight (42), while RNAi-mediated silencing of theRSR1orthologs in wheat led to elevated expressions of several starch biosynthetic genes and increased starch content and grain weight (92). Further, a dehydration response element-binding (DREB)-type TF of SALT-RESPONSIVE ERF1 (SERF1) in rice binds directly to the promoter regions ofGBSSIandRPBF, inhibiting their expressions in endosperms, and the expression level ofSERF1correlates negatively with starch content and grain size (135). Together, these results suggest that a TF-based regulation network is present in endosperms that precisely regulates the spatial and temporal expressions of genes involved in starch biosynthesis.
Several lncRNAs are also involved in repressing starch biosynthesis. Overexpression ofLncRNA_2308,LncRNA_1267, orLncRNA_1631in rice impaired the expression ofGBSSI, resulting in reduced starch content and grain weight (212). The transcriptional repressorRSR1, located nearLncRNA_1267in the genome, is upregulated inLncRNA_1267-overexpressing rice plants, suggesting thatLncRNA_1267may impair the expression ofGBSSIthrough regulatory control ofRSR1(212). These results suggest the presence of multiple layers of transcriptional regulations of starch biosynthesis in cereal endosperms.
Co-expression analyses uncovered the presence of complex networks regulating storage product biosynthesis in the endosperm. For example, the expression ofGBSSIin rice is regulated by a heterodimeric complex consisting of MYC family TF BINDING PROTEIN-5 (OsBP-5) and EREBP family TF OsEBP-89, as well as possibly another heterotrimeric complex consisting of NF-YB1, NF-YC12, and basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family TF bHLH144, as RNAi-mediated silencing ofOsBP-5or mutations inNF-YB1,NF-YC12, orbHLH144led to greatly reduced starch contents in rice endosperm (14,216). It seems that a TF can regulate the expression of multiple starch-synthesis-related enzyme genes, and, conversely, a given starch synthesis enzyme is likely to be regulated by multiple TFs. To some extent, this may explain why the mutation or knockout of a single TF often does not cause a detectable endosperm phenotype. A regulatory network with crosstalk may allow the endosperm to establish resilient responses to internal and external changes. Genetic analyses with readouts ofgrain fillingand starch profiles are undoubtedly powerful in identifying regulatory genes in starch biosynthesis, and recent developments in multiplexed gene editing may provide further insight into the regulatory network involved in starch biosynthesis, especially the distinct expressions and functions of different isoforms of starch biosynthetic enzymes in endosperms and the source tissues of leaves.
Starch biosynthesis in cereal endosperms requires an active energy supply. As the power generators in all eukaryotic cells, mitochondria convert chemical energy into ATP, which can be utilized directly for starch biosynthesis (39). The mitochondrion is a semiautonomous organelle that, like the chloroplast, imports most of its functional proteins, encoded by the nuclear genome, from the cytoplasm. Mutations in these genes may therefore interfere with mitochondrial function (Table 1). Among these mitochondria-targeted proteins, pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins are commonly known to be critical for endosperm development and storage product accumulation. Most PPR proteins exhibit sequence-specific RNA-binding activity and are targeted to mitochondria and/or chloroplasts, where they play essential roles in editing, splicing, and stabilizing RNAs (5). Mutations in mitochondria-targeted PPRs often lead to defective endosperm development in maize. In particular,dek2(120),dek10(119),dek35(23), anddek41(214) maize exhibit 32%, 27%, 20%, and 13% reductions in kernel weights, respectively, mainly due to reduced starch and/or storage protein biosynthesis. Similar results have been observed for severalpprmutants in rice. Theopaque and growth retardation 1(ogr1),small kernel 1(ossmk1),floury endosperm10(flo10), andradicleless 1(rl1) mutants exhibit variable defects in rice grain filling (75,88,181,182). Mutations in other genes encoding mitochondria-targeted proteins, such as the transcription termination factor SMALL KERNEL 3 (ZmSMK3) in maize (114) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) dehydrogenase 1 alpha subcomplex subunit 9 (OsNDUFA9) in rice (61), also caused defective accumulation of storage products. Taken together, these results suggest that mitochondria play a critical role that may be entirely related to energy supply in grain filling and starch biosynthesis of cereals.
Storage proteins produced in cerealendospermsare classified into four types—prolamins, glutelins, globulins, and albumins—according to their solubilities in various solvents (105). The alcohol-soluble prolamin is the major type in maize and wheat endosperms, while the alkaline- and acid-soluble glutelin is the major type in the rice endosperm (71). Water-soluble globulin and albumin in cereal endosperms are easy for humans to digest but account for only a minor fraction of total storage proteins.
Many storage proteins are encoded by multiple genes. For example, the rice genome has 34 genes coding for prolamins, 15 for glutelins, 3 for globulins, and 7 for albumins (72). Most of these genes are expressed specifically in developing endosperms (72,125). Efforts have been made to identify criticalcis-elements in their promoter regions controlling expression specificity, which led to the identification of several conserved motifs, such as GCN4, prolamin-box (P-box), and AACA (187). The GCN4 motif is recognized by bZIP family TFs, including wheat STORAGE PROTEIN ACTIVATOR (SPA) (3), maize O2 (177), BARLEY LEUCINE ZIPPER 1 (BLZ1) and BLZ2 (110,162), and rice OsbZIP58/RISBZ1 (112), which activate the expression of storage protein genes. The P-box motif is recognized by a Dof family TF PBF (101,161,192), and the AACA motif is recognized by MYB family TFs such as OsMYB5 in rice (152) and HvGAMYB in barley (38). A minimal 197-bpGlutelin-B1promoter fragment containing the GCN4, P-box, and AACA motifs confers specific and strong expression of the reporter gene in rice endosperm (177,178). In the promoter regions of storage protein genes, GCN4 and P-box motifs are often present together or separated by a few nucleotides (100,187,192).
Other novel TFs regulating the expression of storage protein genes have also been identified recently. In maize, two O2 HETERODIMERIZING PROTEINs (OHPs), OHP1 and OHP2, are bZIP family TFs, which activate the expression of27-kD γ-zeinthrough binding to its promoter (210). ZmbZIP22 binds directly to the ACAGCTCA box in the27-kD γ-zeinpromoter, activating its expression, and interacts with PBF1, OHP1, and OHP2, suggesting that ZmbZIP22 cooperates with these TFs to regulate the expression of the27-kD γ-zeingene (83). ZmMADS47 interacts with O2 to transactivate the genes encoding α-zein and the 50-kD γ-zeins by binding the CATGT motif of their promoters (123). In wheat, SPA HETERODIMERIZING PROTEIN (SHP), the ortholog of BLZ1, acts as a transcriptional repressor to negatively regulateGluteinin-B1-1expression through binding to its promoter (16).
At the storage product accumulation stage, abundant storage proteins and starch are synthesized synchronously in cereal endosperms, suggesting a coordinated regulation of these two storage products. Some TFs play an essential role in coordinating the expressions of starch biosynthesis and storage protein genes. Maize O2 and PBF1, in addition to their roles in storage protein accumulation, also regulate starch biosynthesis by binding directly to promoters of starch biosynthesis genes (211). Upstream regulatory regions of these storage protein and starch biosynthesis genes have shared motifs, which may allow coregulation of these two types of storage products by common TFs, such as the NAM/ATAF/CUC (NAC) family TFs. ZmNAC128 and ZmNAC130 bind to the ACGCAA motif of16-kD γ-zeinandAGPS2promoters to activate their transcription (209), while OsNAC20 and OsNAC26 also bind to the same motif in16-kD prolaminandBEIfor their transcriptional activations (166). In wheat, TaNAC019 binds directly to a specific motif in promoter regions ofGlu-1(encoding high molecular weight gluten),SuSy1(encoding sucrose synthase), andSSIIato activate their expressions (44). In maize, O11, an endosperm-specific bHLH TF, regulates directly the expressions ofO2andPBF1, coordinating the starch biosynthesis and storage protein accumulation (40). Further, maize B3 domain TF ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE 19 (ZmABI19) may function as an upstream regulator to activate the expressions ofO2,PBF,ZmbZIP22,ZmNAC130, andO11(194). It would be important and challenging to establish the transcriptional regulation network underlying the coordination of starch biosynthesis and storage protein accumulation.
In developing rice endosperm, messenger RNAs (mRNAs) for prolamin, glutelin, and α-globulin are localized on two distinct subdomains of cortical endoplasmic reticulum (ER): prolamin and α-globulin on protein body ER (PB-ER) and glutelin on cisternal ER (cis-ER) (27,87,174). In maize, prolamin and 11S globulin RNAs are concentrated on the PB-ER andcis-ER, respectively, suggesting that the distinct distributions of storage protein mRNAs on the ER may be conserved in cereal endosperms (175). These distinct distributions of prolamin and glutelin RNAs in rice depend on multiplecis-RNA sequences (known as zipcodes) at their coding and 3′-untranslated regions. Deletion of these zipcodes led to mislocalization of these mRNAs (53,173). Some RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) bind to these zipcodes to form messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) complexes that are exported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm (195). Mutations of RBP-L and RBP-P caused mislocalization of glutelin and prolamin RNAs and conferred other general growth defects, including dwarfism, late flowering, and low fertility (155,156). Moreover, a cytoplasm-localized cytoskeletal-associated RBP, OsTudor-SN, is a component of the RNA transport particle and regulates storage protein biosynthesis by mediating the transport, localization, and anchoring of their RNAs to the cortical ER (29,163).
All storage proteins are secretory proteins, which are synthesized on rough ER and later transported to different protein bodies via either Golgi-dependent or Golgi-independent pathways (141). In both rice and maize, prolamins aggregate inside the ER lumen and form intracisternal protein granules that later bud off as spherical protein body I (PB-I) through a Golgi-independent pathway (140). In wheat, prolamins are either packaged into protein bodies through a Golgi-independent pathway or sequestered into storage protein bodies through vesicles via a Golgi-dependent pathway (21). Rice glutelin precursors and α-globulin are transported to the Golgi apparatus to form dense vesicles that are then targeted to protein storage vacuoles. Within these vesicles, glutelin precursors are cleaved into α-acid and β-basic subunits, which together with α-globulin form irregularly shaped protein body II (PB-II) (32). Mutants defective in the Golgi-dependent secretion pathway have been identified by screening for theglutelin precursor overaccumulation(gpa) phenotype in rice. Molecular genetic analyses of these mutants revealed thatGPA1encodes the GTPase Rab5a (172),GPA2[also calledVACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 9A(VPS9A)] encodes a guanine nucleotide exchange factor of Rab5a (91),GPA3encodes a plant-specific Kelch-repeat-containing protein (127),GPA4encodes the evolutionarily conserved membrane protein GOLGI TRANSPORT1B (GOT1B) (170), andGPA5encodes a plant-unique phox-homology (PX)-domain-containing protein as the Rab5a effector (128). GPA1/Rab5a, GPA2/VPS9a, and GPA3 form a heterocomplex that assists in the transport of glutelin precursors from the Golgi apparatus to protein storage vacuoles (127). Interestingly, the mutation ofGPA3also led to the docking of the mispackaged glutelin precursor to extracellular spaces (127). GPA4/GOT1B functions in ER exit of storage proteins through mediating the proper assembly of the coat protein complex II prebudding complexes (170). GPA5 interacts with GPA1/Rab5a and GPA2/VPS9a and may mediate the tethering and subsequent fusion of dense vesicles with protein storage vacuoles (128). Further,GLUTELIN PRECURSOR 3(GLUP3) encodes VACUOLAR PROCESSING ENZYME 1 (VPE1), and its loss-of-function mutant showed a greatly reduced cleavage of the glutelin precursor into α-acid and β-basic subunits (79).ENDOSPERM STORAGE PROTEIN MUTANT2 (ESP2) encodes a protein disulfide-isomerase-like 1-1 (PDIL1-1) that helps to release glutelin precursors out of the ER (153). In maize,FLOURY1(FL1) encodes a novel zein protein body membrane protein with three transmembrane domains and a C-terminal plant-specific domain of unknown function (DUF593). FL1 interacts with the 22-kD α-zein through its DUF593 domain to facilitate the localization of this zein in the protein body (59). A maize myosin XI motor protein, Opaque1 (O1), regulates the protein body formation by mediating ER motility. The endosperm cells in theo1mutant exhibited dilated ER structures and misshapen protein bodies (165). O10 is a cereal-specific protein body protein that is essential for the ring-shaped distribution of 22-kD and 16-kD zeins and controls protein body morphology in maize endosperm (196). Obviously, the storage protein biosynthesis, trafficking, and packaging in cereal endosperms provide a unique system in which to study intracellular protein movement and deposits.
PCD has been reported to be in the early stage ofstarchy endospermdevelopment in several cereal crops (184,200,201), and this is still a controversial issue, as a real PCD in the starchy endosperm cells may compromise storage product accumulation. Further, DNA fragmentation as a common mark of PCD has been observed in maize and wheat but not in rice (201). As both starch biosynthesis and storage protein accumulation require active gene expressions and functional organelles, we propose that the PCD observed in the starchy endosperm occurs in a very specialized form in which only the cytoplasmic membrane loses integrity, while membranes in most intracellular organelles, such as the nuclei, mitochondria, plastids, ER, and Golgi apparatus, remain functional and intact (Figure 5). This may lead to the formation of a large free-trade compartment in shared cytoplasm that allows sugars and amino acids arriving in the starchy endosperm to pass freely within it and, consequently, effective starch biosynthesis and storage protein accumulations (184) (Figure 5).

Figure 5Click to view


Cerealendospermsare not only important food sources but also fascinating models in which to study cell cycle regulation, cell fate determination, epigenetic regulation, transcriptional regulation, protein trafficking, and PCD. The development of high-throughput genomic and gene editing tools provides new avenues to elucidate the molecular machineries acting in these biological events. Further, cereal endosperms are bioreactors for biofortification and drug production. Golden Rice was developed by producing β-carotene in the endosperm to combat vitamin A deficiency (113). Purple Endosperm Rice was developed through the transgenic expression of 13 anthocyanin biosynthesis genes, which are either silenced or expressed at low levels in wild-type rice endosperm, under the control of endosperm-specific promoters (215). Similar approaches have been taken to produce vitamin B1 (147), the antiviral lectin griffithsin (160), the human serum albumin (55), and multiple antihypertensive peptides (122) in rice endosperms. Studies of cereal endosperms will undoubtedly facilitate the improvement of cereal crops to create varieties with better yields and improved cooking and nutrition qualities.




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We thank the many colleagues who have contributed to the research on cereal endosperms and apologize to those whose work was not included owing to space limitations. This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFF1000200), the Chinese Academy of Sciences Innovation Project (XDA24010402), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32070348). We thank Profs. Ian T. Baldwin from the Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, Zhihong Xu and Yue Zhou from Peking University, and Jingshen Lai from China Agricultural University for providing critical comments on the manuscript.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


