We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Sucrose is transported from sources (mature leaves) to sinks (importing tissues such as roots, stems, fruits, and seeds) through the phloem tissues in veins. In many herbaceous crop species, sucrose must first be effluxed to the cell wall by a sugar transporter of the SWEET family prior to being taken up into phloem companion cells or sieve elements by a different sugar transporter, called SUT or SUC. The import of sucrose into these cells is termed apoplasmic phloem loading. In sinks, sucrose can similarly exit the phloem apoplasmically or, alternatively, symplasmically through plasmodesmata into connecting parenchyma storage cells. Recent advances describing the regulation and manipulation of sugar transporter expression and activities provide stimulating new insights into sucrose phloem loading in sources and unloading processes in sink tissues. Additionally, new breakthroughs have revealed distinct subpopulations of cells in leaves with different functions pertaining to phloem loading. These and other discoveries in sucrose transport are discussed.
Article metrics loading...
Sucrose is transported from sources (mature leaves) to sinks (importing tissues such as roots, stems, fruits, and seeds) through the phloem tissues in veins. In many herbaceous crop species, sucrose must first be effluxed to the cell wall by a sugar transporter of the SWEET family prior to being taken up into phloem companion cells or sieve elements by a different sugar transporter, called SUT or SUC. The import of sucrose into these cells is termed apoplasmic phloem loading. In sinks, sucrose can similarly exit the phloem apoplasmically or, alternatively, symplasmically through plasmodesmata into connecting parenchyma storage cells. Recent advances describing the regulation and manipulation of sugar transporter expression and activities provide stimulating new insights into sucrose phloem loading in sources and unloading processes in sink tissues. Additionally, new breakthroughs have revealed distinct subpopulations of cells in leaves with different functions pertaining to phloem loading. These and other discoveries in sucrose transport are discussed.
Fundamentally, vascular plants evolved the ability to fix carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, convert it into sugar, and transport it to distant heterotrophic tissues to fuel growth and the storage of carbohydrates and other nutrients. The phloem orchestrates this miraculous distribution (132) and contains the translocation conduit, thesieve tube, responsible for long-distance transport of assimilates (e.g., sugars, amino acids, lipids) in plants (41). In angiosperms, source tissues—typically mature leaves—are producers and net exporters that supply assimilates as well as signaling molecules (e.g., hormones, proteins, RNAs) via the phloem to sink tissues (e.g., meristems, roots, flowers, seeds), which are net importers of these molecules (79,80,87).
The phloem is one of two conducting tissues in veins. The other conducting tissue, the xylem, transports water and dissolved mineral nutrients taken up from the soil by roots to the aerial tissues (40). Understanding the connectivity of the veins is essential to determine how long-distance transport occurs in plants (87).
In leaves, veins are embedded within photosynthetic cells, positioning them to take up and export assimilates. In monocot leaves, the veins are arranged parallel to the long axis of the leaf and classified based on their size and cell types present into small, intermediate, and large veins (112) (Figure 1a,b;Table 1). Sucrose, the most ubiquitous phloem-transported sugar (159), is predominantly loaded into the phloem in the small and intermediate veins, collectively referred to asminor veins, whereas the largest veins (termed lateral or major veins) function in the long-distance export of assimilates from leaves (47,48). Transverse veins interconnect the different longitudinal classes of veins, enabling sucrose and other phloem contents to be transferred from small to intermediate to lateral veins for long-distance export from leaves. By contrast, the veins in eudicot leaves are arranged in a reticulate (net-like) branching pattern, with the smallest veins (i.e., highest order) principally functioning to load sucrose and the larger vein classes transporting assimilates out of leaves (33,129) (Figure 1c).

Figure 1Click to view

Naming systems and characteristics of maize veins

Abbreviations:abBS, abaxial bundle sheath cells; HS, hypodermal sclerenchyma; PP, phloem parenchyma; SWEET, sugars will eventually be exported transporter; VP, vascular parenchyma.
ZmSWEET13aexpression data from Reference8.

The phloem tissue is composed of (a) three specialized types of cells—thecompanion cells (CCs),sieve elements (SEs), and associatedphloem parenchyma (PP) cellssurrounding the CCs and SEs—and (b) in some species, sclerenchyma cells in the form of phloem fibers (40). Because SEs are enucleate at maturity, they are supported by their adjoining CC, which sustains the metabolism and energetics of both cells; hence, they are often referred to as the CC-SE complex (40,133). Individual SEs are connected viasieve platesin their end walls to form the sieve tube, a contiguous transport path. Nutrients are delivered from sources to sinks through sieve tubes (41,79,132).
This review summarizes recent progress in our understanding of the control of phloem loading and unloading of sucrose. I place current research in context of the rich history of phloem biology, discuss recent findings, and offer questions to stimulate future research. I provide a simplified overview at the beginning that will be more fully explored further into the review. For the new scientist interested in expanding their knowledge of phloem biology, I recommend foundational resources to learn about phloem anatomy (see40,41,49), physiology (see87,98,129,132), and molecular genetics (see3,80,111,113). A deeper understanding of phloem biology is essential to provide solutions to critical challenges facing society, such as enhancing agricultural productivity in the face of global climate change; increasing food and energy security; and maximizing water, carbon, nitrogen, and other nutrient utilization efficiency in plants.
In this review, I focus on sucrose as the principal sugar transported from source to sink tissues, as typical inArabidopsis thalianaand most herbaceous crop species (58,60,94,159). However, some annual and perennial herbaceous plants and trees also transport sugar alcohols and/or raffinose family oligosaccharides through the phloem (159), but these are not discussed further due to space constraints. (For more information on phloem loading in these plants, see References13,102,105,115,154, and159and the sidebar titled Restriction of Plasmodesmata Channel Size Explains Raffinose Family Oligosaccharide Phloem Loading.)
RESTRICTION OF PLASMODESMATA CHANNEL SIZE EXPLAINS RAFFINOSE FAMILY OLIGOSACCHARIDE PHLOEM LOADING
Raffinose family oligosaccharide (RFO)-translocating plants provide an interesting juxtaposition of the two phloem-loading mechanisms as they have symplasmic continuity between mesophyll cells and SEs, but they require energy to synthesize RFOs. RFOs, short tri- or tetrasaccharides, are synthesized in specialized PP cells termed intermediate cells, and the first committed enzyme in RFO biosynthesis, GALACTINOL SYNTHASE1 (GAS1), is expressed in intermediate cells (6). The plasmodesmata architecture between the intermediate cells and the CC-SE complex has been proposed to be arranged such that sugar polymers larger than sucrose are prevented from diffusing back into BS cells (polymer trap hypothesis) (128). Using transmission electron microscopy, Botha & Murugan (13) found that the plasmodesmatal diameter progressively decreased approximately fivefold along the sucrose movement path in leaves ofTecoma capensis, an RFO-translocating species, from mesophyll to BS to intermediate cells, from 49.5 nm to 9.7 nm. Consistent with the polymer trap hypothesis, the radius of the cytoplasmic sleeve within the plasmodesmata of the intermediate cells, through which sucrose travels, was reduced to 1.5 nm. The authors (13) suggest that this narrowing of the plasmodesmata channel likely accounts for the prevention of back diffusion of RFOs into the BS cells.

Sucrose is produced in photosynthetic cells in leaves (mesophyll cells) from carbon fixed through photosynthesis. In some plant species, in particular the C4grasses such as sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum), maize (Zea mays), and sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), the light reactions of photosynthesis are partitioned across two cell types: mesophyll and bundle sheath (BS) cells (35). In these cases, intermediates in carbon assimilation move between mesophyll and BS cells viaplasmodesmata, which connect the cytosol of adjoining plant cells (40,42). Sucrose is synthesized in the cytosol of mesophyll cells and moves symplasmically (from cell to cell through plasmodesmata) into BS cells and again into the PP cell adjacent to the CC-SE complex, depending on the size of the vein (see the section titled Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Identifies Two Populations of Bundle Sheath Cells in Maize Leaves) (Figure 2b). In the minor veins of the leaves of some eudicot species, certain PP (and/or other) cells contain cell wall ingrowths, which are thought to expand the surface area of the plasma membrane, allowing greater flux of assimilates to and from theapoplasm(89,93,97,140). PP cells with these specialized cell wall ingrowths are referred to as transfer cells.

Figure 2Click to view


Sucrose entry into the phloem translocation stream follows one of two paths: symplasmic or apoplasmic (105,115,119,154). In plants where sucrose is proposed to symplasmically enter the CC-SE complex, primarily woody species, sucrose moves through plasmodesmata from the photosynthetic mesophyll cells down its concentration gradient to enter the CC-SE complex (Figure 2a). These plants are often referred to as passive phloem-loading species as energy is not required for sucrose to enter thesieve tubeprior to long-distance transport to sink tissues. Poplar (Populusspp.) is an example of asymplasmic phloem-loadingspecies (152). However, a recent article questions the symplasmic phloem-loading hypothesis for sucrose, at least in red oak (Quercus rubra) trees (52).
Inapoplasmic phloem-loadingspecies, the CC-SE complex is symplasmically isolated from surrounding cell types (but not entirely; see below); hence, sucrose (and other assimilates produced in the photosynthetic cells) must first be effluxed from thesymplasm(by either PP or BS cells) prior to uptake into the CC-SE complex for translocation through the sieve tubes (Figure 2b). In species with symplasmically isolated CC-SE complexes (by definition, apoplasmic phloem loaders), sucrose is at a higher concentration in the sieve tubes than in surrounding cells, indicating that it is actively loaded against its concentration gradient (43,51). This requires energy from the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by a proton ATPase located in the plasma membrane of the CC to create a proton gradient across the continuous plasma membrane of the CC-SE complex (20,147). This proton motive force is then utilized to transport sucrose up its concentration gradient accompanied by a proton moving down its electrochemical potential. This cotransport is accomplished bysucrose uptake transporters (SUTs; also called SUCs for sucrose carriers), which function as proton–sucrose symporters (11,19,21) (Table 2).
Properties of different sucrose transporter proteins

Abbreviations: SUT, sucrose uptake transporter; SWEET, sugars will eventually be exported transporter; TST, tonoplast sugar transporter.
*Different SUT or SWEET proteins localize to either the plasma membrane or the tonoplast.

In apoplasmic phloem-loading species, there are some plasmodesmata located between the CC and neighboring cells that are likely important for the movement of macromolecules, such as RNAs and proteins, into the sieve tubes (43,50,58). However, these are presumably gated closed most of the time to prevent the back-leakage of sucrose and other assimilates to maintain their higher concentration in the CC-SE complex relative to that of adjacent cells. The presence of these plasmodesmata may indicate that sucrose could enter the phloem symplasmically under certain circumstances, which is discussed below (see the section titled Mutants of the Principal Phloem-LoadingSUT/SUCMay Use Symplasmic Phloem Loading). Furthermore, the path of phloem loading is not simply apoplasmic or symplasmic within a leaf. Great heterogeneity exists in the path sucrose follows to enter the phloem, with some plants utilizing both routes in different subpopulations of cells within the phloem (119,135), a theme discussed more below.
Münch (92) proposed that solute movement through sieve tubes can be explained by a hydrostatic pressure difference between source and sink tissues (73). In source leaves, sucrose, amino acids, organic acids, ions, and other solutes accumulate in the sieve tubes to very high osmolarity (measured at over 2.2 M in maize) (94). This high solute concentration attracts water from the xylem into the sieve tubes, raising the hydrostatic pressure within the cells. In sink tissues, the solutes are removed from sieve tubes into adjacent parenchyma cells, with the associated return of water to the xylem, thereby lowering the pressure within the sieve tubes. The difference in pressure in the sieve tubes between the source and sink tissues propels the bulk flow of solution down the pressure gradient, transporting sucrose and other solutes to the sinks.
Can the Münch hypothesis explain the changes in source strength required to support long-distance transport, particularly in larger plants? As the distance between a source leaf and sink tissue increases, concomitant changes in phloem anatomy and physiology are required for transport to occur via the Münch hypothesis. However, the evidence to support this hypothesis was largely lacking. Knoblauch et al. (72) performed a tour de force investigation of phloem anatomy and physiology to address this question. The authors measured the sizes ofSEs,sieve plates, and sieve pores to calculate the conductance that the physical structures in the sieve tube constrain and used a sophisticated arsenal of physiological approaches, including fluorescent imaging to measure sieve tube transport speed and phloem sap viscosity; transport of radiotracers between source and sink; and measurement of phloem pressures in source leaves, in roots, and along the stem separating these tissues at increasing distances (72). Measuring these parameters enabled the authors to calculate the hydraulic conductivity of the sieve tube at different positions along its length from source to sink tissues, and they demonstrated that the source strength increases with greater distance from the sink to increase the hydrostatic pressure of the source CC-SE complex to drive transport. This is largely accomplished by changes in sieve tube conductivity along the path from increased radii of sieve plate pores. Hence, with increased hydrostatic pressure in source sieve tubes and anatomical modifications to decrease resistance along the path, the Münch hypothesis indeed explains how phloem transport functions over long distances (meters).
During daylight, leaves produce more photoassimilates than can be exported by the phloem, which must therefore be transiently stored and mobilized to sink tissue during the night to sustain their metabolic demands. Depending on the plant species and growth conditions, much of the fixed carbon is stored in the chloroplasts as starch, which is then degraded to hexoses and resynthesized as sucrose prior to export (120). Additionally, sucrose can be transiently stored within the vacuole and accumulate to high levels, which requires movement against its concentration gradient (69). This is achieved by a different class of sugar transporters,tonoplast sugar transporters [TSTs; initially named tonoplast monosaccharide transporters (TMTs)], which function as sugar–proton antiporters (34,68,143) (Table 2). The pH of the vacuole is considerably lower than that of the cytosol, so TSTs couple the export of a proton from the vacuole with the import of sucrose from the cytosol into the vacuole. In addition to transitory storage in source leaves, TSTs also play important roles in sucrose storage in sink tissues, discussed below.
TSTs move the sucrose into the vacuole, but how does it later get out? At least one member of the SUT family in all characterized plant species is localized to the tonoplast (36,38,82,103). Recall that SUTs function as sucrose–proton symporters, so the tonoplast-localized SUT exports sucrose to the cytosol by cotransporting a proton down its electrochemical potential (Table 2). The coordinated actions of the TST importing sucrose into the vacuole and the SUT exporting it back out require energy (it is not net energy neutral), which is provided by the proton motive force across the tonoplast. Additionally, the balance of sucrose in the cytosol versus that stored in the vacuole determines sucrose availability to move throughplasmodesmataalong the mesophyll-BS-PP cell symplasmic continuum for efflux to theapoplasmin the pre-phloem-loading step.
Recently, Deng and colleagues (32) described protein phosphorylation as an important regulator of TST activity. They determined that the sugar transport activity of GhTST2 from cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) was stimulated by phosphorylation via a calcium sensor–protein kinase module. CALCINEURINB-LIKE2 (GhCBL2) recruits CBL-INTERACTING PROTEIN KINASE6 (GhCIPK6) to the vacuole membrane to phosphorylate GhTST2, which stimulates its glucose transport activity and sugar import into the vacuole. Interestingly, the serine residue phosphorylated by GhCIPK6 is conserved in barley (Hordeum vulgare), rice (Oryza sativa), andArabidopsisTST2 proteins, suggesting that this calcium signaling cascade regulating sugar accumulation in vacuoles may be conserved across angiosperms (34,62). More work is necessary to determine how widespread protein phosphorylation functions to regulate sugar transporters (26,88,101,142,148), but new findings discussed below (see the section titled Posttranslational Regulation) suggest this could be a prevalent mechanism (66,151).
Inapoplasmic phloem-loadingspecies, the CC-SE complex is symplasmically isolated from neighboring cells, necessitating that sucrose is effluxed to the cell wall prior to entry into the complex (Figure 2b). How does this occur? Chen et al. (25) discovered that sucrose is effluxed by clade 3 members of the SWEET transporter family (sugars will eventually be exported transporters) (5,37). SWEETs function as facilitative diffusers (149), transporting sugars across membranes and down their concentration gradients (23,24) (Table 2). Depending on the plant species and size of the vein, the efflux of sucrose occurs from eitherPPor BS cells (8,43,58). InArabidopsis, AtSWEET11 and AtSWEET12 are expressed in PP cells adjacent to the CC-SE complex (25). Double mutants ofAtsweet11 Atsweet12exhibit retarded growth (∼35% smaller than wild type) and sugar and starch accumulation in leaves, but, curiously, only when the plants were initially grown under low light and transitioned to high light. A slight reduction in plant growth (∼20%) was reported in theAtsweet11 Atsweet12double mutants grown under constant low light (8 h day/night growth conditions), but no excess accumulation of starch was observed. How sucrose is effluxed to the apoplasm under these fixed light conditions in the double mutants remains to be determined. One possibility is that AtSWEET13, another clade 3 family member, acts redundantly to AtSWEET11 and AtSWEET12 and mediates this function, as its expression was upregulated approximately 16-fold in the double mutant, although it is normally very lowly expressed in leaves in wild-type plants (25). But, if so, it is curious that it is not sufficient to prevent sugar and starch hyperaccumulation under the low to high light shift in the double mutant. Perhaps AtSWEET13 activity is sufficient to sustain sucrose efflux under low light conditions, with low rates of assimilation and sucrose efflux, but insufficient under high light conditions that necessitate higher rates of export. Alternatively, perhaps the path of sucrose phloem loading switches to preferentially symplasmic inAtsweet11 Atsweet12double mutants, and under low light, this pathway is capable of translocating the sucrose into the phloem for long-distance export, yet it is insufficient under high light conditions, resulting in the accumulation of starch. Further research is needed to understand the movement of sucrose into the phloem in theAtsweet11 Atsweet12mutant background.
In maize, three redundantZmSWEET13genes,ZmSWEET13a, ZmSWEET13b, andZmSWEET13c, are responsible for sucrose efflux to the apoplasm (7).Zmsweet13a Zmsweet13b Zmsweet13ctriple mutants exhibit slower growth, chlorotic leaves, and sugar and starch hyperaccumulation within leaves due to the inability to efficiently export sucrose to the apoplasm. Previously, the smallest veins in maize leaves had been known to often lack PP cells, and hence, in these veins, sucrose was proposed to be effluxed from the BS cells to the apoplasm surrounding the CC-SE complex (43) (Figure 2b). In largerminor veins, PP andvascular parenchyma (VP)cells frequently intervene between the BS cells and CC-SE complex, and sucrose was postulated to be effluxed from PP cells accordingly (8). Parallel to the surprisingly relatively normal growth ofArabidopsis Atsweet11 Atsweet12double mutants under unchanging light conditions, maizeZmsweet13a Zmsweet13b Zmsweet13ctriple mutants are able to grow and complete their life cycle, producing fertile pollen and ears, albeit with hyperaccumulation of sugars and starch in the leaves and reduced yield compared to wild-type siblings. These data hint that there must be other partially redundant sucrose efflux transporters in maize (perhaps other clade 3 SWEETs) or, alternatively, that sucrose may enter the phloem symplasmically due to the loss of the ZmSWEET13 effluxers.
In apoplasmic phloem-loading species, sucrose entry into the CC-SE complex is mediated bySUTs(3,16,34,80,113). One approach to determine the path of sucrose entry into the phloem is to knock out or knock down the function of the SUT hypothesized to transport sucrose into the CC-SE complex. This method clearly demonstrated apoplasmic phloem loading in potato (Solanum tuberosum) (107), tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) (18), tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) (56),Arabidopsis(53,122), cotton (150), and maize (117,118).
InArabidopsis,AtSUC2is expressed in CCs and loads sucrose into these cells (53,122,123). Under normal growth conditions,Atsuc2mutants are severely debilitated in growth, fail to load sucrose into the phloem, and are sterile. In contrast, when grown under low light conditions,Atsuc2mutants are able to grow and complete their life cycle, including producing seeds but at a greatly reduced capacity (121). In maize, sucrose phloem loading is performed by ZmSUT1, which is expressed in CCs and additional cell types (4,118). Similar toAtsuc2mutants, whenZmsut1mutants are grown under low light conditions, the plants are able to grow to maturity and produce some fertile seed (66). These data indicate that sucrose must be able to enter the phloem for translocation to sink tissues. Either there are redundant sucrose transporter proteins (not necessarily of the SUT family) that function to load sucrose from the apoplasm into the CC-SE complex at low rates or, in the mutants, sucrose may enter the CC-SE complex through plasmodesmata connecting to adjoining cells (symplasmic pathway) (17,43,122).
It is curious that mutations that are expected to abolish apoplasmic phloem loading of sucrose in bothArabidopsisand maize, i.e., the loss of function of either the SWEET effluxers (Atsweet11 Atsweet12andZmsweet13a Zmsweet13b Zmsweet13c) or mutation of the sucrose importers in the CC (Atsuc2orZmsut1), result in different phenotypes. In both plants, loss of the sucrose-exporting SWEET function results in a milder growth reduction (healthier plants) than in the loss of the phloem-loading SUT/SUC. These results may indicate greater genetic redundancy among SWEET family members, or alternatively, that failure to export sucrose from the BS or PP cells enhances the capacity forsymplasmic phloem loading. In summary, the sucrose phloem-loading pathway inArabidopsisand maize is predominantly apoplasmic, but there may be genetic redundancy for sugar transporter function and/or phloem-loading plasticity such that in genetic backgrounds defective for different sugar transporters or specific environmental conditions, sucrose may enter the CC-SE complex symplasmically (3,17,115,122).
Rice is a staple crop for over half of the population on Earth, but the literature includes debate on the pathway sucrose follows into the phloem in rice leaves (for discussion, see17,39,66). Eom et al. (38,39) proposed that rice may use symplasmic phloem loading, controlled by the tonoplast-localized OsSUT2 protein regulating the rate of sucrose efflux from the vacuoles in mesophyll cells. Sucrose would then diffuse from mesophyll cells toward thesieve tubesdown its concentration gradient (Figure 2a). A recent report that the riceOssweet11 Ossweet14double mutants have no vegetative phenotypes supports this hypothesis, although there was a significant reduction in grain yield (46). However, it has also been reported thatOssweet14single mutants exhibited a substantial reduction in plant growth (2). In contrast, based on anatomical, physiological, biochemical, and genetic data, Braun et al. (17) proposed rice uses an apoplasmic phloem loading mechanism, similar to other closely related grass species (Figure 2b). If correct, there could be additional genetic redundancy among SWEET genes in rice, like inArabidopsisand maize, to account for the normal vegetative growth reported for theOssweet11 Ossweet14double mutants.
To address this controversy, Wang et al. (137) used a variety of approaches to explore the path of phloem loading in rice leaves. The authors created transgenic plants that constitutively overexpressed INVERTASE, an enzyme that degrades sucrose to hexoses (76,111), in the cell wall, which is predicted to decrease the sucrose levels in theapoplasmand prevent phloem loading via a SUT. Analyzing these plants, Wang and colleagues (137) found that plant growth, photosynthesis, leaf carbon accumulation, sucrose exudation from leaves, and other related phenotypes were all affected in the transgenic plants. Very similar results were found when researchers used this approach to demonstrateapoplasmic phloem loadingin other species (136). Collectively, these data add further support to the thesis that rice uses apoplasmic phloem loading.
To assess the contribution of OsSUT1 to sucrose phloem loading in rice leaves, previous researchers reduced or eliminated its function, but they did not observe mutant phenotypes characteristic of defects in phloem loading, leaving the question unresolved (61,63,114). To examine the functions of all plasma membrane–localized rice SUTs, Wang et al. (137) used CRISPR-Cas9 to perform gene editing and to mutate theseOsSUTs. Plant height was decreased by a modest 5.1% inOssut1mutants but was not significantly different in the other three mutants. In addition, none of the mutants displayed leaf chlorosis, a common phenotype in mutants perturbed in apoplasmic phloem loading (15,67,116,127). Based on all of their data, Wang and colleagues (137) conclude that rice leaves depend strongly on the apoplasmic pathway.
The data of Wang et al. (137) overall support the hypothesis that rice uses apoplasmic phloem loading, particularly the evidence based on the INVERTASE overexpression experiments. However, there are several outstanding issues needing to be resolved before this question is finally settled. For example, the phenotypes of theOssutmutant plants were very mild in comparison to the loss of function of the principal phloem-loading SUT in other known apoplasmic phloem-loading species (18,56,107,118,122), even though the plants were grown in the field during the summer. In addition, whether any of these mutants accumulate sugars and starch in their leaves, as predicted if phloem loading is reduced (64,118), was not reported. Until additional evidence is provided, conclusions based on theOssutmutants to determine the pathway used for sucrose phloem loading in rice leaves remain tentative.
Might a similar mechanism to that observed inAtsuc2andZmsut1mutants, in which the environmental or genetic conditions are hypothesized to permit switching between apoplasmic and symplasmic phloem loading, operate in rice leaves? Perhaps. It may be that rice is particularly dynamic in switching between apoplasmic and symplasmic phloem-loading pathways, which could account for the lack of a vegetative phenotype in theOssweet11 Ossweet14double mutants and the mild phenotypes reported in theOssut1andOssut5single mutants (17). Analyzing sucrose phloem loading inOssut1 Ossut5double mutants may help address the question. As a complementary approach, a greater understanding of how these genes are regulated would provide additional insights into the path of sucrose phloem loading in rice.
Little is known about the control of sugar transporter gene expression (3,115,146,147,153,156). A significant recent development is the report by Wu et al. (145) on the function of theOsDOF11gene controlling the expression of multiple sugar transporters in rice. OsDOF11 is a member of the DNA-binding with one finger (DOF) class of transcription factors. By characterizing a knockout mutant,Osdof11, the authors found that the mutant plants were semidwarf; had reduced numbers of tillers; were insensitive to sucrose-mediated inhibition of root growth; accumulated less sugar in their leaves; had reduced sucrose movement in leaves; and showed reduced expression ofOsSUT1,OsSWEET11, andOsSWEET14.OsDOF11was expressed in CCs andPPcells within veins of leaf blades and stems, consistent with a potential role in regulating these sugar transporters. By performing chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments, the authors showed that OsDOF11 bound to the promoter regions ofOsSUT1,OsSWEET11, andOsSWEET14.Collectively, these data indicate that OsDOF11 positively and directly regulates the expression ofOsSUT1,OsSWEET11, andOsSWEET14to influence sugar transport.
TheOsdof11mutant displayed a strong vegetative phenotype, whereas theOssut1single mutant andOssweet11 Ossweet14double mutants did not, indicating that additional genes may be misregulated inOsdof11mutants that contribute to the mutant phenotype, although the authors demonstrated thatOsSUT2–OsSUT5expression levels were unchanged in leaves. Whether the expression of otherSWEETor sugar transporter genes was impacted is unknown. Nonetheless, the coordinated downregulation ofOsSUT1,OsSWEET11, andOsSWEET14and the phenotypes observed in theOsdof11mutant support the hypothesis that rice uses an apoplasmic phloem-loading pathway (Figure 2b). On the contrary, if rice usessymplasmic phloem loading(Figure 2a), it is difficult to understand why downregulating these sucrose transporters would be associated with the mutant phenotype observed. Further research is necessary to resolve this important question (for further discussion of how rice sugar transporters are regulated, see34).
Earlier research indicated that sucrose transport is controlled by protein phosphorylation, but the kinase or kinases involved were not known (101). Providing new insights into the posttranslational control ofSUTfunction, Xu et al. (148) transitionedArabidopsisplants from growth in normal light to 4 h of high light and then examined the regulation of both theAtSUC2messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein abundance in the context of photosynthesis and sucrose contents in the leaf and phloem exudates. The authors found the expected increases in photosynthesis, leaf sucrose content, and phloem sucrose exudation after the light shift. However, interestingly, theAtSUC2mRNA level was unchanged, whereas the AtSUC2 protein abundance increased in response to high light. By using cycloheximide to block new protein synthesis, the authors found that AtSUC2 protein levels after 4 h in high light were the same as the normal light–grown plants treated with cycloheximide, but the untreated normal light samples had statistically significant reduced AtSUC2 levels. These data indicate that the AtSUC2 protein turns over in normal light but is stabilized in response to a shift to high light. Additional biochemical studies demonstrated that the AtSUC2 protein displayed higher levels of phosphorylation in response to the high light shift.
To understand potential mechanisms for the increased AtSUC2 protein stability and phos-phorylation, the authors took advantage of recent large-scale yeast two-hybrid studies ofArabidopsismembrane proteins (65). Among potential proteins interacting with AtSUC2, two proteins were of particular interest. The first,A. thalianaUBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME34 (AtUBC34), is an E2 enzyme, which is typically involved in the ubiquitination of E3 proteins. The authors showed that AtUBC34 physically interacted with AtSUC2 and was able to ubiquitinate AtSUC2 in vitro and, by comparing anAtubc34mutant to wild type, that AtSUC2 exhibited reduced ubiquitination in vivo in the mutant background. Interestingly, theAtubc34mutant grew better than the wild type and produced bigger plants. TheAtubc34mutants also displayed higher sucrose phloem exudate when the authors used the ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) method (but see130for discussion of caveats of using this method to analyze phloem sap) and a slower rate of AtSUC2 protein turnover compared to wild type.
The other AtSUC2-interacting protein studied by Xu and coauthors (148) isA. thalianaWALL-ASSOCIATED KINASE-LIKE8 (AtWAKL8), which phosphorylates AtSUC2, enhancing its ability to bind sucrose. Analysis of anAtwakl8mutant found that AtSUC2 protein phosphorylation after shifting the plants to high light was reduced to a level similar to plants grown under normal light. This correlated with reduced sucrose exudation from the phloem, although AtSUC2 protein stability in response to high light was unchanged in theAtwakl8mutant. Growth of theAtwakl8mutant was decreased compared to that of wild-type plants, resulting in smaller leaves and a reduction in total plant biomass. These data suggest that AtWAKL8 is a positive regulator of AtSUC2 activity, which enhances overall growth. As previous efforts to enhance sucrose phloem transport by overexpressing SUT proteins have largely been unsuccessful (31,83,141) (but see the section titled Enhancing Phloem Loading and Unloading Through Overexpressing a SUT: Push–Pull to the Rescue), the authors speculated that manipulating the activity of AtWAKL8 may offer new avenues to enhance plant productivity (148).
Determining how conserved this phosphorylation and regulation of the major SUT functioning in sucrose phloem loading is will be important when translating this discovery to crop species. This mechanism may be conserved in eudicots and pertain to other group 2 SUTs (16), such as StSUT1 in potato and SlSUT1 in tomato, but whether this is more broadly conserved in distantly related group 1 SUTs in monocots (which typically share only ∼40% of their amino acid identity with group 2 SUTs), such as ZmSUT1 in maize, is not clear. Nonetheless, the recent identification of AtUBC34 and AtWAKL8 as regulators of AtSUC2 protein stability and activity opens up new opportunities for investigation.
Several research groups have overexpressed SUTs with the goal of enhancing sucrose delivery to sinks to increase yields. However, most of them have not achieved that goal or had mixed results. For example, overexpressing theArabidopsis AtSUC2gene resulted in stunted plants with poor growth, the opposite of what was predicted (31). This confounding result was likely due to an imbalance in the carbon-to-phosphate ratio, which disturbed metabolism. Similarly, Leggewie et al. (83) overexpressed the spinach (Spinacia oleracea)SoSUT1gene in potato, but there was little change to tuber biomass or starch contents. Weichert and colleagues (141) obtained similar results by overexpressing the barleyHvSUT1gene under an endosperm-specific promoter in wheat (Triticum aestivum) and found no change in sucrose or starch contents in seeds, although protein levels were increased. Likewise, overexpressingStSUT1in developing pea (Pisum sativum) seeds had little influence on mature seed weight or composition (108,109). In one of the few successful efforts, Wang et al. (138) found that overexpressing the AtSUC2 protein under the control of a phloem-specific promoter in rice led to an increase in grain size and yield, indicating that by increasing source strength, more sucrose could be delivered to sinks.
In these and other previous efforts, the authors’ successes may have been limited by the imbalance between source and sink strengths that the transgenic plants developed. To circumvent this potential problem, and to direct the overexpression of the SUT to the apoplasmic interface in developing seeds, Lu et al. (86) used an ingenious combination push-and-pull strategy to simultaneously upregulatePsSUT1in pea (a) in the source leaves (the push) and (b) in the cotyledon epidermal cells, the site of nutrient import into the embryo (the pull) (126). The authors had previously characterized the expression of an amino acid permease (AAP1), determining that it was expressed in the relevant cell types (125). This strategy had successfully been used to enhance the allocation of amino acids to developing seeds (155). Using the promoter of theArabidopsis AtAAP1gene to drive the expression of peaPsSUT1(AtAAP1:PsSUT1), the authors analyzed two independently transformed SUT1-overexpressing (SUT1-OE) lines. The transgenic plants exhibited significantly increased sucrose phloem loading, photosynthesis, shoot biomass, seed size and weight, and seed yield per plant. Intriguingly, the overexpression ofPsSUT1and the enhanced sucrose allocation to sinks resulted in parallel enhancements in nitrogen metabolism. The SUT1-OE lines displayed elevated nitrogen assimilation in leaves, amino acid loading into the phloem, upregulation of several amino acid transporter genes, greater protein abundance per seed, and increased seed protein yield on a per-plant basis. The simultaneous changes in carbon and nitrogen metabolism illustrate the complex signaling and coordinated assimilation, export, unloading, and utilization steps in both sink and source tissues.
In a follow-up study, the SUT1-OE transgene was combined with the constitutive overexpression of the peaPsAAP1gene under the control of theCauliflower mosaic virus 35Spromoter (35S:PsAAP1) to examine the simultaneous upregulation of sucrose and amino acid transport between source and sink tissues (54). The double transgenic plants had significantly more protein in the cotyledons at maturity (30–37 days after pollination), but interestingly, sucrose and starch levels were similar to the untransformed control or SUT1-OE line. Extensive quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analyses found that numerous transporters of theSUT,SWEET, andAAPfamilies exhibited altered expression in leaves, pod walls, ovules, seed coats, and cotyledons. Additionally, cell wall invertase and cytokinin metabolic genes, which are important regulators of sink strength (111), exhibited altered expression. These data suggest that crosstalk between sugar and cytokinin signaling may account for the upregulated assimilate import into developing cotyledons and their enhanced protein content.
Lu et al. (86) and Grant et al. (54) report intriguing results through manipulatingSUTandAAPexpression to implement the push–pull strategy. For both of these studies, the analyzed plants were grown in controlled environmental conditions (greenhouse or growth chambers). The impact of this strategy must be evaluated in field settings to determine whether plants grown in varying environments with additional abiotic and biotic stress show similar improvements in carbon and nitrogen partitioning. This strategy should also be evaluated in cereal crops to determine if it can enhance yields. Nonetheless, these studies tantalizingly suggest that manipulating sucrose and amino acid transporters in both source and sink tissues affords great potential to improve crop yields.
Anatomically, it can be difficult to unambiguously distinguish cell types in images of veins. For example, CCs are often identified by their proximate position adjacent toSEsin veins and by their dense cytoplasmic contents when examined by transmission electron microscopy (40,43). Additionally, the promoter of theAtSUC2gene is activated in CCs inArabidopsisand serves as a marker for this cell type (123). Remarkably, the promoter of theGalactinol synthase1(CmGAS1) gene from melon (Cucumis melo), the first dedicated gene in raffinose family oligosaccharide synthesis that is normally expressed in intermediate cells (see the sidebar titled Restriction of Plasmodesmata Channel Size Explains Raffinose Family Oligosaccharide Phloem Loading), is also expressed in CCs inArabidopsis, even thoughArabidopsisdoes not utilize polymer trapping to load the phloem (57). Similar to CCs, the specific cell identity ofPPcells can be challenging to determine, as they are often similar in size and position to CCs within veins, although specific cues to distinguish these cells exist in some cases (43,90). Until recently, no molecular markers were available for PP cells, but Zhang et al. (153) identified regulatory sequences that specify PP-specific expression forAtSWEET11. Two important advances in our understanding of the subpopulations of cell types within veins in source leaves, and their functions in long-distance transport through the phloem, were also recently reported.
The FLOWERING LOCUS T (AtFT) protein is produced inArabidopsissource leaf phloem cells and travels from leaves to the shoot apex to induce flowering, but the cell types within veins that produce AtFT had not yet been identified (29). Using advances in tissue preparation to enable viewing of cleared tissues for fluorescent microscopy (78), Chen et al. (27) expressed the yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) under the control of theAtFTpromoter (AtFT:YFP) to examine in which cells the reporter was activated. The authors simultaneously expressed a different color variant fluorescent protein [teal fluorescent protein (TFP)] under theAtSUC2promoter to mark CCs. Interestingly, they found that theAtFT:YFP-expressing cells were localized to the adaxial side of the vein and were a subset of the CC marked byAtSUC2activity. Comparing the cell-specific expression of TFP controlled by the melonCmGAS1promoter (CmGAS1:TFP) withAtFT:YFPrevealed that both were coexpressed in the same CC. In a follow-up experiment, Chen et al. (27) expressed theDiphtheria toxin A(DT-A) gene, which kills cells in which it is expressed, behind theCmGAS1promoter to specifically ablate these cells. They found that plants containing this construct had cells in the adaxial region of the phloem that were nearly devoid of cellular contents and presumably dead, whereas other CCs (and all other cells in the vein) appeared normal. Additionally, the plants expressing the DT-A protein were greatly delayed in flowering, but the late-flowering phenotype could be rescued by ectopically coexpressingAtSUC2:FTin the remaining CCs. These data indicate that at least two populations of CCs exist inArabidopsis[as well as in tobacco, as the authors showed (27)] with distinct expression profiles and roles in long-distance transport from source to sinks.
To provide new insights into the different cell identities within veins, Kim et al. (71) performed asingle-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq)experiment on six-week-old mature leaves ofArabidopsisplants grown in long days. Using an unsupervised clustering algorithm, the authors identified 19 distinct cell clusters based on their RNA expression profiles. By analyzing the expression of known marker genes, they could assign 18 of the clusters to different cell types. Interestingly, the CC cluster, identified by its enrichedAtSUC2expression, was the most distinct from the other cell types within the vein. As the plants were grown in conditions that did not induce flowering,AtFTmRNA expression was not detected, and no evidence for distinct subpopulations of CCs was observed.AtSWEET11,AtSWEET12, andAtSWEET13were expressed in two clusters, both identified as PP cells, implying there could be two different populations of PP cells that efflux sucrose. In one of these clusters, gene expression related to callose deposition and cell wall thickening was enriched, suggesting that these cells were transfer cells (140). Surprisingly, the other PP cluster expressed genes related to photosynthesis and other genes responding to various stresses, such as protein refolding and chaperones, high light, and decreased oxygen, suggesting that these cells may have additional roles. This second population of PP cells also expressed genes for the biosynthesis of several hormones, including abscisic acid, ethylene, jasmonic acid, and gibberellins. It is possible that aSWEETprotein expressed in these cells effluxes gibberellins to theapoplasmfor long-distance transport, as some SWEET proteins have been reported to transport gibberellins (70). For more information about the PP cell–specific control ofSWEETgene expression, see the recent report by Zhang et al. (153).
Kim et al. (71) identified different family members of plasmodesmata-located proteins (PDLPs) andmultiple C2 domains and transmembrane proteins (MCTPs)that exhibited distinct expression patterns in the different clusters. These proteins function in regulatingplasmodesmataaperture and structure and hence could relate to possible differences in symplasmic transport along the cellular route from mesophyll cells to SEs (14,30) (Figure 2). These data suggest that plasmodesmata located at different cellular interfaces may have distinct compositions to help regulate symplasmic transport. Earlier transmission electron microscopy investigations along the symplasmic path sucrose follows in leaves demonstrated that the plasmodesmata at the interfaces of different cell types appear morphologically distinct (e.g., branching on one side, presence/absence of sphincters on one or both sides of the plasmodesmata aperture) (13,42–44,58,96). Perhaps these differing constellations of expressed PDLPs and MCTPs in the different cell types may account for these structural polymorphisms. The identification of cell types withinArabidopsisleaf veins by gene expression patterns opens opportunities to expand our knowledge of the unique contributions of the various cell populations, identify and characterize cell-specific gene functions, and develop new markers and tools to better understand source tissue physiology.
A companion study by Bezrutczyk et al. (8) used scRNAseq on young maize leaves to explore expression patterns associated with cell identities. The authors prepared protoplasts from the distal tip of fully mature tissue from leaf two of seedlings. A similar bioinformatic analysis clustered the gene expression patterns into six clusters, five of which expressed mesophyll cell markers, and one was assigned BS cell identity. No vascular cell types were recovered, potentially due to the recalcitrance of the heavily suberized cell wall of BS cells preventing release of vein cells (43,44). Subsequent analyses distinguished two subpopulations of BS cells, which corresponded to the physical positioning of the cells surrounding the vein. Both populations of BS cells function in C4photosynthesis and exchange biochemical intermediates with mesophyll cells. However, one cluster represented theabaxial-localized BS cells, termedabBS cells, and the other the remaining BS cells. Examining the expression of genes differentially expressed between the two BS cell clusters revealed thatZmSWEET13a,ZmSWEET13b, andZmSWEET13cgenes, and several additional transcripts encoding solute transporters, were strongly enriched in theabBS cell cluster. To confirm these findings, the authors performed RNA in situ hybridization experiments (8). In the smallest order of veins (Table 1), all threeZmSWEET13transcripts were detected almost exclusively in theabBS andPPcells. As veins progressed in size,ZmSWEET13aexpression shifted from predominantly in theabBS cells in small veins to mostly equal inabBS and PP cells in intermediate veins to exclusively in PP andVPcells in lateral veins (Table 1). Analysis of stably transformed maize plants expressing a translational reporter protein fusion to ZmSWEET13a confirmed these expression patterns (8). Collectively, these data suggest that two populations of cells in maize veins, theabBS and PP cells, efflux sucrose to the apoplasm, which has interesting parallels to the two populations of PP cells identified inArabidopsisleaves that expressAtSWEET11, AtSWEET12, andAtSWEET13genes.
Based on these data, the authors proposed that maize and potentially related C4plants evolved a novel strategy of phloem loading from theabBS cells as opposed to the canonical pathway via the PP cells as described forArabidopsis(8) (Figure 2b). In fact, such a model had been previously postulated in maize based on ultrastructural studies of the small veins in leaves, which found that they often lack PP cells. Evert et al. (43) proposed that in these cases sucrose and other assimilates must be released to the apoplasm by the neighboring BS cells. In addition, as veins progress longitudinally down the maize leaf blade, they intergrade in their size from smaller toward the tip to larger toward the base (112) (Figure 1a,b). Hence, the varying proportion of expression of theZmSWEET13genes between theabBS and PP cells may reflect the progressive developmental transition of a vein between the small and intermediate vein classes (Figure 1b;Table 1). Similarly, in eudicot leaves, veins progressively decrease in size from the primary and largest (midvein) to the higher orders (i.e., smaller-sized) of branched veins (secondary, tertiary, etc.) (33) (Figure 1c). As in maize, phloem loading in eudicot leaves primarily occurs in the smallest veins (47,105). In performing the scRNAseq experiments, researchers grind up entire leaves to isolate the protoplasts, so transcripts coming from cells from different classes of veins will be represented in the population. It is possible that the two different populations of PP cells proposed by Kim et al. (71) represent differences in the size and order of the veins that they were isolated from, potentially analogous to the developmental progression in phloem-loading activity along a maize vein (43,112). Future research should explore if the expression of theAtSWEET11,AtSWEET12, andAtSWEET13genes exhibits changing cell-type expression (e.g., from cluster C18.1 toward C18.2) within progressively higher-order veins.
Baker et al. (4) found thatZmSUT1was expressed in CCs but also in many additional cell types (including PP, VP, and BS) within the leaf. AsZmsut1mutants leak sucrose into the xylem transpiration stream (4,117), which is contiguous with the phloem apoplasm, the broader expression pattern ofZmSUT1in additional cell types is proposed to function by retrieving sucrose from the apoplasm back to thesymplasmto prevent its loss and to enable additional attempts to effectively load sucrose into the CC (4). Reexamination of theZmSUT1RNA in situ hybridization data in light of theabBS cell expression ofZmSWEET13genes indicates thatZmSUT1, within the BS cells, is preferentially expressed in the adaxially located cells, consistent with its role in retrieving sucrose from the xylem transpiration stream (4) (Figure 3a,b). In addition, the in situ expression data forZmSWEET13andZmSUT1genes raise the conundrum that these sucrose-effluxing and sucrose-importing proteins are expressed in the PP and VP cells in nearly 25% of small veins, 85% of intermediate veins, and all lateral veins (4,8) (Table 1). These data suggest that there must be posttranscriptional regulation ofZmSWEETand/orZmSUT1functions to avoid a wasteful cycle of simultaneously exporting and importing sucrose into the PP and VP cells. Perhaps this continuous efflux/influx of sucrose across the plasma membrane serves as a mechanism for the cell to monitor the rate of sucrose movement towards the phloem. Alternatively, maybe the SWEET andSUTproteins are localized in different subdomains of the plasma membrane. For example, if both theabBS and the PP cells inminor veinsefflux sucrose, perhaps in the PP cells the ZmSUT1 protein is polarly localized in the plasma membrane facing theabBS cell but not toward the CC-SE complex. The ZmSWEET proteins would be localized on the opposite side of the PP cell to efflux sucrose into the apoplasm close to the CC, where ZmSUT1 would import it. Previous research on the subcellular localization of StSUT1 in potato provides evidence that a SUT protein is nonuniformly distributed in the plasma membrane (77). Future research examining the localization and activities of both ZmSWEET13 and ZmSUT1 proteins in these cells is required to resolve this puzzle.

Figure 3Click to view


Within sink tissues, sucrose, amino acids, macromolecules, and other compounds must be unloaded from thesieve tubesand transported into adjacent cells (79,98). Analogous to phloem loading in source tissues, phloem unloading can occur symplasmically or apoplasmically (Figure 2c,d). In the growing root and shoot apices, phloem unloading occurs symplasmically (59,95), with transport through the plasmodesmata cytoplasmic sleeve limiting the rate of phloem unloading (91,98). It has been observed that sugars, carboxyfluorescein and other fluorescent probes, and small molecules freely diffuse from the protophloemSEthrough plasmodesmata into neighboring cells (74,75,95,144). Small proteins, such as the green fluorescent protein (GFP), can also move through plasmodesmata laterally into distal cells (124). However, proteins larger than approximately 27–36 kDa fail to move from the cells adjacent to the phloem and are trapped in a postphloem domain (100,124).
To investigate how and where phloem unloading occurs, Ross-Elliott et al. (110) used a combination of confocal and electron microscopy data to generate mathematical models of the phloem unloading zone in anArabidopsisroot tip. They showed that a developing protophloem SE is not competent to function in phloem transport and unloading until its nucleus begins to degrade, at which time the pores in thesieve plateconnecting it to the phloem translocation stream open, allowing phloem sap to enter the cell. Developmentally, as the root grows, protophloem SEs progress through a spatiotemporal gradient, initially not participating in phloem unloading, then actively unloading for 2–4 h, and finally becoming nonfunctional for unloading. Ross-Elliott and colleagues (110) investigated the transitions occurring in these SEs as they progress along this gradient and found that callose accumulates with cell aging, eventually blocking the lateral walls andplasmodesmataof the SEs, preventing further phloem unloading. By examining the unloading of esculin, a fluorescent phloem-mobile probe (74,75), in comparison to a fluorescent reporter protein expressed specifically in SEs, the researchers determined that esculin, and presumably soluble molecules such as sucrose, moves out of sieve tubes through plasmodesmata into adjacent cells by a combination of diffusion and mass flow, collectively termed convective unloading, whereas the larger protein is trapped and unable to move to distal cells. Intriguingly, the unloading of this protein from SEs into thephloem pole pericycle (PPP) cellsoccurred in pulses, which the authors named batch unloading. Transmission electron microscopy studies to examine the plasmodesmata structure at the interface between the SEs and PPP cells identified a new type: funnel plasmodesmata. Plasmodesmata with similar architecture were previously noted in barley roots by Warmbrodt (139). Collectively, these data demonstrate that phloem unloading in theArabidopsisroot tip occurs symplasmically from protophloem SEs into PPP cells (Figure 2d), not CCs associated with these SEs, as postulated (98,115), and that the PPP cells regulate the unloading of macromolecules from the phloem while simultaneously unloading small molecules without restriction. How PPP cells control batch unloading and the special properties of the funnel plasmodesmata to enable differential unloading awaits further characterization.
Potato tubers are starch storage organs and import large amounts of sucrose and other nutrients from the phloem. During tuber development, the path of sucrose phloem unloading switches from initially apoplasmic to symplasmic (134) (Figure 4). Similar changes in the developmental pattern of phloem unloading have been reported in other plants (discussed in17), but how this shift occurs was unknown. In potato, tubers develop from the tips of stolons, which are modified underground stem tissues (158). Tuber formation is controlled by photoperiod, sugar signaling, hormones, and other stimuli (158). Initially, during the apoplasmic phase of phloem unloading in developing stolons, sucrose arriving in the sieve tube moves through plasmodesmata into neighboring CCs, from which it is effluxed to theapoplasm, likely by aSWEETprotein (Figure 4a). Sucrose is taken up into neighboring storage parenchyma cells by SUT and/or SWEET proteins.

Figure 4Click to view


Abelenda et al. (1) demonstrated thatStSWEET11in potato is expressed in the veins of stolons as they transition to tuberization, likely functioning to export sucrose to the apoplasm. Consistent with this, modifying the expression ofStSWEET11resulted in plants with altered tuber formation. Plants overexpressingStSWEET11under the control of theCauliflower mosaic virus 35Spromoter (35S:StSWEET11) failed to induce tubers in short days but exhibited aerial stolons and tubers, a phenotype previously reported in potato plants with blocked phloem transport (45). The35S:StSWEET11plants also exhibited increased sugars (sucrose, glucose, and fructose) in the apoplasmic fluid extracted from stem segments compared to wild type. By contrast, lowering the expression ofStSWEET11by RNA interference (RNAi) resulted in plants with accelerated tuber initiation, lower tuber yield, starch and sugar accumulation in the leaves, and lower sugar content in stem apoplasmic fluid. These data support the involvement of StSWEET11 in apoplasmic sucrose transport.
In addition to the availability of sucrose, tuber formation requires a phloem-mobile protein produced in leaves,SELF-PRUNING 6A (StSP6A), which is homologous to the AtFT protein inArabidopsisthat induces flowering (158). StSP6A is produced in CCs and moves through plasmodesmata into the SE, travels from source to sink, and exits the phloem symplasmically (1) (Figure 4b). Similar toStSWEET11,StSP6ARNA was expressed in the veins of stolons that were initiating tuber formation. In perhaps the most exciting finding of their article, Abelenda and coauthors (1) demonstrated that StSP6A protein interacts with a domain in the cytoplasmic-facing C-terminal tail of StSWEET11 and that this interaction blocks sucrose efflux by StSWEET11 (Figure 4b). Further, in doubly transformedAtSUC2:StSP6Aand35S:StSWEET11stem segments, sugar contents recovered from the apoplasmic fluid were reduced back to wild-type levels, compared to the single35S:StSWEET11transgenic plants. These data indicate that sugar leakage to the apoplasm mediated by StSWEET11 is prevented through its interaction with StSP6A. In support of this, assaying esculin uptake in yeast demonstrated that StSP6A reduced the fluorescence of yeast cells coexpressing StSWEET11. Collectively, the data support the model whereby StSP6A produced in source leaf phloem cells moves into developing stolons to interact with StSWEET11 in CCs and prevents it from effluxing sucrose to the apoplasm, thereby promoting symplasmic phloem unloading (Figure 4).
The research of Abelenda et al. (1) advances our understanding of the posttranslational regulation of SWEET proteins and the transition between apoplasmic and symplasmic transport, and it provides a novel mechanism for the coordination of sink-source partitioning; however, several questions remain. For example, it is not clear whyStSP6ARNAi lines exhibit increased sugars and starch in the leaves if the two proteins are expressed in different cell types [StSP6A in the CC and StSWEET11 in thePPcells (Figure 4b)]. Similarly, why does the expression ofStSP6Ain CCs (under theAtSUC2promoter) result in increased sugars in the leaf apoplasmic fluid sinceStSWEET11is not expressed in this cell? Another puzzling finding was that in the experiments analyzing the sugar content of the apoplasmic fluid extracted from different tissues, the concentration of hexoses was always greater than that of sucrose, sometimes by more than tenfold. Hexoses are not translocated through the phloem (84), indicating that many of the sugars measured were coming from surrounding parenchyma cells. Alternatively, at least some clade 3 SWEETs are capable of transporting hexoses in addition to sucrose (81), so perhaps StSWEET11 is able to efflux both monosaccharides and sucrose. Lastly, as a potato plant matures, it produces numerous stolons, which transition to produce tubers asynchronously. Yet the phloem is continuous to all of these sinks, which means that StSP6A, which is transported in the sieve tubes to transitioning stolons that are in the process of forming tubers, is also present in the phloem translocation stream feeding nonswelling stolons as well. If so, how is the StSP6A protein prevented from causing premature stolon tuberization? Similarly, as StSP6A moves long-distance through the transport phloem, why does it not inhibit sucrose leakage via a SWEET and block apoplasmic phloem unloading in stem tissue? Apparently, there must be posttranslational regulation of StSP6A to prevent it from interacting with StSWEET11 to initiate symplasmic phloem unloading, but this awaits further research. Future investigations into how StSP6A regulates StSWEET activities are sure to provide new insights into phloem unloading and the regulation of sink strength.
An additional form of posttranslational regulation of SWEETs was recently reported by Chen et al. (26), who showed that SWEET sucrose-efflux activity is controlled by protein phosphorylation in response to drought to enhance the delivery of sucrose to sink tissues.
StSP6A is homologous to AtFT, and both are produced in CCs and move through the phloem to sink tissues to promote tuberization or flowering, respectively. FT-INTERACTING PROTEIN1 (AtFTIP1) binds to the AtFT protein to promote its long-distance movement through the phloem (85). AtFTIP1 is a member of theMCTPfamily, which is encoded by multiple genes in plants. Recently, MCTPs were found to bind to both the plasma and endoplasmic reticulum membranes, serving as membrane bridges (14). Several MCTPs localize to plasmo-desmata, where they have been proposed to function in symplasmic transport (85,131). In fact, a maize mutant,carbohydrate partitioning defective 33(cpd33), with reduced sucrose export from leaves was found to encode a plasmodesmata-localized MCTP (127). The defect incpd33mutants may be in cell-to-cell movement of sucrose through altering plasmodesmata structure. However, one possibility based on the above research is that CPD33 might physically interact with a SWEET protein to modify its transport abilities. If so, perhaps incpd33mutants one or more SWEET proteins are misregulated, which reduces the concentration of sucrose in the apoplasm adjacent to the CC, limiting phloem loading. Further work is necessary to understand whether an MCTP interacts with StSP6A to facilitate its movement, and how MCTPs regulate symplasmic transport.
Over the last several years, we have learned thatTSTsare responsible for sugar accumulation in the major sugar storage crops of sugar beet (Beta vulgaris), sweet sorghum, and sugarcane (10,22,66,68). Hence, modifyingTSTexpression and function in bioenergy grasses is a promising approach to increasing their sink strength for biofuel production (9,66,99). TSTs have also been shown to play important roles in the sugar accumulation of fruits (28,34,104). A breakthrough in our understanding was recently reported by Zhu et al. (157), who described a novel form of regulation ofTSTgenes in apple (Malus domestica) and tomato leaves and fruits. The authors characterized a tonoplast-localized glucose–proton symporter named MdERDL6-1 from apple and showed that it mediates glucose efflux from the vacuole to the cytosol. At first glance, this would be expected to lower the sugar content in the vacuole; however, the elevated cytosolic glucose led to increased expression of theTST1andTST2genes, resulting in increased sugar (glucose, fructose, and sucrose) uptake into vacuoles. These results demonstrate that the coordination of sugar transport across the tonoplast by different families of sugar transporters is important for maintaining cellular sugar homeostasis. There are additional SWEET sugar transporters present on the vacuole membrane, which are predicted to transport hexoses down their concentration gradient (37,55) (Table 2). How the three different types of sugar transporters (TSTs, SWEETs, andSUTs) are coordinately regulated to prevent a futile cycle of sugars moving back and forth across the tonoplast remains to be determined. Additionally, whether TST activity in apple and tomato is regulated by protein phosphorylation as described in cotton andArabidopsisleaves (32,142) or how sugar signals induceTSTgene expression is not known. For discussion of advances in the regulation ofTSTexpression and functions, see Reference34.
The phloem continues to be one of the least-understood tissues in plants, yet it is of paramount importance for plant growth and development and is ultimately required for our food supply. From early anatomical studies to detailed physiological characterizations to more modern molecular analyses, we have learned much about how plants allocate resources through the phloem. It has been nearly 30 years since the firstSUTgene was cloned (106). Since that time, we've made tremendous progress in characterizing the functions of many sugar transporters of multiple families. However, our efforts to translate those discoveries to improving agriculture have been largely unsuccessful. Current and future challenges include understanding how sugar transporters are regulated, which may afford new approaches to modify their functions to improve crops. Looking ahead, I anticipate many exciting discoveries that will expand our knowledge of phloem biology, sugar transporters, and source-sink partitioning. The following are several areas where I foresee new advances in our understanding:

These and other research efforts will afford many new insights into phloem and plant biology, laying the foundation for modifying source and sink strengths to improve crop yields and provide solutions to the grand challenges facing society.




The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
I sincerely apologize to colleagues whose work I could not discuss due to space constraints. I am indebted to Paula McSteen, Tom Slewinski, John Patrick, Bob Turgeon, and an anonymous reviewer for valuable feedback on the manuscript. I greatly wish to thank my mentors and teachers for their help, guidance, training, and advice, and I am especially appreciative of my current and former lab members for their hard work, friendship, dedication, and contributions. I thank Frank Baker and Wilson Lew for theZmSUT1in situ images and Alex Holt for allowing me to use the beautiful photograph showing the veins in a eudicot leaf. I am also thankful to the grant funding agencies for providing financial support for my research, to colleagues in my field, to friends in the Interdisciplinary Plant Group (IPG) and Missouri Maize Center (MMC), and to the University of Missouri and The Pennsylvania State University. What a long, strange trip it's been.
This work was supported by a US National Science Foundation Plant Genome Research Program grant (IOS-1444448) and a US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Biological and Environmental Research grant (DE-SC0018072) to D.M.B.


Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


