We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Anionic phospholipids, which include phosphatidic acid, phosphatidylserine, and phosphoinositides, represent a small percentage of membrane lipids. They are able to modulate the physical properties of membranes, such as their surface charges, curvature, or clustering of proteins. Moreover, by mediating interactions with numerous membrane-associated proteins, they are key components in the establishment of organelle identity and dynamics. Finally, anionic lipids also act as signaling molecules, as they are rapidly produced or interconverted by a set of dedicated enzymes. As such, anionic lipids are major regulators of many fundamental cellular processes, including cell signaling, cell division, membrane trafficking, cell growth, and gene expression. In this review, we describe the functions of anionic lipids from a cellular perspective. Using the localization of each anionic lipid and its related metabolic enzymes as starting points, we summarize their roles within the different compartments of the endomembrane system and address their associated developmental and physiological consequences.
Article metrics loading...
Anionic phospholipids, which include phosphatidic acid, phosphatidylserine, and phosphoinositides, represent a small percentage of membrane lipids. They are able to modulate the physical properties of membranes, such as their surface charges, curvature, or clustering of proteins. Moreover, by mediating interactions with numerous membrane-associated proteins, they are key components in the establishment of organelle identity and dynamics. Finally, anionic lipids also act as signaling molecules, as they are rapidly produced or interconverted by a set of dedicated enzymes. As such, anionic lipids are major regulators of many fundamental cellular processes, including cell signaling, cell division, membrane trafficking, cell growth, and gene expression. In this review, we describe the functions of anionic lipids from a cellular perspective. Using the localization of each anionic lipid and its related metabolic enzymes as starting points, we summarize their roles within the different compartments of the endomembrane system and address their associated developmental and physiological consequences.
Biological membranes delimit cellular compartments as well as the inside and outside of the cell. Each compartment has its own chemical environment, allowing numerous and specialized chemical reactions in the same cell. To enable the proper localization of proteins, each membrane has its own biochemical and biophysical identity. Membranes are composed of lipids that form a bilayer and transmembrane or membrane-associated proteins (65). Glycerophospholipids associated with sphingolipids and sterols are the main lipid components within the eukaryotic endomembrane system. Some glycerophospholipids present negative charges and, as such, are anionic phospholipids. Anionic phospholipids include phosphatidic acid (PA), phosphatidylserine (PS), phosphatidylinositol, and phosphatidylinositol phosphates (PIPs, also referred to as phosphoinositides), the phosphorylated forms of phosphatidylinositol (Figure 1a). Phosphatidylinositol displays an inositol ring that can be phosphorylated in three different positions—3, 4, and 5—creating a total of seven possible phosphoinositide species: three phosphoinositide monophosphates [phosphatidylinositol 3-, 4-, and 5-phosphate (PI3P, PI4P, and PI5P)], three phosphoinositide biphosphates {phosphatidylinositol 3,4-, 3,5-, and 4,5-bisphosphate [PI(3,4)P2, PI(3,5)P2, and PI(4,5)P2]}, and one phosphoinositide triphosphate {phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate [PI(3,4,5)P3]}.

Figure 1Click to view


These lipids are present in low to very low abundance in eukaryotic membranes. InArabidopsisleaf, phosphatidylinositol represents about 7% of total phospholipids, PA about 2%, and PS about 1%. In addition, all phosphoinositides combined account for less than 1% of the total phospholipid content (15,75,140). However, anionic lipids are key components of cell membranes. They are involved in the regulation of nearly all membrane-associated events, including cell signaling, trafficking, cell division, and cell growth. Consequently, overexpression lines or loss-of-function mutants for lipid enzymes that perturb anionic lipid homeostasis lead to severe and pleiotropic phenotypes at the plant level, including defects in development, immunity, reproduction, and stress adaptation (26,99).
Anionic phospholipids are detected in most endomembrane compartments: endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi,trans-Golgi network/early endosomes (TGN/EEs), plasma membrane (PM),multivesicular bodies/late endosomes(MVBs/LEs), vacuoles, and autophagosomes. In this review, we first describe the key physicochemical properties of anionic lipids that mediate lipid-protein interactions and regulate protein dynamics in cell membranes. Then we discuss the functions of anionic lipids from a cellular perspective, using as a starting point the localization of each anionic lipid and its related metabolic enzymes. We summarize the roles of anionic lipids within the different compartments of the endomembrane system and address their associated developmental and physiological consequences.
It should be noted that anionic lipids also accumulate in mitochondria and plastids, where they play a role in division, lipid synthesis, and photosynthesis. Anionic lipids such as PA, PI4P, and PI(4,5)P2are also found in the nucleoplasm of the nucleus, where they may regulate transcription factors, chromatin status, and epigenetic landmarks (130), but this is not further discussed, as we focus this review on the endomembrane system.
Cell compartments are enriched in different anionic lipids, which give specific properties to their membrane and thereby contribute to their identity.Lipid-binding domains (LBDs)can mediate the interaction with the membrane (65,131) (Figure 2d). They allow the targeting of proteins to membranes by stereospecific interactions with a given phospholipid species. Those domains are, for example, Pleckstrin homology domains, Fab1/YOTB/Vac1/EEA1 (FYVE) domains, Phox domains, and C2 domains. The characterization of these domains and their specificity allowed the engineering of a set of anionic phospholipid biosensors by fusion of these domains with a fluorescent protein (97). These so-called genetically encoded biosensors enable the study of the subcellular accumulation pattern and, to some extent, the dynamics of anionic phospholipids in vivo (117,132–134). However, in some cases, LBDs are not sufficient to target the protein to its proper compartment. Indeed, some proteins require the presence of both an anionic lipid and another protein (or lipid) to localize to the right compartment in a mechanism calledcoincidence binding(Figure 2d). For instance, the ubiquitin ligase PLANT-U-BOX13 (PUB13), which regulates the trafficking of the PM receptor FLAGELLIN-SENSING2 (FLS2), is recruited to the TGN via concomitant interaction with RabA4b and PI4P (2). Furthermore, LBDs may also recognize additional membrane features such as curvature or electrostatics. As such, results obtained with lipid biosensors should always be considered with care, as their localization may not reflect the accumulation of a single lipid species. This is exemplified by the fact that biosensors designed to bind to the same lipid species do not always have the exact same localization (117,118). If possible, the potential accumulation of a lipid at a given membrane should be also supported by biochemical evidence, the localization of their metabolic enzymes, or both.

Figure 2Click to view


The combined study of the localization of anionic lipid–generating enzymes and genetically encoded lipid sensors suggests that, inArabidopsisepidermal root cells, the PM accumulates PI4P, PI(4,5)P2, PA, and PS (98,117,118,132,133) (Figure 3). TGN/EEs are enriched in PI4P, PS, and, to a lesser extent, PI3P (98,118,119,133). MVBs/LEs accumulate both PI3P and PI(3,5)P2, although both lipids localize in distinct compartments (39,40,117,134). Finally, the tonoplast and autophagosomes carry PI3P (117,134). However, this subcellular accumulation pattern may vary according to the cell type or the stress status of the cell (36,43,46,51,59,63,115,120) (Figure 3). For example, PI(3,5)P2is found in MVBs/LEs in most cell types but accumulates at the PM in elongating root hairs (36) (Figure 3). PI(4,5)P2and PA are constitutively produced at the PM at low and moderate levels, respectively, but upon stimulation, such as salt stress, they can be massively produced, which triggers specific stress responses (86,126,132). Alternatively, PI(4,5)P2production can be inhibited in response to external stimuli such as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (84).

Figure 3Click to view


Phosphatidic acid, phosphoinositides, and phosphatidylserine have distinct biosynthetic pathways, which we explain in detail below.
PA is structurally the simplest phospholipid. As such, it is a key intermediate for the biosynthesis of other phospholipids (99,126). Multiple pathways involving different enzymes at various locations can lead to PA synthesis and are summarized inFigure 1b. The rapid accumulation of PA is induced by numerous abiotic stresses, including salt, cold, heat, and osmotic stress, but also by biotic stresses, as in the case of pathogen infection (126). Moreover, PA synthesis is regulated in physiological and developmental contexts, including hormonal responses such as salicylic acid, abscisic acid, and auxin (69,126). In each case, PA accumulation leads to different adapted cellular responses, raising the question of how PA can integrate different inputs to lead to specific outputs relevant to the physiological situation. One of the main hypotheses is that PA accumulation never occurs alone but rather that PA is one second messenger among others that together lead to concerted cellular responses (99). The different hypotheses proposed to answer this question are discussed by Pokotylo et al. (99) in a recent review.
The phosphorylation of the inositol ring of phosphatidylinositol is mediated by phosphatidylinositol kinases that are specific to the phosphate position (Figure 1d). Plant genomes do not encode for type-I and type-II PI3-kinases (PI3Ks), which are able to phosphorylate PI4P or PI(4,5)P2(88). As a consequence, PI(3,4)P2and PI(3,4,5)P3likely do not exist and have not been detected in plants. The dephosphorylation of PIPs is mediated by phosphatidylinositol phosphatases that belong in plants to three main families: the SUPPRESSOR OF ACTIN (SAC) domain–containing proteins (SAC1–9), the 5PTase family (5PTase1–15), and the PHOPHATASE AND TENSIN homolog (PTEN) family (PTEN1–3) (26) (Figure 1d). Phosphatidylinositol kinases and phosphatases are highly efficient enzymes in vivo, and PIPs can thereby be quickly interconverted, cycling between two states or creating cascade regulations (90). Because anionic lipid pools can be enzymatically modified within seconds, they are able to respond to various stimuli and act in fast cellular events such as membrane trafficking.
In vitro experiments testing phosphatidylinositol kinase activity often require the use of detergents, which destroy liposomal structures and free lipid substrates to increase kinase activity (16). These results suggest that phosphatidylinositol kinases have difficulty recognizing their substrate embedded in the membrane. The main candidates to fulfill this function are the SEC14lipid transfer proteins. The yeast Sec14p protein is able to transfer phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylinositol from distinct membranes in vitro, possibly bypassing the classical vesicular transport of lipids (16,108). However, the current model, based on crystallographic data, advocates the idea that Sec14p dislodges the phosphatidylinositol head from the TGN membrane, making it accessible for PI4-kinases (Figure 4a). Based on sequence homology,Arabidopsiscontains 32 Sec14p homologs (AtSFHs), each containing a highly conserved sec14 domain. The SEC14 domain of several AtSFHs displays the same in vitro activity as the yeast Sec14p and can rescue the Δsec14yeast mutant (42,135). So far, the best-characterized AtSFH protein is AtSFH1. AtSFH1 belongs to a subclass of 13 members that contain a C-terminal Nlj16 domain. This domain has two functions: It contains a polybasic patch that localizes to the PM in a PI(4,5)P2-dependent manner and a coiled-coil domain that mediates homo-oligomerization (27). In the model built with the combination of yeast andArabidopsisdata, AtSFH1 is targeted at the root hair tip PM by PI(4,5)P2, where it stimulates the activity of phosphatidylinositol kinases (PI4K or PIP5K), thereby enhancing the production of phosphoinositides [directly producing PI(4,5)P2or PI4P that will then be converted into PI(4,5)P2]. PI(4,5)P2recruits new AtSFH1, which oligomerizes and further creates PI(4,5)P2clusters at the root hair tip PM (Figure 3).

Figure 4Click to view


In contrast to PA and PIPs, which can be synthesized by several enzymes, a single enzyme produces PS inArabidopsis: the PHOSPHATIDYLSERINE SYNTHASE1 (96,98,145) (Figure 1b). This synthase is an ER transmembrane protein that synthesizes PS in the luminal leaflet of this compartment (145). Therefore, in contrast to phosphoinositides, PS is not locally produced directly at the membranes where it acts. This implies that PS must be transported from the luminal leaflet of the ER to the cytosolic leaflet of theendomembrane system. Two nonexclusive mechanisms may explain the localization of PS.
As PS faces the lumen in the ER but faces the cytosol once at the PM or endosomes, it must switch membrane leaflets at some point.Flippasesare proteins able to flip phospholipids from the luminal membrane leaflet to the cytosolic membrane leaflet (89) (Figure 4b). TheArabidopsisgenome encodes for 12 aminophospholipid flippases (ALAs), and ALA1, ALA2, ALA3, and ALA10—and possibly others—are able to flip PS in yeast (29,73,74,89,102). ALA proteins localize not only in the ER (ALA1, 2, and 3) but also all along the endocytic pathway (ALA1 at the PM, ALA2 inMVBs/LEs, and ALA3 in the Golgi andTGN/EEs) (9,73,74,78,101). Their localization and function depend on ALA-interacting β-subunits. These localizations suggest that PS could be directly flipped in the ER and then transported through vesicular trafficking to the PM and endosomes. Another hypothesis is that PS is first transported by vesicular trafficking on the luminal side of the organelle and then flipped in specific compartments, such as TGN/EEs or the PM. In yeast, the activity of the PS flippase Drs2p is promoted by PI4P (4,128). As PI4P is present in the same compartments as PS along the endocytic pathway in plants, this could be an argument in favor of the latter hypothesis. In any case, if the flippase activity occurs at the ER membrane, PS is then actively exported out of this compartment, since the ER cytosolic leaflet does not accumulate PS (98,118).
Another hypothesis suggests that PS bypasses classical vesicular trafficking and, rather, directly translocates from the ER to the PM atmembrane contact sites (MCSs). MCSs are staticnanodomainswhere membranes from two different organelles are brought together (at a distance of less than 30 nm) and stabilized by tethering proteins (47,94,112). In animal and yeast, MCSs are major sites of lipid flow and are particularly important in the control of the localization of nearly all anionic lipids (143). Lipid transfer proteins present at MCSs are able to transport lipids between two membranes, extracting the lipid from the donor membrane, transferring it through the cytosol, and inserting it in the acceptor membrane. Notably, proteins from the oxysterol-binding-related protein (ORP) family localize at MCSs via interactions with suppressor of choline sensitivity (VAPs in animal cells) in the ER and phosphoinositides at the PM (3,143). Several ORPs transfer PS (among other lipids) from the ER to the PM and then countertransport PI4P from the PM back to the ER (Figure 4c). The PI4P phosphatase SAC1, an ER resident protein, hydrolyzes the incoming PI4P, thereby maintaining the PI4P gradient between the PM and ER membrane and fueling PS export from the ER (3). Note that PS transfer at MCSs has not been described so far in plants but that ORP proteins are conserved in plant genomes.
As they carry negative charges, anionic phospholipids generate anelectrostatic fieldon the cytosolic leaflet of membranes (80) (Figures 1aand2b). The strength of this electrostatic field depends on the relative concentration of anionic phospholipids and their respective negative charges, which vary from −1 for PS to −5 for PI(4,5)P2. In plants, TGN/EEs are less electronegative than the PM but more electrostatic than MVBs/LEs, whereas ER-derived compartments (e.g., ER, nuclear membrane, peroxisomes) are neutral (98,118). Consequently, an electrostatic gradient is formed from the PM to the tonoplast, which follows the endocytic route and specifies anelectrostatic membrane territorywithin the endomembrane system (98). The extensive use of biosensors locating anionic lipids and assessing membrane surface charge in vivo shows that the high electronegativity of the plant PM relies concomitantly on PI4P, PS, and PA, with a major role of PI4P, whereas the surface charge of TGN/EEs depends on both PI4P and PS (98,118).
The surface charges of membrane compartments are a key determinant in the control of the localization of many membrane-associated proteins. For example, proteins that contain polybasic patches interact with the negative charges of the anionic phospholipids of the membrane by nonspecific electrostatic interactions (Figure 2d). Very often, such motifs also contain hydrophobic residues or are found adjacent to hydrophobic lipid anchors. For example, the plant AGC kinases PINOID, D6PK, and PROTEIN KINASE ASSOCIATED WITH BREVIS RADIX (PAX), which are well-characterized regulators of auxin efflux transporters from the PIN family, localize at the PM through this mechanism (5,63,76,118). Another prominent example of plant proteins that rely, at least in part, on electrostatic interactions with anionic lipids for localization are the small GTPases from the Rho-of-plant (ROP) family, which have a polybasic stretch adjacent to a prenylation site (i.e., a geranylgeranylation lipid modification) (96).
LIPID MOLECULAR SPECIES AND LIPID PACKING DEFECTS
Anionic lipids are defined by their head group. However, they are also composed of two fatty acid chains that can vary in length and unsaturation degree. These parameters influence membranes’ physical properties, notably their fluidity and curvature and thus the recruitment and dynamics of membrane-associated proteins (7). In addition to membrane charge and curvature, another physical feature of the membrane is of particular interest for protein targeting and is directly influenced by fatty acid composition. Indeed, the density of lipids in the membrane is not homogeneous. The regions with low density are called lipid-packing defects (7). Membrane curvature and conically shaped lipids (which can be linked to the degree of unsaturation) can induce packing defects. In this region, the hydrophobic tails of the lipids are transiently exposed. Membrane-associated proteins can recognize and specifically target membranes with packing defects by inserting hydrophobic residues into the membrane. In animal cells, high packing defects are found in the ER andcis-Golgi membrane, while TGN and PM present low levels of packing defects except in highly curved membranes. The relevance of lipid packing defects for protein recruitment in plants is largely unexplored.

There is no precise study on the number of plant proteins that might contain such polybasic stretches and localize to electrostatic membranes through this mechanism, but this is likely a general mechanism, which contributes to the localization of many proteins within the electrostatic membrane territory.
Anionic phospholipids present different geometries (Figure 2a). Indeed, phosphatidylinositol and phosphoinositides have a large head group that carries the phosphorylation, whereas PA has a very small one (10). The bulk of the lipid directly influences the curvature of the membrane. Thus, the conical shape of phosphoinositides enhances positive curvature, while the inverted conical shape of PA and PS favors negative curvature (Figure 2a). Membrane curvature is of prime importance when endocytic vesicles are formed at the PM,secretory vesiclesare formed at the TGN/EE, or proteins are internalized in MVBs, for instance (10,82). Similar to surface charges, the curvature of the membrane can also induce lipid-protein interactions via curvature-sensing domains such as Bin-amphiphysin-Rvs (BAR) domains (7,65) or the amphipathic lipid packing sensor (ALPS) motif, which recognizes packing defects found in curved membranes (see the sidebar titled Lipid Molecular Species and Lipid Packing Defects). This motif can be found in association with a small stretch of positive amino acids to form a so-called +ALPS motif, which allows the coincidence detection of membrane charge and curvature (144). In plants, the PI4-kinase PI4Kβ1 relies on such a motif to localize to the curved and electrostatic membrane of TGN/EEs (98).
Proteins and lipids can also laterally segregate into membrane domains, thereby creating subcompartmentalization inside the membranes (47) (Figure 2c). Such clustering is often required for the protein to fulfill its biological function. While sterol has long been associated with membrane domain formation, it recently emerged that anionic lipids are also key determinants of protein clustering.
For example, remorins (REMs) are proteins that laterally segregate at the PM in domains of about 100 nm in size (hence termednanodomains) (47,49) (Figure 5a). REMs are involved in biotic and abiotic responses, although their exact molecular function is still unknown (50). For example,Solanum tuberosumREMORIN group1 isoform3 (StREM1.3) limits the spreading ofPotato virus Xand regulatesplasmodesmata (PD)permeability (105). A combination of super-resolution microscopy and biophysical experiments showed that StREM1.3 targeting into nanodomains is dependent on the presence of both sterol and PI4P and is required for function (31) (Figure 5a). PI4P is not the only anionic lipid involved in protein nanoclustering into membrane nanodomains. Indeed, PS stabilizes the small GTPase ROP6 into nanoclusters of about 50–70 nm in diameter (96) (Figure 5b). In contrast to REM proteins, which are constitutively localized in PM nanodomains, ROP6 clustering is triggered by its activation (i.e., GTP loading) upon auxin treatment. ROP6 directly binds to PS (and other anionic lipids) via a polybasic region located next to its geranylgeranylation site (96). ROP6 localization into nanoclusters is essential for function, since ROP6 signaling is impaired in mutant lines lacking PS biosynthesis or when the PS-binding site in ROP6 is mutated. Single-molecule imaging and super-resolution microscopy of PS biosensors at the PM suggest that PS itself, not only ROP6, is present in PM nanodomains (Figure 5b). However, unlike ROP6, PS is present in PM nanodomains in both the absence and presence of auxin (96). Therefore, there are prepatterned nanoplatforms of PS at the PM that recruit GTP-loaded ROP6 upon auxin treatment. Future studies are needed to uncover whether such PS nanoplatforms contain additional lipids, such as sterol or PI4P, and how they are formed. The cell wall and the cytoskeleton influence protein diffusion into membranes (47,77,79). It will therefore be interesting to understand the interplay between anionic lipid-induced clustering, cell wall constraints, and cytoskeleton dynamics, the latter being itself regulated by anionic lipids (26).

Figure 5Click to view


All the mechanisms described above converge on the idea that anionic lipids are key determinants of membrane identity, which ultimately allows the precise recruitment of proteins in space and time. There are countless examples of proteins that are targeted to specific membranes by anionic phospholipids either constitutively or upon certain stimuli. These examples are not individually reviewed here. Instead, we dedicate the rest of this review to one of the key questions of cell biology: How do compartments maintain a specific identity despite the constant flow and exchange of proteins and lipids between them? In particular, we highlight how anionic lipids may contribute to MCS establishment and analyze the interplay between membrane trafficking and anionic lipids.
Several reports put ER-PMMCSs(EPCSs) at the center of essential cellular processes, including the immune secretory pathway, viral movement at PD, stabilization of the cortical ER network, endocytosis, membrane integrity, and pollen, seed, and root hair development (55,66,67,95,109,139,146). Lipid exchange at EPCSs is still an open question in plants, but a clear role for anionic lipids in EPCS establishment is documented.
InArabidopsis, three types of EPCSs have been described (Figure 6): the S-EPCSs, which are stabilized by synaptotagmins (SYTs) [orthologs of the mammalian extended synaptotagmins (E-SYTs)] (6,95); the V-EPCSs that contain the vesicle-associated membrane protein–associated protein 27s (VAP27s) and VAP27-related proteins (orthologs of the mammalian VAPs and yeast Scs2) (107,137,139); and the PD-EPCSs, which are specifically enriched at PD and contain MULTIPLE C2 AND TRANSMEMBRANE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN (MCTP) proteins (11). Importantly, all three classes of tethering molecules—VAP27s, SYTs, and MCTPs—directly interact with anionic phospholipids and likely require these lipids to interact with the PM. Nonetheless, S-EPCSs and V-EPCSs are spatially separated within the same cell, suggesting a tethering signature model in which the abundance of one type of EPCS at the expense of another could vary in response to environmental or developmental cues (116). Another model, the tethering arrangement model, proposes that the organization of EPCSs could change in response to stimuli such as lipids or calcium fluxes (28). These two models are not mutually exclusive.

Figure 6Click to view


VAP27s are ER transmembrane proteins that are conserved among eukaryotes (143). Ten homologs of VAP27 exist inArabidopsis(139). At least three of them localize at the EPCSs: VAP27-1, VAP27-3, and VAP27-4, together with the actin binding protein NETWORKED 3C (NET3C) (138) (Figure 6). VAP27-1 and VAP27-3 interact with phosphoinositides in vitro (121). Moreover, VAP27-3 is able to interact with alipid transfer proteinfrom the ORP family, ORP3a, that binds sterol in vitro, suggesting possible lipid transfer similar to what has been described in yeast and animal cells (3,107).
The mammalian E-SYT1 is able to trigger glycerolipids exchanges between liposomes in vitro (110). E-SYTs contain C2 domains that bind anionic phospholipids from the PM in a Ca2+-dependent manner (149). In favor of the tethering arrangement model, E-SYTs Ca2+binding leads to clustering of E-SYTs proteins and an increase in the interactions between E-SYTs and PM anionic lipids (28). This results in stabilization and tightening of S-EPCSs (28,143,149). InArabidopsis, ionic stress triggers the expansion of S-EPCSs in association with accumulation of PI(4,5)P2at the PM, supporting the tethering arrangement model (64). Furthermore, the C2 domains ofArabidopsisSYT1 bind PS in a Ca2+-dependent-manner in vitro (95) (Figure 6). The relevance of this Ca2+-dependent PS binding in vivo is currently unknown but also argues in favor of the tethering arrangement model.
PDpores interconnect virtually all cells within the plant body, establishing direct PM and cytoplasmic continuity. A striking feature of PD is that a strand of ER runs through the pores and is tethered tightly to PM, making PD a unique case of EPCSs in eukaryotes. While SYT1 localizes to PD to some extent (66,95), several MCTP proteins are specifically enriched at PD and likely contribute to ER-PM tethering at the PD pore (11) (Figure 6). Molecular dynamics suggests that MCTP4 C2 domains interact with anionic lipids at the PM—in particular, PS and PI4P. Accordingly, pharmacological experiments support that PI4P is required for MCTP4 PD-specific localization. PD have a specific composition of sterol and sphingolipid (30). By extension, an attractive hypothesis that remains to be tested would be that the PM at PD has a unique anionic lipid signature that could contribute to MCTP PD-specific localization.
Communication between organelles and lipid exchanges occurs not only at MCSs but also during vesicular trafficking. Vesicular trafficking implies exchange of membranes between compartments, and anionic lipids are key actors of those exchanges. Therefore, compartments must maintain a specific lipid identity despite the constant flow and exchange of proteins and lipids that happen during vesicular trafficking. The interplay between membrane trafficking and anionic lipids is detailed in the following section of this review.
In animal cells, it is well documented that anionic lipids play a fundamental role in endocytosis. Clathrin-mediated endocytosis mainly involves PI(4,5)P2produced from PI4P by PI4P 5-kinases (PIP5Ks) (85). PI(4,5)P2allows the initiation and stabilization ofclathrin-coated pits by recruiting several components of the endocytic machinery, including the adaptor protein AP2 (54,100). Moreover, PIP5Ks are directly recruited at the site of endocytosis by AP2, creating a local pool of PI(4,5)P2, which induces a high rate of clathrin-coated pit nucleation (85).
In plant cells, the recruitment of the endocytic machinery to the PM is far less understood. However, the role of PI(4,5)P2in endocytosis has been demonstrated indirectly using PIP5K overexpression and loss-of-function approaches (45,151). Notably, apip5k1 pip5k2mutant has abnormal clathrin-coated pits, which are less dense but bigger than those in the wild type (45). This mutant, as well asPIP5K1andPIP5K2overexpression lines, has defects in the endocytic trafficking of the PIN-FORMED (PIN) polar auxin efflux carriers (45,83,125). These defects in endocytosis impact PIN accumulation at the PM and PIN polar targeting. Abnormal PIN localization ultimately leads to altered distribution of the hormone auxin, leading to various degrees of auxin-related developmental defects (45,83,125). Overexpression ofPIP5Kand thepip5k1 pip5k2mutant also have a phloem differentiation phenotype (32,76).PIP5Koverexpression redirects the trafficking toward the vacuole, leading to protein degradation and vacuole biogenesis, which in protophloem induces vascular discontinuities (32). However, it is unclear if this increase in vacuolar trafficking is caused by an overall heightened endocytic rate at the PM or by regulation of downstream trafficking steps. In any case, PI(4,5)P2levels are constantly kept in check in the root phloem by two PM-localized PI(4,5)P25-phosphatases, COTYLEDON VASCULAR PATTERN 2 (CVP2) and CVP2-LIKE 1, whose double mutant shows phloem discontinuity similar to that of PIP5K overexpression lines or thepip5k1 pip5k2mutant (15,76,106). In addition, PIP5K1 and PIP5K2 were recently shown to be part of a polarity module in protophloem cells (76). In these cells, PIN1 is localized on the basal end of the cell in a polar domain shaped like a donut located close to the cell edge. PIP5K1 and PIP5K2, together with BREXIS RADIX (BRX) and PAX, localize in a muffin-like polar patch inside the donut-shaped PIN1 domain. Researchers proposed that PIP5Ks/BRX/PAX would act as a self-reinforcing polarity module, since PIP5Ks are directly required for PAX localization in the polar patch (and indirectly required for BRX), while PAX/BRX together recruit PIP5Ks in this domain (76). Interestingly, a component of the endocytic machinery, the dynamin-related protein 1A, accumulates in the polar patch domain together with PIP5Ks/PAX/BRX. Because PIP5Ks were proposed to positively promote endocytosis in plants, it is possible that the localized PIP5K targeting favors endocytosis from the polar patch rather than the PIN1-containing donut domain, perhaps further reinforcing the polarity of protophloem cells, which is critical for their proper differentiation (76).
In the growing pollen tube, exocytosis at the tip is balanced by endocytosis in the subapical regions (Figure 3). These regions are marked by PI(4,5)P2locally produced by PIP5Ks and restricted by degradation into diacylglycerol by phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (19,34) (Figure 3). Loss-of-function mutants of PIP5Ks show reduced endocytosis, which leads to a low pollen germination rate and slow tube elongation (43,120). Conversely, pollen overexpressingPIP5K6shows PM invagination and the formation of several tip branches due to a higher rate of endocytosis at the tip of the pollen tube (151). The expression of a clathrin-dominant negative version can rescue the PIP5K6-overexpressing phenotype, indicating that PI(4,5)P2synthesis enhances clathrin-mediated endocytosis (151). A similar mechanism was proposed in response to salt treatment, which increases the level of PI(4,5)P2and induces the formation ofclathrin-coated vesiclesin a PIP5K1- and PIP5K2-dependent manner (45,58).
Salt tolerance studies suggest a role for PA in endocytosis. Indeed, the level of PA is drastically increased under salt treatment (87). In addition to inducing membrane curvature, PA is able to bind clathrin heavy chain and domain clathrin assembly proteins (81). Upon salt treatment, PA production by the phospholipase PLDζ2 induces the internalization of PIN2 inTGN/EEs(23), whereas in normal conditions, PA and PLDζ2 are necessary for the proper cycling of PIN2 in root cells (68). This mechanism decreases the amount of PIN2 at the PM on the salt side and induces auxin redistribution that allows the plant to redirect its root growth away from highly salt-concentrated soil (23). These data suggest that PA could act as a mediator of the auxin response by activating the endocytosis of PIN proteins in high-salinity conditions.
To conclude, a role for PI(4,5)P2in clathrin-mediated endocytosis is established in different cell types and developmental contexts. Nevertheless, the proteins regulated by PI(4,5)P2during endocytosis are still largely unknown. In addition, the role of other anionic lipids such as PI4P and PA in the regulation of the endocytic machinery needs to be clarified.
Exocytosis is led by atethering complexcalled the exocyst, which is conserved among eukaryotes and targets exocytic vesicles to the PM (92). In many cases, exocytosis does not occur homogeneously along the PM but is polarized. Polar exocytosis has been reported in growing tip cells such as root hair and the pollen tube (8,14,70,113,123,141), for the polar localization of auxin efflux carriers from the PIN family (20,93,124), and in the establishment of the Casparian strip (51) or the Ortmannian ring in trichomes (59–61).
The exocyst complex is targeted to the PM via two subunits (SEC3 and EXO70) known to bind anionic phospholipids, in particular PI(4,5)P2. InArabidopsis, SEC3 contains a Pleckstrin homology domain that binds to PI(4,5)P2in vitro (8). The extensive use of biosensors and the localization of lipid metabolic enzymes in plants allowed the cartography of anionic lipids in cells exhibitingpolar secretion, highlighting specific lipid accumulation patterns, notably for PI(4,5)P2(43,44,59,62,63,120,122,151) (Figure 3). Interestingly, the localizations of SEC3 isoforms and EXO70 isoforms often correlate with the PI(4,5)P2subcellular accumulation pattern, suggesting that PI(4,5)P2contributes to their localization (8,51,113). In the pollen tube, SEC3 and EXO70A1 partially colocalize with PI(4,5)P2biosensors (8,113). Since PIP5K mutants display slower tube elongation and reduced secretion of cell wall materials (43,120), PI(4,5)P2likely participates in targeting exocyst complexes to specific PM domains.
EXO70A1 and EXO70B1 are expressed in the growing pollen tube and partially colocalize with both PI(4,5)P2and PA biosensors (113). Therefore, it is possible that the coincidental detection of PI(4,5)P2and PA in the pollen tube restricts the site of exocytosis to the narrow PM strip that contains both lipids (Figure 3). These EXO70 subunits may directly recognize each lipid. Alternatively, they may be sensitive to the overall membrane surface charges. One may speculate that in the pollen tube, the PM membrane domain that contains a combination of both PI(4,5)P2and PA is highly electronegative and thereby could recruit specific EXO70 isoforms. Additional experiments are required to distinguish between these two possibilities.
Exocytosis requires not only specific anionic lipids at the PM but also a regulation of the lipid composition in the TGN for proper vesicle formation. Indeed, root hair studies revealed the importance of the pool of PI4P in the TGN for polar secretion (52,104,127,148). PI4-kinases PI4Kβ1 and PI4Kβ2, as well as the PI4P phosphatase ROOT HAIR DEFECTIVE 4 (RHD4/SAC7), localize to the TGN.pi4kβ1β2andrhd4mutants display short or bulged root hairs (52,104,127). Ultrastructural studies by electron tomography showed the presence of enlarged, likely deficient,secretory vesiclesin the TGN of thepi4kβ1β2double mutant, suggesting that PI4Kβs are indeed involved in secretion (52). PI4Kβs and RHD4/SAC7 have opposite catalytic activities yet apparently locate to the same compartment. PI4Kβs and RHD4/SAC7 possibly localize in different TGN subdomains. Consistent with this scenario, PI4Kβ1 localizes specifically in the secretory vesicle subdomain of the TGN (52). According to this hypothesis, PI4-kinases could be necessary for the production of the pool of PI4P at the TGN that confers the proper physical properties (mild electrostatics and high curvature) necessary for secretory vesicle formation. By contrast, RHD4/SAC7 could localize in a different TGN subdomain, perhaps one directly connected to endocytosis. In such a model, RHD4/SAC7 would degrade incoming PI4P from the PM to maintain the PI4P gradient along the endocytic pathway (118).
Thecell plateis an organelle formed from the secretion and fusion of vesicles from the TGN and forms the new PM of the two daughter cells (13). A combination of clathrin-mediated endocytosis and exocytosis occurs at the cell plate. During this process, the lipid composition of the cell plate varies from that of the bulk PM. Lipid-binding biosensors suggest that PI4P, PA, and PS accumulate and confer a highly electronegative field at the cell plate to a similar extent as, or even higher than, at the PM (18,98,118) (Figure 3). However, PI(4,5)P2is excluded from the cell plate during its creation and extension and appears at the edges of the cell plate just before its full attachment to the PM (18,118,132). Given that PI(4,5)P2is a major regulator of both exocytosis and endocytosis, it is therefore likely that specific trafficking mechanisms occur at the cell plate compared to at the bulk PM, although these have yet to be fully uncovered.
This difference of membrane composition between the bulk PM and the cell plate is crucial for proper cell division. Indeed, several mutants for enzymes involved in anionic lipid homeostasis show cell plate phenotypes, cytokinesis phenotypes, or both. Those include mutants for PI4P production (pi4kβ1β2), PI4P/PI(4,5)P2interconversion (sac9andpi5k1k2), and PI3P/PI(3,5)P2interconversion [formation of aploid and binucleate cells1 (fab1a fab1b) andfra7/sac1)] (52,125,136,142,153). Some of the corresponding enzymes directly act at the cell plate. For instance, PI4Kβ1 localizes at the cell plate, and the absence of PI4Kβ1 and PI4Kβ2 directly affects the vesicular trafficking along phragmoplast microtubules (71). However, others might act indirectly on cell division, such as FAB1A and FAB1B proteins that do not localize at the cell plate (38,142). It is therefore likely that thefab1a fab1bcell plate phenotype results from a broad alteration of membrane trafficking. We refer the reader to a recent review on this subject that details the potential involvement of each anionic lipid during cytokinesis (13).
Fungal infection and mycorrhizal symbiosis induce PM reorganization, which includes lipid patterning at the PM, with likely consequences for both endocytosis and exocytosis.
During the endosymbiotic association of roots with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi inMedicago truncatula,the fungus develops intracellular branched hyphae called arbuscules (46). In response, the root cortical cells form a new membrane in continuity with the PM called the periarbuscular membrane (PAM) (33). The PAM envelops the hyphal branches and is thought to be generated by polar exocytosis. Indeed, the subunit of the exocyst complex and SNARE proteins known to be involved in exocytosis and membrane fusion are required for PAM formation (33,150). By analogy to tip growing cells, anionic lipids might regulate this particular case of polarized secretion. So far, only the pattern of localization of PI4P, PI(4,5)P2, and PA have been documented during arbuscular mycorrhizal interaction (46) (Figure 3). Both PI4P and PA are found in the PAM to a similar extent as in the PM. However, in the trunk part of hyphal branches, discrete regions where PI4P, PI(4,5)P2, and PA reporters coaccumulate can be observed (46). This accumulation could correspond to an accumulation of membranes before formation of small bulges. Furthermore, anionic lipid accumulation could influence membrane curvature and thereby physically contribute to the establishment of the PAM.
Using another model of fungus-plant interactions, researchers recently showed inArabidopsisinfected byColletotrichumthat extra-invasive hyphal membrane (EIHM), which is formed in continuity with the PM, strongly accumulates PI(4,5)P2and PIP5K3 all along the membrane (Figure 3) (41,114,115). The EIHM also accumulates subunits of the exocyst complex, which are likely PI(4,5)P2effectors. Thus, PI(4,5)P2production by PIP5K at the EIHM could increase polar exocytosis, thereby allowing the formation of the EIHM and thus the successful infection by the fungi.
All together, these recent data suggest that anionic lipid patterns are modified in response to fungi and allow the symbiosis or infection to take place, possibly by induction of polar exocytosis to the membrane that surround the hypha.
Most membrane-associated proteins are degraded in the vacuole. To reach the vacuole, PM proteins are first polyubiquitinated, which induces endocytosis and targeting toTGN/EEs(21). Then TGN/EEs mature intoMVBs/LEs. During this maturation, endosomal-sorting-complex-required-for-transport (ESCRT) internalizes membrane proteins into intraluminal vesicles. Once the external membrane of the MVB/LE fuses with the tonoplast, the intraluminal vesicles containing the proteins are released into the vacuole and degraded. Nonubiquitinated cargo can be retrieved in MVBs/LEs by the action of the retromer complex that antagonizes the ESCRT complex (90).
One of the main characteristics of PIPs is that they are quickly interconverted by kinases and phosphatases (Figure 1c). This is well illustrated along the road leading to protein degradation in the vacuole, in which the different maturation steps correlate with a phosphoinositide interconversion (Figure 7). PI(4,5)P2from the PM is converted into PI4P by 5-phosphatases either in TGN/EEs or during the endocytic process. At the surface of TGN/EEs, PI4P is gradually replaced by PI3P through the combined action of 4-phosphatases (e.g., RHD4/SAC7 in root hair) and the PI3K VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING34 (VPS34). Some MVBs/LEs exhibit PI(3,5)P2owing to the action of the PI3P5K from the FAB1 family (38,40,117) (Figure 7). The acquisition of PI3P is essential forprotein sorting. Indeed, FYVE1/FREE1, a component of the ESCRT complex that binds ubiquitinated cargo, localizes in the MVB/LE by interacting with PI3P (24,57). Similarly, SORTING NEXIN 1 (SNX1), a component of the retromer complex, also localizes at the maturing TGN/EEs and MVB/LE through interactions with PI3P, PI(3,5)P2, or both (103). In addition, PI3P, PI(3,5)P2, or both also mediate the association of endosomes with the cytoskeleton, since the loss of FAB1 releases MVBs/LEs from cortical microtubules (37,38) and SNX1 interacts with the microtubule regulator CYTOPLASMIC LINKER ASSOCIATED PROTEIN (1).

Figure 7Click to view


Cytosolic cargoes can also be degraded by autophagy (22). In this process, cargoes are encapsulated by a double membrane to form autophagosomes. The outer membrane of the autophagosome fuses with the tonoplast, and the internal membrane, together with its luminal content, is subsequently degraded in the vacuole (22). The autophagosome is initiated by the formation of aphagophorethat will expand, surround the cargoes, and close. Autophagy-related (ATG) proteins were first discovered via genetic screens in yeast, but most of the actors of autophagy are conserved among eukaryotes (22). In all eukaryotes, PI3P is critical for autophagy. In animal and yeast, PI3P is produced at the initiation step of phagophore formation by a PI3K complex that contains the PI3K VPS34 (22). A member of the complex, ATG14, targets the PI3K complex to the phagophore (17). Furthermore, the production of PI3P is essential to recruit and stabilize autophagy-related proteins at the membrane of the phagophore. In addition, the geometry of the head group of PI3P could also directly help the curvature of the phagophore. In plants, the precise dynamics of PI3P during autophagy is not well understood. Furthermore, ATG14 does not exist in plants, which raises the question of how the PI3K complex is recruited to the phagophore (22). Yet inhibition of PI3Ks blocks autophagy in plants (147), suggesting that, like in other eukaryotes, PI3P is important for this process.
In addition to stabilizing ATG proteins at the membrane of the phagophore, several plant-specific proteins involved in autophagy directly interact with phosphoinositides. SRC-HOMOLOGY3-CONTAINING PROTEINs SH3P2 and SH3P3 are two BAR domain–containing proteins that localize at the phagophore (154). As BAR domains can induce membrane curvature, they may participate in the membrane shaping of the phagophore. SH3P2 interacts with PI3P (and other phosphoinositides) and colocalizes with ATG8 in the phagophore in a VPS34-dependent manner (154). SH3P2 interacts with ATG8 and the PI3K complex. Thefyve1/free1mutant presents an autophagy-related phenotype with accumulation of autophagic structures (24,154). FYVE1/FREE1 interacts with ATG8, the PI3K complex, and SH3P2 (25). As such, FYVE1/FREE1 may play a role in phagophore maturation or closing. Another hypothesis argues for an indirect role of the ESCRT and retromer complexes in autophagy. Indeed, SNARE proteins, necessary for autophagosome fusion with the vacuole, need to be properly sorted to the tonoplast. It is therefore possible that thefyve1/free1phenotype results, at least in part, from a missorting of SNARE proteins (53).
Mutants for the retromer and the ESCRT complexes present small, unfused vacuoles (24,25,48,56,57). This phenotype is also found with the loss of function of vesicle transport v-SNARE11 (VTI11), a SNARE protein involved in the docking and fusion of MVB/LE with the tonoplast (129). PI3P-dependent protein sorting may be important for the proper localization of SNARE proteins and thus vacuole fusion. Moreover, the vacuole phenotype of thevti11mutant can be rescued by inhibition of PI3K activity, suggesting a role of PI3P in fusion of homeotic vacuoles (152). The homotypic fusion and vacuolar protein sorting (HOPS)tethering complexis required for vacuole morphology (12). VPS33 and VPS45, two HOPS complex members, bind phosphoinositide in vitro and localize to the vacuole in a PI3P-dependent manner (12). SAC2, SAC3, SAC4, and SAC5 are likely PI(3,5)P25-phosphatases that localize at the tonoplast and could hydrolyze the incoming PI(3,5)P2from MVBs/LEs into PI3P (91) (Figure 7). Loss of function and overexpression of these SAC proteins lead to abnormal vacuolar morphology, consistent with a deficit in vacuole fusion due to lack of PI3P (91). PI4P is also involved in the morphological changes of the vacuole that are regulated by auxin in the root (72,111). However, the molecular mechanisms connecting PI4P to vacuole morphology are so far unknown.
Many aspects of the role and operation of anionic lipids along theendomembrane systemare conserved among eukaryotes, including many of the enzymes. However, the anionic lipid distribution of plant cells presents several specificities compared to yeast or animal cells, starting with the high and low abundance of PI4P and PI(4,5)P2at the PM, respectively. Thus, the establishment of the anionic lipid distribution in plants is still not fully understood. Moreover, the mechanisms by which this distribution is maintained despite the constant exchanges of membrane between compartments due to vesicular trafficking must be explored. This includes the coupling between the enzymes that produce anionic lipids and the ones that convert or degrade them. Additionally, links or compensatory effects could exist between the different lipid pathways at the level of enzymatic activity, membrane recruitment, or gene expression. Recently,MCSsappeared as a new path of lipid exchange independent from vesicular trafficking. The mechanisms of this exchange, the nature of the exchanged lipids, and the relevance for the cell and plant life remain to be fully appreciated.
The role of anionic lipids in the regulation of membrane trafficking has been clearly established in all eukaryotes. The sorting of many of the proteins involved in membrane trafficking depends on anionic lipids. At the same time, many of the proteins involved in anionic lipid pathways are membrane associated. Thus, their sorting depends on vesicular trafficking. The constant flow of membrane trafficking and the interconnections between lipids andprotein sortingmake it difficult to sort the direct and indirect consequences of lipid perturbation using loss-of-function strategy only. The situation is further complicated by the fact that anionic phospholipids are highly interconnected, and perturbation of one lipid is likely to impact others. Similarly, although anionic lipids are of major importance for many developmental and physiological responses, including stress, cytokinesis, and cell differentiation, the chain of events explaining the observed phenotype is often not known. New live-imaging and inducible perturbation techniques to study lipid dynamics in its physiological context are therefore urgently needed to untangle direct from indirect effects of anionic phospholipids. Similarly, it will also be key to uncover and functionally characterize anionic lipid effectors (i.e., proteins that interact with anionic phospholipids for function and localization), as most are plant-specific proteins.




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
Research on phospholipids in the Y.J. lab is supported by the French National Research Agency by ANR caLIPSO (ANR-18-CE13-0025-02) and ANR STAYING-TIGHT (ANR-18-CE13-0016-02). L.C.N. is funded by a PhD fellowship from the French Ministry of Higher Education.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


