We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Pollen-pistil interactions serve as important prezygotic reproductive barriers that play a critical role in mate selection in plants. Here, we highlight recent progress toward understanding the molecular basis of pollen-pistil interactions as reproductive isolating barriers. These barriers can be active systems of pollen rejection, or they can result from a mismatch of required male and female factors. In some cases, the barriers are mechanistically linked to self-incompatibility systems, while others represent completely independent processes. Pollen-pistil reproductive barriers can act as soon as pollen is deposited on a stigma, where penetration of heterospecific pollen tubes is blocked by the stigma papillae. As pollen tubes extend, the female transmitting tissue can selectively limit growth by producing cell wall–modifying enzymes and cytotoxins that interact with the growing pollen tube. At ovules, differential pollen tube attraction and inhibition of sperm cell release can act as barriers to heterospecific pollen tubes.
Article metrics loading...
Pollen-pistil interactions serve as important prezygotic reproductive barriers that play a critical role in mate selection in plants. Here, we highlight recent progress toward understanding the molecular basis of pollen-pistil interactions as reproductive isolating barriers. These barriers can be active systems of pollen rejection, or they can result from a mismatch of required male and female factors. In some cases, the barriers are mechanistically linked to self-incompatibility systems, while others represent completely independent processes. Pollen-pistil reproductive barriers can act as soon as pollen is deposited on a stigma, where penetration of heterospecific pollen tubes is blocked by the stigma papillae. As pollen tubes extend, the female transmitting tissue can selectively limit growth by producing cell wall–modifying enzymes and cytotoxins that interact with the growing pollen tube. At ovules, differential pollen tube attraction and inhibition of sperm cell release can act as barriers to heterospecific pollen tubes.
The diversity of life forms has long fascinated scientists and fueled numerous avenues of research into how species manifest and coexist. A central tenant of the Biological Species Concept (BSC) is that reproductive barriers between organisms are critical to speciation (31,97). Although the BSC is not universally accepted, it is clear that mechanisms ofreproductive isolation (RI)reduce or prevent gene flow between established species, and the nature and origin of barriers that contribute to RI continue to be a major focus of evolutionary studies (26).
There are two general ways to differentiate reproductive isolating barriers in plants. One is in reference to the timing of barrier action, which can be broadly classified as pre- and postpollination (sometimes referred to as pre- and postmating). Postpollination barriers can be further subdivided into pre- or postzygotic to describe barriers acting before or after fertilization, respectively. Prepollination barriers are diverse and include ecogeographic adaptation to diverse habitats (124); seasonal reproductive phenology (42); floral structure (66); pollinator community, preference, and specificity (15,67,102); and mating system, which can act either prepollination, based on floral traits (92,118), or postpollination, based on pollen-pistil interactions (8,10,16,106). Postzygotic barriers can act at the level of seed development (9,73), hybrid inviability, or sterility, which can be due to genic or cytonuclear incompatibilities, ploidy differences or chromosomal rearrangements (12,37,111,121), or hybrid breakdown in subsequent generations (17). A second major descriptor of RI barriers is whether they are based on environmental factors (extrinsic) or are genetically determined and independent of the environment (intrinsic). Extrinsic and intrinsic barriers are typically distinguished using common garden and reciprocal transplant experiments, and either type of barrier can act either pre- or postzygotically (99).
Three major themes have emerged from studies assessing how reproductive barriers promote RI between natural populations of closely related lineages (summarized in7,86,122,141). First, multiple pre- and postzygotic barriers contribute total RI between any two species. Second, barriers are often asymmetric (133), so it is essential to quantify RI (126) from both directions of gene flow. Finally, as predicted by Wallace (139), prezygotic barriers tend to be stronger than postzygotic barriers, although there are many exceptions.
The focus of this review is on postpollination prezygotic intrinsic barriers mediated by pollen-pistil interactions. We highlight reproductive checkpoints faced by the male gametophyte as it encounters the three constituents of the pistil: the stigma, the style, and the ovary (Figure 1). The pathway for compatible pollen tube growth is defined by the specializedtransmitting tissue (TT)of the pistil, which produces a denseextracellular matrix (ECM)through which pollen tubes extend. While most commonly located in the style, the TT can be prominent in other parts of the pistil, for example, in the stigmas of grasses or in the ovaries of the Brassicaceae (Figure 1c). The TT ECM contains factors that interact with pollen tubes, either promoting or preventing their growth. The terms pollen competition and conspecific pollen precedence are often used to describe the observation that conspecific pollen is generally favored overheterospecific pollen (HP)in mixed crosses, suggesting a direct conflict between male gametophytes. This perhaps wrongly deemphasizes the central role of female tissues in mate selection. Indeed, some have argued that female control over mate selection results in the most fit male-female combinations, and best explains the maintenance of diversity in male gametophytic traits that are observed in natural populations (85).

Figure 1Click to view


The failure of HP in pistils is due to either incongruity or incompatibility (or both). Incongruity can best be described as the lack of a productive relationship between pollen and pistil factors due to species divergence (60). Thus, incongruity acts to reject HP in a passive manner. In contrast, incompatibility mechanisms involve active rejection of pollen and have been best characterized in self-incompatible (SI) species. In this view, we can think of the role of evolution acting in species divergence in two different ways. In the first, coevolution between male and female are required for compatible interactions within a species, and incongruity describes the failure of interspecific crosses due to a lack of these coevolved factors. Alternatively, as described by incompatibility, coevolution of male and female can result in incompatible active rejection of pollen, either within a species to avoid inbreeding or between species to avoid less-fit hybrids. As multiple overlapping barriers have been identified in most studies of RI, it is important to consider incompatibility and incongruity not in opposition to each other but as different elements that can both contribute to RI. In fact, the term UI, which refers to asymmetric reproductive barriers in crosses, can be due to either unilateral incompatibility, as inSolanum(8), or to unilateral incongruity, as inZea mays(68).
In this review, we highlight progress toward the identification of pollen and pistil factors that contribute toRI. These barriers impact evolutionary processes by reducing gene flow to allow populations and species to diverge, thereby contributing to biodiversity in the plant kingdom. In addition, the interactions between pollen and pistil act as control points that either promote or prevent hybridization and are thus critical to the development of new crop varieties and global food security. Many of the molecular players involved in pollen-pistil communication have been recently reviewed (1,63,84,149), but here we focus specifically on factors involved in reproductive barriers. Most of the genetic mechanisms that we report have been discovered through work in a few select model organisms—the Brassicaceae (includingArabidopsis), maize, and the tomato clade ofSolanum. We realize that these cannot begin to capture the diversity of structures and mechanisms involved in RI in the plant kingdom, but it is our hope that the array of pollen-pistil reproductive barriers highlighted here will inspire work in natural populations of many other organisms.
Self-incompatibility is itself a reproductive barrier, and a long-standing question concerns the role of self-incompatibility systems in interspecific reproductive barriers. Therefore, it is pertinent to briefly review self-incompatibility mechanisms. Plant self-incompatibility pathways comprise ancient molecular systems in angiosperms that enforce outcrossing and help maintain genetic diversity (2). However, the transition to self-compatibility is frequent and can constitute a (partial) interpopulation reproductive barrier that is often associated with a reduction in intrinsic interspecific barriers (28,76,110). Lewis & Crowe (76) extensively documented UI between SI species and their self-compatible (SC) relatives in several plant families. This common pattern, known as the SI × SC rule, suggests that the self-incompatibility machinery can be utilized in interspecific interactions. The genetic basis of self-incompatibility has been elucidated in curiously few species. In each case, complexS-loci encode separate pollen- and pistil-expressed genes that together constitute anS-haplotype, which in turn determinesS-specificity in individuals. The identities of these specificity genes (and thus the mechanisms producing a SI response) as well as the requirements for additional (non-S-locus) modifier genes are completely different in the four systems described here.
Within the Brassicaceae, SIBrassica,Arabidopsis, andCapsellaspecies have a single multiallelicS-locus sporophytic self-incompatibility system, where the male determinant of incompatibility is produced by the sporophytic tapetal tissue of the diploid anther (reviewed in62,107). PollenS-genes encode defensin-familycysteine-rich proteins (CRPs)namedS-locus cysteine-rich/S-locus protein 11 (SCR/SP11), which are deposited into the pollen coat. In self-pollinations, these small proteins bind to the female components,S-locus receptor kinases (SRKs), expressed in stigma papillar cells. Self-ligand-receptor binding induces a papillar cell signaling pathway that prevents pollen hydration and germination. Homozygous loss-of-function mutations in either the male or femaleS-locus genes result in a mating system transition to self-compatibility. Expressing the twoS-locus genes,SCR/SP11andSRK, from SIArabidopsis lyrataconferred self-incompatibility on otherwise SCArabidopsis thaliana(108), suggesting that downstream signaling pathways are conserved and functional.
In the Papaveraceae family,Papaver rhoeascontains a single multiallelicS-locus and displays a gametophytic self-incompatibility system where the male determinant of incompatibility is produced by haploid pollen grains (reviewed in38,142). As in Brassicaceae self-incompatibility, pollen rejection is induced upon activation of self-ligand-receptor signaling, but the molecular factors are entirely different inPapaver. PollenSgenes,Papaver rhoeas pollen S(PrpS), encode protein receptors located in the pollen tube plasma membrane. The femaleSgenes,Papaver rhoeas stigma S(PrsS), encode small proteins that are secreted by stigma cells and act as ligands recognized by the pollen receptors. Self-recognition rapidly induces a cascade of physiological responses in the pollen tube that culminate in programmed cell death before stigma penetration. Somewhat surprisingly, the appropriate expression ofPrpSandPrsSin SCA. thalianaconfers self-incompatibility (82), again suggesting that downstream signaling pathways are conserved and functional.
The S-RNase-based self-incompatibility is a single multiallelicS-locus gametophytic system that is well known in Solanaceae, Plantaginaceae, and Rosaceae (39,128), and it has also recently been described inCitrus(Rutaceae) (81). Unlike systems where pollen rejection is physiologically induced, S-RNase-based self-incompatibility has a pistil barrier/pollen resistance architecture (10). The femaleS-specificity determinants are secreted cytotoxic S-RNases, expressed in the stylarTT, and these proteins are indiscriminately taken up by growing pollen tubes via endocytosis. Once expressed, S-RNase and other modifier pistil proteins together create a constitutive barrier in styles that is active against self-pollen tubes, which are killed via RNA degradation. Haploid pollen tubes expressS-locus F-box (SLF) proteins as the maleSdeterminants (72) that can be thought of as S-RNase resistance factors. EachS-haplotype encodes oneS-RNasegene and an array ofSLFgenes. TheSLFarray is thought to encode a combination of SLF proteins that, together, provide resistance to all S-RNases except the one encoded in the sameS-haplotype. Thus (with the exception ofPrunusspecies that contain a singleSLFgene), S-RNase-based self-incompatibility can be described as nonself-recognition (39).
The gametophytic self-incompatibility found in some perennial grasses (Poaceae) is regulated by a two-locus system, the multiallelicSandZloci (70). In this system, self-pollen germinates but is rapidly rejected upon contacting the stigma surface, or, in some species, just after penetration of the stigma cuticle (52). The genes governing self-incompatibility in the grasses are not yet known, although candidate genes have been identified by physical mapping and genome-wide association study (GWAS) approaches (90,132). In an unusual twist, recent studies suggest that an independent self-compatibility locus may be able to override self-incompatibility in this system (30).
Pollen, the male gametophyte, conveys the male gametes (sperm) to the female gametophyte for fertilization. Pollen physiology and structure are uniquely adapted to withstand environmental pressures associated with dispersal, and pollen grains vary widely in size, composition, and desiccation state (112). The elaborate ECMs of pollen grains have long been admired for their diverse structural patterns, but all typically consist of three basic layers (Figure 2). The inner layer, or intine, is composed primarily of cellulose and pectin and contains hydrolytic enzymes required for pollen tube penetration of the stigma (33). The pollen exine surrounds the intine and is composed of sporopollenin, an extremely stable polymer that is deposited in patterns that vary in both structure and porosity (117). Finally, the exine is surrounded by the coat, which is produced by tapetal cells in the anther and is composed primarily of waxes, fatty acids, proteins, and, in some cases, colored and volatile compounds that can play important roles in pollinator attraction (113,120). In addition, the pollen coat can harbor factors that are recognized by the stigma and used in mate selection (62,107,140).

Figure 2Click to view


During pollen germination, drastic metabolic and cellular reorganization generates a specialized pollen tube (Figure 2), which frequently exits the pollen grain through a thinning or gap in the exine (44,65). A highly polar endocytosis/exocytosis zone is established at the growing pollen tube apex to allow tip growth (51). It is here that plasma membrane components and cell wall material are secreted to allow rapid pollen tube elongation, and, simultaneously, substances in the pistilTTECMare taken up via endocytosis (48). An additional noteworthy feature of pollen tubes is the unique cell wall that has evolved to enable extremely rapid cell extension. Unlike most cellulosic plant cell walls, pollen tube cell walls are composed largely of callose (as visualized inFigure 1b) and pectin. Uncharged, methylesterified pectin is secreted at the pollen tube tip, allowing this region to remain flexible and responsive to signaling in the pistil. In contrast, the cell wall of the pollen tube shank requires a higher degree of rigidity in order to traverse intercellular spaces in the stigma and style. To increase cell wall stiffness, pollen tubes secretepectin methylesterases (PMEs)that increase cell wall rigidity (13). A combination of PMEs in pollen tube shanks and PME inhibitors (PMEIs) at pollen tube tips establishes a hard shell–soft tip structure that can be finely tuned as pollen tubes encounter changing environments (119). Recent work has demonstrated that pistils can produce PMEs and PMEIs that modulate pollen tube growth, revealing another mechanism used by female tissue to select appropriate mates, as described below.
The stigma is the portion of the pistil that is receptive to pollen. Stigmas vary widely in chemical and physical structure and can be broadly classified as dry (e.g., Papaveraceae, Brassicaceae, Poaceae) or wet (e.g., Liliaceae, Solanaceae, Rosaceae) (54). In dry stigmas, the cellular protrusions known as stigmatic papillae or trichomes are intact and covered by a waxy proteinaceous cuticle. Conversely, in wet stigmas, surface cells often lyse and/or exude thick secretions containing proteins, lipids, polysaccharides, and pigments. Developmental timing is critical for stigma receptivity, and changes that occur during this short window can impact the strength of reproductive barriers (53,65).
The stigma surface is the first site where pollen and pistil meet, and in many species, compatibility is determined during this initial interaction. Pollen rejection at the stigmatic surface is most important in species with dry stigmas, as the viscous secretions of wet stigmas tend to trap and hydrate pollen indiscriminately (53,54). Five sequential events occur at this stage: pollen adhesion, hydration, germination, pollen tube penetrance of the stigma cuticle, and growth toward the TT (Figure 3). These are active processes wherein transcriptomes, protein signaling pathways, and cellular morphology undergo distinct changes in both pollen and pistils, and failure at any of these steps can act as a reproductive barrier (1,33,53,65,116).

Figure 3Click to view


In many instances, pollen capture by a dry stigma depends on the biophysical or chemical properties of the pollen surface that promote adhesion (150). Pollen adhesion (the formation of a pollen foot) requires interactions between pollen coat proteins (PCPs) and stigma receptors that mobilize the pollen coat (29,128,140). InArabidopsis, the strength of pollen adhesion tends to decline with increased evolutionary distance between species (150). Pollen hydration is spatially and temporally regulated and constitutes an important barrier for self- and interspecific pollen in the Brassicaceae (29,61,62,107). Lipids released through stigma secretory activity can modulate water transfer to pollen and likely help orient subsequent germination and growth (46). However, it should be noted that pollen hydration can also occur on nonfloral tissues in high humidity and in a simple artificial growth medium (89).
After hydration, a compatible pollen grain rapidly reorganizes its metabolism and undergoes germination, producing a pollen tube that emerges from the pollen grain (Figure 2). In grasses, the germination rate of conspecific pollen is typically much more rapid than that ofHP(75), which may help explain conspecific pollen precedence in this system. Penetration of the stigmatic surface by the growing pollen tube requires extensive male-female cross-talk and involves pathways in cell wall modification, protein secretion, and protein signaling (46,120,138). The stigma may also produce guidance cues in the form of small proteins that are required for the growing pollen tube to locate and enter the TT (21).
The stigma is the site of self-pollen rejection in SI Brassicaceae and Poaceae and is also frequently the site of HP failure, suggesting a potential link between the two processes. However, there are notable exceptions to the SI × SC rule in the Brassicaceae (28,59,77,123) and the Poaceae (52), leading some to question the extent to which self-incompatibility and HP rejection pathways overlap in these families.
Our current knowledge of self-incompatibility in dry stigma species suggests a lock-and-key model of self-recognition, making it is difficult to imagine how interspecific pollen rejection pathways, which would presumably require recognition of an extremely wide variety of incompatible mates, could utilize the same receptor-ligand system. There are two examples in the Brassicaceae in which self-incompatibility-like genes have been shown to function in interspecific [Leavenworthia(23)] or interpopulation [Brassica(127)] pollen-stigma barriers. However, in both cases, duplication and neofunctionalization of theS-locus was implicated (23,127), restricting the barrier to specific interactions in which the crypticS-loci are matched. Additional evidence for a mechanistic overlap between self-incompatibility and HP rejection remains indirect. For example, in one study, a SC population ofA. lyrata(which is largely SI) not only accepted self-pollen, but also accepted interspecific pollen from three SC species, all of which were rejected by SIA. lyrata(77). The genetic basis of self-compatibility in this population was not linked directly to theS-locus, but the authors suggested that the observed breakdown of self-incompatibility andUImay be linked to a modifier gene that controls expression of the pistilS-receptor SRK.
Other studies argue against the involvement of self-incompatibility factors in HP rejection at the stigma. Transformation of SCA. thalianawith the male (SCR) and female (SRK)S-determinants of SIA. lyrataresults in a full allele-specific SI response but does not confer pollen rejection ofA. thaliana(105), suggesting that additional mechanisms are required for the observed UI between these two species. Further, controlled crossing studies amongBrassicapopulations found that the strength of an interspecific barrier was linked to five quantitative trait loci (QTLs) that are independent of theS-locus and the modifierM-locus, which is involved in downstream self-incompatibility signaling inBrassica(136). Another genetic study supports a self-incompatibility-independent mechanism for UI in anA. lyrata×Arabidopsis arenosaspecies pair and identified candidate pollen and pistil QTLs that are found at separate loci (77). Therefore, while it is plausible that yet-unknown downstream signaling or regulatory components are shared between the self-incompatibility and HP rejection pathways, evidence for this is currently lacking.
Although little is known about the molecular players involved in self-incompatibility in the Poaceae, two self-incompatibility-independent systems involved in interpopulation incompatibility have been recently characterized inZ. mays(maize). TheGametophyte factor-1(Ga1) locus confers SC × SC UI between popcorn and dent maize populations (68). The corresponding gene controlling pistil-side function (Ga1-s) encodes a PME,ZmPme3, that is highly expressed in maize silks (101). Silks expressingGa1-sreject pollen that does not have the corresponding male factorGa1-p. Intriguingly, a pollen-expressed gene that allows fertilization ofGa1-ssilks (ZmGa1P) was recently identified as a PME as well (147). A separate locus,Teosinte crossing barrier-1(Tcb1), confers UI between maize andZ. maysssp.mexicana, a teosinte that frequently grows alongside cultivated maize in Mexico. Lu et al. (87) reported that a PME is responsible for the pistil-side barrier in theTcb1system. Exactly how these PMEs interact to produce UI barriers is not yet known, but they likely regulate the spatially controlled pectin de-esterification that is crucial for pollen tube growth (Figure 2).
Recently, a stigma-expressed factor, Stigmatic privacy 1 (SPRI1), involved in HP rejection was discovered in the Brassicaceae using a GWAS approach (40). SPRI1 is a transmembrane protein expressed in stigma papillar cells that confers interspecific incompatibility in SCA. thalianaby inhibiting germination and stigma penetration of pollen tubes from distantly related Brassicaceae species.A. thalianaloss-of-functionspri1mutants cannot reject pollen from these species. Additionally, transgenic SI (+SRK/SCR)A. thalianaplants that lackSPRI1expression also cannot reject HP, demonstrating that this system is self-incompatibility independent. Micromanipulation experiments examining both compatible and incompatible pollen grains on a single SPRI1-expressing papillar cell revealed apollen mentor effectwherein normally incompatible pollen grains were now able to penetrate the stigma, leading the authors to speculate that factors in compatible pollen suppress SPRI1 in a localized manner. This result suggests that a self-recognition system other than self-incompatibility exists in the Brassicaceae, but here the interspecific incompatibility pathway must be suppressed to allow pollen tube growth, whereas in self-incompatibility the incompatible pathway is induced to prevent pollen tube growth. The suppression of a universal pollen rejection pathway to allow compatible pollen tube growth in Brassicaceae was proposed previously by Kitashiba & Nasrallah (69), but to our knowledge this is the first evidence supporting this model.
There is doubtless an intensive search being conducted to identify the pollen ligands for the stigma SPRI1 protein, and clear candidates include the numerous smallCRPsin pollen coats of the Brassicaceae, whose receptors are almost entirely uncharacterized (120,140). This research also opens up the potential to unravel the mechanisms underlying the pollen mentor effect, which is presumably driven either by the deactivation of inhibitors of pollen germination or by the activation of a system required for pollen tube germination and growth in the stigma. Pollen mentoring has been utilized in agriculture to generate normally unattainable hybrids for plant breeding (71) but has hitherto been very poorly understood.
In a natural setting, the pollen mentor effect would be expected to have detrimental effects on plant fitness. Indeed, many studies have found that HP loads can be high (80% of total pollen) in natural populations (6), and HP receipt often leads to decreases in seed set (reviewed in100). Ashman & Arceo-Gomez (6) developed a conceptual framework to predict the intensity with which HP receipt impacts female fitness and could thus drive speciation. Importantly, their framework accounts for factors including mating system (SI or SC), incongruities, and critical male and female traits, such as stigma type—all of which may heavily influence HP tolerance. One of their predictions is that outcrossing species will have stronger barriers as females and greater capacity as males, reflecting the weak-inbreeder-strong-outbreeder (WISO) hypothesis proposed by Brandvain & Haig (14) to explain the SI × SC rule. It is exciting to see the overlap in research themes between the diverse groups interested in evolutionary biology, ecology, molecular biology, and plant breeding.
Anatomically, the style is simply the organ situated between the stigma and the ovule(s) (Figure 1). Some species display no style at all, while others have a style that is many centimeters long (e.g.,Brugmansia). Styles range in degrees of closure from open or hollow styles, which contain few to no cells in the center portion, to closed or solid styles filled with densely packed cells (47). Both style types produce an extensiveECM. When the style is open, as in lily, pollen tubes grow on the surface of a central canal lined with mucilage. When the style is closed, as in Solanaceae, pollen tubes grow within the ECM secreted byTTcells. In the case of closed styles, the enzymatic action ofPMEsand PMEIs is critical in modulating pollen tube cell wall rigidity, as the growing tube must push between stylar cells to reach the ovary. The style's size, shape, and the composition of the TT ECM all contribute to its overall function in conducting pollen tubes from the stigma to the ovary.
A number of highly abundant stylar TT ECM proteins have been shown to interact with growing pollen tubes. One is a CRP in lily, the Stigma-stylar cysteine-rich adhesion (SCA) protein (21). Additional TT proteins have been identified from the Solanaceae, including the Transmitting tissue-specific (TTS) arabinogalactan protein (145), the Pistil extensin-like protein family (PELPs) (32), and proteins that display both arabinogalactan and the arabinose glycans typical of extensins [e.g., 120-kDa glycoprotein (83)]. While these proteins likely provide a conducive environment for compatible conspecific pollen [e.g., TTS has been suggested to contribute to pollen tube nutrition (145)], they may also contribute to the rejection of undesirable pollen, as discussed in the section titled Pollen-Style Reproductive Barriers Beyond Self-Incompatibility.
As in the stigma, developmental timing is critical in the stylar response to both self- and interspecific pollen, and developmental studies have provided useful insights into the nature of female choice. Classic self-incompatibility studies showed that immature pistils of SI species accept self-pollen, but mature pistils show rejection (e.g.,5) and a similar developmental onset of interspecific reproductive barriers was found inSolanum pennellii(22). Such patterns can be interpreted as the gain of a pollen rejection mechanism by pistils that is superimposed over the otherwise compatible interaction seen in earlier developmental stages.
Unlike the induced self-incompatibility systems found in Brassicaceae and Papaveraceae, the S-RNase-based self-incompatibility system represents a constitutively active barrier to pollen tube growth in styles, and circumventing this stylar barrier demands matching resistance factors on the pollen side (10). S-RNase-based self-incompatibility is clearly linked to interspecific incompatibility, and there is a long history of investigation into this relationship, particularly within the Solanaceae (8,10,11,25,28,76). For example, S-RNase has been implicated in at least two distinct types of interspecific pollen rejection inNicotiana(104). Transgenic experiments inSolanumshowed that expressing S-RNase in combination with a pistil self-incompatibility modifier protein called HT in cultivated tomato (SCSolanum lycopersicum) creates a stylar barrier that is effective against pollen from four of the six SC members of the tomato clade (134) (Figure 4a). Other stylar factors, including TTS, PELPs and 120-kDa glycoprotein, form complexes with S-RNase and therefore may also contribute to active self-incompatibility andUIpollen rejection mechanisms (27).

Figure 4Click to view


Pollen-side proteins involved in S-RNase-based self-incompatibility have also been implicated in interspecific UI. Genetic studies using SIS. pennelliichromosome segments introgressed into SC cultivated tomato identified multiple loci that confer pollen resistance to stylar S-RNase barriers (25). One pollen-side interspecific UI locus is linked directly to theS-locus, and a specificSLFgene (S. pennellii SpSLF-23) was implicated in the UI interaction (80). A separate pollen UI locus encodes a CULLIN gene (CUL1) that is part of the Skp1-Cullin-F-box (SCF) ubiquitin E3 ligase complex that targets proteins for degradation (78,79). Genetic and transgenic experiments showed that both of these genes are necessary and sufficient to overcome a pistil-side interspecific UI barrier (25,78–80).
These recent studies have, in many ways, verified older models proposing that the sequential loss of self-incompatibility factors will result in concomitant changes to interspecific interactions (28,76,114).Figure 5shows an adaptation of this model, based on our current knowledge of self-incompatibility and UI interactions between tomato clade species and populations. Because of the pistil barrier/pollen resistance architecture of S-RNase-based self-incompatibility (10), loss of pistil-side function typically occurs before the loss of pollen-side function [but gain-of-function pollen mutations can also result in self-compatibility (39,92)]. This is because pollen is rejected in all SI females unless it possesses resistance to S-RNase. In the scenario shown inFigure 5, a population that has lost a female factor (e.g., S-RNase expression) becomes SC but retains pollen-side S-RNase resistance (has a functional SLF suite) and thus exhibits UI with SC species (Figure 5b). This state likely corresponds to the newly evolved SC types described by Lewis & Crowe (76) (“Sc”) and Pandey (114). The absence of a pistil-side barrier relieves selection to maintain pollen-side resistance, leading to the subsequent loss of these factors, which creates a strong interpopulation reproductive barrier (Figure 5c). After the initial loss of a female self-incompatibility factor, subsequent mutation of additional female barriers, which may or may not be self-incompatibility-related factors, results in a loss ofHPrejection (Figure 5d). The tomato clade displays clear examples of this progression of mutational loss with the predicted effects onRI(8,16,91). Under this framework, the loss of female barriers followed by the loss of male resistance factors is also expected to occur for incompatibility mechanisms that operate independently of self-incompatibility.

Figure 5Click to view


Although a mechanistic relationship between S-RNase-based self-incompatibility and UI has been demonstrated in the Solanaceae, there are clearly HP rejection systems in this family that are not reliant on known self-incompatibility pathway components. In many instances, evidence points to a self-incompatibility-independent pathway, but the molecular players have yet to be discovered. For example, extensive analyses of interspecific pollen tube growth in the potato clade ofSolanumshow multiple examples of SI × SI UI as well as SI × SI bilateral incompatibility (20,96). Here, HP rejection cannot be attributed to self-incompatibility because both parents are SI. Further, pollen tube rejection occurs at characteristic points in the style that appear to be genetically determined (19).
Distinctive patterns of interspecific pollen tube rejection have also been found in SC × SC crosses between members of the tomato clade (8,16), which by definition must be governed by self-incompatibility-independent mechanisms. The presence of self-incompatibility-independent UI pathways is supported by the transgenic suppression of HT in SC populations of generally SI species that lack expression of S-RNase (135). In styles of SC populations ofS. habrochaitesandS. arcanumwhere HP normally traverses over two-thirds of the style, HT suppression eliminated the UI response completely and fertile hybrids were obtained (Figure 4b). In contrast, styles of SCS. pennelliishowed that HP grew further but was ultimately rejected (Figure 4c), indicating that HT suppression made the style more permissive, but active UI pistil barriers remain. These results show that HT proteins participate in both self-incompatibility-related and self-incompatibility-independent barriers (134). This is a noteworthy instance of the sharing of factors between different pollen rejection mechanisms: a phenomenon that may be common. Genetic studies of pistil-side UI barriers inSolanumidentified two major QTLs now known to be self-incompatibility-related (S-RNaseandHT), as well as another locus on chromosome 3 (11). Two genes at this locus, which are both are epistatic to the HT locus, may contribute to self-incompatibility-independent UI (50).
In other members of the Solanaceae, abundant components of the stylarTTECMhave recently been implicated in self-incompatibility-independent barriers. For example, PELPIII is involved in the rejection of interspecificNicotiana obtusifoliapollen byNicotiana tabacumstyles as demonstrated by stylar ablation and RNA interference (RNAi) experiments (3,32). Interestingly, PELPIII appears to function in a species-specific manner and is not involved in the interspecific rejection of pollen from allNicotianaspecies tested (3,32). Bioinformatic results suggest that the TT ECM protein TTS may be involved in HP rejection as well. TTS-like sequences were analyzed from multiple species inNicotiana,Petunia, andSolanum, and two proline-rich domains were identified that experience positive selection (18). TTS divergence is correlated with interspecific compatibility, leading the authors to propose a causal role in RI.
Recently, Qin et al. (115) identified the first known pollen-side factor that confers resistance to self-incompatibility-independent UI barriers in styles. Genetic studies previously identified three loci inSolanumthat were related to pollen-side UI (25), including locusui10.1, which functions in a self-incompatibility-independent UI pollen rejection pathway. Both loss- and gain-of-function experiments clearly identified the underlying gene as encoding a pollen-expressed farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase, FPS2 (115). TheFPS2gene is present in cultivated tomato, but it is expressed 18-fold less than in pollen that can overcome self-incompatibility-independent UI barriers. This suggests that high-level expression is required, but there are as yet few additional clues about the nature of this entirely new mechanism for controlling HP tube growth.
The final phase of pollen-pistil interactions prior to fertilization occurs as pollen tubes enter the ovary and grow toward ovules. Ovules exhibit several highly conserved features, although ovule number, ovule tissue thickness, and orientation of ovules within ovaries vary within the plant kingdom (34,35,41,49,125). Three species in which pollen-ovular signaling is well studied includeA. thaliana,Z. maysandTorenia fournieri(structures described below are shown inFigure 6a). Sporophytic ovule structures that surround the female gametophyte include (most commonly two) leaf-like integuments. In most plant species, the integuments nearly enclose the female gametophyte except at themicropyle, the site of pollen tube entry. The innermost sporophytic tissue, the nucellus, is the megasporangium that produces the megaspore that then forms the female gametophyte. Most frequently, the ovule is located on a stalk known as the funiculus, although this structure is absent in grass ovules, including maize. The most common ovule curvature is anatropous, meaning that the ovule becomes sharply bent as it develops, such that the micropyle is adjacent to the base of the funiculus. The end of the ovule opposite to that of the micropyle is called the chalazal end. The haploid female gametophyte, orembryo sac, resides within the ovule. The most common type of embryo sac is the polygonum type, which contains the egg cell with two closely associated synergid cells near the micropylar end. Together, these three cells are called the egg apparatus, which elaborates a complex ECM called the filiform apparatus at the micropyle and serves as a platform for pollen tube entry. The central cell, which will become the triploid endosperm, has two (fused or unfused before fertilization) polar nuclei. Three or more antipodal cells reside at the chalazal end of the embryo sac.

Figure 6Click to view


Pollen-ovule interactions, which are driven by communication between haploid male and female gametophytes, can be divided into two phases (Figure 6b,c). First, pollen tubes emerge from theTTof the style and are guided to the micropyle of ovules (Figure 6b). During the next phase, known as pollen tube perception, three events occur in rapid, almost explosive, succession (57), as a pollen tube invades one of the two synergid cells, arrests growth, and bursts to release the two sperm cells for double fertilization (Figure 6c). Recent studies have shown that the embryo sac utilizes species-specific factors that can create reproductive barriers toHPduring these two phases.
Late-acting self-incompatibility (LSI) is widespread in the plant kingdom (45) and is defined by the lack of seed set despite self-pollen tubes traversing the style and entering ovaries. The phenotypes associated with LSI are diverse—pollen tubes may not enter ovules, may enter ovules but not navigate across the micropyle, or may even enter the embryo sac but not accomplish gamete fusion. The genetic architecture and molecular mechanisms underlying LSI are largely unknown, although genomic studies have been initiated in tea [Camellia sinensis(24,146)] and cacao [Theobroma cacao(74)], two important crop species that exhibit LSI. Due to the lack of fundamental information about LSI mechanisms, its potential role inRIis yet to be elucidated.
In some cases, pollen-ovule communication is species specific and can provide the means of establishing RI. An early step in pollen-ovule communication involves a signal emitted from the embryo sac that directs pollen tubes to exit the TT and reorient their growth toward the micropyles of unfertilized ovules. The nature of these signals has been elucidated by the work of Higashiyama et al. (56), who developed a semi–in vitro pollen tube guidance assay using detachedTorenia fournieriovules, which have exposed embryo sacs (Figure 6a). Laser ablation of each embryo sac cell type demonstrated that embryo sacs with only one synergid cell (and no egg or central cell) were still able to attract pollen tubes (58). Additional experiments using this assay indicated that pollen tube attraction by ovules was highly species specific (55).
The search for a diffusible pollen tube attraction signal soon followed these discoveries. In maize, an egg apparatus–expressed gene,ZmEA1, was identified that encodes a peptide that is secreted onto the filiform apparatus and the nucellus at the micropylar region of the ovule (94). Downregulation ofZmEA1resulted in lower seed set and mistargeting of pollen tubes in self-pollinations, suggesting that the ZmEA1 peptide acts as a pollen tube attractant. In support of this finding, transgenicA. thalianaovules expressingZmEA1in synergids attracted maize pollen tubes in a semi–in vitro system (95). It was also demonstrated that pure ZmEA1 peptide binds to in vitro–grown pollen tube tips in a species-specific manner (137).
Further work inT. fournieriidentified synergid-expressed genes encoding secreted defensin-familyCRPpeptides, which were named LUREs because the peptides were shown to attract in vitro–grown pollen tubes that had grown through a style (109). Using this assay, pollen tubes ofT. fournieriand of close relativeTorenia concolorwere found to show preferential attraction to conspecific LURE peptides (64). Further evidence for species-specific actions of LURE peptides was provided by the analysis of thirteen differentA. thalianaandA. lyrataCRP gene families, which demonstrated that only the LURE gene families formed species-specific clusters (130).
A recent surprising twist in the LURE story suggests that LURE peptides are not required for ovule targeting and fertilization per se, but rather act to confer conspecific pollen preference on growing pollen tubes (148). A septuple null mutant for the entireAtLURE1family (as well as a null mutant for one of their pollen-expressed receptors,PRK6) was unexpectedly found to exhibit normal fertility (148). However, careful measurements of the emergence of growing pollen tubes from the TT onto the funiculus revealed that pollen tube emergence in mutant pistils was significantly delayed compared to that in wild-type pistils. In crosses using an equal mixture of pollen ofA. thalianaandA. lyrata,A. thalianapollen tubes had a 95% ovule-targeting advantage overA. lyratapollen tubes, an advantage that was significantly reduced in septupleluremutant pistils. The authors discovered four additional synergid-expressed LURE-related CRP genes that they namedXIUQIU1–XIUQIU4after a traditional Chinese courtship ritual. Unlike the species-specificLUREgenes,XIUQIUgenes are highly conserved within the Brassicaceae. Further, XIUQIU peptides act in a non-species-specific manner to attract in vitro–grown pollen tubes, and mutants lacking expression ofXIUQIUgenes have reduced fertility. Given these results, it appears that XIUQIU peptides (as well as other factors) function as general ovule attractants, and the LURE-PRK6 signaling system acts to preferentially accelerate conspecific pollen tubes on their journey from TT to ovules.
Species-specific recognition also occurs during pollen tube perception (Figure 6c). A phenotype observed in some interspecific crosses, including inRhododendronandArabidopsisspecies, is interspecific pollen tube overgrowth (i.e., lack of tube arrest and bursting) at or within theembryo sac(36,143). In order to identify factors that affect heterospecific but not conspecific pollen tube perception, Muller et al. (103) conducted a GWAS study with diverseA. thalianaecotypes that varied in their pollen overgrowth response to pollination byA. lyrata. They identified a synergid-expressed gene dubbedARTUMES(ARU) encoding a subunit of an oligosaccharyltransferase complex that mediatesN-glycosylation of proteins. The phenotype of nullarumutants was the intensification of pollen tube overgrowth in interspecific crosses. To explain this result, the authors suggest thatN-glycosylation of an embryo sac receptor protein is necessary for normal pollen tube perception and that underglycosylation of this protein exacerbates an already poor match in an interspecific cross, which then fails to complete fertilization (an example of incongruity). At this time, the relevant target ofN-glycosylation in this system has not been identified.
In maize, pollen tube bursting is regulated by four related defensin-family CRPs, expressed in embryo sacs, known as ZmES1–ZmES4, which are stored in vesicles in the egg apparatus and are then released onto the filiform apparatus upon the arrival of pollen tubes at themicropyle(4). In ZmES RNAi maize lines, seed set is compromised. Chemically synthesized ZmES4 peptide caused in vitro–grown maize pollen tube tips to burst, but tip bursting ofTripsacum dactyloides(eastern gamagrass) was delayed, and pollen tubes of lily and tobacco were impervious to the peptide, suggesting that this step could contribute to RI. Measurements of membrane potential in maize pollen tubes exposed to the peptide indicated a rapid depolarization response, and further work demonstrated that the target of the ZmES4 peptide is ZMK1, a potassium channel protein expressed in maize pollen tubes. Since both the membrane and the cell wall of pollen tubes must rupture to release sperm cells, membrane depolarization may act in concert with ZmPMEI1, a PMEI, which also promotes the bursting of pollen tubes grown in vitro (144). InArabidopsis, a different class of CRPs [Rapid ALkalinization Factors (RALFs)] are involved in controlling tip bursting during pollen tube perception (43,98), but whether these act in a species-specific manner remains to be determined.
Overall, the patterns observed in HP failure in pistils suggest that multiple mechanisms often operate in parallel to contribute to RI (Table 1). These systems can result from either incongruity or incompatibility, and some pathways show overlap with self-incompatibility while others are self-incompatibility independent. Because outcrossing species are challenged by diverse amounts and types of HP, they are under selective pressure to elaborate and maintain multiple interspecific pistil barriers along with corresponding pollen resistance mechanisms.
Pollen and pistil factors associated with reproductive isolation
Abbreviations: ARU, ARTUMES; CRP, cysteine-rich protein; FPS2, Farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase 2; Ga1-P, Gametophyte factor 1 pollen; Ga1-S, Gametophyte factor 1 silk; HP, heterospecific pollen; PELPIII, Pistil extensin-like protein III; PME, pectin methylesterase; PRK6, pollen receptor-like kinase 6; PUI1, Pollen unilateral incompatibility 1; SC, self-compatible; SCR/SP11,S-locus cysteine-rich/S-locus protein 11; SI, self-incompatible; SLF,S-locus F-box; SPRI1, Stigmatic privacy 1; SRK,S-locus receptor kinase; SUI1, Stigmatic unilateral incompatibility 1; Tcb1, Teosinte crossing barrier-1 ZmEA1,Zea maysegg apparatus 1; ZmES,Zea maysembryo sac; ZmK1,Zea mayspotassium 1; ZmPMEI,Zea mayspectin methylesterase inhibitor.

While there has been much recent progress in uncovering the molecular factors underlying pollen-pistil reproductive barriers, much more remains to be discovered. The mechanistic basis of pollen failure has been characterized in surprisingly few species, and the extent to which the identified mechanisms are distributed among plant species is unknown.
Future research should aim to assess the role of pollen-pistil interactions in RI in a broader array of flowering plants, including natural populations of closely related species growing in sympatry. A simple analysis of pollen tube growth through pistils can provide an important starting point for molecular studies, particularly in non-model organisms. For example, if the site of pollen tube rejection or failure is known, specific female tissues can be selected that will best inform RNAseq experiments aimed at identifying key molecular players in RI. In model organisms, QTL mapping and GWAS analyses have been powerful tools for identifying male and female factors involved in HP failure, and we expect that these resources will soon be available for additional plant species. As more of the molecular players involved in pollen-pistil barriers are identified, phylogenetic analyses can begin to shed light on the history, diversification, and evolution of RI in angiosperms.
Another major priority for future research is to gain a better understanding of the evolutionary forces that shape species-specific pollen-pistil interactions. Given the intimate nature of male-female contact during these interactions, it is perhaps not surprising that the evidence so far supports a major role for sexual selection in driving the evolution of HP failure in pistils. The molecular studies described here have demonstrated that female choice is key in plant mating success. These studies have also revealed examples of male-male mentoring (rather than direct male-male competition), which may play a larger role in interspecific interactions than has previously been appreciated. Developing predictive models that can be tested in both artificial and natural communities will be essential to enhance our understanding of pollen-pistil interactions in RI and the evolutionary processes that drive speciation in plants.


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We thank Dr. Bruce McClure for many thoughtful and essential contributions to this work and Dr. Kyle Christie for helpful comments on the Introduction. US National Science Foundation grant MCB1127059 supported the work of the authors on reproductive barriers inSolanum.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


