We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
The two-component system (TCS), which is one of the most evolutionarily conserved signaling pathway systems, has been known to regulate multiple biological activities and environmental responses in plants. Significant progress has been made in characterizing the biological functions of the TCS components, including signal receptor histidine kinase (HK) proteins, signal transducer histidine-containing phosphotransfer proteins, and effector response regulator proteins. In this review, our scope is focused on the diverse structure, subcellular localization, and interactions of the HK proteins, as well as their signaling functions during development and environmental responses across different plant species. Based on data collected from scientific studies, knowledge about acting mechanisms and regulatory roles of HK proteins is presented. This comprehensive summary ofthe HK-related network provides a panorama of sophisticated modulating activities of HK members and gaps in understanding these activities, as well as the basis for developing biotechnological strategies to enhance the quality of crop plants.
Article metrics loading...
fn1a*Corresponding authors
The two-component system (TCS), which is one of the most evolutionarily conserved signaling pathway systems, has been known to regulate multiple biological activities and environmental responses in plants. Significant progress has been made in characterizing the biological functions of the TCS components, including signal receptor histidine kinase (HK) proteins, signal transducer histidine-containing phosphotransfer proteins, and effector response regulator proteins. In this review, our scope is focused on the diverse structure, subcellular localization, and interactions of the HK proteins, as well as their signaling functions during development and environmental responses across different plant species. Based on data collected from scientific studies, knowledge about acting mechanisms and regulatory roles of HK proteins is presented. This comprehensive summary ofthe HK-related network provides a panorama of sophisticated modulating activities of HK members and gaps in understanding these activities, as well as the basis for developing biotechnological strategies to enhance the quality of crop plants.
Protein phosphorylation is one of the ubiquitous signal transduction mechanisms used by both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms (2,85). This activity is mediated by kinases, which are enzymes that can attach a phosphate group to certain amino acid residues present in the proteins (56,115,119,136). Based on the phosphorylation site, the protein kinases can be classified into various families such as serine (Ser)/threonine (Thr) kinases, tyrosine kinases, and histidine kinases (HKs) (1). Multiple lines of evidence have indicated the important roles of two-component systems (TCSs) in the regulation of plant development and responses to environmental factors by employing a phosphorylation mechanism (77,78,108). A simple TCS is composed of two transducers, an HK functioning as a signal sensor and a nuclear effector response regulator (RR) protein acting as a transcription factor (TF) in the regulation of gene expression (2,136). The sensor-regulator coupling mechanism between these two components is based on the transfer of the phosphoryl group from a conserved histidine (His) residue on the HK to a conserved aspartate (Asp) residue on the RR (2,136). Sophisticated TCSs with a multistep His-Aspphosphorelayalso exist, with the presence of an additional phosphoryl group–receiving domain in the HK (so-called hybrid HK) and the third signal element, known as histidine-containing phosphotransfer protein (HP) (37,136). This protein possesses a conserved His residue and acts as a mediator in delivering the phosphoryl group from HK to RR, which can confer more regulatory checkpoints in the plants (108).
Plant–environment interaction is a constant and essential activity throughout the plant life cycle, which influences plant growth, development, and survival. The ability of plants to provide proper and timely adjustments in response to environmental changes is largely dependent on plant perception of external cues. In this review, we focus on the current understanding of the diverse structures, subcellular localization, expression, and acting mechanisms of HK family members in sensing and transducing the signals, which partially explain the versatile functions of the TCSs in plant development and responses to environmental conditions. Although the knowledge of HKs is mainly derived from studies in the model plantArabidopsis thaliana, progress on the research on HKs in other plant species, including crop plants, if available, is also highlighted. The summary of the HK network provides a thorough overview of HK functions and interactions with other cellular components and scientific gaps for future investigation, as well as the identification of potential candidates for genetic manipulation to enhance plant fitness and productivity.
In plants, the complete profile of HK protein–encoding genes is available for a wide range of species (Table 1), including important crop plants. The comparison among the current data revealed that the genome of soybean (Glycine max) displays the highest number of HK and HK-like proteins (113) (Table 1).
Progress ofhistidine kinase(HK) gene identification from genome-wide association studies in various plant species
aGenes identified from the genome encode both authentic and putative HK/HK-like proteins. The number ofHKgenes might encode a larger number of HK proteins due to alternative splicing.

Arabidopsiswas the first plant species used for the systematic analysis of TCS-related genes (74) (Table 1). From its genome, the identified AHK and AHK-like proteins are classified into different groups. The first clade consists of three cytokinin (CK) receptors AHK2, AHK3, and AHK4/CYTOKININ RESPONSE 1 (CRE1)/WOODEN LEG 1 (WOL1) (87,127). Strikingly, AHK4 was discovered to have dual functions as akinaseor a phosphatase, depending on the presence or absence of CK hormone (103). The second clade of AHK and AHK-like proteins serves as ethylene (ET) receptors, consisting of subfamily I, which has a functional HK domain [ETHYLENE RESISTANT/ETHYLENE RESPONSE 1 (ETR1) and ETHYLENE RESPONSE SENSOR 1 (ERS1)], and subfamily II, which has a modified form, including Ser/Thr kinases [ETR2, ERS2, and ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE 4 (EIN4)] (8,20,51,72,73,131). The third HK clade is formed by phytochromes, including five members (PhyA to PhyE) inArabidopsisthat function as light sensors in the red (ca. 660 nm) and far-red (ca. 730 nm) regions (67,136,139). Additionally, CYTOKININ-INDEPENDENT 1 (CKI1) represents an HK member whose function is related to CK-mediated activities by sharing the same set of regulatory targets rather than being a CK receptor, as CKs cannot directly bind to CKI1 (39,84). Two additional HK members with distinct functions are AHK5/CKI2 and AHK1/ATHK1 (36,150).
The genome-wide analyses of TCS-related genes have also been conducted in other plant species (Table 1). Based on sequence alignment and comparison with availableTCSdatabases, the identification of evolutionary relationships of HKs among different species, as well as assignments of HKs into different subgroups, can be made (37,61,99). For example, a phylogenetic tree constructed from HK proteins of four species, Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa),Arabidopsis, rice (Oryza sativa), and soybean, showed that BrHK6–BrHK9, GmHK10–GmHK17, and OsHK3–OsHK6 belong to the CK receptor clade, along with AHK2–AHK4 (99). The same study reported BrHK1, GmHK01, and OsHK2 as AHK1 homologs, suggesting their putative functions as osmosensors (99). Such analyses showed that the expansion of theHKgene family was due to tandem and segmental duplication, as well as nucleotide substitution events (2,27,62). Evolution studies also indicated the early bifurcation of ancestral phytochromes prior to the phytochrome diversification in seed-producing plants (105,128) and the origin of angiospermCKI1from the gymnospermCKI1orthologs (166). Herivaux et al. (65) suggested that the study of ET and CK receptors in plant–fungus interactions could reveal new information pertaining to the evolution of land plants, mycorrhizae, and other symbiotic processes.
A majority of HK proteins are integral membrane proteins that span across the plasma membrane (PM) or intracellular membrane (56,101,153). Therefore, the structure of an HK protein can be divided into three distinct regions: the outside membrane region, the transmembrane (TM) region, and the inside membrane region (62,136). In a hybrid HK, these regions contain different key domains, including (a) a variable ligand-binding (input) domain, (b) a transmitter domain (kinase/HK domain) containing a conserved His site ofautophosphorylation, (c) several N-terminal TM domains, and (d) a C-terminal receiver (REC) domain containing a conserved phospho-accepting Asp (48,61,121). In addition, divergent forms of HK proteins are observed not only across different plant species (2,27,62,99) but also within the same species, whereby one or several motifs may be present in one HK but absent in the other(s) (74) (Table 2). Moreover, several studies have shown that individual HKs may interact with a specific set of HPs and RR proteins in relaying the signal for a particular response (75,108,109,152). In the following paragraphs, the differences in structure of these HKs and their subcellular localization will be described.
AHKs illustrating the structural diversity of plant HKs
aTransmembrane domains are shown as gray rectangles, and the other domains are annotated. The typical HKs are defined by the presence of an HK domain (e.g., AHK1, AHK3, AHK5, CKI1, ETR1, and ERS1), whereas the divergent forms contain either the S/TK domain (e.g., ETR2 and ERS2) or the HK-related domain (e.g., PhyB). In the phytochromes, the sensory module is composed of the N-terminal extension (not shown), PAS, GAF, and PHY domains, which are located at the N terminus. A pair of PAS domains are also found in the output module of the phytochromes at the C terminus.
bData from the UniProt Consortium or cited reference(s).
Abbreviations: AHK,Arabidopsishistidine kinase; CHASE, cyclases/HKs-associated sensory extracellular; CKI1, CYTOKININ-INDEPENDENT 1; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ERS1, ETHYLENE RESPONSE SENSOR 1; ETR1, ETHYLENE RESISTANT/ETHYLENE RESPONSE 1; GAF, cGMP-specific phosphodiesterases-adenylyl cyclases-FhIA; HK, histidine kinase; HKRD, histidine kinase-related domain; ND, no data; PAS,Drosophilaperiod circadian protein (Per)-vertebrate aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt)-Drosophilasingle-minded protein (Sim); PHY, phytochrome-specific domain; PM, plasma membrane; Rec, receiver; RLD, receiver-like domain; S/TK, serine/threonine kinase.

Regarding the CK receptors, the cyclases/HKs-associated sensory extracellular (CHASE) domain is believed to be the ligand-binding domain essential for CK perception, and it exclusively resides between the two TM domains (3,114,143) (Table 2). Although the CK-binding activity was shown for the CK receptors, for example, AHK3 and AHK4, the ligand-binding domain has not yet been systemically identified (145,163). Study of the structure of the sensor domain of AHK4 (residues 126–395) indicated that this sensor domain forms a homodimer and, more interestingly, a membrane-distal Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain is possibly involved in CK recognition (71). With respect to the ET receptors, they contain a C2H2-type zinc-finger domain functioning as the binding region for ET (45). Also, near the N terminus of the ET receptors, such as ETR1 and ERS1, the presence of cysteine (Cys) residues was found to be responsible for disulfide-linked homodimerization, thereby stabilizing the receptor for ET binding (24,59,137). Although no structural information is available yet for the ET-binding domain, a computational model–based study predicted an ET binding site in the N terminus that is possibly located between the first two helices, hence the signal could be transmitted via helix 3 (138). The structural characterization of the cytosolic C-terminal domain of ETR1 has shown that the His phosphotransfer subdomain in thekinasedomain of each monomer takes part in ETR1 dimer formation (106,116). Studies have also suggested that the ET receptors possibly form heterodimers (8,56). Additionally, the cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-adenylyl cyclase-FhIA (GAF) domain is found in the C-terminal region of the ET receptors but not in the CK receptors (136). The GAF domain is able to interact with small molecules, such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cGMP (85). However, the specific function of the GAF domain in ET receptors is not yet understood.
InArabidopsis, some of the ET receptors, such as ETR2, EIN4, and ERS2, are considered atypical for HK structure due to the lack of a conserved His residue (112,136) (Table 2). This indicates that the HK activity might not contribute to the signal recognition by these proteins (136). A number of studies have provided evidence for this assumption, including observable in vitroautophosphorylationat Ser residue (115) and a potential interaction between the ET receptor with a non-HP protein CONSTITUTIVE TRIPLE RESPONSE 1 (CTR1) that is a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (MAPKKK) (19,50).ArabidopsisERS1 and ERS2 are the two ET receptors that do not possess the REC domain, displaying simple HK forms similar to bacterial ones (136). Type I and type II families of ET receptors differ from each other in number of TM domains (25). Moreover, from in vivo and in vitro assays, the HK domain of ET receptors is found to be essential for the interaction with EIN2, a central regulator of the ET-signaling pathway (12). In fact, the autophosphorylation at the H353 residue of ETR1 is needed for the ETR1-EIN2 complex disassembly at the ET presence (12).
Similar to some of the ET receptors that lack the conserved His residue, such as ETR2, EIN4, and ERS2, plant phytochromes inArabidopsis(PhyA to PhyE) have also been considered as atypical HKs, adding extra variation among the HK members (67) (Table 2). In addition to an HK-related domain (HKRD) and two PAS domains located at the C terminus, the phytochromes also possess an N-terminal photosensory module and three structurally related domains consisting of PAS, GAF, and a phytochrome-specific domain (PHY) [139; for a comprehensive description of structures and functions of phytochromes, see95]. Unlike bacterial phytochromes that function as light-regulated HKs owing to their C-terminal HK domain activity, plant phytochromes are not HKs. Instead, their ability to autophosphorylate themselves at Ser/Thr residues has been proposed for a long time (46,88). Recently, the autophosphorylation activities ofArabidopsisPhyB and PhyD have been confirmed in vitro; intriguingly, they also function as protein kinases that could directly phosphorylate one of their substrates, PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR 3 (PIF3) (140). Due to the observation of the reduced kinase activity in vivo when expressing wild-type and different truncatedPhyAconstructs from oat (Avena sativa) in theArabidopsis phyA-201mutant, the authors also suggested that the kinase activity resides not in the C terminus but in the N terminus, which consists of the photosensory module with the PAS-GAF-PHY domain. However, to modulate light signaling, both the N-terminal extension ofArabidopsisPhyB, displaying several phosphorylated Ser/Thr residues, and the C-terminal region, having the HKRD involved in PhyB homo- and heterodimerization, are crucial for the sufficient mediation of PIF3 degradation (126,155). Therefore, the presence of HKRD might play a role in the regulation of the signaling function of PhyB. Meanwhile, the typical HKs, including AHK1, CKI1, and AHK5/CKI2, do not have a ligand-binding or signal perception domain (Table 2); thus, the molecular basis of their ligand-binding manner remains elusive.
Subcellular localization is an important aspect of protein functional characterization. HK localization studies revealed that HKs can localize at different positions in a cell (Table 2). AHK1 has been found to reside only at the PM (153). On the other hand, endomembrane ET receptors bound on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus have been documented (41,56). However, intensive research has only focused on the ER-associated receptors (12,40,50,56). A subcellular localization of AHK5, based on green fluorescence detection of a GFP-AHK5 fusion protein (36), and rice OsHK3 (an AHK3 homolog), based on yellow fluorescence detection of OsHK3-YFP fusion protein (160), revealed that they localize both at the PM and in the cytoplasm. Since AHK5 does not have a predicted TM domain, the PM localization of AHK5 is probably a result of the presence of a putative N-myristoylation site (36).
The CK receptor AHK3 was first described as associating with the PM inArabidopsisprotoplasts, reinforcing the previously predicted subcellular localization by bioinformatic approach (129). On the other hand, there is growing evidence supporting the intracellular localization of AHK3, as well as of the other two CK receptors (AHK2 and AHK4), on the ER, with the sensory domain oriented into the ER lumen (14). These findings are supported by a more relevant pH condition of the ER (pH ca. 8) for CK binding to its receptors, the presence of CK transporters on the PM, and the ER localization of CK receptors (14,100). Studies performed on other plant species also reported ER localization of the CK receptors; for example, in the case of maize (Zea mays) ZmHK1 (101) and apple (Malus domestica) MdCHK2, MdCHK3a, MdCHK3b, MdCHK4a, and MdCHK4b (33).
Interestingly, an independent study claimed that AHK4 and ZmHK1 are also able to retain ligand-binding capacity at the PM with a pH of 5 (100), albeit subsequent signaling events remain unknown. The functional relevance of PM-localized CK receptors was further supported by the finding that removal of extracellular CKs reduced the signaling output (169). Moreover, the argument that the CK perception mainly occurs at the ER site was due to the observation of translocation of bioactive CKs fromapoplastic spacesto the cytosol under the activity of CK transporters like PURINE PERMEASE 14 (PUP14) (169). Therefore, an integrative model for CK recognition by both PM- and ER-localized CK receptors has been proposed, with the hypothesis that the preferred site for CK perception might depend on tissue type, developmental stage, and CK active forms (129). Interestingly, an application of the bioactive CK fluoroprobe, iP-NBD (i.e., the small fluorophore 7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazole attached to theN9position of isopentenyladenine, a form of active CK), to epidermal cells of theArabidopsisroot apical meristem, has recently shown that, in addition to the ER, iP-NBD also resides at the PM and in endosomal vesicles, suggesting that iP-NBD-binding proteins, i.e., CK receptors, might be localized at these respective sites (91). Indeed, other observations from this study also indicated that in the same cell type, the CK receptor AHK4 could be transported through the endomembrane system and be localized at both the ER and PM, while in the root lateral cap cells AHK4 may reside preferentially at the ER.
HK members display organ- and development-specific expression patterns, which are related to their particular roles in plant development.AHK1transcripts are highly abundant inArabidopsisroot tissues (153).AHK5expression was detected in guard cells but also in other parts of the plant body, including flowers, siliques, roots, stems, and leaves (36). High expression ofCKI1occurs predominantly in the ovules of flowers (63). Regarding CK receptor–encoding genes,AHK4is mainly expressed in the root tissues, whereasAHK2andAHK3transcripts are found in different tissues of roots, leaves, and flowers (151). Expression variation among ET receptor–encoding gene members inArabidopsisassociating with tissue type and ET availability is also reported (73). In tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), among the six members of ET receptor–encoding genes,LeETR1andLeETR2displayed stable expression levels throughout development, whereas expression ofNEVER RIPE(NR),LeETR4,LeETR5, andLeETR6was tightly regulated (94). These findings indicate redundant as well as unique functions of HK isoforms.
In chickpea (Cicer arietinum), expression analyses ofHKfamily genes using available RNA-sequencing data and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assay also showed distinct tissue-related expression profiles of HK members, although the results obtained from these two methods were not totally in accordance (2). Such a variation of data highlights the dependence of gene expression on genotype, growing conditions, plant age, and developmental stage. Study of the coexpression network of TCS-related members involved in the ripening process in banana (Musa acuminata) revealed that the expression ofMaERS2,MaHP3, and threeRRgenes (i.e.,MaPRR,MaRR4, andMaRR5) was co-upregulated, indicating that these genes might work within the same transduction pathway or exhibit crosstalk (37).
The highly complex and tight regulatory control ofHKgene expression is also attributed to circadian rhythm effects. For example, diurnal expression profiles of riceHKgenes showed the highest transcript levels ofOsHK4andOsHK6during the transition from nighttime to daytime (142). As many important biological processes in plants are dependent on the circadian clock, the function of phytochromes in plant photoperiod responses is a strong indication of the diverse regulatory role of HK proteins as the initiators of signaling.
Being one of the multifaceted phytohormones that have various roles in plant development, metabolic pathway and regulatory functions of CKs have been intensively and extensively investigated (54,75,129). The CK-mediated pathway has been shown to regulate seed development and germination, leaf differentiation and senescence, shoot and root architecture, vascular development,photomorphogenesis, flowering, root nodulation, and nitrogen-dependent photosynthetic enzyme activities, as well as nutrient uptake and mobilization (60,127,134,146).
In addition to differential binding specificities to various active forms of CKs (100,101), CK receptors have been shown to have redundant functions in mediating CK-dependent responses. For example, all three AHKs regulate shoot and root development (127). However, specific functions of individual CK receptors have also been reported. AHK4 is responsible for maintaining the expression ofWUSCHEL(WUS), a TF-encoding gene that is required for the proliferation of pluripotent stem cells in the shoot apical meristem (55). AHK3 is the key CK receptor that positively mediates the leaf longevity process via coordination with ARR2 (87). Plants possessing again-of-function mutationor overexpression ofAHK3exhibited postponed leaf senescence, maintenance of chlorophyll content, and cellular integrity. In a recent study,SENESCENCE-SUPPRESSED PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE(SSPP), a proteinphosphatasetype 2C (PP2C)-encoding gene, has been shown to be an AHK3 downstream target in the regulation of the leaf senescence process (159).
According to the model of CK signal transduction derived fromArabidopsisresearch, the phosphoryl group is shuttled from activated HKs (AHK2–AHK4) following CK binding in the cytosol to the REC domain of type-BArabidopsisRRs (ARRs) in the nucleus via mobile HPs (AHP1–AHP5) (39,103). This group of ARRs contains a myeloblastosis (MYB)-related DNA-binding domain and functions asTFs, thus enabling the regulation of downstream gene expression, including type-AARRs. Type-A ARR proteins lack the MYB domain and participate in the negative feedback loop as the repressors of CK-signaling pathway (112) (Figure 1a). Previous results have also suggested that, upon CK perception, two CK receptors could form homo- or heterodimers facilitating thetransphosphorylationbetween HK domains (33).

Figure 1Click to view


ET is the only phytohormone in gaseous form that might diffuse through the PM (10,167). Similar to CKs, ET also regulates various aspects of the plant life cycle, including germination, seedling and leaf development, root hair formation, flowering, fruit ripening, senescence, abscission, and sex determination (52,76). Over the last two decades, great progress has been made toward elucidating the role of various ET receptors in plant development. InArabidopsis, ETR1 activity is involved in seedling nutation (11), while ETR2 modulates the trichome branching process (125). The development characteristics of light-grown seedlings, including rosette size, flowering time, and sterility, are under the regulation of two ET receptors, ERS1 and ETR1 (58). In tomato, a newly discovered seventh ET receptor member, SlETR7, is responsible for fruit development (23). Functional characterization of a rice type II subfamily ET receptor, OsETR2, revealed its participation in determination of flowering time and starch accumulation by regulating the expression ofGIGANTEA(OsGI),TERMINAL FLOWER 1/CENTRORADIALIShomolog (OsRCN1), andOsRamy3D(encodes α-amylase) (162). Recently, zucchini squash (Cucurbita pepo) CpETR1A and CpETR2B, which are homologs of ETR1 and ETR2, respectively, have been reported to govern sex determination (52). Homozygous single- and heterozygous double-mutant lines with defectiveCpETR1AandCpETR2Bdisplayed abnormal sex development associated with the conversion of unisexual to bisexual or hermaphrodite flowers (52).
Molecular analyses of mutant plants and epistatic studies of ET-responsive genes were mainly used to identify members of the ET-signaling pathway and their upstream/downstream partners (43). However, studies of protein–protein interactions of individual ET receptors have not been equally conducted. Through the course of investigation over several years, functional knowledge has been predominantly delineated to the type I subfamily ETR1, including the physical interaction of ETR1 with other ET receptors (51), CTR1 (50), REVERSION-TO-ETHYLENE SENSITIVITY 1 (RTE1) (40), and EIN2 (12). More recently, an in-depth characterization of type II subfamily ETR2 interactions using biochemical and spectroscopic tools showed that ETR2 not only bound to CTR1 and EIN2 (with similar affinities as ETR1) but also displayed a better ability to stabilize the dimer form with another ET receptor (8). These findings highlight the important role of ETR2 in the ET responses.
According to the current acting model, ET-mediated responses are placed under the control of two signaling pathways (reviewed in10) (Figure 1b). Different combinations of ET receptors as homo- or heterodimers are proposed to confer various receptor signal outputs (6). In the major route, in the absence of ET, the receptors are autophosphorylated by their intrinsic autokinase activity and thus can facilitate the phosphorylation of EIN2 protein by CTR1 for subsequent proteasome-mediated degradation of EIN2. However, in the presence of ET, ET binding results in a conformational change of the receptors, and EIN2 suppression is then released from the activity of CTR1, enabling the translocation of its cleaved C-terminal polypeptide (EIN2-CEND) to the nucleus for enhancement of EIN3, EIN3-LIKE 1 (EIL1), and EIL2 activities (10). These proteins function as TFs, regulating the expression ofETHYLENE-RESPONSE FACTOR(ERF) genes to confer ET-dependent responses. Therefore, this pathway highlights the negative regulatory function of ET receptors. In addition, successful attachment of ET to ET receptors is required by the presence of Cu+ions at the binding domain (10,25). Apart from CTR1, RTE1 is another physically associating partner of ETR1, which colocalizes with ET receptors in both ER and Golgi membranes (40,41). However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In addition, TETRATRICOPEPTIDE REPEAT 1 (TPR1) (97), CYTOCHROME b5 (Cyb5) (21), and CONSTITUTIVE EXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES 5 (CPR5) (158) have also been reported as regulators of the activities of the ET receptors.
In the second route of the ET-signaling pathway, thephosphorelaybyTCSsis engaged (10). Researchers have proposed that the rice OsHK1/MHZ1, an AHK5-like protein, is activated upon ET binding to the ET receptors. In turn, OsHK1 can relay the signal to OsAHP1 and OsAHP2, followed by the cognate OsRR21. This pathway and the OsEIN2-mediated pathway act together to modulate the expression of certain ET-responsive genes, at least in controlling root growth (168). In another study,ArabidopsisETR1 was found to be able to establish an interaction with a downstream component of the CK-signaling pathway (ARR3), without the involvement of EIN2, for controlling root apical meristem size and, thereby, root growth (167). In addition, the REC domain of ETR1 has also been found to interact with AHP1–AHP3 and AHP5 (167). These results imply the possibility for the tight coordination between ET- and CK-signaling pathways, whereby they can crosstalk via shared HP and RR members. Furthermore, findings of transcriptional regulation assay have suggested that EIN2 might also regulate certain RRs, which would be interesting to investigate further (167).
Light spectral composition, intensity, duration, and direction significantly influence plant development such as seed germination, plant growth, photosynthesis, flowering, fruit ripening, and shade avoidance responses as well as cold acclimation (49,154). Among the different groups of photoreceptors, the phytochromes constitute the main group involved in light perception and regulating photomorphogenic processes from vegetative to reproductive stages (49) (Figure 1c). InArabidopsis, a major role within the five phytochrome members is performed by PhyB, which is synthesized in the cytoplasm in its inactive form. Upon sensing a high ratio of red over far-red light, PhyB turns into its active form, translocates to the nucleus, and affects different signaling pathways (31,67,102). In the nucleus, PhyB can inactivate PIFs by priming them to the proteasome for degradation (5). In addition, the photoactivated phytochromes can also prevent the activity of the E3-ubiquitin ligase CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1 (COP1)-SUPPRESSOR OF PHYTOCHROME A-105 1 (SPA1) complex, leading to the maintenance of ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5 (HY5) activity, which is a basic leucine zipper (bZIP)-type TF (68,149). During fruit ripening and photoautotrophic growth associated with photosynthetic pigment production, the PIFs and HY5 negatively and positively, respectively, control expression of thePHYTOENE SYNTHASE(PSY) gene, which encodes the key enzyme in the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway (149). Additionally, PIFs (especially PIF4) are responsible for the shade avoidance responses that are associated with the stimulation of auxin- and brassinosteroid-signaling pathways [via AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR 6 (ARF6) and BRASSINAZOLE-RESISTANT 1 (BZR1), respectively], as well as by the degradation of DELLA proteins that are negative regulators of gibberellin (GA) signaling, resulting in hypocotyl, internode, and petiole elongation upon getting more light (31).
Another reproductive event, flowering time, is also regulated by photoperiod. In rice, the cooperative activities of PhyA, PhyB, and PhyC result in postponed flowering under long-day conditions. However, under short-day growing conditions, PhyA and PhyB appear as antagonistic regulators of the flowering process (148). In addition, preliminary data reported the cytoplasmic and PM actions of phytochromes, indicating the existence of alternative phytochrome-signaling pathways apart from the nucleus-oriented phytochrome functions (44,67).
In other studies, multigenic isoforms of phytochromes have been reported to be master regulators of light-induced germination processes, includingArabidopsisPhyA (activated by far-red light), and PhyB and PhyE (activated by red light) (102). PhyA and PhyB affect the biosyntheses of GAs and abscisic acid (ABA), and an increased ratio of GA/ABA can promote seed germination (7). The study on soybean provides evidence of the connection between the shading response and germination process in cross-generations, suggesting the involvement of GmPhyA and GmPhyB activities (22). According to this report, seeds that were produced by mother plants exposed to shading conditions during the reproductive stage could germinate more rapidly as a result of an increased GA/ABA ratio, lower proanthocyanidin content, and changes in fatty acid composition (22).
The connection between light-signaling pathways and CK action has also been documented. InArabidopsis, ARR4, a type-A RR of the CK transduction pathway, was found to stabilize the active form of PhyB through physical interaction (147). In addition,CKI1expression was found to be regulated in a PhyA-dependent manner during hypocotyl elongation and hook development under dark conditions (39). According to this study, PhyA can control the binding activity of TFs to the promoter region ofCKI1.
Other types of HKs also appear as the key regulators of specific physiological processes. The main function of AHK1 is considered to be osmosensing, indicating its essential role in osmotic stress responses (150) (Figure 1d). Additional functions of AHK1 in plant growth (150) and seed development (161) have also been identified. In barley (Hordeum vulgare), an AHK1 homolog (HvHK1) has been shown to be associated with the development of endosperm transfer cells (66). These cells play an important role in nutrient transport from maternal tissues to the endosperm, thus affecting the quality of grain and yield. Recently, successful purification of intact AHK1 from bacteria has opened opportunities to investigate in-depth the three-dimensional structure and molecular activities of this protein (69). Remarkably, initial biochemical analyses of the isolated AHK1 revealed its capacity to function as a phosphatase.
An important role of CKI1 in megagametogenesis has been reported, as CKI1 dysfunction resulted in gametophytic lethality (34). The hypothetical model of CKI1-mediated female gametophyte cell fates inArabidopsishas been proposed (98), with AHP2, AHP3, and AHP5 functioning as CKI1 partners (122) (Figure 1e). Crosstalk between CKI1 and CK-related members has been described in regulation of root growth (34) and vascular bundle formation in the shoot tissues (along with AHK2 and AHK3) (64).
Regarding AHK5, its activities are related to regulating stomatal aperture size mediated by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (36) (Figure 1f). AHK5 has also been shown to negatively modulate the ETR1-dependent ET pathway in controlling (in cooperation with ABA) root elongation (79). AHP1, AHP2, and AHP5 as well as ARR4 and ARR7 were found to be downstream components of the AHK5-signaling cascade, suggesting its crosstalk with the CK-signaling pathway (109).
Being immobile, plants have evolved various mechanisms to protect themselves against abiotic and biotic threats from the environment (16,93,164). Bioinformatic analyses revealed that the promoter regions of manyHKgenes contain specificcis-elements that are regulated by stress-responsive TFs and phytohormones (62).
In planta studies have confirmed the participation of several HK-encoding genes in plant responses to abiotic stresses. The most recently characterized HK members are summarized inTable 3.ArabidopsisCK receptors AHK2–AHK4 were the first well-characterized proteins that were associated with heat stress (18), low temperature, drought, and salinity responses (119,150), mainly functioning as negative regulators. CK receptors are also involved in light stress responses (30,118). Theahk2 ahk3double-mutant plants showed reduced antioxidant capacity, increased photodamage, and enhanced degradation of the D1 protein, which is one of the key components of photosystem II (30). AHK3 was found to maintain the proper function of the circadian clock under light stress conditions by preventing cell death, which is a process activated by the jasmonic acid (JA)-signaling pathway (118) (Table 3).
Progress of abiotic stress-related histidine kinases (HKs) that have been characterized in planta since 2016

A recent study highlighted the involvement of a terpenoid synthase (TPS22) in CK-mediated plant adaptation to selenium stress (82).tps22mutant plants acquired better selenium stress tolerance due to downregulated expression of CK-biosynthesis-related (ISOPENTENYL TRANSFERASE 1) and CK-signaling (AHK3andAHK4) genes, which resulted in a lower intracellular selenium accumulation and enhanced detoxification (82) (Table 3). However, theahk2andahk3single mutants displayed higher sensitivity to selenium stress. A hypothesis for this observation is a possible feedback regulation of CK biosynthesis under a lower level of CK signaling activities, which are maintained by other functional CK receptors (83). Regulation of plant response to excessive selenium via the ET pathway through ETR1 action was also reported (96).
Functional studies of AHK1 revealed thatAHK1-overexpressingArabidopsisplants had an improved survival rate against drought, whileahk1mutant plants displayed more sensitive phenotypes under drought as well as salt stress conditions (150). In addition, microarray analysis of anahk1knockdown mutant exposed to dehydration stress showed downregulation of many osmotic stress- and/or ABA-responsive genes, such as TF-encoding genesABA-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING PROTEIN 1(AREB1), [NO APICAL MERISTEM(NAM),ARABIDOPSIS TRANSCRIPTION ACTIVATION FACTOR 1/2(ATAF1/2),CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON 2(CUC2)019] (ANAC019), andDROUGHT-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING PROTEIN 2A(DREB2A), as well as their downstream genes (150). These data support the positive regulatory function of AHK1 in drought responses. In contrast, AHK5 was reported as a negative regulator of salt stress responses (123). Furthermore, the dependence of AHK5 on H2O2in regulation of stomatal aperture implies the involvement of this receptor in oxidative stress response (36). Previously, ETR1 was identified as a target of H2O2to mediate guard cell activity, indicated by the oxidation capacity of H2O2on the Cys residue of the receptor (35). In rice, expression ofOsHK3could also be induced by application of H2O2(160). Analysis of OsHK3 functions showed that its activity is associated with increased levels of ABA-dependent antioxidant enzymes, which are important for plant response to oxidative stress that occurred under drought and salinity (160).
In addition to red and far-red lights, the phytochromes are also able to absorb ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Exploring the functions ofArabidopsisPhyA and PhyB in plant response to UV-B light (280–315 nm) showed their regulatory roles in a broad range of biological processes, including hypocotyl elongation (negatively regulated by PhyB), germination, rosette growth (regulated by synergistic action of PhyA and PhyB), and biomass accumulation (regulated by PhyA, PhyB, and other phytochrome members) (104). Furthermore, the importance of these two phytochromes in controlling light-mediated photosynthesis and programmed cell death in response to UV-C light (200–280 nm) has also been demonstrated (130).
In tomato, analyses using single-mutant plants with defectivePhyA[far-red-insensitive(fri)],PhyB1[temporary red-insensitive(tri)], orPhyB2(phyB2) indicated the involvement of these phytochromes in water stress-responsive pathways, partially via the regulation of stomata-related traits (32). The study of acting mechanisms of individual phytochrome proteins revealed their participation in responses to different adverse conditions, with unique as well as redundant functions (53) (Table 3). PhyB1 has been shown to be a negative regulator of salinity response as thetrimutant plants displayed better growth, higher proline and carotenoid contents, and a lower malondialdehyde level in comparison with the wild-type plants under the same treatment conditions (53). In addition, PhyB1 has been found to play an essential role in influencing plant tolerance to salinity in response to varied red to far-red light ratios (15) (Table 3).
Temperature and light intensity are highly associated environmental cues (4). Plants shaded by the canopy of neighboring plants can experience lower light levels and reduced temperatures. InArabidopsis, heat stress responses can be modulated by PhyB, a photoreceptor with dual functions involved in the sensing of light and ambient temperature (4). Compared with the wild-type plants,Arabidopsis phyBmutant plants showed better thermotolerance after exposure to shaded as well as simulated sunlight conditions, which was acquired through alteration of PIF activities and the expression of fatty acid desaturase (FAD)-encoding genes (4) (Table 3). The phytochromes also regulate plant adaptation to low temperatures, as observed from studies using transgenic turfgrass (Zoysia japonica) expressing mutated versions of oatPhyA(57) and several tomatophymutants (i.e.,phyA,phyB1,phyB2,phyB1 phyB2, andphyA phyB1 phyB2) (157) (Table 3).
HKs have been found to mediate plant responses to a wide range of pathogens, ranging from viruses, bacteria, fungi, insects, and nematodes to parasitic plants (Table 4). Activation of plant AHK3 and AHK4 by some bacterium-born CKs, such as byAgrobacterium tumefaciensandRhodococcus fascians, is used as a part of their invasive strategies, which include the stimulation of cell division and nutrient transport to the site of infection (54,133). A study onR. fasciansinfection suggested that AHK3 could be the initial receptor of the bacterial attack, and expression ofAHK4is subsequently enhanced by the bacteria, increasing the sensitivity to pathogen CKs (54). In the case of CK-nonproducing bacteria, activation of the CK-signaling pathway significantly promotes resistance; for example, by leading to the increased expression ofPATHOGENESIS-RELATED PROTEIN 1(PR1) in the salicylic acid (SA)-signaling pathway (26). The mutations in bothAHK2andAHK3genes significantly diminish this resistance (26). Interestingly, the pathogenic fungusAlternaria alternatawas found also to have a positive effect on plant growth and photosynthesis (132) (Table 4). Volatile compounds produced by this fungus stimulated the CK pathway through AHK2 and AHK3.
Progress of biotic factor–responsive histidine kinases (HKs) that have been characterized in planta since 2016
Includes HK-mediated plant interactions with pathogens (white background) and symbionts (green background).

CKs also play roles in attacks of insects, especially leaf miners, gall formers, sawflies, and wounding caterpillars (54). In the defense against the herbivoreManduca sexta, the positive roles of NaCHK2 and NaCHK3 fromNicotiana attenuatain plant protection were associated with stimulated accumulation of secondary metabolites phenolamides and enhanced activity of trypsin proteinase—the main components of antiherbivore defense (135). In contrast, some pathogens utilize the plant CK receptors for successful infection. From studies on feeding site establishment required for nematode infection, it was found that while the cyst nematodes (Heterodera schachtii) upregulated all three genesAHK2,AHK3, andAHK4during syncytia formation (141), the root-knot nematodes (likeMeloidogyne incognita) downregulatedAHK4expression during gall formation (42) (Table 4). Similarly, the hemiparasitic plantPhtheirospermum japonicumis able to stimulate root cell division and differentiation in the host plantArabidopsisby transferring its CKs to the plant CK receptors, thus laying the foundation to access plant nutrients (144) (Table 4). The double mutantsahk2 ahk3, and especiallyahk3 ahk4, did not exhibit root hypertrophy, which was associated with improved plant resistance toP. japonicum(144).
Involvement of ET- and phytochrome-related HKs in biotic stress responses has also been documented. TheTurnip mosaic viruscan be transmitted by the green peach aphidMyzus persicae(17). Theetr1andein2single-mutant plants had reduced aphid fecundity as well as enhanced callose formation, which indicates that activation of ET-signaling pathways is required for virus-mediated suppression ofArabidopsisresistance to the green peach aphid. Evaluation of several JA-, ET-, and SA-related mutations inArabidopsisrevealed that thecoi1-1mutant was the most susceptible toFusarium poaeinfection, followed byetr2-1, while low symptoms were observed in thenpr1-1mutant (38) (Table 4). Positive functions of ET receptors in plant defense against pathogens have also been reported. Stimulation of theArabidopsisdefense after attack ofPseudomonas aeruginosarequires ETR1 activity (120). In contrast, in response to herbivores, ETR1 seems to play an important role in the later stages of defense and adaptive phenotypic plasticity (117).
Both PhyA and PhyB are required for the stimulation of systemic acquired resistance. After infection of tomato plants withP. syringaeand upon their exposure to red light, PhyB affected not only the SA content and SA-signaling pathway, but also the antioxidant system, e.g., the activities of glutathione transferase and certain WRKY TF members, as well as cellulose synthase (165). It is interesting to note that PhyB repressed the synthesis of coronatine, which is a compound produced byP. syringaethat possesses a structure resembling JA-isoleucine (the bioactive compound in JA-signaling pathways). In cooperation with PhyA, stimulation of the JA and SA pathways by PhyB plays an important role in plant defense against virus infection. After infection withChilli veinal mottle virus, theNicotiana tabacum phyA phyBdouble mutant exhibited more severe membrane damage, enhanced accumulation of reactive oxygen species, and lower activities of antioxidant enzymes (47) (Table 4). A combination of far-red light and herbivore attack causes negative effects on the expression of plant photosynthesis-related genes (80). Inactivation of PhyB had profoundly negative effects on the direct and indirect defense of tomato plants toward caterpillars ofMamestra brassicae(29) (Table 4). ThephyBtomato mutants exhibited a changed spectrum of volatile compounds, which became more attractive for the predatory mirid bugMacrolophus pygmaeus(29).
Expression ofAHK5was upregulated during biotic stress responses, which led to enhanced resistance against both the virulent hemibiotrophic bacteriumP. syringaepv.tomatoDC3000 and the necrotrophic fungusBotrytis cinerea(124). Pham & Desikan (123) suggested that AHK5 could represent a link between abiotic and biotic stress responses, which involves the regulation of reactive oxygen species formation and phytohormone production.
HKs also mediate CK functions in the interactions of plants with symbionts and even gain certain advantages from interactions with pathogens (9,132) (Table 4). For example, the study of volatile compounds emitted by the rhizobacteriumProteus vulgarishighlighted the role of AHK4 in the promotion of plant growth (9). Additionally, AHK4-homologous CK receptors LHK1 fromLotus japonicus(110), MtCHK1/MtCRE1 fromMedicago truncatula(13), and AhHK1 fromArachis hypogaea(92) have been shown to play key roles in symbiosis with nitrogen-fixing bacteria (Table 4).
TheL. japonicusET receptor LjETR1 regulated ET-signaling pathways in both nonsymbiotic and legume-specific symbiotic responses (111) (Table 4). Interaction between the symbiotic fungusTrichoderma atrovirideand theetr1 Arabidopsismutant showed defective root hair induction and enhanced inhibition of primary root growth, indicating the involvement of the ET-signaling pathway in modulating the architecture of the inoculated root system (28).
An in-depth understanding of the mode of action of specific proteins has assisted the improvement of stress resistance and agronomic traits of crop plants by genetic engineering. However, not many HK-based manipulation studies have been reported, and the majority of the efforts so far has been conducted in the model research plantArabidopsis. One of the main reasons is the slow progress in performing in planta functional characterization of crop plant HK members in association with enhanced plant fitness. Another challenge is the pleiotropic effects conferred by the HK members when overexpressing or silencing anHKgene, thus requiring a smart engineering approach for generating novel plant cultivars that satisfy both agricultural and economic purposes (10). For example, it is plausible that the splitting of two pathways regulated by PhyB, i.e., growth inhibition and defense stimulation, might enable the maintenance of disease resistance even in crops that are cultivated in high density (156).
From the limited reports pertaining to the successful manipulation of HKs, it has been shown that an effective and eco-friendly strategy for controlling the ripening of climacteric fruits is to use a synthetic octapeptide, known as NOP-1 (LKRYKRRL) (86,89). This novel inhibitor mimics the nuclear localization signal motif in theArabidopsisEIN2 protein (107). Suppression of fruit ripening upon NOP-1 binding to the GAF domain of the ET receptor has been reported in tomato (86) and apple (89), probably due to interference with the ETR1–EIN2 interaction (107). In addition, application of NOP-1 also showed promise for extending the longevity of cut flowers (70).
The term photobiotechnology has been used to indicate any strategies for increasing the value and performance of crop plants, mainly targeting photosensory machineries (for a review, see49). Manipulating the right phytochrome(s) with an appropriate strategy can result in the enhancement of fruit quality, biomass, grain yield, or plant resistance to abiotic stresses (49). Photoreceptor-engineered plants, such as tomato ectopically expressing the oatPhyAgene, could acquire the capacity to suppress the typical etiolated phenotype resulting from the shade avoidance responses, which includes an elongated stem and pale yellow and small leaves (13). In addition, maintenance of the photomorphogenic phenotype even under darkness is observed inArabidopsis phyBmutant plants (49,81). Another advantageous feature that might be observed with genetically modified plants is the upregulation of photosynthesis-associated genes using phytochrome-encoding transgenes (49,90).
Other methods have been conducted but are still waiting for future validation to determine the practical feasibility of widespread usage. The stimulation of CK-signaling pathways could serve as a good tool for increasing plant resistance to bacterial pathogens (which do not produce CKs) and herbivores (135). Additionally, enhanced CK-signaling pathways could also increase the sensitivity to volatile compounds produced by symbiotic soil bacteria, which might lead to plant growth promotion and earlier flowering (9,132). On the other hand, inhibition of individual CK receptors in roots could help in the defense against parasitic plants without negative effects on shoot growth (144).




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
This research is funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Vietnam, under grant ĐTĐL.CN-12/19 and by the Czech Science Foundation grant 20-22875S. This work was partially supported by the Cabinet Office, Government of Japan; Cross-Ministerial Moonshot Agriculture; and the Forestry and Fisheries Research and Development Program, Technologies for Smart Bio-Industry and Agriculture (funding agency: Bio-Oriented Technology Research Advancement Institution, grant JPJ009237). X.L.T.H. was supported by Vingroup Joint Stock Company and the Domestic Master/PhD Scholarship Programme of Vingroup Innovation Foundation (VINIF), Vingroup Big Data Institute (VINGBIGDATA), code VINIF.2020.TS.09.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


