We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Plant cell walls are dynamic structures that are synthesized by plants to provide durable coverings for the delicate cells they encase. They are made of polysaccharides, proteins, and other biomolecules and have evolved to withstand large amounts of physical force and to resist external attack by herbivores and pathogens but can in many cases expand, contract, and undergo controlled degradation and reconstruction to facilitate developmental transitions and regulate plant physiology and reproduction. Recent advances in genetics, microscopy, biochemistry, structural biology, and physical characterization methods have revealed a diverse set of mechanisms by which plant cells dynamically monitor and regulate the composition and architecture of their cell walls, but much remains to be discovered about how the nanoscale assembly of these remarkable structures underpins the majestic forms and vital ecological functions achieved by plants.
Article metrics loading...
Plant cell walls are dynamic structures that are synthesized by plants to provide durable coverings for the delicate cells they encase. They are made of polysaccharides, proteins, and other biomolecules and have evolved to withstand large amounts of physical force and to resist external attack by herbivores and pathogens but can in many cases expand, contract, and undergo controlled degradation and reconstruction to facilitate developmental transitions and regulate plant physiology and reproduction. Recent advances in genetics, microscopy, biochemistry, structural biology, and physical characterization methods have revealed a diverse set of mechanisms by which plant cells dynamically monitor and regulate the composition and architecture of their cell walls, but much remains to be discovered about how the nanoscale assembly of these remarkable structures underpins the majestic forms and vital ecological functions achieved by plants.
Plants, which cover much of Earth's terrestrial surface, owe their growth and persistence to their ability to construct walls around their cells, spinning their bodies out of sunlight, air, water, and mineral nutrients. Plant cell walls are complex and dynamic biological networks composed of interacting polysaccharides, proteins, polyphenolics, small molecules, and water that provide support and protection to plants and determine both their morphology and mechanical characteristics over the course of development. As the most abundant repository of biomass on Earth, plant cell walls have been used for millennia by people as sources of food, animal feed, clothing, shelter, and energy. Over the 400 million years since plants emerged from the oceans onto land, plant cell walls have evolved to resist degradation while allowing for growth, making them both tough and flexible. Decrypting the codes by which plants construct and modify their walls promises to usher in a new era of renewable materials and bioenergy, but our current knowledge of how plant cell walls are built, monitored, and modified during plant growth, development, and interactions with biotic and abiotic environments is limited. The discovery and characterization of many of the genes responsible for these processes are beginning to peel back the layers of regulation governing cell wall dynamics in vivo, but how the products of most of these genes function and interact at the molecular level is still largely shrouded in mystery.
This review focuses on the cell and molecular biology underlying the synthesis, assembly, integrity sensing, and remodeling of plant cell walls, highlighting recent advances in our efforts to understand these phenomena. Although we focus mainly onprimary cell walls, it is important to realize that plant cell walls are heterogeneous in structure and function across cell types, developmental stages, and species and are categorized into three main types: primary walls, which are deposited by actively growing plant cells and contain mainly polysaccharides and proteins;secondary cell walls, which are deposited in certain differentiating cell types, mostly after growth has ceased, and contain polysaccharides and lignin (122); and gelatinous layer walls, which are made only in some species, composed almost entirely of polysaccharides, and capable of generating contractile forces (76). Likewise, wall composition varies widely across different plant taxa (149): For example, type I primary walls are common in eudicots and nongrass monocots, whereas type II primary walls predominate in grasses (202). Due to its extensive genomic, biochemical, cell biological, and mechanical characterization,Arabidopsis thaliana(Arabidopsis) is the main focus of our discussion, but we also highlight a small portion of the biological diversity of cell wall architectures and dynamics across the plant kingdom. For a more extensive review of type II wall synthesis, see Reference72. Excellent recent reviews cover cell wall structure and nanoscale mechanics (37,38) as well as experimental approaches for monitoring cell wall dynamics (203), so those topics are not extensively covered here. We apologize to colleagues whose important contributions are not highlighted due to space constraints.
The polysaccharides that make up most of the plant cell wall range from linear polymers to highly complex biomolecules (Figure 1). Cellulose is the dominant mechanical component of all types of plant cell walls and has a tensile strength similar to that of steel. It is composed of multiple β-1,4-linked glucan chains that are hydrogen bonded together to form cable-likecellulose microfibrils, but despite decades of intense scrutiny, the precise molecular structure of cellulose remains mysterious and might consist of a heterogeneous mixture of highly crystalline regions interspersed with or surrounded by amorphous stretches or layers. Cellulose Iβ is most commonly associated with plant cell walls, but other allomorphs of cellulose exist naturally or can be generated industrially (156). Recent modeling (107) has proposed different potential cross sections of native plant cellulose based on evidence that cellulose microfibrils contain 18–24 chains (65,109,132,191,192,225). Cellulose microfibrils in primary walls are approximately 3 nm in diameter, whereas cellulose in secondary walls can coalesce into macrofibrils that are more than 20 nm in diameter, and the degree of polymerization for the glucan chains in cellulose ranges from a few hundred glucose monomers to over 10,000.

Figure 1Click to view


Hemicelluloses comprise several different classes of polysaccharides with neutral sugar backbones linked by equatorial β-1,4 linkages, some of which are decorated with side chains (170). These include xyloglucan, the most abundanthemicellulosein type I primary walls, which has a β-1,4-linked glucan backbone decorated with side chains that can consist of sequentially linked xylose, galactose, and fucose residues in specific patterns as well as other sugars in some plant species (221). Xylans have β-1,4-linked xylosyl backbones with side chains consisting of arabinose and glucuronic acid, some of which are methylated or feruloylated, and are the predominant hemicellulose in type II primary walls and eudicot secondary walls but are also present in small amounts in type I primary walls (154). Mannans, which are polymers of β-1,4-linked mannose, are prevalent in gymnosperms but are also present in other plant taxa. Glucomannans contain repeating disaccharide subunits of glucose and mannose joined by β-1,4 linkages. Mixed-linkage glucan, which contains β-1,4-linked stretches of glucose interspersed with β-1,3 linkages, is common in rapidly growing grass tissues (170).
Callose, which is sometimes classified as a hemicellulose but does not contain the equatorial β-1,4 linkages that are shared by hemicelluloses (170), is a polymer of β-1,3-linked glucose subunits. It is synthesized in specific developmental and environmental contexts and at particular subcellular regions, including cell plates during cytokinesis, plasmodesmata, and sieve plates. Callose is often degraded soon after its synthesis, making it one of the most dynamic cell wall polymers (58).
Pectins are acidic polysaccharides that contain galacturonic acid residues (1,2,7). Homogalacturonan, the most abundantpectin, is composed of continuous α-1,4-linked chains of galacturonic acid that are sometimes decorated with xylose or apiose side chains. Homogalacturonan can be methylesterified at the C6 carboxyl groups of its galacturonic acid residues, in addition to being acetylated at its O2 and O3 positions. The backbone of rhamnogalacturonan I, another pectin domain, consists of alternating galacturonic acid and rhamnose residues, and anchors arabinan, galactan, and arabinogalactan side chains. Rhamnogalacturonan II, a highly conserved and complex pectin, has a backbone of homogalacturonan decorated with side chains containing 13 different sugars and over 20 distinct glycosyl linkages. Collectively, hemicelluloses and pectins are called matrix polysaccharides.
Structural proteins are key components of plant cell walls, although their complex glycosylation patterns and large gene families have made them challenging to functionally characterize (18). These include extensins, which are hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins, proline-rich proteins, and arabinogalactan proteins (178). Enzymes and nonenzymatic proteins are also present in plant cell walls, as are ions, small metabolites, and water in both bulk and surface-associated forms. However, some metabolites that are abundant in the cytoplasm of living cells, such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), are scarce in the wall, making it an energetically distinct compartment.
Although groups of cell wall polysaccharides are often discussed as independent entities, accumulating evidence points to the existence of covalent linkages among the different classes. For instance, the ARABINOXYLAN PECTIN ARABINOGALACTAN PROTEIN (APAP1) glycoprotein (187) contains pectin and arabinoxylan domains that are covalently linked to a polypeptide core, and covalent linkages between pectins and xyloglucans have been detected in some cell walls (147,148,193). Likewise, researchers have recently proposed that pectin-cellulose (24) and pectin-xylan (23) complexes exist in some wall types. It is unclear whether these hybrid molecules arise as the immediate products of intracellular synthetic events, from the ligation of independently synthesized domains shortly after synthesis, or after transglycosylation reactions that occur in the wall (see the section titled Cell Wall Modification During Growth).
Lignin, which is abundant in secondary walls, is a hydrophobic, polyphenolic compound made of covalently linked monolignol subunits that undergo redox-mediated polymerization (199). Lignin can be covalently linked to the ferulate side chains of xylans (88).
In isolation, no single wall polysaccharide is capable of recapitulating the mechanics and behaviors of in vivo–assembled plant cell walls. Thus, interactions between wall polymers that arise during the assembly of the cell wall are crucial for determining the mechanical characteristics and growth capacity of plant cell walls. For example, specialized biomechanical hot spots of cellulose-xyloglucan interfaces have been identified as the targets of expansins, proteins that noncatalytically loosen the wall (206). Pectins have been detected in close proximity to cellulose by solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (46), and mutants with altered homogalacturonan molecular weight show changes in homogalacturonan-cellulose interactions and the relative mobility of both polymers (144). Demethylesterified homogalacturonan can be cross-linked via calcium bridges to form mechanically robust networks, rhamnogalacturonan II monomers can be cross-linked by borate diesters, and the feruloylated side chains of rhamnogalacturonan-I can also be cross-linked via ferulate diesters. These pectic interactions might be key determinants of cell–cell adhesion, which typically keeps plant cells locked in their relative locations during development but can be disrupted to drive cell separation events, for example, during leaf shedding or seed release (41).
The forces that drive interactions between wall polymers are sometimes obscure, with electrostatic, hydrogen bonding, van der Waals, and hydrophobic/hydrophilic forces all being implicated. The substitution of every other xylose in the xylan backbone with acetyl groups is thought to favor the adoption of a twofold helical screw conformation, allowing for binding to the hydrophilic surface of cellulose (77). However, despite in vitro evidence pointing to the neutral side chains of pectins being responsible for their interactions with cellulose (229), evidence of close apposition between homogalacturonan and cellulose (46) points to potential direct interactions between homogalacturonan backbones, which are negatively charged, andcellulose microfibrils. One classic model of the plant cell wall (102) envisions the wall as a single unified macromolecule joined by many covalent interactions; although this model is unlikely to be fully correct because many wall components, in particular pectins, can be extracted by treatments that do not break covalent bonds (66), the growing list of covalent linkages between different wall components (23,24,147,148,193) does lend partial credence to this view.
In addition to the direct physical interactions between components in the cell wall, evidence is emerging of signaling pathways by which changes in the status of one cell wall component can result in compensatory changes in the dynamics and status of other wall components. For example, mutations in xyloglucan synthesis genes that eliminate detectable xyloglucan inArabidopsis(29,140) result in reduced cellulose synthesis and alter the expression of wall-integrity-sensing genes (217); despite this, the mutant plants can grow and reproduce with only slightly abnormal morphology.
Because of the close proximity between the plasma membrane and the cell wall and due to the fact that at least some wall components, e.g., cellulose, are synthesized at the cell surface, connections between the wall and the plasma membrane, as well as those extending across the plasma membrane into the cytoplasm, have been hypothesized to be important routes of communication between the outside and inside of plant cells (104). Direct evidence for these connections stems from plasmolysis experiments, in which placing plant cells in high concentrations of osmolytes results in the formation of Hechtian strands that bridge the cell wall to the shrinking protoplast (110). Likewise, membrane-embedded receptor proteins that bind to wall components (44,63) are points of direct contact between the wall and the plasma membrane, although whether these interactions are transient or permanent in vivo has not been firmly established.
Pectins andhemicellulosesare synthesized in the lumen of the Golgi body using activated nucleotide sugars as substrates (173) and then transported to the cell surface where they can be further modified in the wall (Figure 2). The enzymes that catalyze the assembly of these polymers includeglycosyltransferases, methyltransferases, and acetyltransferases, whereas those that modify them postsynthesis include glycosyl hydrolases, transglycosylases, polysaccharide lyases, and carbohydrate esterases (28). The most prominent group of these enzymes includes the Golgi body–localized glycosyltransferases, with individual enzymes forming specific types of glycosidic linkages (168). Glycosyltransferases encompass large families of enzymes that can be broadly classified into two types: Type I glycosyltransferases synthesize the backbones of pectins and hemicelluloses in the Golgi body, processively adding sugar moieties to backbone chains, whereas type II glycosyltransferases decorate the backbones by adding one sugar moiety at a time to form side chains (168). Type I glycosyltransferases are integral membrane proteins with their catalytic domains oriented in either the cytosol or the lumen of the Golgi body; Type II glycosyltransferases have a single-pass transmembrane domain with their catalytic domain generally facing into the lumen. The biochemical activities of only a small subset of all glycosyltransferases have been elucidated; for example, researchers have suggested that pectin biosynthesis requires more than 65 distinct enzyme activities, including those of glycosyltransferases, methyltransferases, and acetyltransferases (127), but only a few of these have been genetically and biochemically characterized.

Figure 2Click to view


Precisely where in the Golgi body the various enzymatic steps involved in the synthesis of matrix polysaccharides occur is not fully understood. The Golgi body is composed of a series of flattened membrane-enclosed disks known as cisternae, which occur as distinct compartments that include the cis-face, which interacts with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the medial Golgi, the trans-Golgi cisternae, and finally thetrans-Golgi network (TGN)where secretory vesicles form (182,183). The TGN can either be associated with the Golgi body or move independently in the cell. In the case of xyloglucan, quantitative immunolabeling experiments using antibodies targeting either the backbone or the fucosylated side chains revealed that the xyloglucan backbone occurs in the trans cisternae, but that the fucosylated side chains occur in both the trans cisternae and the TGN (52,224). Likewise, the enzymes that sequentially elaborate xyloglucan side chains are localized in different Golgi body subcompartments (32). A similar model of step-like biosynthesis was developed forpectinbiosynthesis using antibodies specific for the low-methylesterified pectin backbone or highly methylesterified pectin (51,136,224). Thus, these glycans are synthesized in an assembly-line-like manner as they move through the Golgi body (220).
More recent analysis of protein–protein interactions among various enzymes involved in xyloglucan biosynthesis paints a different picture. Chou et al. (33) examined interactions among various enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of xyloglucan inArabidopsis, including enzymes catalyzing the synthesis of the glycan backbone [CELLULOSE SYNTHASE-LIKE C4 (CSLC4) and XYLOGLUCAN XYLOSYLTRANSFERASE1–XYLOGLUCAN XYLOSYLTRANSFERASE5 (XXT1–XXT5)], as well as enzymes that decorate the side chains (e.g., the FUT1 fucosyltransferase and the MUR3 and XLT2 galactosyltransferases). From coimmunoprecipitation and bimolecular fluorescence complementation experiments, these authors found interactions between the CSLC4/XXT complexes and CSLC4, MUR3, and XLT2. This suggests that the enzymes that synthesize both the backbone and side chains of xyloglucan are present as a large, multisubunit complex, presumably present in the same Golgi domain (Figure 2). Consistent with these results, Lund et al. (116) used a reversibleRenillaluciferase protein complementation assay to demonstrate interactions between XXTs, MUR3, and FUT1 in transiently transformedNicotiana benthamianacells.
The presence of a large protein complex acting in the synthesis of both the backbone and side chains of xyloglucan is at odds with a model predicting the spatial separation of these biosynthetic steps drawn from the localization of different xyloglucan epitopes and green fluorescent protein (GFP)-localized biosynthetic enzymes in different subcompartments of the Golgi body (32,52,224). One contributing factor to this paradox could be the masking of polysaccharide epitopes (93) that might undermine the conclusion that different xyloglucan species are present in distinct locations within the Golgi body. A second issue is that overexpressed fusion proteins might be mislocalized in transiently transformed cells. Alternatively, multiple protein complexes with differing compositions involved in xyloglucan synthesis might be present in distinct regions of the Golgi body. Further studies are required to understand the spatial distribution of glycan synthesis in the Golgi body, and ideally, these studies will analyze the steps of glycan synthesis in vivo with high spatiotemporal resolution.
Cellulose is synthesized by cellulose synthases (CESAs), enzymes that are active at the plasma membrane as a protein complex called the cellulose synthase complex (CSC) (129,180). Each CSC subunit is thought to catalyze the polymerization of a single glucan chain using cytosolic uridine diphosphate-glucose (UDP-glucose) as a substrate. CESAs are integral membrane proteins that are often encoded by multigene families. At least three different CESA isoforms are likely required to form a functional CSC (45,189,190). Given thatcellulose microfibrilsare likely composed of 18–24 glucan chains (65,109,132,191,192,225), a model in which 18 CESA proteins form a functional CSC in the membrane as a hexamer of trimers has been proposed based on stoichiometric, electron microscopy, and modeling evidence (74,94,135).
InArabidopsis, CESA1, CESA3, and CESA6 interact to form CSCs that function in primary wall biosynthesis (5,62,143,169). CESA2, CESA5, and CESA9 also function in primary wall synthesis and are partially redundant with CESA6 (45,143). The differences in function among these partially redundant CESAs do not simply reflect distinct patterns of expression, as neitherCESA2norCESA5driven by aCESA6promoter fully complements acesa6mutant (45,143). CESA4, CESA7, and CESA8 form distinct rosettes that function insecondary wallbiosynthesis (6,69,189). Within the CSCs, each of the three CESA isoforms occurs in equimolar amounts as determined by coimmunoprecipitation, mass spectrometry, and quantitative immunoblot studies (74,94).
CESA proteins are synthesized in the ER and transported to the cis Golgi body via coat protein complex II (COPII)-coated vesicles (21). Freeze-fracture studies of vascular plant cells detected CSCs in the Golgi body, but not the ER, suggesting that CSCs assemble in the Golgi body before being transported to the plasma membrane (39,80,82). However, CSCs have been observed in the ER in moss (159), suggesting either that CSCs assemble in the ER only in nonvascular plants or that some assembly occurs in the ER in most plants and this simply has not yet been observed in angiosperms. CSC assembly involves the STELLO1 and STELLO2 proteins, which localize to the Golgi body where they interact with multiple CESA proteins and are required for the normal multimerization, cellular trafficking, and plasma membrane insertion of CESAs (226). STELLO1 and STELLO2 contain a domain with homology toglycosyltransferasesthat is localized to the Golgi lumen, suggesting that they might glycosylate CESAs, but their precise molecular function is currently unclear.
Trafficking of CSCs plays a critical role in regulating the level of cellulose synthesis (11,39,40,146,208) (Table 1). After assembly in the Golgi body, CSCs are likely packaged into vesicles in the TGN for initial delivery to the plasma membrane. Consistent with this, proteomic analysis of immunoisolated SYNTAXIN OF PLANTS61-containing vesicles revealed that CESA1, 2, 3, and 6 are present in these vesicles (50). Further, thedet3mutation, a weak allele ofVHA-Cthat specifically affects the pH of the TGN and early endosomes, impairs secretion and recycling of CSCs, suggesting a role for TGN and early endosomes in CSC trafficking (118). A small Golgi-localized GTPase, RabH1B, has also been linked to CESA exocytosis:rabh1bmutations result in decreased secretion of CESA from the Golgi body, reduced cellulose levels, and an accumulation of vesicles around the Golgi body (89). However, CESA endocytosis is also decreased, and the density of CESA particles at the plasma membrane is elevated in this mutant (89), likely reflecting complex feedback regulation involved in CESA trafficking and function. The concurrence of increased CESA particle density at the plasma membrane with decreased cellulose levels in the mutant suggests that CESA trafficking is important for removing nonfunctional CSCs from the cell surface.
Genes identified that play a role in the trafficking of CSCs
Abbreviations: AP2M/μ2, AP-2 complex subunit mu; CC, COMPANION OF CELLULOSE SYNTHASE; CESA, cellulose synthase; CSC, cellulose synthase complex; CSI, CELLULOSE SYNTHASE INTERACTIVE PROTEIN; DET, DE-ETIOLATED; PM, plasma membrane; PTL, PATROL; TGN, trans-Golgi network; SHOU4L, SHOU4-LIKE; TML, TPLATE COMPLEX MUNISCIN-LIKE.

The exocyst complex has also been implicated in the delivery of CSCs to the plasma membrane (219). The exocyst is a multisubunit assembly that functions in a variety of developmental events (214,222). CESA6, CELLULOSE SYNTHASE INTERACTIVE PROTEIN1 (CSI1), and PATROL1 all interact with multiple exocyst subunits, suggesting a role for this complex in CESA trafficking (228). PATROL1 functions in the trafficking of proteins to the plasma membrane (87), and disruption ofPATROL1results in slower CESA delivery rates to the plasma membrane and lower cellulose levels (228). Based on detailed analysis of the cellular dynamics of these proteins, Zhu et al. (228) proposed an elegant model in whichPOM2/CSI1serves as a landmark for the insertion of CESA-containing exocytotic vesicles along cortical microtubules, with PATROL1 priming the fusion of these vesicles.
The paralogousSHOU4andSHOU4Lgenes also play an important role in regulating exocytosis of CESAs (145).SHOU4was identified in a suppressor screen of the cellulose-deficientfei1 fei2mutant. Disruption of bothSHOU4andSHOU4Lresults in elevated CESA density at the plasma membrane due to enhanced exocytosis, which in turn leads to increased amorphous cellulose. Because SHOU4 and SHOU4L interact directly with primary wall CESAs and the levels of SHOU4 and SHOU4L appear to be critical to their functions, SHOU4/SHOU4L might act as a counter of CESA levels at the plasma membrane, with the complex generating a signal to responsively inhibit CESA exocytosis and maintain optimal levels of cellulose biosynthesis.
The residence time of CESA proteins in the plasma membrane has been estimated to be as short as 7–8 min, but the half-lives of the proteins are much longer (95,162), suggesting that CESA proteins are likely recycled between intracellular locations and the plasma membrane, dynamically controlling the level of cellulose synthesis in cells. CESA proteins have been detected in microtubule-associated vesicles, called microtubule-associated cellulose synthase compartments (MASCs) or small CESA compartments (SmaCCs), which might arise from endocytosis of CSCs from the plasma membrane and could serve as intracellular storage depots of CSCs (40,60,80). Treatment with the cellulose inhibitor isoxaben or with hyperosmotic conditions induces the formation of SmaCCs/MASCs. The CSI and COMPANION OF CELLULOSE SYNTHASE1 (CC1) and CC2 proteins are required for efficient recycling of CSCs in the presence of abiotic stress, at least in part through the regulation of SmaCC/MASC formation and by controlling microtubule dynamics (60,111).
One mechanism underlyingCSCrecycling is clathrin-mediated endocytosis (83,138). The μ-adaptin subunit of the AP2 complex,AP2M-1, which docks to the plasma membrane and recruits the clathrin-mediated endocytosis machinery, interacts with CESA6 (10,125).ap2m-1mutants show reduced endocytosis and increased CESA density at the plasma membrane (10). Likewise, a component of the large adaptor TPLATE complex, TWD40, is required for general endocytosis and for maintaining normal CESA density at the plasma membrane (12). The higher CESA density in these mutants correlates with reduced levels of cellulose, similar to the situation with therabh1bmutant (89). In addition to TWD40, other members of the TPLATE complex, TML and TPLATE, also interact with CESAs to mediate their endocytosis (166). Phosphoinositides (PIs) also modulate CESA trafficking, with PI3K and PI4K playing distinct roles: PI3K regulates clathrin-mediated endocytosis of CESAs, whereas PI3K functions in the exit of CESAs from the Golgi body (68).
Several inputs regulate CESA function at the plasma membrane (146). The β-1,4 glucanase KORRIGAN interacts with primary and secondary wall CESAs and influences both CSC trafficking and cellulose synthesis (120,196). Another potential regulator of cellulose synthesis isCOBRA, which encodes a putative glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored extracellular protein (157,171). Cells in the elongation zone ofcobramutant roots display radial expansion that is correlated to a reduction in the level of crystalline cellulose. Posttranslational modifications also regulate CESA function (146). Phosphorylation of CESAs occurs at multiple residues within the hypervariable regions in the N terminus and in the central cytosolic loop (181) and likely regulates multiple aspects of CESA function, including degradation by the 26S proteasome (188), CSC movements in the plasma membrane (31), and response to hormones (165) and environmental factors (15). CESA proteins are also regulated byS-acylation; CESA7 isS-acylated at four cysteines in variable region 2 and the C-terminal domain, and mutation of these sites results in a reduction of crystalline cellulose, likely as a consequence of aberrant CESA trafficking (108).
The CESA-interacting protein CSI1/POM2 likely links CSCs to microtubules to pattern cellulose deposition (22,115). Disruption of CSI1, and its paralogs CSI2 and CSI3, leads to reduced movement of CESA particles, lower cellulose content, and defective cell elongation (22,79,115). The CC1 and CC2 proteins also tether the CSCs to microtubules and are necessary to traffic CSCs back to the plasma membrane following their internalization after exposure to salt stress (60). CC1 affects microtubule bundling and dynamics via an intrinsically disordered region in the N-terminal domain (103).
While it is clear thatpectinsandhemicellulosesare synthesized in the Golgi body and then delivered to the cell surface, the mechanisms underlying this trafficking are not well understood. The timely and spatially accurate delivery of cell wall components is essential for proper functioning of the wall and must be dynamic, adjusting with development and in response to environmental stimuli. There are two general modes of secretion to the apoplastic space, called the conventional and unconventional protein secretion pathways (34,207). The unconventional pathway has been reviewed recently and is not discussed in depth here (42,133,151,155). It is thought that pectins and hemicelluloses primarily traffic through the conventional pathway (179,197). In the conventional pathway, cargos move from the trans face of the Golgi to theTGN, where they are trafficked to different cellular destinations (201). Correct targeting of TGN-derived vesicles that contain glycans to distinct regions of the plasma membrane involves transport along a cytoskeletal element and recognition and fusion to the plasma membrane, likely mediated in part by motor and SNARE proteins (227).
The TGN and vesicles emerging from it have been shown to contain matrix polysaccharide epitopes by immunocytochemistry (101,164,194) and glycome profiling (209), suggesting that pectin and hemicellulose cargos are sorted and packaged in the TGN. The function of the TGN is regulated by diverse inputs, including RAB GTPases, SNARE proteins, and accessory proteins. Indeed, mutations in several of these elements disrupt the proper targeting of Golgi body–derived glycans. Mutations in genes encoding YPT/RAB GTPase Interacting Protein 4a (YIP4a), YIP4b, or their interacting protein ECHIDNA disrupt secretion of matrix polysaccharides (71). Further studies revealed that disruption ofECHIDNAresults in accumulation of pectins in post-Golgi vesicles and ER-derived bodies and mistargeting to the central lytic vacuole (121). Individual null mutants inRABA1,RABA2, andRABA4affect the levels of pectin, cellulose, and hemicellulose, respectively, in the cell walls ofArabidopsisstems, although these mutants do not display obvious morphological or growth phenotypes (117). Pectin has been colocalized with SECRETORY CARRIER MEMBRANE PROTEIN2 (SCAMP2) vesicles in tobacco BY-2 cells (194), suggesting a role for this conserved component of secretory vesicles in the trafficking of pectins and/or other glycans. In contrast, in border cells derived from alfalfa root tips, xylogalacturonan is packaged into large vesicles that derive directly from the margins of trans-Golgi compartments (205), suggesting that the sorting of Golgi-derived wall polysaccharides into exocytic vesicles might occur as early as the trans Golgi.
Are Golgi body–derived polysaccharides and proteins packaged together or into discrete vesicles? Several lines of evidence suggest that these macromolecules traffic through distinct routes from the Golgi to the plasma membrane. For example, mutations in the FRAGILE FIBER 1 kinesin reduce the delivery of pectins to the cell wall, but do not appreciably affect CESA3 trafficking (227), suggesting that they may be trafficked in distinct vesicles. Consistent with this, whereasechidnamutations result in a mislocalization of wall polysaccharides to the vacuole as noted above, proteins are not mistargeted to the vacuole in the mutant (121), suggesting that distinct post-TGN trafficking components might mediate downstream events in their secretion from the TGN. However, counter to this idea, both CESA proteins and matrix polysaccharides have been detected in isolated SYP61-containing vesicles (50,209), suggesting at least some overlap between the pathways.
Different Golgi body–derived wall polysaccharides may be targeted to distinct secretory vesicles. The proton ionophore monensin, which inhibits the proton gradient of the secretory pathway, causes intracellular accumulation of hemicelluloses but does not affect pectin secretion (223). Another study used double labeling with antibodies specific for either xylogalacturonan or xyloglucan to demonstrate that each of these glycans occupies distinct vesicles (205). In contrast, double labeling of vesicles moving from the TGN to the plasma membrane inViciaroot hair cells determined that polygalacturonic acid and xyloglucan epitopes are present together in most vesicles (176). A model consistent with these results includes multiple classes of vesicles derived from the TGN (or in some cases directly from the Golgi body) that contain distinct sets of multiple glycans.
Golgi stacks move around the cell via actin-myosin-driven cytoplasmic streaming in a stop-and-go fashion (16,99,131), and cargos are likely unloaded during Golgi pauses (39,131). Several studies suggest that the delivery of glycans to theapoplastoccurs nonuniformly across the cell surface. In growing pollen tubes, pectin subtypes are distributed heterogeneously from the tip to the shank of the tube (30,158). InArabidopsisroot cells, polysaccharides that are metabolically labeled to allow for fluorescent tagging (4) first localize in the cell wall as distinct puncta that likely mark the sites of vesicle-mediated delivery of new polysaccharides. Consistent with the dynamic nature of glycan delivery, this pattern of incorporation changes significantly along the developmental gradient of the root (4).
Insights into the initial interactions between wall components can be gained from the analysis of cytokinesis in plant cells, during which cell wall components are sequentially delivered to the growing and developing cell plate that separates daughter nuclei (163). This de novo wall formation begins with the deposition of positively charged extensins and negatively charged pectins that potentially interact electrostatically (26), followed by the deposition of callose, and finally the synthesis of cellulose (126). However, whether these ordered delivery and synthesis events persist during the interphase deposition of cell walls is unclear, and the question of how exactly cellulose-matrix interactions arise in vivo is an open one. Given the potential separability of the secretory pathways for CSCs and matrix polysaccharides mentioned in the section titled Trafficking of Polysaccharides from the Golgi Body to the Cell Wall, it should be possible to functionally dissect how these initial interactions take place and how altering their kinetics and patterning affects wall structure immediately after its initial assembly.
Plant cells can expand tremendously in volume over their lifetimes, swelling to thousands of times their initial volumes. This growth, which is driven by the turgor pressure imposed by water influx into the cell, is accompanied by increases in cell surface area, which can arise from the expansion and thinning of existing wall materials or from the spatially controlled deposition of additional wall components. Both mechanisms appear to exist in plants and their relatives: For example, dark-grownArabidopsisseedlings deposit thick outer epidermal walls during a slow elongation phase that then become thinner during a subsequent rapid elongation phase (142,153), whereas expanding cells of the charophyte green algaPenium margaritaceumlay down new wall material at an isthmus that displaces older wall regions toward the cell tips (49), and tip-growing cells such as pollen tubes and root hairs grow via polarized wall deposition (9). In certain cell types, such as the protoxylem cells ofArabidopsisroots that form circular and spiral thickenings ofsecondary wallmaterial (172), cell growth can persist even after the deposition of secondary wall layers, but once secondary walls fully encase plant cells, their growth ceases and they often undergo programmed cell death.
CSCsmove in the plasma membrane along linear tracks determined by underlying cortical microtubules (139), driven by the force generated by cellulose polymerization (43,48,92,128). Because cellulose is the main load-bearing element of the wall, its orientation often dictates the extent and direction of cell expansion. In elongating cells, such as root or hypocotyl cells, cellulose is deposited with a net orientation perpendicular to the axis of expansion, thus constricting radial expansion (13,78,186). However, cellulose fibers change in orientation in elongating cells (3), suggesting that after transverse synthesis, cellulose might passively reorient in growing cells to generate differentially oriented wall layers. Additionally, recent evidence (19,141) suggests that polarized pectin modification might underlie the initiation of anisotropic growth in some elongating cells, with the deposition pattern of cellulose responding to and reinforcing this initial growth asymmetry.
Although gravity is thought to be sensed primarily by intracellular amyloplasts, it is also possible that deformation of the cell wall itself by gravity results in changes in wall status that are sensed by the plant. Weakening of the cell wall due to abnormalities in wall synthesis or remodeling can result in mechanical failure of plant stems near the ground level under the forces imposed by gravity and/or wind, which is called stem lodging (97,215), causing major reductions in crop yields. Plants also respond to wind-induced bending and touch. Thearad1 arad2double mutant, which is deficient in arabinan synthesis, produces stems that are deficient in their responses to touch (200). Additionally, the hydration status of the wall is likely to alter both wall-membrane contacts and the interactions of wall polymers themselves, resulting in changes in wall integrity signaling (64).
The dynamic nature of growing and developing plant cell walls, combined with the effects of biotic and abiotic stresses, necessitates an ability of plant cells to monitor the integrity of their walls and modulate wall synthesis and properties in order to allow for appropriate expansion and/or to resist bursting in different conditions (96,98,145,184,204,210–212).Cell wall integritysensing is best understood in the budding yeastSaccharomyces cerevisiae, which employs a family of five cell-surface sensors that contain an extracellular domain that is highlyO-mannosylated and acts as a nanospring embedded in the wall (57,112). These sensors control the activity of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) Rom2, which in turn regulates the activity of a small GTPase called Rho1. Rho1 activates a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade that ultimately phosphorylates transcription factors, which modulate the expression of genes involved in cell wall synthesis and function.
In contrast to our understanding of wall integrity sensing in yeast, our understanding of wall integrity sensing in plants is still in its infancy. An early clue suggesting the existence of a wall integrity sensing system in plants was that tomato cell cultures that had been adapted to the presence of the cellulose synthesis inhibitor 2,6-dichlorobenzonitrile could grow, despite the fact that they synthesize virtually no cellulose (175). A number of reports indicated compensatory changes in plants in response to chemical or genetic inhibition of cellulose synthesis, including ectopic lignification, enhanced callose deposition, increased pectin synthesis and demethylesterification, elevated jasmonic acid levels, increased production of reactive oxygen species, and changes in carbohydrate metabolism (reviewed in84). These studies imply the existence of a cell wall integrity monitoring system that perceives perturbation of the wall and signals to the cell to execute compensatory changes.
Genetic studies have implicated a number of receptor-like kinases (RLKs) from several distinct clades in cell wall sensing (reviewed in146,184,210,212) (Table 2). The best characterized of these are in theCatharanthus roseusprotein-kinase-1-like (CrRLK1L) family. These proteins are composed of an extracellular N-terminal domain with two tandem malectin-like domains, a single transmembrane domain, and a cytosolic serine/threonine kinase domain. In animals, malectin binds dimeric and oligomeric glucose chains (167), suggesting that by analogy, the CrRLK1L family members might bind to wall components. One member of the CrRLK1L family,THESEUS1, was identified as a suppressor of the growth defects of thecesa6prc1mutant. Loss-of-function mutants inTHESEUS1suppress growth defects, ectopic lignification, and many of the gene-expression changes that occur in response to cellulose deficiency, but do not restore wild-type cellulose levels (90). This suggests that the response to cellulose deficiency, including reduced growth, is an active process, and that this response requires THESEUS1. More recently, a new hypermorphic allele ofTHESEUS1was identified that expresses a truncated protein lacking the kinase domain (124), suggesting that kinase activity is not required for signal activation, but rather that it attenuates THESEUS1 signaling.
Putative RLK cell wall integrity sensors in plants
Abbreviations: ABI, ABA-insensitive; ANX, ANXUR; FER, FERONIA; GEF, guanine nucleotide exchange factor; GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; LRE, LORELEI; MIK2, MDIS1-interacting receptor-like kinase 2; RALF, rapid alkalinization factor; ROS, reactive oxygen species; THE, THESEUS; WAK, wall-associated kinase

FERONIA, the best-studied member of the CrRLK1L family, has pleiotropic roles in growth and development, including pollen tube reception in the female gametophyte, root hair development, brassinosteroid and ethylene signaling, and wall integrity perception (reviewed in113) (Figure 3). FERONIA is required to maintain cell wall integrity during salt stress viapectinbinding and by inducing Ca2+transients that are necessary for cell acclimation to salt stress (63). FERONIA, together with a set of extracellular leucine-rich repeat extensins, is also required to coordinate changes in cell wall acidification and loosening with an increase in vacuole size in expanding atrichoblast cells inArabidopsisroots (56). FERONIA appears to signal through a GEF to regulate the activity of a GTPase (Rac/ROP or a RHO), which in turn regulates NADPH oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species levels during root hair growth and in the female gametophyte postpollination (54,55). The cytoplasmic kinase domain of FERONIA likely also acts through other signaling elements, including the phosphatase, ABI2, RPM1‐induced protein kinase, and the β‐subunit of heterotrimeric G protein (53). These diverse signaling outputs likely mediate the pleiotropic effects of FERONIA in different cell types. Further, two GPI-anchored proteins, LORELEI and LORELEI-LIKE-GPI-ANCHORED PROTEIN 1, directly interact with FERONIA and likely act as chaperones and coreceptors (114). Related CrRLK1L family members, such as ANXUR1 and 2, have also been linked to cell wall synthesis, though they may primarily affect pectin synthesis (134). Interestingly, THESEUS1, FERONIA, ANX1/2, and BUPS1/2 also act as receptors for rapid alkalinization factor (RALF) peptides (70,75,86). How the binding of RALF peptides and a glycan in the extracellular domains of these proteins relate to each other is not yet clear.

Figure 3Click to view


Another pair of RLKs implicated in regulated cell wall synthesis is FEI1/FEI2 (218) (Figure 3). Doublefei1 fei2mutants display reduced growth anisotropy that is correlated to reduced cellulose biosynthesis. The FEI extracellular domain has relatively few leucine-rich repeat (LRR) proteins, suggesting that it might act in concert with other RLKs to accomplish wall sensing or signaling (Figure 3). Genetic analyses indicate that the FEIs act in a linear pathway with SOS5, a GPI-anchored protein that has been linked to the regulation of cellulose biosynthesis (14,218). The SOS5-FEI2 pathway is required to produce cellulosic rays that anchor the pectic components of mucilage to the seed surface (85,123). Radial swelling infei1 fei2roots is suppressed by inhibitors of the ethylene precursor 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) but not by inhibitors of ethylene signaling or by genetic disruption of ethylene perception, implicating ACC but not ethylene in cell wall sensing. Consistent with this, inhibition of cell expansion in response to isoxaben in root epidermal cells is dependent on ACC but not on ethylene (195). Similar results were found when these cells were treated with the peptide elicitor flg22, perhaps linking ACC to defense activation in response to wall perturbation. Thefei1 fei2phenotype is also reverted by mutations in auxin biosynthesis genes, which can also partially suppress other cellulose-deficient mutants such ascesa6prc1−1,cobra, andsos5, consistent with a role for auxin incell wall integritysignaling (185).
Plants possess surveillance systems to detect potential pathogen infection, including the perception of so-called damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), which are host-derived molecules that activate plant defense responses. DAMPs include wall fragments released in response to pathogen infection that are perceived by the wall integrity sensing system (8,17,119). Consistent with this, mutations affecting cellulose biosynthesis can affect pathogen interactions. For example, thecev1mutant, a hypomorphic allele ofCESA3, causes constitutive expression of defense-related genes and resistance to powdery mildew pathogens (27,59). Likewise, mutations insecondary wallCESAgenes induce defense genes and reduce susceptibility to broad-host necrotrophic and vascular pathogens (91). Chemical inhibition of cellulose biosynthesis also leads to the induction of defense-response genes (27,61,198), and the treatment ofArabidopsisseedlings with three different inhibitors was used to identify a set of robust immune markers that are also induced by cell wall damage (198). The induction of these genes by the inhibition of cellulose biosynthesis required another LRR-RLK, MIK2.
The cellulose biosynthesis inhibitor isoxaben andBasidiomycetes-derived wall-degrading enzymes induce similar wall damage responses (61,73). Phenotypic clustering reveals that the activation of these responses depends on a set ofRLKs, with THESEUS1, MIK2, and FEI2 playing the most prominent roles, and that pattern-triggered immunity repressed the responses to cell wall damage (73). Gigli-Bisceglia et al. (73) proposed that wall damage induces a negative feedback loop, in which the wall integrity response triggers an immunity-related signal that in turn represses cell wall integrity signaling. Intriguingly, cellulose perturbation also induces genes encoding enzymes that degrade cytokinin (CKX2andCKX3), which in turn leads to the downregulation of cell cycle genes (73), suggesting a link between cell wall integrity sensing, hormone signaling, and the cell cycle.
Pectinshave been linked to disease resistance in multiple reports (8). This is likely due to pectins acting as a physical barrier to ingress by pathogens and to their release of pectin-derived DAMP glycans upon their degradation that activate defense signaling, the latter of which is relevant for wall integrity sensing. Application of oligogalacturonides (OGs), which are oligomers of α-galacturonosyl residues derived from pectin, to plants can trigger activation of MAPKs, production of H2O2, induction of defense genes, and callose deposition. One protein family that likely functions in the perception of these OGs are wall-associated kinases (WAKs) (Figure 3), which are a family of RLKs, some of whose extracellular domains bind to pectin in planta (105). In vitro, the WAK extracellular domain binds to pectin oligosaccharides in a Ca2+-dependent manner (44,106). A domain-swap experiment revealed that WAK1 could be activated by OGs (25), and WAK2 was found to be required for the induction of MAPK activity in response to pectin (106). WAKs have been linked to resistance to a number of pathogens, includingFusarium, Botrytis,andVerticillium longisporuminArabidopsis(25,47,81), indicating that the WAK gene family plays an important role in wall-mediated plant defense. Although in a few cases it is clear that the WAK ligands are pectin or pectin-derived OGs, for most WAKs no clear ligand has been identified.
THESEUS1 has also been linked to plant defense. Loss-of-functionthe1mutants are more susceptible toBotrytis cinerea, andTHESEUS1overexpression results in reduced disease severity for this pathogen (150). Several genes that are differentially expressed in response toB. cinereainfection are altered in aTHESEUS1overexpressing line and likely represent the downstream transcriptional targets of this signaling pathway during pathogen response. THESEUS1 interacts directly with the RHO OF PLANTS (ROP) GEF4, and altered GEF4 function affects susceptibility toB. cinerea. These results suggest that THESEUS1 might be involved in the perception of cell wall fragments released duringBotrytisinfection and, similar to FERONIA, likely signals through a GEF to activate defense responses.
A recent study identified oligosaccharides derived from xyloglucans called Xh that might also act as DAMPs (35). Xh oligosaccharides trigger a signaling cascade similar to that observed in response to OGs. Purified Xh activates defense gene expression, H2O2elevation, and MAPK activity inArabidopsisand grape (Vitis vinifera). Exogenous application of purified Xh resulted in resistance toB. cinerea(grape andArabidopsis) andHyaloperonospora arabidopsidis(Arabidopsis), acting through the jasmonate, salicylate, and ethylene pathways.
In response to growth stimuli, plant cell walls must loosen to allow for turgor-driven expansion (37). This can be facilitated by the binding activity of nonenzymatic proteins called expansins, which are hypothesized to disrupt the interactions between cellulose and xyloglucan that mechanically constrain wall expansion (36). However, enzymatic modification and cleavage of wall polymers can also occur during growth and likely contribute to at least part of the increase in wall surface area. Homogalacturonan crosslinking by calcium is enabled by demethylesterification of galacturonic acid residues by pectin methylesterases (PMEs) in the wall, and a cycle of calcium binding and unbinding might allow for remodeling of the pectin network in expanding, and even contracting, cells (20,160). For example, a subset of polygalacturonases, enzymes that cleave homogalacturonan backbones, is required for normal cell expansion inArabidopsisplants (160,216). Homogalacturonan can also be cleaved by pectate lyases, although these are less well-characterized at the molecular and genetic levels. Xyloglucan can also be remodeled in the wall by xyloglucan endotransglycosylases/hydrolases, which cleave and can religate xyloglucan molecules. This large class of enzymes has also recently been shown to possess the capability of performing additional transglycosylation reactions between cellulose (177) and xylan (100), opening up the possibility that hybrid molecules with covalent cellulose-matrix links might be generated in the wall. Thus far, however, direct evidence for the function of xyloglucan endotransglycosylase/hydrolase enzymes in cellular growth is sparse, although their functions might be masked by genetic redundancy and/or the dominant biomechanical roles played by other polysaccharide modifications.
Given that enzymes that modify matrix polysaccharides are secreted to theapoplast, likely along post-Golgi trafficking routes that are similar to or overlap with those of their polysaccharide targets, it is not surprising that many of these enzymes are inactive intracellularly and are activated upon secretion or in response to changes in wall conditions, such as pH. A common regulatory mechanism for wall-modifying enzymes is the presence of an auto-inhibitory domain, or an inhibitory binding partner, that is removed or inactivated to initiate the activity of the enzyme. For example, many PMEs are synthesized as proPMEs that contain inhibitory sequences, which must be cleaved (161). One PME, AtPME17, has been hypothesized to be cleaved from a proPME into an active form by the subtilisin-like protease SBT3.5 (174). PMEs also interact with PME-inhibitory PMEI proteins that are likely to dynamically bind and release PMEs, allowing them to demethylesterify homogalacturonan in response to signaling cues (213).
Remodeling of plant cell walls can be achieved by the selective degradation of specific wall components, but it can also be accomplished by the biased production and integration of new wall components. One recent study reported that the Golgi compartments of grasses and eudicots contain similar proportions of matrix polysaccharides and glycoproteins (137), which, given the compositional differences between these two types of cell walls, implies that selective trafficking or degradation of these initially similar contingents of components might account for the differences in wall composition between the two taxa. Likewise, suites ofglycosyltransferaseenzymes might be differentially expressed, post-translationally modified, and degraded to tune the composition of new layers of cell walls. Investigating the differential composition of wall layers before and after experimentally applied, transient stimuli might shed new light on how walls are modified to adapt to changing conditions and would go beyond the constitutive changes induced by gene mutations.
Regardless of the remodeling mechanism, clear connections have yet to be made between wall integrity sensing and its downstream signaling pathways (Figure 3) and the synthesis of new wall components or the proteins that deliver and remodel them. By controlling the spatiotemporal activation of integrity-signaling pathways and monitoring wall assembly and modification in real time, it should be possible to begin to understand the cellular mechanisms by which plant cells can dynamically tune their extracellular environment to optimize growth, protection, and morphogenesis.
Although they exist outside the boundary of the plasma membrane, plant cell walls are dynamic extracellular structures that undergo assembly, metabolism, modification, and controlled degradation and thus mirror many of the characteristics found in the living protoplast. Genetic identification of new players in wall synthesis, sensing, and modification has provided a rapidly expanding cast of characters that carry out myriad activities in the cell wall, but determining exactly how all of these players function alone and in concert will require new, molecular-level information in living plants.




The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
Contributions by C.T.A. to this work were supported as part of the Center for Lignocellulose Structure and Formation, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences (award DE-SC0001090). Contributions by J.J.K. were supported by the National Science Foundation (award IOS 1456658).
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


