We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Fertilization of flowering plants requires the organization of complex tasks, many of which become integrated by the female gametophyte (FG). The FG is a few-celled haploid structure that orchestrates division of labor to coordinate successful interaction with the sperm cells and their transport vehicle, the pollen tube. As reproductive outcome is directly coupled to evolutionary success, the underlying mechanisms are under robust molecular control, including integrity check and repair mechanisms. Here, we review progress on understanding the development and function of the FG, starting with the functional megaspore, which represents the haploid founder cell of the FG. We highlight recent achievements that have greatly advanced our understanding of pollen tube attraction strategies and the mechanisms that regulate plant hybridization and gamete fusion. In addition, we discuss novel insights into plant polyploidization strategies that expand current concepts on the evolution of flowering plants.
Article metrics loading...
afn1*These authors contributed equally to this article
Fertilization of flowering plants requires the organization of complex tasks, many of which become integrated by the female gametophyte (FG). The FG is a few-celled haploid structure that orchestrates division of labor to coordinate successful interaction with the sperm cells and their transport vehicle, the pollen tube. As reproductive outcome is directly coupled to evolutionary success, the underlying mechanisms are under robust molecular control, including integrity check and repair mechanisms. Here, we review progress on understanding the development and function of the FG, starting with the functional megaspore, which represents the haploid founder cell of the FG. We highlight recent achievements that have greatly advanced our understanding of pollen tube attraction strategies and the mechanisms that regulate plant hybridization and gamete fusion. In addition, we discuss novel insights into plant polyploidization strategies that expand current concepts on the evolution of flowering plants.
The etymological meaning of reproduce is “bring forth again” (https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/163098). The term reproduction therefore implies that the organism formed bears resemblance to the parental ones. This is ensured by genes and associated traits, which are inherited from one generation to the next. Yet it is the ability to not reproduce exactly but to instead generate variations on a theme that has made sexual reproduction in flowering plants so successful. The explicit modifications are first and foremost induced through the integration of two distinct genomes and concomitant genetic recombination events. However, infrequent deviations from regular patterns, which can be developmentally encoded or reflect stoichiometric system errors, can substantially affect the reproductive outcome and have critically affected the genetic content and ploidy of flowering plants on an evolutionary scale.
To engage with another organism, a multitude of processes have to be orchestrated. Thefemale gametophyte (FG)constitutes a bona fide example of division of labor. It generates the egg cell along with three additional cell types and separates distinct fertilization tasks both temporally and spatially. Among the processes regulated by the distinct FG cell types are the generation of a molecular platform that allows for cell-cell interaction, the decision to start an interaction with the male fertilization partner, the installation of a recognition system that allows discrimination between beneficial and deleterious contacts, the ability to switch systems off once they become dispensable, integrity control mechanisms, and the establishment of strategies that allow repair of or compensation for developmental errors. While we are still just scratching the surface of the complex plant reproduction mechanisms, tremendous progress has been made over the past several decades to dissect these processes. Here, we review the development of the FG, starting with thefunctional megaspore (FM), which represents the haploid founder cell of the FG. We discuss the fascinating capabilities of the FG to coordinate the distinct phases of fertilization. We highlight recent achievements that have greatly advanced our understanding of pollen tube attraction strategies and the mechanisms that promote and/or prevent plant hybridization and gamete fusion, and we discuss recent results that expand our concept of plant polyploidization strategies.
InArabidopsis thaliana, as in most angiosperms, the establishment of the egg-forming FG traces back to a single subepidermal cell in the apical part of theovuleprimordium (Figure 1). This so-called archesporial cell differentiates into the megaspore mother cell (MMC). The MMC then enters meiosis, resulting in the formation of four haploid spores (163). These processes are referred to as megasporogenesis [comprehensively reviewed by Drews & Koltunow (40) and Nakajima (136)]. The three most apical spores degenerate, and the remaining FM undergoes four incomplete mitotic divisions (Figures 1band2b). The resultingsyncytiumcontains eight nuclei that become incorporated into the seven-celled FG: Three antipodal cells at thechalazalend and the egg cell and two synergids at the micropylar pole surround the central cell (Figure 2b). The latter carries two haploid nuclei, which fuse later on.

Figure 1Click to view


Figure 2Click to view


In comparison, themale gametophyteis formed within anthers from microspore mother cells that trace back to a single archesporial cell (166,208). In contrast to the FG, the pollen develops following only two mitotic divisions that give rise to the three-celled pollen grain, wherein the vegetative cell harbors the two sperm cells (47). Upon pollination of the stigma, the vegetative cell germinates and grows as a pollen tube through the maternal sporophytic tissue of stigma and style toward the FG-containing ovule.
Both the central and the egg cell are gametic and get fertilized by the two sperm cells delivered by a single pollen tube. The fate of the antipodal cells is variable among different angiosperms: In some species such asArabidopsis, they enter aprogrammed cell death (PCD)pathway at about the time point of fertilization (78,172). In others, including the important cropsZea maysandOryza sativa, the antipodal cells proliferate and become integrated into the seed after fertilization (39,112). The synergid cells are essential for control of pollen tube attraction (61) and provide the interface for communication with approaching pollen tubes (62).
The developing FG shows a distinct polarity between the micropylar and the chalazal pole. Positional information for this polarity is already provided by the surrounding maternal tissue during ovule primordia formation: High cytokinin biosynthesis and response, as well as expression of receptors likeCYTOKININ RESPONSE1(CRE1), were observed in the ovule primordia at the chalaza (8,27). The polar cytokinin signaling is thought to specifically regulateSPOROCYTELESS(SPL) andBELL1(BEL1) (8). While SPL seems to be needed for expression of the auxin transporterPIN-FORMED1(PIN1) in the sporophytic cells surrounding the MMC, BEL1 appears to be important for the inhibition ofPIN1andWUSCHELin the developing integuments at the chalaza (8). The establishment of a chalazal and thus polar cytokinin response therefore appears to provide the basis for the establishment of spatially restrictedPIN1expression in the sporophytic cells of thenucellus(Figure 2a), which is vital for FG formation (23). This restricted pattern shows that shortly after the ovule primordia form, PIN1 connects tissues synthesizing auxin at the chalazal side and thefuniculuswith the nucellus, where auxin response factors are active. The expression pattern is kept until early stages of FG development (Figure 2a) and knockout or knockdown ofPIN1in the ovule lead to arrested development in the mono- or binuclear embryo sac stage (23). The importance of a polar hormonal pattern is also supported by work onIMPORTIN β4(IMB4) (104). IMB4 and its cargo, the transcriptional coactivator GROWTH REGULATING FACTOR-INTERACTING FACTOR1 (GIF1), are important for correct integument growth. Inimb4mutants, nuclear import of GIF1 is affected and several ovule developmental defects are observed, including ectopic cytokinin response and a corresponding reduced auxin signaling. While the regulating role of auxin in the sporophyte is evident, there is some debate about the presence of auxin within the FG (23,103,142), as two of three studies failed to detect established auxin response markers in the embryo sac.
A molecular polarity within the developing FG already becomes evident in the four-nucleate stage, when the histidine kinase CYTOKININ INDEPENDENT1 (CKI1) is polarly activated at the chalazal pole (207) (Figure 2b). Mutants defective forCKI1exhibit micropylar signatures also in their chalazal half, while ectopic expression ofCKI1in the entire FG causes expansion of central cell signatures toward the micropylar end (55,149,207). These results reveal CKI1 as a key player for the establishment or maintenance of a micropylar-chalazal polarity.
The switch from meiotic phase duringFMformation to the mitotic development of the gametophyte is a vital step in plant reproduction. In addition, the FM marks the onset of a developmental phase in which deleterious recessive loci become unmasked due to the lack of a second functional allele. Notably, the heterozygous history of a given mutant embryo sac can substantially mask gene functions, as mutant defects are expected to occur with a time lag, depending on the amount and turnover of functional protein carried over from the MMC to the FM. Abnormal phenotypes that become manifest during embryo sac development and maturation have thus to be interpreted with care.
The early phase of megagametogenesis is regulated by multiple pathways, as evidenced by the various genes involved in nuclear proliferation. InSolanum chacoense, initiation of mitotic division has been shown to rely on the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase FERTILIZATION-RELATED KINASE3 (ScFRK3), and RNAi knockdown lines show mitotic arrests of the FM (35). ScFRK3 likely acts in a MAP kinase cascade together withSolanum chacoenseMITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE KINASE3 andSolanum chacoenseMITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE13. A strongly represented functional category associated with control of nuclear proliferation in theFGis genes involved in rRNA and ribosome biogenesis (169).SLOW WALKER1encodes a WD40 protein, which is, like its yeast homolog UTP15, involved in the processing of pre-18S rRNA and necessary for nuclear divisions in the FG (168). Similarly, the RNA helicase SLOW WALKER3, which is homologous to the yeast 18S rRNA processing factor DEAD BOX PROTEIN8, promotes mitotic progression and thereby prevents premature FG arrest (106). Along these lines, mutants defective inSLOW WALKER2, which has a predicted role in preribosome export from the nucleus, and mutants affected in the ribosomal protein RPL27a segregate FGs that arrest prior to the eight-nucleate stage (100,213).
Early embryo sac arrests are reported to occur inMODIFIER OF SNC1,7(MOS7) loss-of-function mutants (144). The nucleoporin MOS7 is mainly generated prior to meiosis and inherited to the embryo sac. It remains unclear whether its function in nucleocytoplasmic transport or rather its interaction with mitotic microtubules accounts for the early mutant defect. An FG arrest during the early mitotic phase was also reported for therangap1-1 rangap2-3(rg1-1 rg2-3) double mutant (155), and this defect was independent of the established function of RAN GTPase ACTIVATING PROTEIN (RanGAP) in nucleocytoplasmic transport (16). Intriguingly, the double mutant does not exhibit a male gametophytic defect (155), suggesting that the role of RanGAP1 and 2 in syncytial mitosis is FG specific. A similar phenotype with arrest during the mitotic phase was described for mutants ofPHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL-PHOSPHOLIPASE C2(PLC2) (38,99). Enzymes like PLC2 can catalyze the hydrolysis of distinct membrane lipids, thereby affecting multiple cell signaling pathways (134). Unlike therg1-1 rg2-3mutant,plc2-1also shows defects in male gametophyte development (38,99). Recently, the ovule-specific group of RWP-RK domain-containing (RKD) transcription factors was shown to be involved in FM-to-FG transition and regulation of the mitotic growth phase (188) in addition to the factors’ described role in egg cell specification and zygote formation (70,89,199). Double mutants ofrkd2-2and eitherrkd4-1orrkd5-2arrested in FM stage, and some of the ovules inrkd3-2single mutants arrested during early FG development. In comparison,rkd2-2andrkd4-1single mutants showed accelerated development and nuclear overproliferation (188).
As expected, mutations in established cell cycle regulators negatively (93,183,201) and positively (41,74) affect nuclear proliferation. For example, defects inRETINOBLASTOMA-RELATED PROTEIN1lead to overproliferating nuclei in FG development (41,74). The mutant is defective in a protein that regulates a multitude of other processes in plant development, including germ line entry, meiosis,male gametophytedevelopment, stem cell formation, cell differentiation, and DNA damage regulation (12,15,18,25,26,209). To this end, knowledge of how these different pathways are integrated to control the syncytial growth phase of the FG remains largely elusive.
Given the polarity of the FG and surrounding sporophytic tissue, the positioning of the nuclei within thesyncytiumof the developing FG is likely to play a decisive role for FG patterning (175). In the two-nucleate stage inArabidopsis, both nuclei become positioned at opposing ends of the developing syncytium, separated by a central vacuole (32,163) (Figure 2b). Disruption of this pattern in, for example,mos7-5correlates with FG arrests (144). In the second round of mitosis, the nuclei of both poles divide, and two nuclei come to lie at each pole in a transverse orientation to the longitudinal axis of the FG, followed by a shift at the end of the four-nucleate stage orienting the nuclei parallel to this axis (32,163,175) (Figure 2b). Again, FG arrests are observed in mutants in which this patterning is impaired, such asyaozhe(yao) andanaphase promoting complex4(apc4) (98,201). After the third mitotic division, the outermost nuclei at each pole locate transverse to the longitudinal axis, while the innermost nuclei locate alongside this axis (32,163). The two nuclei positioned next to the central vacuole at each pole of the FG migrate toward each other, forming the polar nuclei of the central cell, while cytokinesis occurs, giving rise to synergid, egg, and antipodal cells (32,163) (Figure 2b). Intriguingly, some mutants show this migration pattern for more or even all nuclei of the developing FG: InAtNACK1/HINKELandSTUD/TETRASPORE/AtNACK2double mutants (atnack1 atnack2), cellularization after the third mitotic division is impaired and all nuclei group in the FG center (186). AtNACK1 and 2 appear to be involved in phragmoplast development (160,182). Along these lines, loss-of-function mutations inFUSED protein kinase TWO-IN-ONE(TIO), shown to be involved in phragmoplast establishment, exhibit cellularization defects and aberrant nuclei migration into the syncytial center (140). These data suggest that both processes are regulated by common mechanisms or that cellularization is necessary to manifest nuclear position. After cellularization, the polar nuclei fuse inArabidopsis, while they remain unfused in grasses such as maize (43). The homodiploid central cell nucleus ofArabidopsisis positioned at the micropylar side of the central cell, adjacent to the egg cell (32,163). This positioning is facilitated by F-actin, and a disruption or manipulation of F-actin in the central cell leads to achalazalshift of the nucleus (84). However, this misplacement of the nucleus does not impair fertilization, implying that the requirement of F-actin forkaryogamy(85) is not related to central cell nucleus positioning. Furthermore, these experiments also show that aberrant nuclear position after cellularization does not impair central cell function.Along these lines, theZ. maysmutantbaseless1(50) and the recently described mutantsbaseless2,no legacy1,heirless1,superbase1, andmaternally reduced endosperm1(29) all show aberrantly positioned polar nuclei in the central cell after cellularization, with no effect on fertilization. Notably, several of the mutants exhibit a defect in the formation of the basal endosperm transfer layer (29,50), indicating that nuclear positioning might be relevant for correct patterning during seed development (50).
By contrast, in synergid cells, nuclear positioning after cellularization might even be an important factor for specification and maintenance of cell identity, since several lines of evidence show that reprogramming into egg cells correlates with changes in nuclear position (48,88,94,130,143). However, whether abnormal nuclear positioning is a cause or consequence of the cell fate switch remains to be clarified.
To establish and maintain different cellular functions in the mature FG, cellularization-mediated compartmentalization is necessary. Mutants with defects in FG cellularization arrest (140,145,186) and typically exhibit no or aberrant expression of cell type–specific markers (153,207). The transcription factors MYB64 and MYB119 have been shown to be essential in the transformation from syncytial mitotic growth to cell specification in the FG (153). Both factors are initially expressed in all nuclei of the four-nucleate FG; however, their expression becomes confined during later stages: In the maturing FG,MYB119expression becomes restricted to antipodal and central cell nuclei, and MYB119 protein is detected only in the central cell nucleus (Figure 2b). By contrast, MYB64 is found in the central and egg cell nuclei (Figure 2b). Inmyb64 myb119double mutants, cellularization is impaired and mitotic growth continues. Moreover, cell specification is affected, as demonstrated by ectopic expression of central and antipodal cell markers in all nuclei of the FG at the expense of synergid and egg cell marker expression. Recently, a key role of the relatedMapoly0001s0061 FEMALE GAMETOPHYTE MYB(MpFGMYB) gene inMarchantia polymorphafemale sexual differentiation was uncovered. Loss ofMpFGMYBresults in female-to-male sex conversion (63), indicating a shared origin for female gamete formation in plants. Since somecki1defects are reminiscent ofmyb64 myb119mutants (55), Rabiger & Drews (153) analyzed potential genetic interactions. Their data suggest thatMYB119is activated by CKI1 to then cooperate with MYB64 in order to mediate the growth-to-differentiation transition.Arabidopsis HISTIDINE PHOSPHOTRANSFER PROTEINS(AHP)1,2,3,4, and5constitute key elements of the two-component signaling system, characteristic of cytokinin signaling. Notably, quintuple mutants exhibit a phenotype comparable to that ofcki1mutants (36), and protein interaction studies reveal an interaction between AHP2, 3, and 5 and CKI1 (146). While theahp2 ahp3 ahp5triple mutant does not exhibit the nuclear overproliferation or cellularization defects characteristic tocki1, thecki1-like phenotype for extended micropylar cell fate is recapitulated, suggesting that this functional aspect of CKI1 is regulated by the two-component signaling system (109).
After cellularization, additional molecular information becomes superimposed on the existing micropylar-chalazal polarity (190), allowing for a more refined differentiation of FG subdomains into distinct cell types. Among MYB transcription factors related to the feminizerMpFGMYBinM. polymorpha, a third FG-specific factor calledMYB98has been identified (63).MYB98is specifically expressed in synergids, and its loss of function affects the formation of thefiliform apparatusand concomitant pollen tube guidance (81,151) (Figure 3a). The filiform apparatus is marked by a fingerlike cell wall protrusion at the micropylar side of the synergid cell (64,203) that is thought to constitute a secretion site for guidance cues mediating pollen tube attraction (152). MYB98 acts upstream of a gene regulatory network of proteins that ultimately leads to the secretion of guidance cues into the micropylar region of the FG (151). Among these downstream targets isDD2/CRP810_1.2/LURE1.2, which is a powerful pollen tube attractant (184).

Figure 3Click to view


Central cell development is regulated by the transcription factor AGAMOUS LIKE 80 (AGL80) and its heterodimeric interaction partner AGL61 (7,150,178). The respective mutants exhibit defects in central cell maturation and fail to initiate endosperm (7,150,178) (Figure 3a). Mutants of RPS9M, a mitochondrial ribosomal protein (110), and BiP, an Hsp70 chaperone (117), exhibit similar phenotypes; however, it is currently unknown whether these factors are connected with the AGL61/80 complex. For implementing central cell identity, regulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels is crucial, as indicated by high abundance of ROS in the central cell (Figure 3a) and analysis of Mn-superoxide dismutaseOIWAmutants. Loss of OIWA leads to increased ROS levels in synergid and egg cells and concomitant activation of central cell characteristic features in these cells (115).
For the egg cell,RWP-RK domain-containing transcription factors(RKD)1and2have been reported to initiate an egg cell–like transcriptome profile (Figure 3a), even when expressed in sporophytic tissues (89). However, defects inRKD1and2(89,188) suggest that additional factors contribute to the specification of egg cells. A known gene downstream ofRKD1and2isARGONAUTE8(AGO8) (89), suggesting a link to RNAi processes (57,205). According to studies onM. polymorpha,RKDfunction appears to be largely conserved. Downregulation ofMpRKDhas been shown to cause defects in egg cell differentiation (158) or egg cell arrest (87).
Multiple mutants have been described that form ectopic egg cells at the position of synergids [eostre,lachesis(lis),clotho(clo), andatropos(ato)] and the central cell (lisandclo) (48,130,143). Ineostremutants, the homeodomain geneBEL1-like homeodomain 1(BLH1) is expressed ectopically and interacts with the class II knox geneKNAT3.Pagnussat et al. (143) showed that this ectopic interaction activates egg cell signatures at the position of synergid cells. WhileBLH1itself is not involved in FG development, mutants ofOFP5, a negative regulator of the BELL-KNOX complex, exhibit aneostre-like phenotype. They therefore hypothesized that, for functional FG formation, the BELL-KNOX complex—formed with homologs of BHL1—must be controlled (143). The mutantslis,ato, andcloare, in contrast toeostre, caused by loss-of-function mutations. Intriguingly, all three genes encode for putative core components of the splicing machinery (48,130), thereby linking the restriction of gametic fate to a yet unknown mechanism that operates posttranscriptionally. The gametic competence of all FG cells is compatible with the idea that egg cell identity is the default state. Different lines of evidence provide experimental support for this hypothesis. RNAi-based approaches by Völz et al. (197) indicated the presence of a LIS-dependent mobile factor that originates from the egg cell to restrict gametic fate in accessory cells via lateral inhibition (Figure 3a). Along these lines, laser ablation studies demonstrated that accessory cells acquire gametic fate in the absence of an intact egg cell (94,179). Remarkably,lis,clo, andatoalso point toward a hierarchical order of the FG cells along the micropylar-chalazal axis with respect to their gametic potential: Inlismutants, the egg cell–specific marker is ectopically expressed in synergid and central cells in 36% of all analyzedovules, while 16% showed an ectopic expression of a central cell marker in the antipodal cells. Together with morphological features such as nuclei positioning and cell size, a gradual change from synergid to egg cell, central cell to egg cell, and antipodal cell to central cell becomes apparent (48). It has been proposed that this gametic potential provides a backup mechanism in case of gametic failure (48) and thus increases robustness of the FG (102). The important role of the egg cell for FG patterning is further highlighted by the role of the small secreted peptide Zea mays EA1-like1 (ZmEAL1) fromZ. mays.ZmEAL1is expressed and translated in the egg cell of the mature FG and necessary for repressing central cell fate in antipodal cells (92) (Figure 3a). Finally, the egg cell has also been shown to promote central cell maturation, as evidenced by a study investigating the function ofGAMETE CELL DEFECTIVE1(GCD1). Mutations affect the maturation of both female gametes, and the defect in the central cell can be rescued by providing GCD1 specifically to the egg cell and vice versa (204) (Figure 3b).
It is currently unclear how and to what extent sporophytic cells contribute to cell differentiation in the FG. Thealtered meristem program 1-1(amp1-1) mutant, which forms supernumerary egg cells, can be rescued by sporophyticAMP1expression (88) (Figure 3a).AMP1encodes a putative Glu carboxypeptidase (56), which is endoplasmic reticulum–membrane associated and involved in miRNA-mediated translational inhibition (101). It is therefore conceivable that AMP1 contributes to the generation of a mobile signal specifying egg cell fate at the micropylar end of the FG (88).
In conclusion, FG development is controlled by various factors that participate in cell- and non-cell-autonomous regulatory pathways to coordinate the differentiation and maturation of distinct FG cells. These intra- and intercellular communication strategies ensure the formation of an FG that comprises functionally diversified cells that faithfully support the complex task of fertilization.
While reproduction is inherently associated with formation of new life,FGmaturation and fertilization is a catastrophic event to accessory cells (59). Antipodal cells start to degenerate in the final stage of FG maturation. Notably, in FGs that are artificially kept unfertilized, antipodals disappear three days after emasculation, a time point when fertilized ovules of the same age are in the four-to-eight-nucleate endosperm stage, indicating that antipodalPCDis fertilization independent (78,135,172). Antipodal degeneration is induced non-cell-autonomously by mitochondria-derived signals generated in the central cell. Evidence for this unprecedented regulatory mechanism came from theArabidopsis syco-1mutant, which exhibits mitochondrial cristae defects and an extended life span of antipodals (78) (Figure 3b), and a similar defect has been observed ingcd1mutants (204). Notably, central cell–specific restoration of SYCO gene function not only complemented the central cell defect but also induced regular PCD in antipodal cells. Moreover, selective disintegration of central cell mitochondria mediated by cell type–specific expression of a dominant ATP-ADP translocase led to an extension of antipodal life span (78,204). Intriguingly, in many grasses such as maize, antipodals do not degenerate but instead proliferate as a distinct cluster at the chalazal end of the endosperm after fertilization (39). While it is so far unknown how these contrasting cell fate decisions have evolved, it was recently shown that auxin is a major factor for antipodal cell proliferation inZ. mays(28).
In contrast to antipodal cells, synergids disintegrate sequentially in a fertilization-dependent manner (6,96,118,120,159,196), with the first degeneration occurring upon contact of the pollen tube with the receptive synergid. The exact trigger for PCD of the receptive synergid seems to differ between species. InArabidopsisandTorenia fournieri,degeneration of the receptive synergid was observed only upon pollen tube arrival (159), while in tobacco and apples, one synergid seems to degenerate before pollen tube arrival, raising the question of how the receptive synergid is chosen (65,180,191). Recently, REM transcription factorsVALKYRIE(VAL) andVERDANDI(VDD) were identified as key controlling factors for PCD in the receptive synergids ofArabidopsis(124). Downregulation ofVALand loss ofVDDlead to synergid cells that are able to attract pollen tubes but do not undergo cell death afterward. The mitochondrial chaperone GAMETOPHYTIC FACTOR2, an important regulator of synergid PCD (31), acts downstream ofVALandVDD(124). Interestingly, the nonreceptive synergid disintegrates in a two-step process after successful double fertilization by rapid fusion with the endosperm and degeneration of the nucleus (6,118,120). This process requires the fertilization-independent seed (FIS)-class Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 as well as the transcription factors EIN3 and EIN2, which are components of the ethylene response pathway. Plants defective in any of these factors retain a synergid function and attract supernumerary pollen tubes despite successful fertilization, highlighting their importance for the establishment of a pollen tube block (196). The persistent synergid nucleus has been shown to become molecularly assimilated by the endosperm and participates in the syncytial nuclear division regime. The developmental impact of such synergid nucleus inheritance is currently not known.
The efficient and specific attraction of pollen tubes toward female tissue has fascinated generations of scientists and prompted various speculations about the mechanistic basis of this growth pattern (58,60,170). In a seminal paper, Higashiyama et al. made use of single and combined laser cell ablations inT. fournieri, thereby unraveling a key role of synergids for pollen tube attraction. While ablation of both synergids fully abolished pollen tube attraction, egg and central cell ablation did not result in a statistically relevant reduction of pollen tube–ovule interactions (61). The establishment of semi in vivo (SIV) fertilization studies allowed researchers to investigate the behavior of pollen tubes when physically disconnected from female tissue. In SIV assays, pollen tubes grow through a cut style and parts of thetransmitting tractonto solid medium containing excised ovules. Notably, when pollen tubes approach the ovules in SIV fertilization studies, they actively turn toward themicropyle, suggesting the existence of diffusible attractants that are secreted through the filiform apparatus. The establishment of the filiform apparatus requires the transcription factor MYB98, and the respective mutants almost completely lack the fingerlike cell wall protrusions that typically project far into the synergid cytoplasm. The morphological defect correlates with a failure in micropylar guidance and concomitant reduction in fertility (81). Apart from synergids, the central cell and the egg cell have been implicated in pollen tube guidance inArabidopsisand maize, respectively. The CENTRAL CELL GUIDANCE (CCG) protein is expressed in theArabidopsiscentral cell, andccgmutants fail to attract pollen tubes, a defect that can be rescued by central cell–specific restoration of CCG function (24).
Z. mays EGG APPARATUS1(ZmEA1) encodes a small peptide that becomes secreted toward the micropylar region of the ovule. RNAi-mediated downregulation revealed a critical role of ZmEA1 in micropylar pollen tube guidance and fertility.ZmEA1is expressed not only in synergids but also in the egg cells, and it has hence been suggested that maize egg cells contribute to pollen tube attraction (116). To this end, it is unknown how the peptide signal of ZmEA1, a protein class specific to grasses, is perceived and interpreted.
InT. fournieri, pollen tube attraction requires small cysteine-rich proteins (CRPs). These CRPs were named LURE proteins and are highly abundant in synergids (141). LUREs contain a predicted cleavable signal peptide and localize to the filiform apparatus, from which they get secreted to the micropylar tissue (141,184).
The emerging picture for pollen tube guidance suggests a well-signposted route through distinct maternal fields equipped with diffusible and thus gradually distributed guidance cues (Figure 4a). The signals can indicate gateways, such as the micropyle, but also junctions, including theseptum-funiculustransition. Interestingly, this route can be co-opted by fungal pathogens to enter the plant (167). These attacks are usually parried by small CRPs that are related to the defensin-like class of fast-evolving proteins (DEFLs). The DEFLs are secreted from the plasma membrane into the extracellular space, which serves as a first interaction zone between invader and host cells. Likewise, pollen tubes from different accessions or even species might successfully germinate on thestigmaticsurface to then follow the indicated way toward the embryo sac. In light of such hybridization scenarios, recent work by Zhong et al. (211) is very interesting. The group has reinvestigated previously describedArabidopsisLUREs to find that their field of action starts well upstream of micropylar guidance: AtLURE1 peptides mediate the penetration of the septum, when pollen tubes transit from the transmitting tract onto the funicular surface. Intriguingly, AtLURE1 accelerates pollen of its own species, thereby providing a competitive advantage over unrelated pollen tubes. This is evidenced by the fact that pollen tubes fromArabidopsis thalianaare sensitive to a knockout of all seven functionalAtLURE1genes, resulting in delayed pollen tube attraction, whereas guidance ofArabidopsis lyratapollen tubes is not affected in theAtLURE1septuple mutant.AtLURE1genes thus confer positive kin selection that operates at the level of septum emergence. By contrast, the four CRPs XIUQIU1–4 contribute to pollen tube attraction in a species-independent manner, as evidenced by their ability to attract pollen tubes of differentArabidopsisspecies (211). The fact that even a hendecuple (eleven) mutant consisting of allAtLURE1s andXIUQIUs exhibited only a 20% reduction in fertility reveals an intriguing redundancy in pollen tube attraction control and suggests the existence of additional, yet unknown attraction mechanisms (Figure 4b).

Figure 4Click to view


AtLURE1 is perceived and interpreted by multiple members of the receptor-like kinase (RLK) family, which have been associated with responses to environmental challenges. Two groups recently performed a candidate gene approach, screening about 30 RLKs to find factors that support pollen tube attraction. Takeuchi & Higashiyama (185) performed in vitro bead-based pollen tube attraction experiments and found that POLLEN-SPECIFIC RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE6 (PRK6) is essential for pollen tube reorientation toward AtLURE1. In plants, defects in PRK6 exhibit a moderate effect; however, when combined with mutants defective for PRK1, PRK3, and PRK8, pollen tubes fail to enter ovules (185). Wang et al. (200) used a similar candidate gene approach and identified two pairs of RLKs. The first pair was named MALE DISCOVERER1 (MDIS1) and MDIS2 and the second MDIS INTERACTING RLK1 (MIK1) and MIK2 (200). Direct interaction studies confirmed binding of MDIS1, MIK1, and MIK2 to AtLURE1 (200). In addition, both groups confirmed relocalization of these RLKs upon AtLURE1 binding. Moreover, membrane localization of PRK receptors concentrated toward an AtLURE1 gradient, strongly supporting the notion that PRKs are bona fide AtLURE receptors (30,185,200).
In their initial growth phase while approachingovules, pollen tubes have to resist internal turgor pressure to promote cell elongation. Conversely, the terminal phase within the ovule is characterized by pollen tube rupture, enabling sperm cell release (72,125,210). Pollen tube integrity and growth are interdependent processes that are regulated by a complex signaling network and critically rely on monitoring and maintaining of the cell wall (162). Cell wall integrity is controlled by severalCatharanthus roseusreceptor-like kinases (CrRLKs) that locate to the pollen tube tip (97), including ANXUR1, ANXUR2 (13,127), BUDDHA'S PAPER SEAL1 (BUPS1) and BUPS2 (46), and ERULUS (54,164). Although we are only beginning to understand the complex receptor-ligand interactions, it has recently been shown that small rapid alkalization factors (RALFs) can act as ligands for the CrRLK receptors (54). These RALFs are released by the pollen tube (autocrine signaling) and the host tissues (paracrine signaling), indicating that CrRLKs are involved in the integration of intracellular signals and information coming from the environment.
Two recent studies showed that pollen-secreted RALF4 and RALF19 bind to LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT EXTENSINS associated with cell wall development (123) and to the receptors ANX-BUPS (46). When the pollen tube reaches the site of fertilization, it is confronted with a different set of RALFs (RALF1, RALF33, and RALF34) released by the ovule. Ge et al. (46) performed a functional assay demonstrating that nanomolar RALF34 concentrations are sufficient to induce pollen tube discharge in vitro. It thus seems likely that maternal- and paternal-derived RALFs compete for receptor binding and that, at the gametophyte, a switch from autocrine to paracrine signaling participates in the induction of pollen tube discharge (46).
Fluorescence resonance energy transfer–based Ca2+probes that allow for live cell imaging helped establish that female and male Ca2+signatures dynamically change upon arrival of the pollen tube (37,52,68,126,138). Notably, depending on their role during fertilization, the two synergids respond differentially to pollen tube arrival, with the receptive synergid showing stronger but less persistent Ca2+oscillations (37,68,138).
Along thechalazal-micropylar axis, the synergid cell has been divided into distinct zones differentially available for physical contact with the pollen tube. The chalazal zone is engulfed by the cytoplasm of the central cell. The intermediate zone comprises a narrow neck area, and the micropylar zone is characterized by the filiform apparatus (95) (Figure 5a).

Figure 5Click to view


Following the physical interaction with the synergid, the pollen tube increases its speed, passes thefiliform apparatus(95), and grows alongside the synergid's axis (37,138). Intriguingly, as the pollen tube progresses toward the synergid chalazal zone, the highest Ca2+amplitudes within the synergids follow the tip region of the pollen tube. This might indicate that large areas of the synergid are capable of sensing and potentially guiding the pollen tube (37). The explosive release of sperm cells is cytologically followed by a quick shrinking of the receptive synergid (138). However, receptive synergid degeneration is already initiated at an earlier time point and is not a direct consequence of pollen tube discharge, as evidenced by the fact that mutant FGs exhibiting a defect in pollen tube rupture are capable of inducing synergid degeneration (96).
The calcium dialogue critically relies on synergid surface receptors, including FERONIA (FER). Theferphenotype is manifested by irregular growth and extensive curling of one or more pollen tubes inside the micropyle of the FG, indicative of a failure in reception (42,67,157). FER associates with the two redundantly acting receptors—HERCULES RECEPTOR KINASE1 (HERK1) and ANJEA (ANJ)—andherk1 anjdouble mutants resemble the FER phenotype (45). The small GPI-anchored protein LORELEI (LRE) mediates the relocalization of FER to the filiform apparatus, where LRE serves as a coreceptor interacting with both FER and HERK1/ANJ (21,97a). Downstream signaling involves the mildew resistance locus O protein NORTIA that is necessary for Ca2+spiking (138). NORTIA function is dependent on relocalization from Golgi-associated compartments to the synergid filiform apparatus upon pollen tube arrival (76,206), a process that is defective inferandherk1 anjdouble mutants (45) (Figure 5b). In addition, in maize, small defensin-like embryo sac4 (ZmES4) molecules are secreted from the synergid cells and interact with the potassium channel (KZM1) of the pollen tube to effect pollen tube reception (1). The PCD of the receptive synergid sets the stage for the final phase of fertilization.
Upon pollen tube rupture within theFG, the sperm cells have to reach distinct female gametes to then faithfully attach and fuse with both the egg and the central cell. Successful fertilization not only establishes the basis for the next generation but also stimulates the disintegration of the pollen tube attraction machinery, thereby preventing the attraction of supernumerary pollen tubes.
Commonly, only one pollen tube reaches the synergids (6), suggesting the existence of a pollen tube block that restricts the number of sperm targeting the female gametes. Interestingly, incomplete fertilization of either only the egg cell or only the central cell triggers additional pollen tube reception (79). This fertilization recovery mechanism rescues single fertilized ovules, which otherwise would have aborted, and suggests that synergid integrity is coupled to the fertilization status. In fact, whilePCDof the receptive synergid is induced upon pollen tube reception, the disintegration of the second synergid requires successful fertilization (6,79,196).
It has recently been shown that the disintegration of the second synergid is biphasic, reflecting the double fertilization process, involving the disintegration of the synergid nucleus and the fusion of the synergid with the endosperm (120). Apart from the fusion of gametes, the synergid endosperm fusion is the only described membrane fusion in plant cells to date, since plant cells are normally separated by a rigid cell wall (119,120). The fusion process is associated with a rapid cytoplasmic flow from the synergid into the much larger endosperm, leading to a quick dilution of pollen tube attractants such as AtLURE1.2 (119,120).
Both cell fusion and the elimination of the synergid nucleus are necessary to terminate pollen tube attraction (120,196). The disintegration of the nucleus of the second synergid is defective in three classes of mutants (119). The first class comprises several central cell–expressed members of the Polycomb group proteins, including MEDEA (MEA), FERTILIZATION INDEPENDENT SEED2, and FERTILIZATION-INDEPENDENT ENDOSPERM (FIE) (120). The second class is defective in the ethylene response mediators EIN2 and EIN3 (196). The third class of mutants contains JAGGER, which is a sporophytic factor that belongs to the highly glycosylated arabinogalactan proteins that locate to the cell surface. Its sugar moieties have been implicated with signaling processes, as described for glycosides of the pollen tube activator AMOR (128,147,212). Moreover, JAGGER expression is upregulated inconstitutive triple response1(ctr1) mutants, linking JAGGER and ethylene signaling in the synergid degeneration pathway (148). Interestingly, all three mutant classes do exhibit supernumerary pollen tube attraction and successful double fertilization. This leads to a unique situation in which additional sperm cells that potentially challenge the egg cell are present in the ovule. Whether and to what extent they contribute topolyspermyis currently unknown and the subject of future research.
It has long been speculated that active, cytoskeleton-based transport is involved in the transfer of the sperm from the site of pollen tube reception to the site of gamete fusion (202). Based on results from high-resolution microscopy, however, a passive transport scenario appears more plausible: Following the explosive pollen tube burst, the two physically connected sperm cells are detected in a cleft between the egg and the central cell at the chalazal site of the receptive synergid (51,53) (Figure 6a). Given that the velocity of the ejected sperm cells is up to 10 μm/s and that the movement of the sperm is continuous, the ejaculation force appears to be sufficient for the sperm cells to reach the final site of fertilization (51,53,83).

Figure 6Click to view


Sperm cell release triggers various fertilization-activating mechanisms. Capitalizing on fusion-defectivegcs1mutant sperm, Kasahara et al. (80) showed that the pollen tube content induces ovule enlargement and the initiation of seed coat development. This indicates that, irrespective of successful fertilization, the pollen tube content has proliferative effects on the central cell and ovule. In addition, a short Ca2+wave is observed in both egg and central cells (37,52), indicative of female gamete activation.
At about the time point of pollen tube burst, the egg cell starts to secrete vesicles containing CRPs of the EGG CELL1 (EC1) family. The vesicles fuse with the sperm cells, thereby inducing relocalization of the fusogen GENERATIVE CELL-SPECIFIC1-HAPLESS2 (GCS1-HAP2) (see below) from the sperm transmembrane system toward the plasma membrane (176). The five EC1 family members act redundantly, highlighting the robustness of this sperm-activating process.
It is not known whether and to what extent the fertilization zone on the female gamete matrix is predefined for sperm entry; however, electron microscopy has revealed position-dependent indentations in the egg cell wall of tobacco (129) andArabidopsis(189) that may represent sites of gamete fusion. In addition, based on live-cell microscopy data, the size of these zones could be approximated to 38 μm2for the egg cell and 52 μm2for the central cell (66). Interestingly, MICROTUBULE DEPLETION DOMAIN1 (MIDD1), which inhibits cortical microtubules necessary for building a cell wall in xylem cells (139,194), is expressed in egg and central cells, and the protein is found in polarized patches on the egg apparatus, suggesting involvement of MIDD1 in the occurrence of egg and/or central cell wall modifications (194) (Figure 6a).
When the two physically connected sperm cells reach the fertilization zone, they rest for several minutes, which possibly reflects a mechanism that enables and verifies membrane adhesion (51,53). Indeed, it has recently been observed by live-cell imaging that most sperm cell pairs initially attach to a single female gamete. This is followed by a rectification process, which is characterized by the release, rotation, and reattachment of one of the sperm cells (66). Subsequently, the physical connection between the sperm cells is disrupted, and the two sperm fuse with the egg and the central cell, respectively (72,122). The molecular mechanisms underlying these processes are largely unknown. The first identified molecular player in flowering plants that is involved in sperm cell adhesion is GENERATIVE EXPRESSED2 (GEX2).gex2mutants exhibit a subtle transmission defect that can be traced back neither to morphological defects of the sperm cells nor to a failure in pollen tube reception. Instead, ingex2mutants, sperm cell attachment to female gametes is partially compromised, as evidenced by an assay probing adhesion between sperm and protoplasted female gametes (131). Sperm adhesion is also compromised inec1gametes, indicating that EC1 proteins serve a twofold function during the activation of male gametes, mediating the recruitment of unknown sperm adhesion factors and the relocalization of HAP2 necessary for membrane fusion (34). HAP2 is a highly conserved transmembrane protein that was initially identified in a screen for male sterility (73). HAP2 specifically locates to the sperm plasma membrane (132,198), where it trimerizes. The resulting apical amphipathic helix inserts into the female gamete plasma membrane, thereby enacting the fusion of the two gametes (fusogen) (44). This indicates that HAP2 functions unilaterally and does not need a female binding partner, implying that additional mechanisms are needed to avoid unspecific fusion of sperm cells with each other or with somatic cells (72). The large differences in identity and fate of the two female gametes contrasts with the morphological and molecular similarity of both sperm cells, characteristic to many flowering plants. Hamamura et al. (53) made use of photoconversion experiments, which allowed them to differentially mark and trace individual sperm in the FG. These experiments, together with cytological studies of mutants with increased frequencies of single fertilization events (131,156), clearly indicate that the two sperm have no preference with respect to their fusion partner. Still, the fertilization machinery of the egg and the central cell differ, as shown by two recent reports, which uncovered that both fusion events can be genetically separated: By analyzing microsomal fractions, Takahashi et al. (181) identified a generative cell membrane protein inLilium longiflorum(lily) that is an ortholog of DUF679 DOMAIN MEMBRANE9–DUO1 ACTIVATED UNKNOWN2 (DMP9-DAU2) fromArabidopsis(14,82). DMP9 function was also investigated by Cyprys et al. (34), who showed that bothArabidopsisand lily DMP9 protein localize to the plasma membrane of the sperm, notably impairing gene function of DMP9 and DMP8 through either RNAi or Crispr-Cas9, which exhibit a defect in sperm-egg fusion, while sperm-central cell fusion remains uncompromised (34,181).
The fusogen HAP2 is correctly localized indmp9 dmp8double mutants, and an attachment assay using protoplasted female gametes indicated that DMP9 and DMP8 facilitate egg fusion rather than egg adhesion (Figure 6b). These apparent differences in the molecular fusion machinery potentially contribute to the different polyspermy ratios suggested for the egg and the central cell (34,165) (see Section 5).
An elegant study usedtetraspore(tes) mutants to investigatepolyspermybarriers in vivo.tesmutants eject multiple sperm cells from a single pollen tube.Ovulesfertilized withtespollen were investigated with respect to the ploidy of the resulting embryo and endosperm. While incidences of seeds ascribable to central cell polyspermy (26%) were reported, no indication of supernumerary sperm fusion to the egg was found, suggesting that the polyspermy block in the central cell (if there is any) is less strict than in the egg (165). Along these lines, Grossniklaus (49) reported a central cell polyspermy rate of 2.6% based on comprehensive phenotypic analysis of about 50,000 maize kernels. Among the 2.6%, only a single seed segregated an embryo with an increased ploidy. In the absence of tools that discriminate between unreduced gametes and polyspermy as potential sources of a ploidy increase, egg polyspermy has until recently remained a hypothetical concept in flowering plants (189). Recent advances now bypass these technical limitations, thereby opening polyspermy as a novel research field (189). Toda et al. (192) generated triploid rice gametes by in vitro electrofusing two sperm cells with a single egg cell.
While some of these artificially generated polyspermic zygotes aborted, several seeds tolerated this scenario, which allowed for the generation of viable plants (192,193). The resulting zygotes were viable and passed the embryo stage, verifying that a genomic increase following polyspermy can be tolerated. In addition, a high-throughput polyspermy detection assay was developed that provided the first direct evidence for the occurrence of polyspermy in plants (137). The system capitalizes on the yeast Gal4-UAS two-component system, which is provided by two distinct pollen donors. In the case of polyspermy involving sperm from the two distinct fathers, an herbicide resistance is activated. Screening of more than 120,000 seeds showed that polyspermy can generate viable offspring that can have three parents: one mother and two fathers. While polyspermy is an infrequent event, it is noteworthy that a singleArabidopsisplant can give rise to five polyspermy-derived triploid seedlings (137). These results have important evolutionary implications, as triploid plants are considered an important bridge toward polyploidy (see Section 6).
Our knowledge of the mechanisms that regulate polyspermy at the female gamete level is very restricted. As discussed in Section 4.2, the final steps of fertilization start with a first Ca2+spike in both female gametes associated with pollen tube rupture. At about the time of gamete fusion, the egg cell but not the central cell exhibits a second elevated Ca2+peak (37,52). Fertilization-triggered Ca2+waves in the egg cell have been observed among organisms of distinct kingdoms and appear to constitute a universal activation signal of the egg cell (22). This Ca2+wave has been associated with the induction of a multitude of cellular processes, including a fast electrical block against polyspermy, as described forXenopus(33), sea urchin (69), and fucoid algae (19), for example. In fucoid algae, the fast block is released within seconds and is dependent on sodium (19). In addition, mechanistic data ofXenopuseggs show that the fast block is associated with a rapid depolarization of the plasma membrane that is dependent on Ca2+-activated Cl−channels (111). It has to be noted, though, that the fast polyspermy block remains controversial in many species (22), including flowering plants.
The fast polyspermy block can be followed by an intermediate mechanism that removes fusion competency from the gamete membranes (173). In mammals, the sperm cell receptor JUNO is shed from the egg surface to avoid further binding to its ligand IZUMO (9–11). Similarly, following membrane fusion, theChlamydomonasHAP2 ortholog is rapidly degraded and thus removed from the plasma membrane, which adds to the prevention of polygamy (107,108).
Flowering plants conceivably evolved similar mechanisms. In this respect, it appears noteworthy that the genetic mechanisms regulating sperm attachment differ between the egg and the central cell, as described in Section 4.2, and it will be interesting to decipher the roles of EC1 and GEX in this process (34).
Moreover, a third permanent polyspermy block has been reported in animals that induces physical renovation of the egg cell surrounding coat (77). There is compelling evidence that similar mechanisms do exist in plants, as in vitro studies in maize have shown that the zygote wall gets structurally enforced within several minutes postfertilization (2). In addition, at about 10 min postinsemination, in vitro fertilized rice egg cells exhibit a drastic reduction in fusion competency (192).
In the second half of the last century, polyploidy (i.e., an increase in genome copies) was regarded as a sidetrack of evolution. Recent technological advances, however, drastically changed this view, and today, polyploidy is regarded as one of the most important speciation mechanisms (5). The evolutionary significance of polyploidy is emphasized by the broad scientific consensus that virtually all lineages of vascular plants have a polyploid ancestor (3,71,133) and that a large fraction of extant plants are comprised of young polyploids (4,195). Although the research on polyploidy has intensified in the past two decades, mostly due to advances in the field of genomics, flow cytometry, and computer-based modelling, we are still far from understanding polyploidy formation (17,174,187).
Apart frompolyspermy, two additional pathways can contribute to stable polyploid formation. The first route involves somatic doubling, which can arise spontaneously or upon heat treatment (154). In agriculture, targeted somatic doubling is induced by chemicals (161,177). In natural habitats, however, somatic doubling has been rarely observed, and the literature is restricted to a few isolated reports describing young alloploids (171).
The second pathway has gained the most attention and involves polyploidization via fusion of infrequently forming unreduced gametes (86). Given the low probability that meiotic failures and the formation of unreduced gametes occur in both sexes synchronously (bilateral pathway), it has been suggested that stable tetraploids rather form via an intermediate triploid bridge, which forms upon fusion of one unreduced gamete with a regular reduced one (unilateral pathway) (20,86,91,121,154). In fact, the occurrence of triploid individuals has been observed in several natural populations (154,174).
While polyspermy can be unambiguously demonstrated if two genetically distinct pollen donors are involved (137), no direct evidence has been provided for natural polyploid formation from unreduced gametes. However, there is compelling indirect evidence highlighting the importance of this route toward polyploidy. Diploid (2n) male gametes are easily detectable, and their occurrence has been described for many plant species (20,91,154). In Brassicaceae, unreduced sperm occur at a frequency of about 1.8% (91). In addition, crosses between diploid and tetraploid plants have been shown to yield viable triploid offspring (75).
However, a natural hybridization barrier termedtriploid blockrestricts the potential of many plants to polyploidize through unreduced gametes (86,114). The triploid block traces back to the action of dosage-sensitive Polycomb group genes that are predominantly active in the endosperm. An increase in paternal genome copies violating the maternal:paternal 2:1 genome ratio commonly induces aberrant endosperm development that leads to seed abortion (86). This postzygotic hybrid incompatibility thus constitutes a major limitation for plant breeding. Mutants in the paternally imprintedADMETOSgene have been shown to suppress the triploid block (90). Importantly, polyspermy can also bypass this hybridization barrier: Mao et al. (113) have established a robust assay for the identification of seeds containing triparental embryos. Their results show that polyspermy can selectively polyploidize the egg cell. In addition, the polyspermy-derived offspring segregate stable diploid and tetraploid plants that are reproductively isolated from their parents in the first generation (113). The discovery of polyspermy as a viable reproductive mode and the results by Mao et al. qualify polyspermy as a powerful driving force for flowering plant evolution (113,137,192) (Figure 7).

Figure 7Click to view


The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the European Research Council (ERC Consolidator Grant bi-BLOCK ID 646644 to R.G.). We thank the Groß-Hardt lab for proofreading.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


