We usecookiesto track usage and preferences.I Understand
Light is essential for photosynthesis. Nevertheless, its intensity widely changes depending on time of day, weather, season, and localization of individual leaves within canopies. This variability means that light collected by the light-harvesting system is often in excess with respect to photon fluence or spectral quality in the context of the capacity of photosynthetic metabolism to use ATP and reductants produced from the light reactions. Absorption of excess light can lead to increased production of excited, highly reactive intermediates, which expose photosynthetic organisms to serious risks of oxidative damage. Prevention and management of such stress are performed by photoprotective mechanisms, which operate by cutting down light absorption, limiting the generation of redox-active molecules, or scavenging reactive oxygen species that are released despite the operation of preventive mechanisms. Here, we describe the major physiological and molecular mechanisms of photoprotection involved in the harmless removal of the excess light energy absorbed by green algae and land plants. In vivo analyses of mutants targeting photosynthetic components and the enhanced resolution of spectroscopic techniques have highlighted specific mechanisms protecting the photosynthetic apparatus from overexcitation. Recent findings unveil a network of multiple interacting elements, the reaction times of which vary from a millisecond to weeks, that continuously maintain photosynthetic organisms within the narrow safety range between efficient light harvesting and photoprotection.
Article metrics loading...
Light is essential for photosynthesis. Nevertheless, its intensity widely changes depending on time of day, weather, season, and localization of individual leaves within canopies. This variability means that light collected by the light-harvesting system is often in excess with respect to photon fluence or spectral quality in the context of the capacity of photosynthetic metabolism to use ATP and reductants produced from the light reactions. Absorption of excess light can lead to increased production of excited, highly reactive intermediates, which expose photosynthetic organisms to serious risks of oxidative damage. Prevention and management of such stress are performed by photoprotective mechanisms, which operate by cutting down light absorption, limiting the generation of redox-active molecules, or scavenging reactive oxygen species that are released despite the operation of preventive mechanisms. Here, we describe the major physiological and molecular mechanisms of photoprotection involved in the harmless removal of the excess light energy absorbed by green algae and land plants. In vivo analyses of mutants targeting photosynthetic components and the enhanced resolution of spectroscopic techniques have highlighted specific mechanisms protecting the photosynthetic apparatus from overexcitation. Recent findings unveil a network of multiple interacting elements, the reaction times of which vary from a millisecond to weeks, that continuously maintain photosynthetic organisms within the narrow safety range between efficient light harvesting and photoprotection.
Why do plants and algae depend on light for their autotrophic metabolism and yet needphotoprotectionagainstexcess light? There are at least three answers. First, the dynamic range of light supply is very high. The available light on the earth's surface changes every day from low intensity at dawn to very high at midday. Although photosynthetic organisms can adapt their functional architecture to level out the light absorption by modulating the size of their photosyntheticantenna systemsthrough regulatory tuning (referred to as acclimation), this requires several days (41), which makes it impossible to cope with the diurnal change in photon fluxes. Too fast an increase in irradiance leads to the absorption of too much light, exceeding the capacity of plants and algae to use the photons inreaction centers (RCs)for photochemistry (specifically, charge separation) and, later, for CO2reduction, which is orders of magnitude slower than charge separation (Figure 1). When the capacity for charge separation is exceeded (referred to as overexcitation), the excited pigments return to the ground state by other mechanisms, possibly resulting in the generation of reactive compounds, which cause photooxidative damage to the components of the photosystems, and, ultimately, inhibiting photosynthesis (or photoinhibition). The second answer is the high pigment content of leaves. Plants accumulate a large surplus of chlorophylls (Chls) in their leaf mesophyll, relative to the optimal amount needed for light harvesting, in order to compete with shading competitors (29). This creates steep light gradients in canopies, further exacerbating the impact of sudden changes in light intensity and quality (spectrum). Third, plants grow continuously, requiring continuous synthesis of the photosynthetic apparatus, which involves the coordinated assembly of proteins, lipids, and pigments. Less than perfect coordination between biosynthetic pathways and the assembly steps can lead to an imbalance between pigment and protein accumulation. Among the pigments are Chls, which absorb photons to generate the abovementioned reactive excited states. Pigment-protein breakdown also occurs continuously during the life span of plants, and this also poses risks with respect to the exposure of assembly intermediates to light, and hence the prospect for photodamage. Therefore, most photosynthetic organisms must deal with excess light daily or seasonally. The amount of light that is defined as excess is modified by environmental conditions (116). If the capacity of the system to use light energy or the products of the light reactions are reduced because of environmental stress, such as cold, drought, salinity, heat, or nutrient deprivation, the utilization of the incident light is limited, and stress is worsened (182).

Figure 1Click to view


The importance of photoprotection is highlighted by the large number of mechanisms by which chloroplasts sense excess light and modify the molecular architecture of their photosynthetic apparatus in order to maintain photosynthetic efficiency. Many excellent reviews have been published on general aspects (91,113) or that focus on the more specific aspects of acclimation (180), biogenesis (133), redox signaling (52) and the role of photoreceptors in activating photoprotection mechanisms (4). Here, we review the diverse photoprotective mechanisms that are activated to limit overreduction of photosynthetic electron chains and to sense and dissipateexcitation pressure. The molecular physiology of photoprotective processes is discussed in light of recent insights provided by molecular biological, genetic, and spectroscopic approaches.
Photosynthesis is a complex mechanism that includes steps catalyzed in lifetimes over a wide time range. In both photosystem (PS) I and PSII, charge separation occurs in picoseconds, while the slowest reaction in photosynthetic metabolism is catalyzed by Rubisco in 10−1s. In between, the time constant of plastoquinol (PQH2) oxidation by cytochromeb6f(Cytb6f) is in the order of 10−3s. The time constants of these reactions are so different that a flux balance could only be reached in steady-state light conditions by assembling electron transport chains with components in vastly different stoichiometries. Under natural conditions, the dynamic range and spectral distribution of irradiance, however, exceed the capacity of both the assimilatory reactions and regulation mechanisms, thus potentially giving way to overexcitation and photodamage. The major mechanisms of photodamage are two: (a) reduction of O2to superoxide anion (O2−), hydroxyl radical (OH⋅) (99), andreactive oxygen species (ROS)and (b) the release of singlet oxygen (1O2*) (164,165). Although not technically a ROS, singlet oxygen is often included in this group, because of its similar oxidative properties. Both species lead to photoinhibition and undermine productivity (9).
The major sources for the generation of ROS are the PSII RC, PSI, and the light-harvesting complex (LHC) of PSII (110), LHCII. Solar energy is captured mainly by Chls bound to the LHCs, which undergo transition to1Chls*. Energy is then excitonically transferred to the RC, where it promotes photochemical reactions. In PSII RC, the special Chl pairP680is excited to P680*and transfers electrons to pheophytin, which, in turn, reduces quinone molecules, QAand then QB. Reduced QBtransfers electrons to plastoquinone (PQ). P680 transiently assumes a positive charge (P680+), neutralized, within 30 μs, by electrons from a specific tyrosine, named Z, in the D1 polypeptide of PSII, linked to a water-splitting reaction (143). While electron flow from P680*to PQ enables efficientphotochemical quenchingof1Chls*in the antenna, the accumulation of large amounts of reduced plastoquinol (PQH2) promotes the reverse reaction, which is charge recombination from QA−/QB−to P680+, restoring P680*. Charge recombination and also the rapid equilibration of P680 with antenna pigments can generate P680*beyond the capacity of the electron transfer chain. Therefore, the lifetime of1P680*increases, enhancing the probability ofintersystem crossingto3P680*(139).3P680*readily reacts with O2in the triplet ground state (3O2), generating1O2*, which will damage nearby protein and lipid molecules, in particular the D1 subunit of PSII (174). In addition to1O2*, PSII can generate both O2−and OH⋅ under excess light (127).
PSI can also experience photoinhibition by ROS (159) produced when PSI-reducing activity exceeds the capacity for the use of reducing equivalents for downstream reactions. Thus, production of O2−occurs within PSI (80); O2−can directly damage the peripheral subunits of PSI, limiting electron transfer from the excited state of the special Chl pairP700(1P700*) to acceptor Chl and enhancing triplet excited P700 (3P700*) formation (138),1O2*release, and PSI photoinhibition (25).
Photooxidative stress also occurs due to Chls bound to LHC proteins sinceRC closurein excess light decreases photochemical quenching of1Chl*and enhances3Chl*yield (169), either in loosely coupled LHC subunits or in unbound Chls (126), during biogenesis of pigment-binding proteins (76). While oxygenic photosynthesis has been functioning for a billion years, high O2levels only accumulated in the last 500 million years (30). Release of ROS is an unavoidable consequence of Chl excited states and their reaction with O2. The protection mechanisms were developed by photoautotrophs during a long evolutionary process in order to react to enhanced photooxidation.
Under light-limited conditions, most of the energy absorbed by the antenna pigments is used in photochemistry, which drives linear electron flow (LEF) from H2O to NADPH, resulting in O2evolution, assimilatory CO2/NO31−/SO42−reduction and support to cell functions. The complexes PSII, PSI, and Cytb6fcooperate to drive LEF and to generate thetrans-thylakoid ΔpH. The thylakoid membranes fold to form distinct compartments: the grana partition, forming paired vesicles further stacked into piles, and the stromal lamellae, unstacked thylakoids connecting the granas. Grana formation establishes two functionally distinct domains, namely the grana core surrounded by the grana margins. The distribution of photosynthetic complexes within the thylakoid membranes is heterogeneous: Functional PSII resides mainly in the grana core, PSI in the stromal domains, and ATPase and Cytb6fare present in both grana margins and stromal lamellae (Figure 2).

Figure 2Click to view


In order to maintain photosynthetic electron transport in an environment of contrasting light conditions, the tuning of excitation pressure versus partitioning of reducing power is a crucial factor (132). The assimilatory rate of photosynthesis is optimized to the prevailing light conditions by long-term acclimation responses, which involve changes in gene expression, metabolic fluxes, and enzyme activities (167). Regulatory mechanisms, in addition, affect a number of alternative electron transport pathways, which were shown to be relevant for preventing photoinhibition (Figure 1).
Cyclic electron flow (CEF) around PSI prevents the photoinhibition of PSII: CEF increases electron transfer from PSI back to PQ without the production of O2or accumulation of NADPH. This results in the generation of a ΔpH across the thylakoid membrane, which, in turn, drives the synthesis of ATP and the induction of energy dissipation (61) (see the section titled Nonphotochemical Quenching).
CEF occurs via two redundant pathways: The major one requires a complex involving proton gradient regulation 5 (PGR5) and PGR5-like photosynthetic phenotype 1 (PGRL1) (63), while the minor pathway requires an NAD(P)H dehydrogenase-like complex (NDH) (120). Tobaccondhmutants (145), which are sensitive to heat and drought stresses, suggest that this pathway is essential forphotoprotection(69,177). Similar phenotypes are exhibited bypgr5,pgrl1, andcrr(chlororespiratory reduction) mutants (31,108). In addition to the linear photosynthetic electron flow, a chloroplast respiratory electron transport pathway, defined as chlororespiration, transfers electrons from NAD(P)H to O2via the PQ pool, thus preventing the complete oxidation of the PQ pool in the absence of light as well as its full reduction inexcess light. The chloroplastic components involved in this process are an NAD(P)H dehydrogenase and a plastoquinol terminal oxidase (PTOX), the latter deployed to divert electrons from PQH2to O2, producing H2O (171). Together, these provide and remove electrons, respectively, thus balancing the redox state of electron carriers (83).
A complex antioxidant network in the chloroplast deactivatesROSand minimizes photodamage. The detoxification systems include ROS scavengers and enzymatic antioxidant components (Figure 1).
Carotenoids (Cars), including oxygenated derivatives calledxanthophylls, make a crucial contribution to chloroplast photoprotection. Cars are present in thylakoid membranes in two distinct pools: (a) a fraction free in lipid phase, which scavenges ROS released from LHCs andRCcomplexes, and (b) Cars bound to photosynthetic machinery, where they are in close contact with Chls (36). Despite the great diversity generated by evolution, the carotenoid content of land plants is well conserved in both the overall composition and the localization in the photosynthetic complexes: β-Carotene is bound to the RC, while LHCs bind xanthophylls lutein (Lut), violaxanthin (Vio), neoxanthin (Neo), and, once accumulated under excess light, zeaxanthin (Zea). While free Cars undergo fast photooxidation (181) due to the effect of ROS produced by the reaction of3Chl*with O2, pigment-protein complexes are far more resistant due to synergic effects, including ROS scavenging, modulation of3Chl*yield, and regulation of1Chl*lifetime (53).
Theexcitation energy transferfrom ROS to Car results in the formation of the ground triplet state of molecular oxygen (3O2) and3Car*.3Car*decays into the ground state, while the excitation energy is safely converted into heat (48).
Neo has a specific function as a quencher of O2−(37), while Vio's photoprotection role is1O2*scavenging (39). In excess light, Vio is de-epoxidized to Zea, with enhanced antioxidant and3Chl*-quenching activity. In addition, the binding of Zea to LHC proteins upregulates thermal energy dissipation, thereby undermining light-harvesting efficiency (38). β-Carotene is a component of both PSI and PSII core complexes, suggesting it has a role in mitigating oxidative damage under excess light conditions (161). Recently,14CO2-labeling studies showed that carbon flux is far greater in β-carotene compared to downstream xanthophylls, implying that most of the β-carotene undergoes oxidative degradation within complexes and is turned over at high rates at its binding sites (15).
The degradation of β-carotene has been shown to produce β-cyclocitral, both through direct oxidation by1O2*or, enzymatically, by carotenoid cleavage dioxygenases (CCDs). The observation that knocking out CCDs inArabidopsisdid not significantly affect the β-cyclocitral level (128) suggests that β-cyclocitral is mostly produced by direct oxidation from1O2*, particularly under excess light stress (32). Exposure ofArabidopsisleaves to β-cyclocitral changed transcription in a similar way to that observed during1O2*stress and increased stress resistance to excess light and drought, implying that β-cyclocitral is a stress-signaling compound downstream of the primary events of oxidative stress. Sensitivity to β-cyclocitral and the enhancement of stress resistance require the MBS1 protein (146), without which ROS response is deregulated. Other genes induced by β-cyclocitral encode xenobiotic detoxifying enzymes, which act by modifying these signal molecules and compartmentalizing them in the vacuole (130). Loss of SCL14 (SCARECROW-like 14) regulative factor, which is required for the transcriptional activation of genes involved in the detoxification of xenobiotics, results in plants that do not respond to β-cyclocitral. The plants remain sensitive to excess light stress, suggesting that detoxification mechanisms, activated by endogenous harmful metabolites that are products of the decomposition of lipid peroxides (98), are key components of the excess light stress resistance.
In this way, Cars, while participating in chemical and photophysical reactions related to photoprotection, also feed the signaling pathways and activate the defense mechanisms involved in the acclimation to excess light. Nevertheless, the full landscape of apocarotenoid signaling in unicellular algae still needs to be defined.
The strong coupling between Chl and Car within pigment-protein complexes results in excitation energy transfer from3Chl*to Car, yielding the Car triplet excited states (3Car*). Indeed, the3Car*population increases with light intensity in leaves, thylakoid membranes, and isolated complexes (38). Quenching of3Chl*prevents1O2*formation. Lut, the most abundant xanthophyll species in the photosynthetic apparatus of plants and green algae, promotes3Chl*quenching and also has a role in scavenging of ROS (39).
Moreover, Cars modulate the1Chl*population in photosynthetic complexes. Under excess excitation energy, excited Chls cannot be quenched by P680 because it is in the closed state. Hence1Chl*builds up, with the potential to generate reactive species causing photodamage. Alternatively,1Chl*can relax to the ground state by thermal degradation thereby decreasing the probability of intersystem crossing to generate3Chl*. This process can be observed through an acceleration of Chl fluorescence decay. Cars are involved in this process as quenchers of the1Chl*population in photosynthetic complexes.
In organic solvent, the fluorescence lifetime of1Chl*is 6 ns but decreases in detergent-solubilized LHC antenna proteins to 3.7–4 ns (105) and drops further to 2.8 ns in a more physiological environment, such as in thylakoid membranes or lipid nanodiscs, thereby decreasing the probability of3Chl*formation (149). The Chl fluorescence lifetime of the LHCII antenna, binding most of the Chl in leaves, depends on the properties of the Chl-xanthophyll interactions.
In addition to Car, other nonenzymatic antioxidant components include the following:

Figure 3Click to view


Enzymatic antioxidant components include superoxide dismutase (SOD), APX, catalase, glutathione reductase, and peroxiredoxins (101). In this context, the water–water cycle is essential to avoid photodamage in PSI: Inexcess light, photoreduction of O2in PSI can occur, thereby generating O2−, which can be enzymatically converted into H2O2by SOD. The hydrogen peroxide detoxification system in chloroplasts is operated by the ascorbate–glutathione cycle, in which APX utilizes ascorbate to reduce H2O2to H2O. These reactions consume excess electrons, reducing the excitation pressure on PSI, but contribute to the generation of a ΔpH without concomitant utilization of ATP. In algae and mosses, flavodiiron proteins catalyze O2to H2O2reactions in a single step (3), suggesting that their expression in crops is a possible strategy for improving resistance to abiotic stresses.
Since3Chl*production is an intrinsic property of Chls, the capacity to control its formation is essential for plant survival and is operated by several inducible mechanisms that are effective in quenching excess1Chl*(that cannot be used for photochemistry) and safely dissipating excited states as heat. Collectively, these mechanisms are referred to asnonphotochemical quenching (NPQ)in contrast tophotochemical quenching, which refers to quenching of the excited1Chl*in the RC by charge separation. NPQ was originally measured as a decrease in the Chl fluorescence of leaves when illuminated with enoughactinic lightto saturate photosynthesis: Since photochemistry is saturated, the quenching of the excited Chl can only be nonphotochemical. Within NPQ, a number of components (depicted inFigure 4) have been identified, based on the timescales of their rise in excess light and relaxation on return to a dark state. These are triggered by acidification of the thylakoid lumen, which is a consequence of the saturation of photosynthesis. The proton concentration in the lumen results from the balance between the rate of photosynthetic electron transport and the dissipation of the pH gradient by the activity of the ATPase: In excess light, the saturation of the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle limits the regeneration of Pi and ADP, the substrates of the ATP synthase. Lumen acidification occurs both directly and through the activation of CEF, which enhances H+transport to the lumen and triggers NPQ (75). In plants and algae, other mechanisms modulate the fluorescence yield. Theantenna systemsof PSII and PSI differ in their light absorption properties, while changes in the quality of incident light can lead to unequal excitation of the two PSs, thus impairing photosynthetic yield. Photoautotrophs can balance the light energy absorbed by the PSs in a process known as state transition, which redistributes antenna proteins between PSs to optimize photosynthetic electron flow during short-term light quality acclimation (5). As a result of this rearrangement, the displacement of the LHCII antenna from PSII to PSI results in fluorescence quenching called qT (see the section titled State Transition-Induced Fluorescence Quenching (qT) and Spillover). In addition to these components, fluorescence emission is also decreased by the chloroplast light avoidance response (23).

Figure 4Click to view


Although the dissection of different fluorescence decline processes is not a trivial matter, it can be performed empirically. The use of pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) fluorometry is widespread in plant physiology laboratories. In this procedure, a supersaturating light pulse is directed at dark-adapted leaves or cells in order to determine the maximal level of fluorescence (Fm). When actinic light is switched on to build up quenching(s), additional supersaturating flashes are delivered to determineFmʹ, at different times, and the NPQ is then calculated as (Fm−Fmʹ)/Fmʹ (12). However, this simple and effective procedure cannot, for example, disentangle quenching from decreased fluorescence due to the bleaching of the sample or other processes. Alternatively, direct determination of fluorescence lifetime, irrespective of the amplitude, can be carried out by applying a PAM-like protocol but using fast pulsed light rather than continuous sources, coupled with time-gated detection within the short dark windows of actinic light (157). This measurement through fluorescence lifetime snapshots produces lifetime values that are reliable indicators of quenchers and are insensitive (within limits) to changes in fluorescence amplitude. For example, PSII fluorescence kinetics have a quenching component dependent on lumen acidification, which develops within 1–2 min, superimposed on a slower component due to chloroplast light avoidance, which develops within tens of minutes (23). Fluorescence lifetime selectively detects the first component while remaining insensitive to the latter, since it does not involve a genuine quenching reaction (157) (Table 1).
Mechanisms that contribute to NPQ
3Chl*formations by intersystem crossing and release of1O2*are harmful events, which are counteracted by the photoprotective, multicomponent mechanism NPQ, which prevents production of harmful excited states through de-excitation of excess1Chl*and thermal energy dissipation. All of these processes have been classified according to the kinetics of chlorophyll fluorescence quenching under EL. The different processes that contribute to NPQ, and the mutants affecting the quenching response, are listed above.
Abbreviations: Chl, chlorophyll; EL, excess light; LHC, light-harvesting complex; NPQ, nonphotochemical quenching; PS, photosystem; RC, reaction center; WT, wild type.

When studying quenching processes and their photoprotective effects, the researcher is faced with the problem of separating quenching from loss of PSII maximal quantum yield. Increase in minimal Chl fluorescenceF0can be due to an inefficient connection of the antenna to the PSII core as in theno minor(NoM) mutant (35), sustained quenching in LHCII as in thesuppressor of quenching 1(soq1) mutant (97), or PSII damage (18), all resulting in a decrease of the photochemical yield of PSII, measured by the Chl fluorescence parameterFv/Fm, calculated as (Fm–F0)/Fm(where F0is the very low fluorescence emitted from dark-adapted leaves that have all of their PSII RCs in the open state and therefore are excellent quenchers). The kinetic analysis of fluorescence parameters during dark relaxation is therefore a better indicator of photochemical and quenching processes than theFv/Fmratio (96).
Fluorescence is the technique of choice when a reliable protocol is available. Measuring the photochemical quenching parameter in the dark (qPd) following a series of lighting setups with increasing levels of light was proposed to identify the photon flux at which qPd is less than 1 due to a higher measured dark fluorescence level (F0′) with respect to the trueF0ʹ value [calculated as 1/(1/F0− 1/Fm− 1/Fm′)] (137). Experience with this method is still limited, and results are not always consistent with independent methods of analysis, as in the case of thephototropin 2(phot2) mutant, which appears to be insensitive tophotoinhibition, as assessed by this method, (179), and yet undergoes photobleaching uponexcess lightexposure (23). Although more challenging experimentally, the direct measurement ofROSrelease by fluorescent probes (66) or electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (54) was efficient in revealing the performance of wild type (WT) versus thenpq4mutant, devoid of qE (131). ROS react with proteins and lipids, producing covalent modifications that can be detected either biochemically (10), by quantifying products from lipid peroxidation such as malonyldialdehyde (170), or by the autoluminescence from the decomposition of lipid peroxides (47). Finally, the best assessment of photodamage/photoprotection can be obtained from a physiological characterization of electron flow, either on the whole chain or through individual thylakoid complexes by probing electrochromic shift at different wavelengths (11).
The core complexes of the two PSs are similar in different organisms while the antenna complexes are far more diverse. In green algae and plants, LHC proteins are encoded by the multigenicLhcfamily of three membrane-spanning α-helices (33,94), which evolved from the high-light-inducible proteins (HLIPs) of cyanobacteria (45), likely protecting intermediates during the biosynthesis of Chl-binding proteins (26). Within the dimeric PSII core, each monomer binds one copy of the monomeric antenna proteins Lhcb4 (CP29) and Lhcb5 (CP26). An additional interactor of Lhcb4, in plants but not in algae, is Lhcb6 (CP24), which, in turn, coordinates M-LHCII (moderately bound) trimers. Additional L-LHCII (loosely bound) trimers accumulate in low light conditions (144,154). Finally, Lhcb4 is an interacting partner of PSBS, the pH sensor protein essential for triggering NPQ (55). Lhcb5 (CP26) is bound to CP43, together with the S-LHCII (strongly bound) trimer (154) (Figure 5). LHCII forms trimers in a homo- or heterotrimeric composition. Each LHCII monomer binds eight Chla, six Chlb, and fourxanthophylls—two Lut, one Neo, and one Vio/Zea (see94), bound to sites named L1, L2, N1, and V1, respectively. While L1, L2, and N1 are active inexcitation energy transferto Chla, V1 is not, and its Vio ligand is exchanged for Zea in excess light (22). InArabidopsis thaliana, LHCII is encoded by nine genes belonging to three groups,Lhcb1–Lhcb3(72). In the green algaChlamydomonas reinhardtii, LHCII is also encoded by nine genes. Notice that there is no correspondence with theLhcbgenes inA. thaliana, indicating that these evolved after the separation of green algae and land plants. In the case of green algae and land plants, the LHC-typeantenna systemof PSI is named light-harvesting complex I (LHCI). LHCI consists of two heterodimers, Lhca1/Lhca4 and Lhca2/Lhca3 (Figure 5) (117). Two additionalLhcagenes are expressed inA. thaliana: The corresponding Lhca5 and Lhca6 proteins are essential for the assembly of large and rare PSI-NDH complexes catalyzing CEF (119). The 10 LHCI subunits are distributed between two different locations of the supercomplex (155). Eight of them form a double moon–shaped arc with four Lhca proteins each, while two additional Lhca subunits are bound to an opposite site with respect to the PSI core complex. The PSI-LHCI supercomplex inC. reinhardtiiis depleted of red-shifted absorption forms (ƛ>700 nm) compared to plants. Far-red light is absorbed by water and is therefore a poor energy source in aquatic environments. LHCII is also known to bind to PSI, either upon state transition or in steady-state light conditions, and increases the total amount of Chl by approximately 20% with a minimal quantum efficiency loss (178). In green algae, besides LHCII, Lhcb4 and Lhcb5 also migrate between PSs duringstate transitions, forming an even larger complex than the one found in plants (166).

Figure 5Click to view


Energy quenching (qE) develops within a tenth of a second after a sudden increase in light intensity and relaxes within 1–2 min at subsaturating light (68). qE is triggered by protonation of lumen-exposed acidic residues carried by specific gene products—either LHCSR in algae, PSBS in plants, or both, as in mosses (2,86,118)—switching the antenna system fromlight-harvesting mode to dissipative mode(136). The occurrence of both LHCSR and PSBS in mosses has been of major importance in comparing the properties of distinct qE mechanisms in the same physiologic and structural background (2).
In the green algaC. reinhardtii, LHCSR is encoded by three genes, two of which are deleted in thenpq4mutant, which displays a qE-deficient phenotype. Mutation of the lastLHCSR1gene results in a complete lack of qE activity (172). Like PSBS, LHCSR belongs to the LHC superfamily, and its responsiveness to low pH depends on lumen-exposed protonatable residues (20,92). Two LHCSR isoforms, LHCSR1 and LHCSR3, are active in qE. The former is constitutively weakly expressed at low light while the latter strongly accumulates in excess light (104).
Critically, LHCSR differs from PSBS for binding pigments, namely Chla, Lut, and Vio (20). Consequently, LHCSR is, potentially, the site of both the pH-sensing and the quenching reactions.
Functional analysis of LHCSR proteins has mainly been performed on the LHCSR1 protein fromPhyscomitrella patens(123). Fluorescence lifetime analysis of recombinant ppLHCSR1 in detergent solution showed that the protein responds to acidification by undergoing conformational transition from a 3.7-ns excited state to a short-lived 80-ps state (122), thus quenching the excited states (77). These results were observed with the protein binding Zea, consistent with the extreme dependence of quenching on Zea observed in vivo (124). It has been reported that the quenching reactions in land plant antennae rely on the formation of Zea radical cations in monomeric LHCs (35) or on excitation energy transfer from Chlato Cars in trimeric LHCII (135). Surprisingly, both these mechanisms were found to be active in LHCSR1 (125). Interestingly, the radical cation activity was dependent on Lut rather than Zea (125), suggesting xanthophyll site occupancy might be different in LHCSR compared to plant LHCs.
While LHCSR proteins undergo quenching during acidification in vitro, the drag of the excitation energy requires interaction(s) with the PSII core and/or antennae. LHCSR proteins have been localized in stroma membranes and grana margins but depleted in grana partitions (123). Nevertheless, PSII fluorescence is efficiently quenched, implying that interaction between LHCSR and PSII supercomplexes at the grana margins and cooperativity between PSII units in delocalizing excitation energy (158) are effective in photoprotecting PSII. In addition to PSII, the PSI antenna system is quenched by LHCSR (123). There are at least two answers to the question of whether LHCSR-photosystems interaction occurs through a specific pigment-protein complex. First, single-particle electron microscopy (EM) analysis revealed that a dimeric LHCSR was located in PSII supercomplexes near the CP26 position (141), consistent with the observation that LHCSR-dependent quenching in transgenicArabidopsisrequires monomeric LHCs (43); second, in CP26-lessChlamydomonasNPQwas strongly decreased (24). Since the CP26-less mutant still retains substantial NPQ activity, at least one additional interaction subunit can be identified as LHCII, it being the only antenna accumulated in stroma membranes (57) (Figure 5).
The PSBS protein is missing in theArabidopsisqE-lessnpq4mutant (86). Mutation analysis showed that pH-dependent PSBS activation requires two lumen-exposed glutamate residues (87). Despite this, PSBS is not a pigment-binding protein (49), implying that whatever the effect of pH on its conformation, it must be transduced to a Chl-xanthophyll-binding protein in order for quenching to be catalyzed. The identity of PSBS interactors has been studied extensively. Reverse genetics has shown that knocking out CP29 does affect qE amplitude (59), that the deletion of CP26 has no consequence, and that the direct involvement of CP24 is difficult to assess due to pleiotropic effects on PQH2diffusion (40). The strongest contribution to qE is provided by trimeric LHCII (35), mainly through its Lhcb1 components (121), while Lhcb2 and Lhcb3 reportedly play a minor role, possibly due to their lower abundance (111).
While LHCII is readily accessible from membrane-embedded subunits due to its high abundance and peripheral location in PSII, CP29 is buried deep within supercomplexes, implying its interaction with PSBS might be hindered. However, triggering qE involves PSBS-dependent reorganization of thylakoid membrane domains (17), which might well expose CP29 to interaction with PSBS (Figure 5). Cross-linking PSBS withinArabidopsisthylakoid membranes upon induction of quenching revealed that the most represented covalent adducts were PSII core and Lhcb1 (28). Consistent results were obtained through affinity chromatography of histidine-tagged PSBS in moss (55).
Models other than specific protein-protein interactions were also proposed for triggering quenching reactions: It has been suggested that quenching is generated on the formation of aggregated LHCII-only domains, undergoing quenching due to cooperative interactions and thetrans-thylakoid pH gradient (136). In this scenario, however, any mutation that overaccumulates LHCII or disrupts PSII supercomplexes (35) is expected to enhance NPQ activity, rather than enhancing fluorescence yield, as observed.
Plant and algae Car composition undergoes changes depending on environmental conditions. The fastest response involves Vio to Zea interconversion, which, inexcess light, forms thexanthophyllcycle through the activity of the violaxanthin de-epoxidase (VDE) enzyme; in low light, Zea is converted back into Vio by a stromal zeaxanthin-epoxidase (71). The effect of the xanthophyll cycle on NPQ is species-dependent: NPQ ofC. reinhardtiiis Zea-independent, while LHCSR-dependent NPQ ofP. patensis strongly upregulated by Zea (124) through binding to both V1 and L2 binding sites in synergy with low pH (122). In plants, quenching activity is modulated by Zea, and its constitutive accumulation, as in thenpq2mutant, makes the onset of qE faster (115). Lut also plays a role in NPQ: Lut-deficient mutants have reduced and slower NPQ, while Lut overaccumulation in part compensates for the lack of Zea (89). Consistently, the lack of both Lut and Zea results in a null NPQ phenotype mimicking the PSBS-less mutation. Owing to the involvement of multiple LHCs, which have different xanthophyll compositions, the amplitude and kinetics of quenching in vivo are the result of different contributions. The NPQ catalyzed in LHCII was only dependent on Zea since it was unaffected bylut2mutation. Since a lack of Lut severely affects NPQ in WT backgrounds (39), it is suggested that NPQ reactions in monomeric LHCs are Lut-dependent (35).
Zea accumulation is also responsible for a slower component of NPQ developing in parallel with the reconversion of Zea into Vio and is therefore called qZ (112). This Zea-dependent mechanism is independent of PSBS and lumenal pH and is associated with Zea binding to monomeric LHCs (34), while its binding to the trimeric LHCII does not affect Chl fluorescence lifetime, implying that qZ is specific to the inner antenna closely connected to PSII core (150).
Several physical mechanisms underlying the quenching processes have been proposed, localized in either LHCs orRCsof PSII (Figure 6):

Figure 6Click to view


Figure 7Click to view


It should be emphasized that quenching mechanisms occurring in vivo are not necessarily mutually exclusive, and more than one process might well contribute to establishing the overall quenching state. In at least one case, the occurrence of energy transfer from Chlato Car S1 with thermal dissipation (mechanism 1) and formation of the Lut radical cation (mechanism 2) have been observed within the same pigment-protein complex (125).
PsbS catalyzes qE in mosses and land plants. Genes that encode PSBS-like proteins are found in the genome of unicellular algae, including the model speciesC. reinhardtii. Transcription analysis of synchronized cells displayed strong induction upon dark to light transition (153), and the PSBS protein was transiently detected, although it was unable to induceNPQin the absence of LHCSR (162). Nevertheless, PSBS overexpressors in a LHCSR3-less background exhibited enhancedphotoprotectiontowardsexcess light, possibly by regulating LHCSR1 activity. In mosses, the ancillary PSBS quenching activity evolved in a self-sufficient NPQ activity (2) and became the only form of quenching in land plants, since LHCSR-encoding genes were lost (58). The question of why LHCSR was replaced by PSBS is interesting and potentially useful for translational research: If the two proteins are endowed with nonredundant photoprotective functions, crops expressing LHCSR might exhibit enhanced stress resistance. The major difference between PSBS and LHCSR lies in the latter's ability to bind two Zea ligands upon excess light exposure and possibly enhance itsROSscavenging activity. A second difference is the localization of PSBS in grana partitions (123), while LHCSR resides in stroma membrane domains where most biogenetic machineries are located, including the PSII repair cycle. Grana width and stacking level increased during evolution from unicellular algae to land plants (8). In land plants, a typical grana partition disc contains ∼600 PSII supercomplexes (79), while quenching can be propagated over ∼8–10 PSIIRCs(6). Therefore, activity from the periphery of grana discs provided by LHCSR can only quench ∼30% of PSII, leaving those at the center unprotected. According to this theory, segregation of PSII in large grana partitions has favored quenching mechanisms catalyzed by PSBS, which is located in this membrane domain. In the presence of PSBS, LHCSR residual function (e.g., in mosses) consisted of quenching LHCII, a component of the large PSI antenna, until the evolution of red-shifted chlorophyll absorption forms in LHCI (102) made both LHCII and LHCSR complexes redundant in the process of providing sufficient photons to PSI and regulating this activity.
PSII and PSI perform differently in terms of light capture, depending on both light spectrum and fluence. PSII cannot absorb far-red radiation (λ > 685 nm); therefore, the photon absorption rate of PSII is limited under canopy compared to PSI because of the enrichment in far-red radiation of these environmental niches (13). Under these conditions, the process of state transition redistributes part of the LHCII antenna, i.e., the excitation energy supply between PSII and PSI. State 1 refers to the antenna arrangement that favors PSII excitation, whereas, in state 2, PSI is endowed with additional LHCII. This reversible process is controlled by reducing the PQ pool and activating a protein kinase, STT7 in algae and STN7 in plants (134), which phosphorylates specific gene products of the LHCII antenna (85,166) and promotes its migration to PSI. On preferential excitation of PSI, the PQ pool becomes oxidized, the kinase is inactivated, and a phosphatase (TAP38/PPH1) dephosphorylates the mobile LHCII, which moves back to PSII (142). As a result of this rearrangement, a fraction of the LHCII antenna is transferred from PSII, a shallow trap, to PSI, which is a more effective quencher, resulting in a fluorescence quenching called qT. The photoprotective relevance of this process is unclear since the STT7/STN7 kinases are inhibited in excess light (84).
Since PSII is a shallow trap for excitons while PSI has a far shorter fluorescence lifetime, a LHCII complex connected to both PSI and PSII RC will be quenched photochemically by the former. PSI is very sensitive to highly variable irradiance, owing to the photoinhibitory effect of excess electrons from PSII on Fe-S centers (156). Under these conditions, concomitant overreduction of PQ activates state transitions while damaged PSI remains a trap for excitation energy, thereby leading to thermal dissipation with the outcome of both reducing PSII antenna size and quenching LHCII in stroma domains (163). While the occurrence ofspilloverbetween PSII and PSI has been reported in diatoms (51), its activity in plants is controversial, owing to the extreme lateral heterogeneity of thylakoid membranes and segregation of PSI versus PSII.
Sustained quenching has been identified in evergreens (56), either deployed for the maintenance of low lumenal pH (175) or independent of lumen acidification (42). A sustained decrease in fluorescence yield was linked to a suppressor of quenching called SOQ1 (21). qH itself is catalyzed by a plastidial lipocalin (LCNP), the as-yet-unknown action of which on the major LHCII antenna complex is inhibited by SOQ1 (97). SOQ1 spans the thylakoid membrane, exposing a thioredoxin (TRX) domain to the lumen where it may act to regulate LCNP. CCDA, a TRX-like subunit of thylakoid membrane, is also involved in the transfer of reducing equivalents from the stroma to the lumenal compartment (103). Further genetic analysis identified ROQH1, a reductase that catalyzes the relaxation of quenching induced in LHCII by LCNP (7). qH appears to be independent of lumenal pH and is instead controlled by the redox state of the stroma compartment, which becomes reducing upon the saturation of CO2fixation. Consistent with this hypothesis, theArabidopsismutant devoid of NADPH thioredoxin reductase C enhances NPQ, boosting its qH component. Both LCNP and VDE are lumen-localized lipocalins that have multiple thiol residues, potential targets for TRX.
The slowest quenching component, qI, is attributed to processes involving a decrease in active RCs of PSII upon photodamage (148). Quenching in photoinactivated RCs occurs due to charge recombination between QA−and P680+, but other quenching reactions of an unknown nature are probably involved (27,50). D1 protein of the RC is more susceptible to photodamage, and photodamaged D1 can accumulate in high levels under conditions such as cold and excess light before being degraded and replaced (9); photoinhibition of PSII only occurs if the rate of damage overtakes the rate of repair (160). Recently, highly quenched pigment-protein complexes have been found to be involved in protecting PSII during assembly/repair, which may maintain damaged PSII in its quenched state (151).
While most three-helix LHC proteins are abundant, some LHC-like proteins only accumulate in small amounts or are undetectable under normal conditions but can be strongly and transiently induced under specific stress conditions. This is particularly true for early light-induced proteins (ELIPs) (62). These proteins accumulate transiently in thylakoid membranes, mostly under conditions of light stress. ELIPs have three transmembrane domains, the first and third helices of which display high sequence identity with the corresponding helices of LHC proteins. In comparison with other LHC proteins, ELIPs have an unusual pigment composition that consists mostly of Chlaand large amounts of Lut and have a low excitonic coupling between Chls (1). ELIPs have been localized in the stroma-exposed thylakoid membranes where PSII repair takes place. Also, constitutive expression of ELIPs was shown to restore the photosensitivity ofchaos, a mutant deficient in the signal recognition particle (SRP) pathway and unable to rapidly accumulate ELIPs underexcess lightand chilling conditions and therefore highly photosensitive. Together, these findings strongly suggest that ELIPs have a photoprotective role (70).
Constitutive expression of ELIP2 inArabidopsisled to a 50% decrease in leaf Chl content and photosystems (173), which suggests that ELIPs may act as sensors that modulate Chl synthesis in order to prevent the accumulation of free pigments and, thereby, photooxidative stress. Among ELIP-like proteins, the MSF1 protein ofChlamydomonas(183) is structurally related to ELIPs and accumulates only under stress conditions. MSF1 is required for the stability and maintenance of PSI since the loss of MSF1 leads to a fourfold decrease in PSI abundance. MSF1 appears to be linked to the Chl biosynthetic pathway, based on the observation that it interacts with CTH1, which catalyzes the synthesis of protochlorophyllide. This suggests that MSF1 might link Chl biosynthesis to the maintenance of photosynthetic Chl-protein complexes under specific stress conditions. In the absence of both LIL3 (a protein with two transmembrane domains) isoforms ofArabidopsis, the supply of the two metabolites chlorophyllide and phytyl pyrophosphate, which are required for the final steps of Chl synthesis, is compromised (65). In barley seedlings, LIL3 specifically accumulates during the de-etiolation stage and assembles as a Chl-binding protein complex (129). LIL3 could thus play an important role in efficiently channeling tetrapyrroles to their final destination within the photosynthetic complexes, thereby preventing photooxidative damage.
Originally identified in cyanobacteria, the small cab-like proteins (SCPs), also called one-helix proteins (OHPs) or HLIPs, are small Chl binding-like proteins containing one transmembrane domain that binds Chl in vitro (152). In land plants, OHP1 appears to deliver Chl to the PSII core complex, and loss of either OHP1 or OHP2 leads to a pale green phenotype and reduction of the accumulation of the photosystems (14). Thylakoid membrane organization is altered in mutants lacking OHP1, with an almost complete absence of stromal lamellae and swelling of the marginal thylakoid membranes (88). Moreover, OHP2, the stromal part of which interacts with HCF244, is required for the stability of OHP1 and HCF244 and is specifically involved in the assembly of the PSII complex (64). Formation of the PSIIRCcomplex is specifically inhibited in the absence of OHP1 and OHP2 inArabidopsis, and it was shown they form a PSII-RC-like complex at an early stage of PSII assembly as well as during PSII repair (88). Ultrafast absorption spectroscopy revealed that this process occurs through a direct energy transfer from the ChlaQystate to the β-carotene S1 state (151). Taken together, these studies indicate that the mechanisms governing PSII RC assembly are highly conserved in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic photosynthetic organisms and there is a close coordination between Chl synthesis and the assembly of the photosystems. Despite this control, low levels of unbound Chl are probably present in the membranes, which have been reported to cause photoinhibition (140). This suggests that the excess Chl content of leaves, functional to competition by shading competitors, might have negative effects onphotoprotectionand plant productivity.
The photoprotective processes described above clearly have beneficial effects for the survival of photosynthetic eukaryotes in the natural environment. However, most of these mechanisms have not been optimized for productivity. Rather, evolution has selected and honed them for survival and reproductive success. In particular, processes that prevent photooxidation have a cost in terms of energy and are not optimized for carbon gain. Most of them are potential targets for manipulation aimed at enhancing productivity. Photosynthesis in crops has not been improved during the Green Revolution, and it is currently far below its theoretical limit. Recent advances in genome engineering provide direct proof that photosynthetic performance can be significantly improved by tuning phototolerance. Such exciting evidence makes clear that understanding the photoprotective responses is critical in order to identify molecular targets for enhanced light-use efficiency. To bring such ambitious goals within reach, the following will be crucial: (a) theoretical modelling for predicting targets in photosynthetic machinery, the redesign of which could enhance yield in either suboptimal or controlled conditions, and (b) monitoring the effects of chloroplast manipulation in real canopy conditions, since the complex genotype-environment interactions are what determine biomass yield.


Despite the long time since its discovery, photoprotection by energy dissipation is far from elucidated in terms of both the underlying molecular and biophysical mechanisms as well as its consequences for plant productivity.
Regulation of photosynthesis by energy dissipation is one of the most complex chapters of plant physiology, and only because of that, it is worth studying and devising new instrumentations and methods of analysis. Nevertheless, the translation of knowledge into engineering crops for enhanced resistance and productivity is a target of high importance for humankind. The seminal work by Kromdijk and coworkers (81) has shown that NPQ reactions are a target for improving productivity. It is likely that a more detailed knowledge of the mechanisms involved will allow for even more precise and effective engineering work.
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
The authors acknowledge the support of MIUR (grant 201795SBA3-PRIN2017 to L.D.) and EEC (grant 675006-SE2B to R.B.). Dr. Roberto Caferri of the University of Verona is thanked for help in the preparation ofFigures 5and7.
Literature Cited
Data & Media loading...
Literature Cited


