Title: Constructed Languages


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Constructed languages, also known as conlangs, are languages that have been purposefully created for either real-world or fictional speakers. Within this article, I provide a summary of the language creation process and how the community of conlangers, people who make languages, come to know each other's work, as well as how language creation assignments are being adopted within university classrooms. I also explore the role of the language creator in bringing a community of speakers into existence through the invention of a language. I discuss whether speakers of a constructed language are part of a community of practice or a speech community and the implications for this distinction within anthropology. I also describe conscripts, or constructed orthographies, as well as the relationship between endangered languages and constructed languages, how invented worlds can create real-world shifts in worldview, and suggestions for new directions in research linking anthropology and constructed languages.

Section: INTRODUCTION

In 2014, the Oxford English dictionary added the word “conlang,” the blended form of the phrase “constructed language” ( Martin 2014 ). This addition corresponded with a surge in use of this word and growing interest in these languages, people who make them (i.e., conlangers), and the general practice of making new languages (i.e., conlanging). If anthropology can be defined as “the study of all people, at all times, and in all places” ( Ottenheimer & Pine 2019 , p. 2), it makes sense that anthropologists would be interested in constructed languages because these are people-produced phenomena. People create these languages, people learn them, and people create communities around them. This article focuses on each of these groups of people, as well as on future directions for constructed language studies within anthropology.
Constructed languages are languages that are consciously developed by an individual or, more rarely, a group rather than through the natural progression of language development and change over time ( Okrent 2009 , Adams 2011 , Shannon 2012 ). Within academia, scholars refer to the individuals responsible for these languages as language creators, language planners, language inventors, language engineers, or language architects ( Adams 2011 , Peterson 2015a , Gobbo 2017a , Watkins 2017 ). The languages themselves are known as planned languages ( Krägeloh & Neha 2014 , Tonkin 2015 , Gobbo 2017a ), invented languages ( Lo Bianco 2004 , Okrent 2009 ), fictional languages ( Barnes & van Heerden 2006 , Kazimierczak 2010b , Schreyer 2021b ), artificial languages ( Gomez & Gerken 2000 , Culbertson & Schuler 2019 , Schreyer 2021a ) or, simply, “fake” languages. Language creation is a continuum of intentionality with language play (including private vocabulary and codes, such as Pig Latin, and ciphers) on one end and conlangs that consider grammaticality on the other end ( Watkins 2017 ). Constructed languages are often developed for a specific domain or specific community of practice, which means that, at times, they have limited vocabulary and simple grammatical structures or, in some cases, only a writing system (see the sidebar titled Comparing Constructed Languages and Contact Languages). The question “is this a language?” is therefore common in this field; some scholars refer to these simplified or incomplete conlangs as “miniature artificial languages” ( Kersten & Earles 2001 , Carpenter 2016 , Fedzechkina et al. 2016 ), “flavour conlangs” ( Portnow 2011 , p. 140), or “invented vocabularies” ( Jackson 2011 ), whereas constructed writing systems are known as ciphers, codes, or conscripts. Some scholars also refer to the overall study of planned languages as “interlinguistics” ( Schubert 1989 ). 1
Constructed languages are often categorized in two ways: how they are created and why they are created. The terms used to describe the manner of creation are a priori (a language made from scratch without influence from other languages) and a posteriori (a language made with influences from one or more other languages). Terms used to describe the purpose of a language are ( a ) auxlang (international auxiliary language), ( b ) artlang (a language used for artistic purposes, such as media or literature), and ( c ) engelang (a language developed to test if something is possible in a language, often to make a “better” language than the individual's own first language) (see the sidebar titled Experimental Artificial Languages). In this article, I provide examples of each of these in order to illustrate what we can learn about constructed languages from the language creation process itself as well as from the creators.
COMPARING CONSTRUCTED LANGUAGES AND CONTACT LANGUAGES
Constructed languages are often developed for a specific domain or specific community of practice, which means that, at times, they have limited vocabulary and simple grammatical structures or, in some cases, only a writing system. This description is very similar to the definition of a pidgin, as Jourdan (2021) notes that “pidgins were rudimentary auxiliary languages used in sociocultural contexts, such as trade, for instance” (p. 364). The difference between the two types of languages is intentionality. Constructed languages are developed purposefully, usually by a single individual, whereas pidgins and other contact languages “developed during sporadic or prolonged economic and cultural contacts between people who did not speak the same language and in social situations that made it impossible for one existing language to be used as a common language” ( Jourdan 2021 , p. 364). In sum, constructed languages are developed with intentionality, and contact languages are developed out of necessity. As well, constructed languages are usually spoken in communities of practice, with the act of speaking the language being the activity that brings the community together, whereas pidgins and creoles are spoken in speech communities ( Jourdan 2021 ).
EXPERIMENTAL ARTIFICIAL LANGUAGES
Experimental artificial languages (languages developed by linguists and cognitive scientists to test theories of language acquisition or evolution) are a fourth category of constructed languages. These languages in particular tend to be incomplete or miniature and are intended for use in specific experiments. Because they are not developed into languages for imagined speakers or communities, and are of limited interest to anthropologists, I do not include extensive commentary on them in this article. For information on the use of experimental artificial languages, see Christiansen (2000) , Gómez & Gerken (2000) , Kersten & Earles (2001) , Friederici et al. (2002) , Fedzechkina et al. (2016) , and Bartolotti & Marian (2019) .


Section: THE LANGUAGE CREATION PROCESS

As noted above, language creators usually work alone, and, therefore, each might have their own process of language creation. However, conlangers also learn from each other. In his book The Art of Language Invention , Peterson (2015a) notes that conlangers from around the world were finally able to find each other and build their global community virtually when the Conlang Listerv began in 1991. Peterson writes that “there had never before in history been a place where those who created languages could discuss strategies for doing so” (p. 12). Peterson's ( 2015a ) book itself is also a guide on how to approach language creation. Another way that conlangers can share their experiences, receive feedback on their work, and learn from each other is through the Language Creation Conference, which began in 2006 and now runs biennially. 2 After the first conference, members of the conlanging community formed the Language Creation Society in 2007, a nonprofit organization whose purpose “is the promotion and furthering of the art, craft and science of language creation (conlanging) through conferences, books, journals, outreach activities, or other means” ( https://conlang.org/about-the-lcs/ ). The Language Creation Society also runs Fiat Lingua, “an online archive of conlang articles” (for more details, see http://fiatlingua.org/about/ ).
As the community of conlangers has grown, a recent trend within academia, particularly within linguistics, has been the inclusion of both constructed language data sets and language creation assignments in the classroom ( Gobbo 2013 , Sanders 2016 , Punske et al. 2020 ). Sherwood & Cheng (1979) describe one of the earliest examples of a linguistics course focused on constructed languages. More recently, scholars have described how they have used constructed languages in their university courses as both an introduction to the discipline of linguistics ( Anderson et al. 2020 , Berry 2020 , Goodall 2020 ) and as a capstone course ( Carpenter 2020 , Sams 2021 ). Scholars have also discussed their use of conlangs to teach concepts such as typology and cross-linguistic universals ( Pearson 2020 ) and proto-languages ( Byrd & Byrd 2020 ). Others have documented how they have brought linguistics, and language construction in particular, “from the classroom into the community” ( Gillon et al. 2020 , p. 137; Adger & Coppe van Urk 2020 ). However, this practice of using language creation projects within anthropology courses has not been similarly documented. In Sanders & Schreyer (2020) , Schreyer documents a case study of how constructed languages can be used to teach the concepts of linguistic and cultural relativity (pp. 179–84; see also Schreyer et al. 2013 ). They also note that in Sanders's linguistics courses students often chose aliens and nonhuman creatures as the speakers of their invented languages, whereas in Schreyer's anthropology courses the languages were usually invented for imagined, or real, human groups. The next section further discusses language creators and how their worldviews and culture may have shaped the languages they have developed.

Section: CREATORS OF CONLANGS

People have likely been inventing languages, and playing with language, as long as there have been languages. Scholars have commented on how difficult it is to document the number of languages that have been invented owing to limited records ( Large 1985 , Okrent 2009 , Adams 2011 ), although it is widely believed that Lingua Ignota, created by nun Hildegard von Bingen in the twelfth century CE, is the oldest recorded constructed language ( Higley 2007 ). That said, if records of a conlang existed and that language was an a priori language, perhaps no one would be able to read it. Bowern & Lindemann (2021) comment in their review of the Voynich manuscript that this indecipherable document may have been written in a conlang. Another reason that it is difficult to document the history of constructed languages is because for many years, at least since the late 1800s, constructing a language, particularly one for personal pleasure, was seen as something to keep hidden. In fact, J.R.R. Tolkien, author of The Hobbit (published in 1937) and The Lord of the Rings (published in 1954), and a language creator himself, called language creation “a secret vice” [ Tolkien 1983 (1931) ]. Even today, contemporary language creators describe the process of sharing their language creation practice as “coming out of the closet” ( Peterson 2015a ). However, in recent years, the art of language invention has flourished, removing some of the stigma associated with the practice.
In fact, one of the first people to become known for popularizing language creation was J.R.R. Tolkien, despite his reserve, and he has continued to influence the field even after his death. Tolkien's technique for language creation involved developing historical language families, which many language creators follow today ( Peterson 2015a ). Tolkien was very much concerned with the art and aesthetics of his language creation ( Weiner & Marshall 2011 ), including a personal investment in the sounds of his languages ( Farrugia 2018 ). However, within his same lecture on the “secret vice,” he stated that an audience was needed for language creation to be complete [ Tolkien 1983 (1931) , p. 202]. Therefore, for Tolkien, language creation was both intensely personal as well as a social endeavor, and a linguistic fandom has developed of those who are interested in studying and learning his languages ( Kazimierczak 2010b ). The social aspect of language creation, for all types of conlangs, is where opportunities for anthropologists can be found.
As noted above, language creation is a human project. Most language creation ventures are solo, even private, works, but even when a language creator is working independently on a language project they are imagining invented speakers. As Barnes & van Heerden (2006) write, “In the case of fictional languages, authors actually ‘create’ native speakers within the fictional world of the book or film, which makes them ‘virtual’ natural languages” (p. 103). As well, novelist James E. Hopkins, and inventor of the Itlani language (as well as many others), writes in his 2019 article that he has been “writing essays that attempt to fill-out real in-universe issues in various ways” ( Hopkins 2019 , p. 1). Hopkins, like many other language creators, has imagined a fictional world, and language is a part of that world. He has engaged in world-building, which is the practice of developing an alternative reality for a piece of literature, television, or film. The World Building Institute describes world-building in the following way:
World Building is founded on three beliefs, namely that storytelling is the most powerful system for the advancement of human capability due to its ability to allow the human imagination to precede the realization of thought; that all stories emerge logically and intuitively from the worlds that create them; and that new technologies powerfully enable us to sculpt the imagination into existence. ( https://worldbuilding.institute/about )

Anthropologists have long been interested in storytelling as a powerful tool ( Boas & Hunt 1902 , Lévi-Strauss 1955 , Bauman 1975 , Webster 1983 , Ochs & Capps 2001 , Duranti 2009 ), which makes this part of storytelling, the use of constructed languages to create texture in the stories, an obvious focus for anthropologists. Despite this connection, there has been little focus on constructed languages, their speakers, and communities within anthropology to date. As Manning (2009) noted, this absence “seems particularly odd given that much recent linguistic anthropological work on ‘language ideologies’ has problematized the very naturalizing basis that would privilege ‘natural spoken languages’ over ‘conlangs’ like those associated with virtual communities, imaginary geographies, or Star Trek fans, in the first place” (p. 315).
While the idea of world-building in fictional contexts is the focus described above, language creators interested in auxlangs are also interested in world-building—building a world that shares a common language, often for utopian purposes. For example, another well-known language creator who was concerned with the social nature of language was L.L. Zamenhof, inventor of Esperanto, the international auxiliary language, which has spread worldwide with its utopian ideals of shared communication and understanding ( Li 2003 , Blanke 2009 , Smith 2011 ). But before Zamenhof, a contingent of scholars in the 1650s were interested in categorizing the world in order to understand its pieces. According to Large (1985) , in these philosophical language projects, “Knowledge was organised in classification tables according to ‘philosophical’ or scientific principles” (p. 21). The most well-known of these projects was John Wilkins's attempt to develop a hierarchical language that would categorize the world ( Yaguello 1991 , Lewis 2007 , Okrent 2009 ). Other later attempts at logical communication systems include Loglan, a language that was intended to be logical, and its daughter language Lojban ( Cowan 1997 , Okrent 2009 ). Recent research on Lojban has investigated how it might be used as an interlingua between humans and computers because of the simplification of semantic concepts in Lojban ( Speer & Havasi 2004 , Goertzel 2013 ). As well, in 2001, Sonja Lane invented Toki Pona, an auxlang, as “a tool to meditate, to simplify the thinking processes, and as a way to modify the mood and impressions about the world” ( Fabbri 2017 , p. 1). The language's minimal vocabulary (only 123 words) is designed to focus the mind, as attention to detail is needed to craft sentences in the language; enthusiasts suggest that it takes only 30 hours of study to become fluent in the language ( Morcin 2015 ). As a result, computer scientists have also considered it as a programming language ( Fabbri 2017 ). Finally, on the opposite end of the spectrum is John Quijada's language Ithkuil, an example of a language that was intended “to be maximally precise, but also maximally concise” through the use of a robust morphological system utilizing a range of affixes ( Foer 2012 , Watkins 2017 , Quijada 2019 ). Quijada developed the language to be used in situations where “exactitude and clarity of cognitive intention is called for” ( Quijada 2019 ), such as in political debates or philosophical discussions.
In sum, why should anthropologists care about language creators and their constructed languages? In creating a language, these individuals are building a community. The community might be a fictional one, a group of imagined speakers, or one that creators hope will develop in the real world ( Cheyne 2008 ). Fictional languages are most often found in sci-fi and fantasy works whose goal is often a commentary on the contemporary state of the world of the creator ( Bray 1986 , Yaguello 1991 , Anderson 1992 , Cheyne 2008 , Jackson 2011 ). In the real-world context, the language creators are often hoping that their language will be a catalyst for change, often for a shared worldview (see Stria 2015 for an Esperanto example). One example of a conlang that has impacted personal worldview is Aaron Simon's Saandic language; Simon developed his language as a way to help him understand the world as a transman, particularly when he was a teenager and through his transition ( Watkins 2017 ). Simon's story was featured in the film Conlanging: The Art of Crafting Tongues , and in her review of the film Shulist writes the following:
[S]everal language creators [featured in the film] found something profound in this craft because they were able to give voice to the profound difference that they felt, to a sense of self that was indescribable using the limited tools of socially developed and agreed upon tongues. One of the most powerful expressions of this view comes from a young trans man who found not only honesty, but also safety and secrecy, in a language his abusive parents could not access. ( Shulist 2017 , emphasis in original)

Therefore, in both the fictional and real-world contexts, these languages can foster the development of communities of speakers, even if that community is a community of one.

Section: SPEAKERS OF CONLANGS

As noted above, communities have developed around constructed languages, and each of these has their own sociolinguistic characteristics. Gobbo (2017a , p. 38) has argued that “what is formed around the planned language is a community of practice, not a speech community in the classic sense.” His argument is based on the fact that individuals are coming together to participate in a “regular joint activity,” following Eckert's (2006) definition. Similarly, Meluzzi (2019) argues that the Dothraki and Klingon communities are better defined as communities of practice owing to the “active internal construction” (p. 25) of the group, as compared with speech communities, which are externally defined. Similarly, Gobbo (2017a) also points out that one thing that marks as unique the communities structured around constructed languages is the fact that “people are accepted regardless of their social categories of belonging” (p. 39), an internal construction. This fact is certainly true for the Esperanto and Klingon communities. However, do these communities of practice become speech communities over time as they grow and even acquire native speakers? Individuals within conlang communities can be in “regular and frequent interaction” with a “shared set of social norms” ( Gumperz 2009 , pp. 66–67) as illustrated in the examples below.
Esperanto is often declared one of the most successful constructed languages. Esperanto speakers are located around the world, and the community of speakers could, in fact, be considered a transnational community ( Li 2003 , Blanke 2009 ). Much has been written about Esperanto as a language and about its creator L.L. Zamenhof ( Broadribb 1970 ), the “daughters of Esperanto” (the languages that formed after Esperanto, using it as a model) ( Libert 2008 ), and the community that has adopted the language ( Forster 1982 ), either as a second language or, more rarely, as a first language. A 2007 review of Esperanto studies is a clear example of the extensive, diverse literature on Esperanto, including references on linguistics, literature, the speech community, and history, as well as Zamenhof himself ( Tonkin 2007 ). Early commentary on the unique sociolinguistic nature of the Esperanto community is found in Mark Fettes's article, where he tentatively asserts that the Esperanto community is a “quasi-ethnic linguistic minority” but also comments that
in order to prove a persuasive description of how such a community functions, far more research must be done on that part of the population which develops an active interest in Esperanto, on the socialization processes at work during exposure to various aspects of the community (clubs, textbooks, periodicals, literature, meetings and congresses, personal encounters, etc.), and on the sociolinguistics of communication in the language. ( Fettes 1996 , p. 57)

Although some progress has been made toward understanding the Esperanto community as a speech community, scholarly focus has still tended to remain on the ideologies of the Esperanto movement, including the ideological neutralism of the language ( Lo Bianco 2004 , Gobbo 2017b ) and the role that Esperanto has played in a range of countries from China ( Li 2003 ) to Japan ( Usui 2008 ), from Sweden ( Karlander 2020 ) to Switzerland ( Garrido Sardà 2020 ), and even in the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly ( Sokolovska 2016 ). However, linguistic anthropologists may be interested specifically in the topic of Esperanto language acquisition and socialization because the majority of children who learn Esperanto as a first language learn the language from someone who is a non-native speaker of Esperanto ( Versteegh 1993 ). Scholars have focused on nativization ( Bergen 2001 ), overregularization among children learning Esperanto ( Corsetti et al. 2004 ), Esperanto language learning as similar to the creolization process ( Lindstedt 2006 ), and challenges to understanding the social dynamics of Esperanto-speaking families ( Lindstedt 2010 ). Other studies have investigated the successful use of Esperanto as a lingua franca in an international nongovernmental organization context ( Fiedler & Brosch 2018 ) as well as the use of Esperanto as a first additional language in the British school program Springboard to Languages, which illustrated that children who participated in the program had enhanced metalinguistic awareness and cross-cultural awareness ( Roehr-Brackin & Tellier 2018 ). Finally, because Esperanto, like many constructed languages, is often learned first as a written language, studies have focused on resulting dialectal variation ( Cheng 1982 , Sherwood 1982 ) as well as literacy rates ( Becker 2006 ) and Internet usage, including social media ( Wandel 2015 ).
While Esperanto is the best known auxlang, Klingon is the artlang with the biggest community ( Rogers 2011 ). As Windsor & Stewart (2017 , p. 3) note, there are “as many as 7,500 self-declared learners, up to 120 fluent speakers, and at least one first language learner (cf. Okrent 2009 ).” Linguist Marc Okrand was hired to develop the Klingon language in 1984 for the film Star Trek III: The Search for Spock ; he built on words that had already been included in past episodes of the show, created by actor James Doohan (who played the character Montgomery Scott, also known as Scotty) ( Okrand et al. 2011 ). Since then, the language of Klingon has grown into a phenomenon that is known around the world, matching the spread of the popularity of the television series and films in the Star Trek franchise. A range of linguistic studies of Klingon, including a typological analysis ( Sutrave 2017 ) and a survey of four artlangs (Quenya, Klingon, Dothraki, and Na'vi), have sought to ascertain whether these languages follow Greenberg's Linguistic Universals ( Destruel 2016 ). According to this study, “Quenya and Dothraki function very much like natural languages, and follow Greenberg's universals rigorously.… Similarly, Na'vi seems to behave like a natural language, albeit a rare or uncommon one.… Unlike the other three languages however, Klingon most obviously defies Greenberg's Universals, suggesting the language is very unlike natural languages” ( Destruel 2016 , p. 87). There are also many tools to learn the language, including a Klingon language dictionary ( Okrand 1992 ) and books such as “ The Klingon Way: A Warrior's Guide (1996) , a collection of Klingon proverbs (in English and Klingon) with commentary, and Klingon for the Galactic Traveler (1997) , an examination of dialects, specialized vocabulary, idioms, and slang” ( Okrand et al. 2011 , p. 125; Okrand 1996 , 1997 ). The development of dialects as well as idioms and slang helps establish this community as a speech community, beyond the community of practice. In fact, scholars have conducted two different studies examining the sociolinguistic makeup of the Klingon speech community ( Hendriks-Hermans 1999 , Wahlgren 2004 ).
The development of the Klingon Language Institute in 1991 ( https://www.kli.org ) also assisted in the development of a virtual community for speakers of Klingon ( Olsen 2003 ). As Gobbo writes, “[I]f we consider [the] Internet as a virtual place, [the] Internet itself becomes the natural place for virtual languages as all conlangs are” ( Gobbo 2005 , p. 4). The Klingon Language Institute has been key in developing language materials for the community, including Shakespeare translations ( Kazimierczak 2010a ) and HolQeD: The Journal of the Klingon Language Institute , where authors can expand on their ideas about Klingon, such as The Paleo-Klingon Numeral System ( Comrie 1995 ). The Klingon Language Institute also engages in other nonvirtual activities, specifically the qepHom, “a meeting devoted to learning and speaking the Klingon language” ( Okrent 2009 , Kazimierczak 2010b ). Scholars have also shown that despite the fact that the language was made to be as alien, or as unlike natural human languages, as possible ( Okrand et al. 2011 , Destruel 2016 ), seven advanced speakers of Klingon “have successfully acquired the arbitrary stress system of that language, as evidenced in their production data from spontaneous conversation” ( Windsor & Stewart 2017 , p. 13). Starr et al. (2020) have shown that there has been variation in the production of Klingon within the Star Trek series over time. They argue that the reasons behind this variation include “authenticity, respect for fans, and respect for foreign languages and cultures.” While scholars continue to waver on whether the Klingon community is a speech community ( Okrent 2009 , Okrand et al. 2011 , Meluzzi 2019 ) or a community of practice, such as a linguistic fandom ( Kazimierczak 2010b ), the language is clearly used by fluent speakers on a regular basis. The Klingon language was also featured in a court case, where Paramount Pictures and CBS Studies sued makers of a Star Trek fan film for copyright infringement. With the support of the Language Creation Society, a brief was filed, which successfully argued against the Klingon language as a copyrightable entity because it is now used in a community of speakers ( Post 2017 ). 3

Section: CONSCRIPTS

Ahead of Wilkins's attempt to categorize language through his hierarchical system, “the earliest attempts to construct a means of international communication concentrated on the design of a universal character rather than a universal language” ( Large 1985 , p. 11). In the seventeenth century, European scholars were just learning about the Chinese language and the logographic symbols used to write the language and believed that a universal character, or writing system, would allow individuals to retain their own spoken languages ( Large 1985 ).
In contemporary conlangs, while some inventors of constructed languages are focused on developing a specific orthography, others begin their language creation journey by playing with codes, also known as conscripts ( Watkins 2017 ). Once the code is created, they can back-form a language onto the code, which is opposite of naturally occurring languages ( Gobbo 2017a ). However, many other language creators develop an orthography for their language concurrently with the language. In both cases, individuals may develop fonts for their scripts ( Watkins & Annis 2014 , Peterson 2015b ) and often include their scripts in artwork for the worlds in which their language exists ( Watkins 2017 ). In fact, many of the conscripts used in popular culture media are “flavour conscripts,” providing a taste of a language and a sense of world-building rather than being modeled on an actual full writing system used by a language. For example, “[W]hen written Klingon is shown, it is written in special characters. These characters, however, have never been matched up with the spoken language.… [I]t is artwork” ( Okrand et al. 2011 , p. 126).
A more recent example is the science-fiction drama film Arrival ; the plot of the movie features the writing system of the alien creatures (heptapods) extensively, but it is not based on an actual language ( Coon 2020 ). James Portnow's (2011) chapter describes the use of conscripts and constructed languages in video games, explaining that earlier video games focused on “fancy scripts and intricate writing” in favor of languages used in game play communication (p. 149). He also describes Leet, “the international language of gamers” (p. 156), as “a form of digital calligraphy” (p. 157), as numbers and other symbols are typed as a form of communication. Denise Vultee (2013 , p. 118) has studied the fictional writing system from the television show Doctor Who , a series about a time-traveling alien doctor. The language of Gallifreyan (the Doctor's native alien language) is very rarely spoken, but three versions of the written script have appeared in various incarnations of the show. Vultee classifies it into three varieties: Old High Gallifreyan; Modern Gallifreyan, a more fluid version of the original script; and Circular Gallifreyan, which is “a complex system of interlocking circles, semicircles, and lines.” Her work examines how fans have interpreted these writing systems in order to make meaning out of the symbols, assigning sounds to the symbols arbitrarily because there is no official, or canon-approved, version of the writing system.
Another artlang, the language of Kryptonian, is an example of how a conscript began as a code in comic books and then developed in association with a full constructed language when Schreyer worked on the language for the 2013 Hollywood film Man of Steel . While the Kryptonian language was not spoken in the film, it is visible as artwork on many different pieces of the set, including walls, chairs, robots, and weapons. The fictional Kryptonian conscript has also gone on to appear in real-world places to capture the imagination of Superman fans, including cereal boxes when Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice was released in 2016 and on coins developed by the Canadian mint in 2016 ( Schreyer 2021b ).
If we turn to real-world examples, there is also the question of how new scripts for traditionally oral languages, such as Indigenous languages, or sign languages are made. Are these scripts—such as Cherokee (an Indigenous language spoken in the United States) ( Bender 2002 , Gnanadesikan 2009 , Watkins 2017 ), Eskaya (a script and language developed in the southern Philippines) ( Kelly 2016 ), sign writing used to write a range of sign languages from around the world ( Hopkins 2008 , Hoffmann-Dilloway 2011 ), or even emoticons or emojis used globally as a form of digital communication ( Stark & Crawford 2015 , Cincu 2017 )—conscripts? I argue that they are because they have been purposefully created to serve the needs of a specific community.
In addition, Tim Brookes (2010) has examined the idea of “endangered alphabets” in his book and nonprofit organization of the same name. The Endangered Alphabets Project's website states that their mission “preserves endangered cultures by using their writing systems to create artwork and educational materials” ( https://www.endangeredalphabets.com/about-us/ ). An interesting connection between the idea of endangered orthographies and conscripts is that the two might be mutually beneficial. Conlangers often develop scripts based on real-world examples, and some language creators may be interested in using these lesser-known scripts as models for their new scripts as a form of a posteriori orthography development, honoring scripts that might not be used any longer or that are endangered.

Section: CONSTRUCTED LANGUAGES AND ENDANGERED LANGUAGES

Schreyer (2011) has also discussed the relationships between speakers of constructed languages and endangered languages. In particular, she has argued that constructed languages are, in fact, endangered languages because they are rarely learned in the home as a first language, the numbers of speakers in a community are low, and they are lacking in official status and prestige. Kimura has argued that the two types of speech communities are similar because community members learn the languages later in life and do so voluntarily ( Kimura 2012 ). In her article on the status of endangered contact languages, Lee (2020) questions, “Why should anyone care about the loss of contact languages?” (p. 311). Many of her points are also relevant to constructed languages. She maintains that contact languages are tied to community identity, and this notion can be true of constructed languages as well, particularly the Esperanto community or those tied to a fan community. In fact, Lindstedt (2009) has suggested that Esperanto is an Eastern European contact language “with Romance lexifiers and Slavonic and Yiddish substrates” (p. 133). Lee (2020) also argues that “contact languages also can encode various types of local knowledge” as other Indigenous languages do. I argue that constructed languages can encode local knowledge as well, and they also often provide a window into one individual's, the creator's, worldview ( Watkins 2017 ). However, when these constructed languages become popular, such as Esperanto, others who share similar values might also learn the language to understand more about this worldview. Finally, Lee argues that to learn more about “all that is possible” ( Lee 2020 , p. 313) in human languages, contact languages should be included, but so too should constructed languages, as these often push the boundaries of what is linguistically possible. As Van Oostendorp (2019) argues in his discussion on the types of language creation, “[A]ny kind of language creation is inevitably influenced by existing languages in one way or another” (p. 130) because they are made by humans who use language. In fact, Thorny Games, a game design company that develops games about languages, has developed Dialect: A Game About Language and How It Dies , which first involves the group creation of a language. Games such as these could help provide even more connection between language creation and language endangerment ( Hymes & Seyalioğlu 2017 ).
Other scholars describe the relationship between language planning and planned languages and argue that language revival, such as in the case of Hebrew or Cornish ( Romaine 2011 , Tonkin 2015 ), shares similar processes of lexical expansion and language planning, particularly standardization. Krägeloh & Neha (2014) also compare lexical expansion projects for Te Reo Māori and Esperanto to illustrate how these processes are similar for both communities. Schreyer has also argued that speakers of endangered languages can learn from speakers of constructed languages with regard to their use of media, information technology, and other forms of language planning ( Schreyer 2011 ). She also argues that developing passionate, “fan-like” interest in endangered languages could lead to more individuals, and community members in particular, developing interest in endangered languages ( Schreyer 2015 ).

Section: INVENTED LANGUAGES AND INVENTED WORLDS

In her 2015 presidential address to the American Anthropological Association, Monica Heller described the potential for invented languages to be windows into alternate realties. She stated,
The story of invented languages helps us grasp the shape-shifting dimension of imagining alternative worlds that is, I want to argue, the specialty of anthropology. The same two ideas have been used to try to solve all kinds of issues: either we think we will solve human problems by finding a way to communicate clearly across difference, or we think we will do so by embracing the incommensurability of difference. ( Heller 2017 , p. 13)

While Heller was focusing specifically on Esperanto, an auxlang, as her example, Brianna Peacey examined whether artlangs also have this capacity to provide alternate windows into contemporary society. Peacey's research examined the language of Trigedasleng, a constructed language spoken in the postapocalyptic world of the television show The 100. She explains that “in The 100 , issues surrounding morality, gender, or social hierarchies are considered differently than humans currently experience them on Earth today. Through this alternative view, it is possible to investigate how humans may explore ideas with differing political, hierarchical, or stereotypical boundaries” ( Peacey 2020 , p. 20).
Similarly, Amy Doricic, in her research with Game of Thrones fans, found that those fans who learned the Dothraki language also altered their worldviews as they gained an appreciation for the relationship between language and identity. This widening viewpoint also led these fans to appreciate other real-world cultures and languages outside of the Game of Thrones universe ( Doricic 2018 ).
Suzette Haden Elgin, a science fiction author and linguist, developed her language of Láadan to examine a particular worldview, the worldview of women ( Anderson 1992 ). She used the language for her novel Native Tongue ( Elgin 1984 ); the book is “a futuristic novel in which a marginalized class of women linguists create a language for themselves” ( Okrent 2009 , p. 242). However, Elgin also “began to see the possibility for a real-world experiment” ( Okrent 2009 , pp. 242–43) and wondered if the language would have ripples of impact as a tool for feminism. Elgin eventually declared the experiment a failure, although, interestingly, its use of evidential markers was incorporated into the Lojban language ( Okrent 2009 ).
Finally, while constructed languages can be used to imagine alternate contemporary worlds or future worlds, there is also the potential for constructed languages to be used to imagine past lives and worlds. Schreyer & Adger (2021) describe their experiences creating prehistoric languages for two separate popular culture projects, a film ( Alpha , released in 2018) and a television show (which did not air). In this chapter, the authors describe how their languages [Beama (Schreyer) and Tan!aa Kawawa ki (Adger)] were based on both linguistic research on prehistoric languages and also principles of artistic design as requested by the production teams. Both Schreyer & Adger also included metaphor and metonymy in their languages, something that linguistic research has not been able to trace accurately through time, but which added a richer sense of detail and authenticity to the imagined worlds they were working to portray through language.

Section: NEW DIRECTIONS IN CONSTRUCTED LANGUAGES

One popular critique of language documentation is that very little pragmatic information is included ( Amery 2009 ), which limits new speakers’ ability to engage in everyday conversation. Often, limited pragmatic information is found within the documentation of constructed languages as well; sometimes everyday conversational items are not included within the vocabulary of the language or the language creator has not developed forms of nonverbal communication, including gestures, facial expressions, and proxemics. In some cases, it is difficult to include this level of detail owing to the context of language creation (particularly when it is being developed for a media performance with actors rather than for literature). However, nonverbal communication in constructed languages or even research into constructed sign languages and how these might differ from natural sign languages are foci that could be further developed. There are records of new sign languages developing around the world, such as Nicaraguan Sign Language ( Senghas 2003 ), and these could be compared with constructed sign languages. For instance, some scholars have compared Esperanto to Gestuno, also known as the International Sign Language for the deaf, because it is also an artificial language that was intended to be an international auxiliary language ( Rosenstock 2008 , Hiddinga & Crasborn 2011 , Green 2014 , Whynot 2016 ). New artlang sign languages have also been developed recently for popular culture, including Tusken sign language in the Star Wars universe ( Weiss 2020 ) and a Na'vi sign language to be seen in the upcoming Avatar 2 film ( Jones 2020 ). It will be interesting to see how fan communities develop around these new forms of constructed languages and whether they will become as popular as spoken fan languages.
Fan communities as a whole are often an understudied aspect of society within the field of anthropology, although fandom and fan communities have been taken up with media and cultural studies. As noted above, many constructed language communities, particularly fan communities, are virtual owing to the global nature of fan networks. Fan studies itself is a developing discipline, but, as its roots are within cultural studies, anthropology has been included in this field only peripherally ( Evans & Stasi 2014 ). But Evans & Stasi argue that ethnographic methods are one of the core methods of fan research. Further study of constructed languages would allow anthropologists to contribute both to their own discipline, by extending the types of communities under study, as well as to a better understanding of fan studies methods and methodologies.
The topic of constructed languages is one that has great potential within anthropology. It is clear from this review that anthropologists are currently lagging behind linguists in adopting language creation as an assignment for their courses, or at least in publishing about the experience, even though one of the introductory textbooks available for the subdiscipline of linguistic anthropology, The Anthropology of Language: An Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology ( Ottenheimer & Pine 2019 ), has included a language creation assignment since the first edition of the book ( Ottenheimer 2006 , p. xxii). Language creation assignments assist in learning about key anthropological concepts, but an added benefit is that more anthropologists will understand the language creation process, leading to more anthropological research on constructed languages. One article that is thoroughly grounded in anthropology and language creation within a natural community is Luke Fleming's (2017) article on the emergence of Damin, a constructed register in Lardil society. This article critiques linguistic anthropology's descriptive/prescriptive binary, which impacted how the constructed register of Damin was identified by past scholars. Fleming's article could be a model for others who are interested in describing how constructed languages are nativized in speech communities. In sum, the study of constructed languages touches on many current topics in linguistic anthropology, including sociolinguistics, linguistic relativity, the speech community, and communities of practice, as well as language acquisition and socialization. If more anthropologists turn to constructed languages, their creators, and communities as a focus of their research, they could provide many interesting and important contributions to our understanding of how people use language in a unique context.

Section: disclosure statement

Following is a list of factors that might be viewed as biasing this review. The author created the languages of Kryptonian (for Man of Steel , released in 2013) and Beama (for Alpha , released in 2018). The author was also an executive producer for the film Conlanging: The Art of Crafting Tongues (released in 2017), and she is a member of the Advisory Board for the Endangered Alphabets project.

Section: acknowledgments

My sincere thanks go to Brianna Peacey for her assistance compiling sources for this review. Her expertise with and enthusiasm for constructed languages were the perfect foil to my own. I also thank the reviewer for their insightful comments and suggestions. Any remaining errors are my own.

Section: literature cited


Section: RELATED RESOURCES

Fiat Lingua. http://fiatlingua.org/
Language Creation Conference. https://conlang.org/language-creation-conference/
Language Creation Society. https://conlang.org/
World Building Institute. http://worldbuilding.institute/
