Title: Beyond the Household: Caribbean Families and Biocultural Models of Alloparenting


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Alloparental or extramaternal care is an integral aspect of human childrearing. This behavior has been explored both as an extension of the primary mother–infant dyad that evolved to meet the demands of altricial offspring and as an economic exchange of energy and resources. Much of this research centers on foraging or small-scale communities and positions the household as the central unit through which to explore negotiations of care. In this review, I use evidence from Black Caribbean communities living in industrialized countries to challenge the broad applicability of the analytical model of the bounded household and to question whether our current articulations of theory and empirical assessments of extramaternal care are well suited to investigations of these behaviors in the vast majority of contemporary human populations. Alloparental practices in the Caribbean reflect dynamic responses to maternal migration and the local influence of global labor markets. The children who remain at home experience variability in the care received from their surrogate parents. The dynamic aspect of the care practices enacted by these transnational families reveals the behavioral flexibility that has been integral to human survival.

Section: INTRODUCTION

The demands of highly altricial offspring are not unique to humans, but these effects, along with overall increased prosociality, are amplified in human lineage beginning by some estimates approximately 200,000 years ago ( Boyd 2006 , Burkart et al. 2009 , Hare 2017 , Henrich 2004 , Marean 2015 , Silk & House 2011 , Wrangham 2019 ). Managing the needs of dependent offspring who experience a long infancy, a distinct period of childhood, and highly social intergroup dynamics requires increased dependence on individuals other than the mother, known as alloparents ( Burkart et al. 2009 ). Extramaternal or alloparental care is a central feature of human thriving and survival. Access to reliable and consistent helpers likely enabled our species to expand demographically, while colonizing precarious environmental areas and enduring various resource-based challenges. Unlike our nonhuman primate relatives, we have benefited from an expanded temporal period of childhood while expanding our population by employing alloparental care to compensate for the long interbirth intervals observed in closely related species ( Bogin 1999 , Hrdy 2011 , Jones et al. 1999 , Kuzawa & Bragg 2012 ).
This increased investment in offspring is particularly pronounced in many species across the Primate order. In many nonhuman primates, there is an elongated period of infancy beyond that found in humans, which in effect slows the entire trajectory toward adulthood ( Bogin 2006 , Thompson & Nelson 2011 , Trevathan & Rosenberg 2016 ). This long infancy necessitates reliance on adults for both the material needs of food and shelter and the socioemotional instruction required to navigate a successful adulthood. In species that are relatively solitary like orangutans, this long dependence on primary caretakers is met by a particularly long interbirth interval of six to nine years ( Wich et al. 2004 ). In species that often twin, such as marmosets and tamarins, the needs of relatively large infants with high caloric demands are met by male partners who provide noninsignificant amounts of care ( Fernandez-Duque et al. 2009 ). This pattern of extramaternal care is relatively rare in nonhuman primates and is more often found in humans. It is so rare in our closest living ape relatives that some scholars have proposed that it may have evolved with the genus Australopithecus as infant brain size increased, and arboreality decreased ( DeSilva 2011 ), or later in the genus Homo ( Antón & Josh Snodgrass 2012 , Cofran & DeSilva 2015 , Coqueugniot et al. 2004 , Dunsworth & Eccleston 2015 ). From an evolutionary perspective, any rigorous conceptualization of human life histories must center nonparental care as a reproductive strategy that allowed our species to survive and thrive around the world.
Alloparenting has been modeled both as an extension of the primary mother–infant dyad that evolved to meet the needs of altricial offspring and as a pseudoeconomic exchange of energy and resources ( Cofran & DeSilva 2015 ; Hrdy 1999 , 2011 ; Paull 2009 ). Many of these models foreground the input and output of resources in a purportedly bounded unit, often designated as the household. Modeling that positions the household as primarily an economic unit considers individuals living within the space as net consumers or producers of resources. These schema are evolutionary and economic extensions of the laws of thermodynamics ( Bellamy Foster & Burkett 2008 , Ruth 1996 ). However, in many contexts the household is becoming a less meaningful analytical unit of measurement, as global markets demand a more fluid exchange of resources between individuals. In this review, I use evidence from Black Caribbean communities to challenge the broad applicability of the analytical model of the seemingly bounded household as a lens through which to understand alloparental care. A study of alloparental care in communities that are intimately engaged in global labor markets provides insight into gendered labor migration, the creation of transnational kin networks, and variability in the quality of care received by children in the absence of their primary caregivers.

Section: MODELING ALLOPARENTAL CARE

Models that position alloparenting as a transference of resources that occurs primarily within or near to a closed network of households do so with a keen eye toward acute energetic trade-offs between growth and reproduction over the human life span. As such, the utilization of alloparental care is correlated to variability in energetic availability for mothers. As proposed by Reiches et al. (2009) , the energetic availability model understands alloparental care as impacting the energetic balance available to women as they navigate this particular stage of life. Reiches et al. (2009) suggest that as part of cooperatively breeding species, we should consider indirect reproductive investment from related alloparents as part of a pooled energy budget that is mediated ultimately via individual women. Similarly, in nonhuman primates, alloparenting has demonstrated impacts on maternal fitness. It may enable chimpanzee mothers to wean earlier and thus redistribute reproductive resources toward future offspring ( Bădescu et al. 2016 ). When articulated as such, the pooled energy model does not account for the investment of resources in individuals to whom women are not related and is perhaps most applicable to studies of natural fertility populations where high levels of kin-based genetic investment have been demonstrated over time. For communities where children spend an increasing amount of time with paid caregivers and nonkin, this model may be less relevant.
Because alloparental care is an essential feature of human reproduction, observations of it are plentiful in the ethnographic record. Considerable attention has been paid to identifying, at minimum, a kind of essential or primary model of alloparental care ( Bogin et al. 2014 , Flinn 2011 , Flinn et al. 2007 , Hrdy 2007 ). As has been the case for many anthropological studies of familial dynamics and parental investment, attention has been given to forms of alloparental care in foraging communities ( Nelson 2020 ). Though many researchers now resist this interpretation, foraging populations were long the standard-bearer for the hypothesized antiquity of our familial dynamics. Indeed, this kind of language still permeates research on the arc of human evolution and social dynamics ( Layton et al. 2012 ). Alloparental care in foraging communities has been examined largely within the context of studies of child survival, interbirth intervals, long-term reproductive strategies, and life-history trade-offs between individual growth and reproduction. Much of the data on parental investment in foraging communities was gathered from a select few communities, including the Aka, the Hadza, and the !Kung San ( Nelson 2020 ). In one study, Meehan and colleagues tested the hypothesis that proximity to maternal relatives would influence the quality and quantity of extramaternal care received by Aka infants. In reality, there was no discernible difference in the quality of care received by infants in these diverse residential settings ( Meehan et al. 2013 , 2014 ). Scelza and colleagues found that 70% of couples in a study of Himba families had at least one child with extrapair paternity and that this kind of female choice with regard to partnership and paternity is one central feature of their reproductive and parental care practices ( Scelza 2011 , 2013 ; Scelza et al. 2020 ). Flexibility in extramaternal care strategies, along with creativity in other aspects of our cultural and social lives, including dietary practices and niche construction, is likely a central key to child thriving ( Laland et al. 2001 , Potts 1998 ).
The diversity of helpers observed among the Aka may actually mirror the plurality of configurations of alloparental care found around the world. In many communities, extramaternal care is often provided by maternal relatives, and specifically grandmothers ( Sear & Mace 2009 ). While human longevity may be an artifact of shifts in our human life history beyond care modeling ( Gurven & Kaplan 2008 ), it has contributed to a reproductive strategy that opportunistically employs help from a variety of caretakers. There is likely not one familial form that can serve as a representative model for our understanding of the centrality of extramaternal care. Whether provided by maternal relatives, as often observed among the Hadza, or by fathers and young women, as seen in the Ituri and the Ache, the flexibility of this care system is key ( Bogin et al. 2014 , Meehan et al. 2014 ). Understanding alloparenting as an inherently flexible feature like much of human behavior allows us to explore how it is manifested in populations that are incorporated into local markets and global economies.
Evidence of humans employing flexible child care strategies supports the idea that we are cooperative breeders. Cooperative breeding, or the creation and use of a network of people to care for dependent offspring, is relatively rare but occurs frequently across human communities ( Hrdy 2011 , Kramer 2010 ). This kind of cooperative breeding and the evolution of alloparental care may be a selfish evolved trait, in that it largely benefits an individual to whom the donor is related ( Quiatt 1979 ). The time delay on these investments may be aided by mutualisms that provide immediate benefits to individuals providing alloparental care ( Kramer 2010 ). Cooperative breeding models propose that individuals who engage in this extramaternal care also experience material proximate benefits. Alloparental care by nulliparous females may be a by-product of selection for highly invested maternal care for altricial infants ( Meredith 2015 ). However, in some communities, such as the Ituri forest hunters, Efe infants are cared for by relatives and nonrelatives alike, in what amounts to a communal system anchored in easily predicted causal mechanisms, like kin investment and reciprocity, and immediate skill building including caregiving ( Ivey 2000 ).
Extramaternal care that ultimately contributes to the direct and indirect reproductive fitness of the donors is mediated by proximate mechanisms that reinforce the benefits of these seemingly costly acts. Considerable evidence indicates that endocrinological pathways facilitate physiological outcomes that support the continued donation of costly acts. For human and nonhuman primate fathers, care may be a proximate mechanism for mating and reproductive effort that is mediated by cultural and endocrinological proxies ( Smuts & Gubernick 1992 ). Human fathers have been shown to have lower levels of testosterone when engaged in high levels of parental care ( Gettler et al. 2011 ). Similarly, oxytocin, vasopressin, estradiol, prolactin, progesterone, and cortisol have also been implicated in parental care in the immediate postpartum period and in the provisioning of care as children get older ( Bos 2017 ). While much of this research has been conducted in fathers, these pathways may also be at work in alloparents, even nonkin, who are providing considerable consistent care.
As a model that can be applied across taxa, cooperative breeding situates genetic relatedness as the causative factor that structures the distribution of alloparental care. Bogin and colleagues call for a shift in thinking away from cooperative breeding, owing to its limited applicability in humans, and toward the idea that humans engage in biocultural reproduction ( Bogin et al. 2014 ). As a concept, biocultural reproduction provides a more flexible avenue through which we can investigate alloparental care in communities that are fully integrated in local and global market economies and that engage in scheduled, delayed, and planned reproduction.
This review brings into conversation evolutionary hypotheses regarding the emergence and persistence of alloparental care and case studies from contemporary human communities, specifically Black Caribbean families. In focusing on Black families from the Caribbean and Caribbean Diaspora, I explore whether our current articulations of theory around parental and extramaternal care are well suited to investigations of the manifestation of these behaviors in the vast majority of contemporary nonforager human populations. Black Caribbean families live in both single-family and multifamily dwellings and sometimes on familial land near to kin. Individuals across the region range in completed education levels, as well as in subsequent employment and financial earnings. Across the Black Caribbean, considerable overlap exists in the kinds of fluidity found in household formations and parental practices borne out of regional colonial and postcolonial histories, along with current entanglements in global labor markets. Despite an emphasis in the literature on female-headed households, father involvement is a notable feature of child care in the region, and like many communities, there are paired individuals raising their children together ( Roopnarine et al. 1997 , 2000 ; Senior 1991 ; Taylor et al. 2017 ). This variability reflects the diversity found in families across cultures and around the world. It may be time to move past binaries that attribute evolutionary mismatch to our understandings of the diversity of forms of parental investment and alloparental care. This analysis of familial forms encourages an unbinding of tropes routinely used in evolutionary modeling and calls specifically for complicating ideas about investment and in conceptualizations of the household as a bounded economic unit through which we can understand the flow of resources. In the case of families in the Caribbean and Caribbean Diaspora, and communities that are immersed in the global economy, the household is unbounded; thus we must reimagine the transfers of energetics, psychosocial support, and material resources as being a more nuanced exchange.

Section: CARIBBEAN KINSHIP AND THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL CANON

Within the anthropological canon, kinship studies have played a central role in the dual tasks of making sense of the human experience and ranking cultural progress. Whether the research stemmed from imperialist imaginings of supposed savagery or from colonialist inquests about leadership and power, an attempt to understand how familial structures are situated with larger communities remains a mainstay within the discipline ( Boas 2016 , Evans-Pritchard 1951 , Herskovits 1937 , Trouillot 2003 ). However, from their inception, kinship studies were heavily influenced by ideas about the boundaries of human normativity. Notions of appropriate behavior, gender roles, familial arrangements, and childrearing were being debated within a larger cultural and scientific framework that pathologized almost all non-European peoples. Thus, early kinship studies were not value-neutral assessments of the diversity of human familial forms, but rather judgments indicating the need for and capacity of the people in these communities to transcend their current familial practices to move toward an evolved cultural state.
Early studies of the Caribbean emerged from this pointed critique of nonwhite families. What should now easily be recognized as part of our human capacity for behavioral flexibility was labeled pathological ( Bastien 1961 ). The Caribbean Islands as a locus of study are bounded by a geographical proximity, the precolonial movement of indigenous communities throughout the region, the European importation of African slaves and laborers from other colonies, and postcolonial identities and relationships to former rulers and other small island states ( Mintz 1974 , Trouillot 1992 ). Early reports of maritime histories, trade, and landownership slowly transitioned to studies of these newly independent yet still financially and politically enmeshed majority Black but ethnically diverse countries. Some of the earliest discussions of family forms in the region centered Black Caribbean families in what was a larger transdisciplinary project that reified racial hierarchies. The race project began well before anthropology established itself as a discipline, but beliefs about the power of a few observable phenotypic traits to correctly and reliably signal hierarchies of human cognitive capacity and cultural aptitude became a trademark of this discipline ( Fuentes et al. 2019 ). Consequently, beliefs in the durability of race and its ability to predict individual competence also became a hallmark of early kinship studies in the Caribbean. One theme emerges from some of the earliest studies conducted with Caribbean communities by European and American scholars: the bounds of normalcy and the problem of pathology.
While the region had long produced scholars such as José Martí and C.L.R. James, who reflected astutely on the positionality of their countries in the broader region and world, the influence of white European and American researchers on shaping dominant discourses about the region should not be minimized. Countries in this region gained political independence beginning in 1962 in Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago, and much later in St. Kitts and Nevis in 1983 ( Will 1991 ). At this moment, other nation-states and transnational organizations such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund were gaining interest in the region's financial potential ( Girvan & Girvan 1973 , Klak 1996 ). With an eye toward productivity and extraction, researchers and business people alike were focused on the region. The barriers to this idealized future flush with economic growth, financial self-reliance, and stability were often linked to the pathology of social practice in these majority Black and culturally pluralistic communities.
The family as the core locus of societal productivity or pathology is a conceptual framework that is prevalent throughout the social sciences as parents, and particularly mothers, are held responsible for the development of the nation-state ( Kandiyoti 1991 ). Anthropological analyses of the Black family as inherently pathological emerged within this larger context of the relationship between an international race problem, more specifically a “Negro problem,” and the postcolonial moment. Although it is now well accepted that a core human adaptation is our ability to create and maintain a diversity of social relationships and that this flexibility is key to our long-term survival as a species, this was not the dominant discourse when the first kinship studies emerged in earnest at the turn of the nineteenth century. As such, what was later conceptualized as alloparenting was initially labeled a sign of dysfunction and representative of an insurmountable lack of familial stability.
While rarely based in empirical understandings of how care work was being completed around the world, the nuclear family came to serve as the standard and idealized familial form ( Krull 2011 ). To that end, early research on family systems that diverged from this norm were characterized as inherently problematic and even dangerous. Historically, Caribbeanist research tied childrearing to household configurations and relationship status in an attempt to make sense of arrangements that diverged from Victorian norms. Relationships in Black Caribbean communities, the primary subjects of this early anthropological and sociological gaze, were sorted primarily into three categories: ( a ) legally married unions and ( b ) common-law unions, both of which included partners who were residing in the same home; and ( c ) visiting unions ( Clarke 1957 , Herskovits et al. 1947 , Otterbein 1965 , Smith 1957b ). These terms were used to try to characterize and explain the diversity of pair bonds between adult men and women beyond the nuclear family, and scholars of the era often labeled this diversity as defective.
A purported link between the economic growth and stability of the nation and the durability and constancy of family units was made explicit by many parties interested in the region, ranging from policy makers to researchers. Developing from a framework that values white heterosexual legal and religiously ordained marriage, relationships in Black communities across the Diaspora were not simply described but labeled a corrupted version of this idealized form. A common theme in these early ethnographies was the weakness of these various forms of union and the high prevalence of female-headed households. There were, of course, durable features in these relationships. Women were heads of household and primary caretakers for their children. Researchers attributed this matrifocality to various factors, including a retention of African practices, the legacy of familial separation during slavery, and male irresponsibility ( Brown & Chevannes 2001 , Higman 1978 , Smith 1957a ). Matrifocality, as the dominant descriptive term, sought to explain the relative unimportance of the bond between husband and wife, the lack of male authority, and the centrality of women as primary caretakers for dependent children and as the central sources of financial and emotional support for adults and children alike ( Smith 2013 ).
Even with attention to family structures, these early ethnographies were neither explicitly interrogating whether children were thriving in these matrifocal cultures nor identifying the differences between familial forms and familial care practices. Rather, the framing of conjugal unions as relatively weak or strong was a commentary on whether men were a constant presence in the household ( Smith 2014 , Solien 1960 ). This notion was based on assumptions about what these men could or would be doing with regard to childcare and their necessity for child thriving. The positioning of illegitimacy as a defining and inherently problematic feature of Caribbean families accompanied much purported hand-wringing about why concubinage is acceptable in these communities ( Goode 1960 , Manyoni 1977 ). There was, in fact, quite a bit of distance between the categorical listings of different kinds of romantic unions ( Goode 1960 , Schlesinger 1968 ) and the actual material work of family building and childrearing. Matrifocality and extramaternal care in the Caribbean have been cultural norms that do not negate high levels of investment by fathers, despite a scholarly focus on male absenteeism. Societal acceptance of nonlegal marriage arrangements likely reflected the financial pressures of everyday life, coupled with cultural practices permitting diverse familial structures, which allowed women, particularly working-class and poor women, to enact more flexibility and assert more agency in their living arrangements ( Safa 1986 , Stuart 1996 ). Caribbean familial systems were and remain care systems that are both prescriptively and empirically flexible.

Section: CARE WORK AND CHILDREN'S LIVES

Emic perspectives on proper care for children as well as evidence collected on the practical work of child rearing have revealed vast differences between early deficit models and cultural practices and material concerns about childrearing in the Caribbean. This movement away from assessments of pathology and onto practice began in earnest when Caribbean and African American women scholars began were permitted entrée into academic networks. Not coincidentally, contemporary understandings of the fluidity of care systems in Black Caribbean families are influenced by these discipline-shaping manuscripts ( Barriteau 1995 , Brodber 1974 , Senior 1991 , Stack 1975 ). This focus on matrifocality in Caribbean research serves as an intriguing bridge between ethnographic studies in the region and biocultural studies of familial forms and parental investment grounded in evolutionary theory. Parental investment and kin investment predict that helpless infants will require high and sustained investment from related individuals ( Flinn et al. 2007 , Trivers 1972 ). Comparative ethnographic data support the argument by Bogin et al. (2014) that humans are flexible in their creation of systems of support ( Bentley & Mace 2009 ). In practice, the mother–infant dyad that has been so central to evolutionary discussions of species thriving is also culturally significant in Caribbean familial structures and the Black Diaspora broadly. It is through the parents broadly, but specifically mothers and their extended kin, that alloparental networks are constructed.
Having children and growing a family are culturally significant parts of the adult life cycle for both Caribbean men and women ( Barrow 1996 ). While boys are implicitly permitted to engage in sexual activity at younger ages than their female peers, having children should ideally begin in adulthood ( Chevannes 2001 ). Black Caribbean men's work in raising children has been minimized and relatively unrecognized ( Brown et al. 1997 ). At the same time, women and their social and kin networks are responsible for most of the day-to-day care work of raising children. Communal mothering is a fundamental feature of care and kin work in the Caribbean ( Lawson 2000 ). Thus, in this context, alloparenting is an essential stage of the life trajectory experienced not just by mothers who entrust their children to the care of their kinfolk, but also by family members who are expected to provide supplementary care.
The material work of childrearing and alloparenting in this region is complicated by ever-shifting global labor markets. Working-class and poor women have been most vulnerable to the economic shocks and extraction that have rendered the region continually dependent on neighboring countries, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank ( Barriteau 1996 , James 1983 ). As governments have tried to expand their economic bases, women have become increasingly involved in formal and informal labor markets ( Massiah 1986 ). Their engagement in wage-earning activities has been coupled with shifts in rates of completion of formal education, which have resulted in girls increasingly being educated at similar or higher rates than their male peers, representing a reverse in the historical trend of boys being more highly educated than girls ( Powell 1984 ). These changes in the educational and working lives of Caribbean women foretold shifts in sometimes already treacherous parenting landscapes.
Social and cultural ideas and ideals about parenthood, and particularly motherhood, have rendered this stage of life both an ascribed and an achieved status. By official estimates in the late 1990s, 25–45% of residences in the Caribbean were female-headed households ( Mondesire & Dunn 1995 ). Thus, conceptualizing alloparental care as extramaternal care in the form of provisioning resources and/or caregiving may be particularly apt in this cultural context ( Emmott & Page 2019 ). However, whether they coreside with their children, Caribbean fathers provide a non-inconsequential amount of material support to primary caregiving mothers. Considerable evidence has demonstrated that Caribbean men are culturally prescribed to provide support for their families ( Roopnarine 2015 , Roopnarine et al. 2009 ). This material care often consists of, but is not limited to, providing food, clothes, and childcare ( Bailey et al. 2001 ). And although emotional care is often categorized as women's work, research supports a cultural consensus about the importance of men's attentiveness to the social and emotional growth of their children ( Brown & Chevannes 2001 , Williams et al. 2012 ).
Although there is much popular discourse about men's responsibilities to their children, the reliability of father care is often correlated with his financial status, current relationship status, and whether he is currently involved in a new or different romantic relationship that has resulted in additional children ( Roopnarine 2013 ). Coresidence with a partner and children, and thus perhaps more reliable investment, becomes increasingly likely as people age and if they gain financial independence ( Bailey et al. 2001 , Brown et al. 1997 ). While there is an expectation that men will provide for their children, there are also concerns about men who provide this kind of material care for children who they may unwittingly believe to be their biological kin when they are not ( King 2011 ). Providing material resources to these kinds of children (often called “jackets” in the Anglophone Caribbean) is typically considered an unwise or inappropriate allocation of paternal care. However, it may be one way for infertile men to create this kind of culturally highly valued kin relationship ( King 2011 ). Although considerable analyses have questioned the assumed one-to-one association between relationship status, household composition, and father involvement, these factors, along with the father's economic status, do influence men's ability to provide extramaternal care and material support.
Fathers in the Caribbean often provide a noninsignificant amount of material care for their children, and this care is correlated with health and development outcomes for both adult males and their offspring. The practical manifestation of this parental investment varies depending on the residential status of the father, and there is some evidence of higher rates of formal marriage and partnered coresidence in Indo-Caribbean rather than Black Caribbean families ( Brown et al. 1997 , Roopnarine 2013 ). Caribbean fathers, like fathers around the world, tend to experience hormonal fluctuations that reflect the intensity of their involvement with their young dependent children; men who engage in high levels of caregiving experience lower testosterone levels ( Gray et al. 2007 , 2017 ). Additionally, Jamaican fathers of new babies experience depressive symptoms in the postpartum period if they lack much needed financial resources or support networks ( Gray et al. 2018 ). Father involvement, even in cases where they do not coreside, may correlate with the well-being of their offspring in Caribbean communities ( Flinn 1986 , 1992 ). This research supports the need for analytical models that transcend the confines of a singular home setting as the central locus of negotiations of care.
While cultural prescriptions demand that fathers in the Caribbean provide material resources to their children, extramaternal caregiving is also provided, in large part, by extended kin. This reliance on kin networks for childcare is higher in poor, working-class, and middle-class communities but ultimately transcends class, ethnicity, and marital status, mirroring caregiving norms practiced in communities around the world ( Barrow 1996 , Chamberlain 2003 , Thompson & Bauer 2000 ). This use of extended kin care has been documented extensively in sociological and cultural anthropological studies of Black Caribbean families. Child minding or child shifting is the practice of other individuals, most frequently maternal kin, providing primary care for a child ( Senior 1991 , Stack 1975 ). Child shifting may take place for a myriad of reasons, including, but not limited to, mother's inability to care for the child, abandonment by the father, parental neglect or abuse, or a mother's impending migration ( Clarke 1957 , Ramkissoon 2006 ). This communal care of children serves both the primary caretaker, typically mothers, and the surrogate parent. Mothers gain help with their children and surrogates gain an additional helper living in the home ( Brodber 1974 , Clarke 1957 , Foner 2009 , Rodman 1971 ). There is some evidence that younger children are more likely to be shifted out of their mothers’ homes and into alternate care settings, and typically surrogate parents are older than the birth parent ( Gordon 1987 ). Additionally, heads of household, in this case the surrogate parents, may be carefully overseeing the movement of children in and out of the home to address a need for supplementary income from the child's parents, a desire for additional help with tasks around the home, and availability of resources to care for the incoming child ( Gibbison & Paul 2006 , Gordon 1987 ). Child shifting arrangements, by design, interrupt the concept of a physically bounded household consisting of unchanging members. In effect, fostered children belong to more than one household and are the responsibility of many adults. As such, children and surrogate parents may form affective and durable attachment bonds ( Arnold 1997 , Gordon 1987 , Smith et al. 2004 , Suárez-Orozco et al. 2011 ).
Extended kin care is increasingly taking place in the context of Caribbean women's active engagement in global labor markets via transnational migration. Expanding and intrusive global labor markets and shifting employment opportunities within the region, coupled with dwindling options for reliable and consistent income near to home, have resulted in many families developing adaptable care systems. Some women decide to pursue employment abroad even while understanding that this will require a new care system for children who will remain at home because employment abroad provides the best chance for upward financial mobility ( Gmelch 1992 ). In many cases, there is a temporal impermanence surrounding parental migration to other islands in the Caribbean, the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Foreign visas rarely allow children to accompany their parents. Thus, these moves are often done either with plans of returning to children who remain at home or with the intention of eventually bringing those children to live abroad with their parent ( Gmelch 1992 , Lashley 2000 , Smith et al. 2004 ). Because women do most of the day-to-day care work, the lives of their children are disrupted by gendered migration that often occurs in the midst of these women's primary childbearing years.
International migration places particular kinds of pressures on families as they navigate geographical distance and negotiate care dynamics from afar ( Hope 1989 ). The movement of women out of their home countries results in the creation of transnational families. Building on Anderson's conceptualization of imagined communities, transnational families are familial networks that transcend both geographical and theorized boundaries and that emphasize biological relatedness and physical proximity ( Chamberlain 2004 , Ho 1999 ). These are families where at least one family member remains at home awaiting the return migration of their kin ( Chavez 2012 ). Evidence has shown that Black Caribbean women migrants keep in more frequent contact with their natal kin than do their male counterparts, thus supporting the theorized importance of female-centered kin networks in these communities ( Gussler 1980 , Taylor et al. 2017 ). The relationships between these women and the children who remain at home are shaped by the expectations of caretakers and dependents at home and cultural practices in the Caribbean Diaspora (see Figure 1 ).

Figure 1 Click to view


Figure 1 Click to view

Section: THE CHILDREN AT HOME

Within the anthropological literature, there is considerable focus on and even idealization of extended familial communities that help with childrearing. In practice, the care received and the long-term psychosocial impact on children who have moved between homes are variable. Unlike remittances, which are typically sent to the head of household or alloparental care provider, some material items are sent directly to the children who remain in the Caribbean. “Barrel children” is one name given to fostered children who receive material goods from parents who are living abroad. This term refers to the fact that many goods are shipped to children via large plastic barrels ( Bakker et al. 2009 , Crawford-Brown & Rattray 1994 , Sobo 1993 ). Because parental migration is often situated in narratives about increased economic opportunities, sending care packages in the form of much-needed material items is one way for migrants to signal to alloparents that they are earning a reasonable wage abroad and remain committed to their children's well-being. Some evidence indicates that in light of these packages, children may develop unhealthy attachments to material items, as these items come to symbolize their relationship with their migrated parent and give them entrée into consumer cultures that would be inaccessible without the migration of their parent ( Bakker et al. 2009 , Horst 2006 ). While the receipt of remittances or a barrel full of items may provide material support for children who have been fostered, they provide no guarantee of appropriate daily care in the absence of their primary caretaker.
While some children thrive in the care of extended family members, others experience neglect and abuse. In a study of Jamaican children, those who had little contact with a mother who had migrated were more likely to have experienced behavioral problems ( Crawford-Brown 1997 ). Gibbison & Paul (2006) demonstrate that fostered children, particularly boys, do not attend school as regularly, nor do they attain the same educational outcomes as their age- and gender-matched peers who live with a biological parent. This may be an extension of the gendered pattern of decreased expectations from educators and family members and diminished academic engagement from boys as compared with their female peers ( Parry 2000 ). Child abandonment and subsequent fostering have been linked to parental socioeconomic duress, and low socioeconomic status and overcrowding have been linked to impaired growth and a co-occurrence of under- and overnutrition in Jamaican youth ( Bronte-Tinkew & DeJong 2004 , Jackson et al. 2002 , Sargent & Harris 1998 ). Additional evidence from Jamaica found that girls who were being fostered had better growth outcomes than their male peers, which was likely due to gendered labor practices and girls’ responsibilities around food preparation ( Sargent & Harris 1992 ). In some cases, children who are being fostered end up in state-regulated children's homes when their kin fail to provide proper care. In these instances, their growth may be compromised as compared with their peers who live in familial homes ( Nelson 2016 ). Thus, children who are fostered may not necessarily be moving into a care setting that can provide equal or better care. In these instances, child shifting falls short of ideological and cultural aspirations regarding the proper communal care of children.
The conditions of the parental absence can influence the care received by these fostered children. Research from Jamaica suggests that in some cases child fostering is effectively “passing on” or parental abandonment ( Brody 1981 ). Whether children are safe depends on whether they happen to reside with a reliable caregiver. In some cases, child shifting children move between familial homes before eventually becoming wards of the state and being sent to live in one of the many children's homes across the island ( Brodber 1974 , Sargent & Harris 1992 ). Like fostering situations, the care received in children's homes varies. In a sample of children's homes in Manchester Parish, Jamaica, younger boys living with at least one biological parent had better growth measures than their peers living in state-regulated care settings ( Nelson 2016 ). Some evidence shows that child abuse was more likely to occur when mothers rather than fathers migrated ( Bakker et al. 2009 ). Sargent & Harris (1992) suggest that abandonment is a socioeconomic phenomenon that should not be pathologized, but rather understood in the context of broader ideologies of parenting and particular global, local, and cultural pressures whereby parents cannot meet the economic needs of their children.
From the perspective of attachment theory, children who have secure bonds with one or more primary caretakers have an increased chance of appropriate psychological development and of thriving ( Bowlby 1977 ). Child shifting, particularly in the case of migration and thus parental absence, can disrupt these bonds ( Elliot-Hart et al. 2006 , Smith et al. 2004 ). Although the practice of child fostering is common, a retrospective study revealed that adults could recall the differences in food availability and care received when they lived in homes absent their biological parents. They were able to discern differences in how their caregivers treated them as compared with their own children ( Nelson 2008 ). Despite reunification, some adults recall psychological trauma from the separation, difficulties trusting adults, and feelings of being loved less than other siblings who never experienced separation ( Arnold 2006 ). Although technology allows children to better navigate relationships with their migrant parents, fostered children report experiencing depression and anxiety in the absence of their primary caretaker ( Horst 2006 , Jones et al. 2004 , Pottinger 2005 ). These circumstances are not immediately alleviated upon reunification, as there is often a long period of readjustment to the parent–child union, as well as an orientation to the new country setting ( Glasgow & Gouse-Sheese 1995 , Lashley 2000 ). Migration and child shifting are not without risk for children who remain at home. Despite the prevalence of child shifting, the variable psychosocial outcomes for children reflect the challenges that face parents who live in countries experiencing chronic economic problems.

Section: CONCLUSION

Human altriciality requires communal labor in childrearing. Models of extramaternal care or alloparenting in humans have given considerable attention to foraging and small-scale communities in which individuals live in close proximity to one another and exchange resources and labor between presumably bounded or semicircumscribed household units. These data have highlighted the flexibility with which humans adjust to the needs of dependent offspring. While data support the theory that maternal kin and specifically grandmothers are providing considerable childcare, humans’ success as a species has likely been due to the ability to create and maintain affective ties with kin and nonkin who can help with childrearing.
By centering many analyses in foraging or small-scale communities, anthropologists have both uncovered the plurality of alloparental care configurations and limited the strength of analyses as they pertain to communities that are engaging in global labor markets. In many Caribbean communities, where becoming a parent is regarded largely as the central achievement of adulthood, there are significant societal expectations about the care children should receive as well as a belief that fathers and extended kin will help parent these children. However, families in the Caribbean are often woman centered. Economic shocks have limited the ability of many Caribbean women to establish independent households and to earn a living near to their kin. In this context, we have to expand our understanding of alloparental care networks to include the creation and maintenance of transnational families. This pattern has been increasingly observed both across the Caribbean and in regions around the world, including but not limited to Latin America, South and South East Asia, and West Africa ( Baldassar et al. 2014 , Ho 1999 , Levitt 2001 , Mazzucato et al. 2015 , Mazzucato & Schans 2011 , Parreñas 2005 ).
Transnational Black Caribbean families are maintained by frequent communication, return visits, and reliance on family for care work. The affective ties between family members, specifically maternal kin, are created by proximity and maintained through communication ( Chamberlain 2004 ). Descriptions of romantic unions and child shifting in early literature on the Caribbean do not capture either the ordinary regularity of this cultural practice or the complicated dynamics that can lead to mixed developmental outcomes for dependent children. Younger children are more likely to be fostered, and homes with older heads of household are more likely to receive fostered children. The care received by fostered children is often contingent upon the maintenance of affective ties with parents whose time away is often of unknown duration. Although some children thrive in these settings, many struggle with challenges relating to the absence of their parent. Additionally, in the cases where reunification occurs, there is an adjustment period during which these children and their biological parents must reestablish their familial roles and relationships with one another. In light of the increasing interconnectedness of communities around the world, the Caribbean provides one case study through which we can expand our understandings and assessments of alloparental care and interrogate the applicability of the household as a bounded space through which resources are exchanged.
Evolutionary theory predicts that altricial offspring will demand consistent and reliable care from kin and close social contacts. Through this example of parental investment and alloparental care in Black Caribbean families, we are provided with one case study through which to explore the manifestation of this highly evolutionarily conserved behavior in communities that are fully engaged in global labor markets, and thus impacted by even the slightest economic shocks. By expanding our understanding of the exchange of these necessary socioemotional and financial resources beyond the bounded convenience of a household or even a village, we begin to address much-needed gaps in our thinking regarding the diversity and effectiveness of variable forms of parental investment.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I thank Sallie Han and Tracy Betsinger for providing editorial suggestions on earlier iterations of my writing on this topic. I also thank the anonymous reviewers whose suggestions helped to improve this article. All errors are my own.

Section: literature cited

