Title: Typologies, Typifications, and Types


Section: 

fn1a This article is part of a special theme on Race. For a list of other articles in this theme, see https://www.annualreviews.org/toc/anthro/49/1

Section: ABSTRACT

This article positions types at the center of anthropological knowledge production, considering them both from the abstract, analytical perspective of expert typologies and from the tacit, phenomenological perspective of everyday practices of typification. Proposing what an “anthropology of types,” broadly construed and across these two scales, might look like, I examine the histories and uses of types and typological thinking in anthropology, highlighting the empirical, analytical, methodological, ethical, and political questions they have raised. I then describe the phenomenological foundations of typification, how sociocultural and linguistic anthropologists have approached it, and the accompanying challenges related to translation and representation. Finally, I review ethnographies of expert practices of type production, tracing the circuit of typification–typology–type and back again to show how forms of expertise institutionalize lay knowledge in ways that further solidify the misrecognition of types as natural, and examine visual and arts-based interventions that draw attention to these processes.

Section: INTRODUCTION

Types are a complicated symbol within anthropology. While anthropologists have used types to construct and critique theories of evolution, culture, and change; systematically compare, contrast, and connect disparate languages, technologies, and cultures across time and space; and communicate these ideas to broader publics, in the past 50 years, many have eschewed types and typological thinking as essentialist, drawing attention to their integral and instrumental use in racist pseudoscience and racialist science that solidified ideas of discrete racial and cultural differences organized into colonial hierarchies ( Ewen & Ewen 2006 , Marks 2017 ). Yet, types, like categories and classifications, are inescapable ( Bowker & Star 1999 , Goodenough 1999 , Hacking 2007 ). Archaeology would not be possible without them ( Adams & Adams 1991 , Gnecco & Langebaek 2014 , Whittaker et al. 1998 ). Even with its shift from types to populations, biological anthropology still relies on phenotypes and genotypes as shorthand to describe a range of visible and nonvisible genetic variation and expression ( Caspari 2003 , 2018 ). Sociocultural and linguistic anthropology likewise depend, in part, on understanding individuals’ everyday typifications , or the “taken-for-granted habits of thought and perception” ( Segal 1999 , p. 236) as a way of understanding cultural practices.
Moreover, while anthropologists have moved past types as an organizing rubric for the field, the concept endures in popular discourse. There has been an explosion of type creation on multiple fronts beyond it. From algorithms ( Besteman & Gusterson 2019 , Crawford & Paglen 2019 , Noble 2018 ), advertising ( Dávila 2001 , Shankar 2015 ), and design ( Benjamin 2019 , Murphy 2016 ) to policing ( Beliso-De Jesús 2020 , Maguire et al. 2018 , Rosa & Díaz 2020 ), performance ( Herrera 2015 , Kondo 2018 ), and policy making ( Eubanks 2017 , Merry 2016 ), ad hoc and everyday ways of perceiving and making sense of difference are rapidly becoming routinized and institutionalized into newly professionalized practices or are augmenting already established fields. Many of these new forms either directly or obliquely reference earlier anthropological projects as they seek to construct, commodify, and discipline groups of people as types ( Sadre-Orafai 2019 ). As such, types remain a key symbol of anthropology to broader publics, which poses the question, How are we as a field grappling with the complicated legacies of type production in our own discipline ( Rana 2011 ) and among other professional domains, where experts are involved in similar work of typological world making?
In this review article, I propose an anthropology of types as a strategy for highlighting key epistemological challenges in our field and their mutual imbrication in domains beyond it. An anthropology of types connects work from across the subdisciplines that theorizes culture, evolution, and change both through and against types. It positions types at the center of anthropological knowledge production, considering them from both the abstract, analytical perspective of expert typologies , on the one hand, and the tacit, phenomenological perspective of everyday practices of typification, on the other. An anthropology of types helps us focus on the circuit of typification–typology–type and back again or how new forms of expertise institutionalize lay knowledge as expert knowledge that further solidifies the misrecognition of types as real and natural in the world ( Goodwin 1994 ). A cross-subdisciplinary anthropological analysis is needed, given that much of the legacy of type is rooted in early holistic approaches that blended cultural, linguistic, biological, and material features together in their construction ( Braun & Hammonds 2012 ).
Although there is an impressive body of literature on the multiple, braided histories of types and typological thinking both within and beyond anthropology (e.g., Arvin 2019 , Baker 1998 , Bennett et al. 2017 , Edwards 1990 , Ewen & Ewen 2006 , Kim 2018 , Morris-Reich 2016 , Poole 1997 ), tracing these overlapping and distinct intellectual lineages in the same level of depth and detail is beyond the scope of this review. Instead, here, I knit together multiple scales and vantages across a range of domains to point to key moments and questions that can surface when centering types, typologies, and typifications. I argue that in addition to deconstructing current pernicious type production practices, this perspective can reveal and place in tension the multiple domains and trajectories from which they are emerging. While the proliferation of types risks flattening difference, removing nuance, and sucking out the vitality, contingency, and ultimately unknowable interiority of people ( Jackson 2005 ), when juxtaposed against one another, they can also enliven, activate, and animate a range of concerns in unique ways that are worthy of our attention.
To outline this approach, I begin with a brief history on the use of typologies and types in anthropological methods and theories, showing how the type concept crosses subdisciplines and multiple scales of fieldwork. I discuss the empirical, analytical, methodological, ethical, and political questions they raise. Next, I chart the shift away from types to figures in social theory, the phenomenological foundations of typification that are implicated in this reframing, and how sociocultural and linguistic anthropologists have approached both and their related issues of scale, translation, and ethnographic representation. I then review ethnographic analyses of a range of experts involved in cultural practices of type production—in criminology and policing; policy and government; science and technology; and advertising and media—and how anthropologists have used visual and arts-based approaches to reimagine the discipline and its relationship to types.

Section: TYPOLOGIES AND TYPES IN ANTHROPOLOGY

Typologies are abstract systems of classification and comparison that render the complexities and nuances of everyday life or continuous features of biological and material diversity discrete and comparable through the modeling and use of types. Based on identifiable, isolatable, and bounded characteristics and features, typologies are “made for the sorting of entities” ( Adams & Adams 1991 , p. 47). Typologies are always created from a particular perspective and with a specific purpose in mind ( Adams & Adams 1991 , pp. 48–49; Gnecco & Langebaek 2014 , p. v). From the nineteenth century through the first half of the twentieth century, anthropologists vigorously debated the merits of a range of typological methods and practices, not just their theoretical and analytical utility, but the number, kind, and realness of types they contained. Goals ranged from making anthropology more systematic and scientific to making it more metaphorical and amenable to theoretical abstraction. Aptly summarizing an ongoing concern, Kluckhohn (1939 ; 1960 , p. 135), a frequent contributor to these debates, bemoaned, “Most [anthropologists’] classifications are either crudely empirical or grossly impressionistic. We are relatively rich in content categories but poor in conceptual or relational categories.” Theorists sought inspiration from math, philosophy, linguistics, and biology, while also highlighting the distinctiveness of anthropological data and the limitations of various methods and materials. Early anthropological typologies drew data and theories from across the subdisciplines, with archaeological models heavily influenced by theories of evolution ( Lyman et al. 1997 ) and racial typologies informed not just by perceived physical differences, but by linguistic and cultural ones as well ( Braun & Hammonds 2012 , pp. 67–68; Edwards 1990 , p. 256).
Because typologies are “explicitly theoretical in intent as opposed to…[purely] descriptive categorization” ( Kluckhohn 1960 , p. 134), theorists use types heuristically to construct them. As Adams & Adams (1991) note, “A type, unlike other kinds of classes, is also a sorting category” (p. 47). Types are symbolic representations that build both scale and relations ( Irvine 2016 ); they can be iconic, indexical, part of type–token relationships, or various combinations therein ( Agha 2011 , Reyes 2017 ). Types are reductive, making it possible to compare disparate phenomena, features, or idiosyncratic differences. Within typologies, types are designed as a means to an end but are frequently misrecognized as ends unto themselves. They are imperfect frames. Types are sense-making devices but are prone to distortion, simultaneously flattening and heightening differences. In some formulations, such as Weber's ideal type, this distortion is the point: “Ideal types were never meant to conceptualize the objective world. They allow us to conceptualize and delineate the value-laden world of culture, history, and human subjectivity” ( Fernandez 2016 , p. 46). Types do not exist empirically but are used to distill key features, sharpen boundaries, and aid in analysis. Still, types work by being apparent. In many of the mid-twentieth-century debates about types, theorists juxtaposed typologies—with their graphic, revelatory structure—against purely quantitative, statistical ways of knowing that lurked beneath the surface. While typologies are amenable to statistical quantification, they are of a different logical order. They rely on expert analyses and consensus that the qualities and features highlighted are both meaningful and, with the appropriate frame, readily evident.
In their historical research on types, visual anthropologists have shown the importance of graphic representations (e.g., drawings, photographs, sculptures, and museum displays) in both anthropological practices of typological and type production and their mediation beyond the discipline ( Edwards 1990 , 1997 ; Pinney 1990 , 2011 ; Poole 1997 , 2005 ). These representational practices include anthropologists’ use of type photographs as scientific data alongside and in service of anthropometric measurements ( Delaplace 2019 ), as well as their translation into nonscientific artistic renderings for broader publics. For example, writing about American sculptor Malvina Hoffman and the Chicago Field Museum's 1933 The Races of Mankind exhibition, Kim notes that Hoffman “mediated race for American common sense … [by modifying] the terms of anthropological typology … presenting not a series of racial types but a series of racial portraits … [replacing] biometrics and mechanical objectivity with portraiture's ethos of embodiment, physical and psychological immediacy, and interpersonal connection” ( Kim 2018 , p. 127, emphasis in original). Despite these different orientations, however, anthropological and artistic representations of types share a similar visual aesthetic.
Writing about anthropological type photography in the mid-nineteenth century, Edwards (1990) observes, “Photographically, the ‘type’ is expressed in a way which isolates, suppressing context and thus individuality. The specimen is in scientific isolation, physically, and metaphorically, the plain background accentuates the physical characteristics and denies context” (p. 241). This erasure of context is the prerequisite for typological comparison. As Poole argues, writing in relation to early-nineteenth-century biological drawings and the visual discourse of type, “Deleting the observer … allowed the artist to isolate the represented figure from any specifically narrative frame and to make it speak—as it were—for itself. The represented, visual type acquired a materiality and existence of its own” ( Poole 1997 , p. 103). Decontextualization works as a form of highlighting that helps define an anthropological professional vision. As Goodwin (1994) notes, “[T]he way in which such highlighting structures the perception of others by reshaping a domain of scrutiny so that some phenomena are made salient, while others fade into the background, has strong rhetorical and political consequences” (p. 628). Moreover, this style of visual evidence, in turn, serves as an insignia of the discipline, a fact that has been productively refracted and used as a form of critique by a range of contemporary visual artists, such as South African visual activist and photographer Zanele Muholi (2018) in their Somnyama Ngonyama: Hail the Dark Lioness series and Indian artist Pushpamala N and Bangalore-based Scottish photographer Clare Arni's 2000–2004 collaboration Native Women of South India: Manners and Customs ( Pushpamala & Arni 2006 ). Yet as Poole argues, both in the case of type photographs and in contemporary reinterpretations and interventions of them, the apparent fixity of these categories must be tempered by the ontological instability of photography's form: “[T]he understanding of race that emerges from a history of anthropological photography is clearly as much about the instability of the photograph as ethnological evidence and the unshakeable suspicion that perhaps things are not what they appear to be as it is about fixing the native subject as a particular racial type” ( Poole 2005 , p. 165). This tension runs throughout anthropological uses of types.
The epistemological uncertainty about types, typologies, and their operational inferences structured decades of archaeological debates. Theorists and practitioners sought to refine the use of types from pure description to connecting time, space, and history through functionalist analyses or mentalist approaches aimed at accessing emic perspectives, to refining theories of assemblage and culture in a more positivist, scientistic way, to leveraging computational prowess in the refinement of types ( Adams & Adams 1991 , pp. 265–77; Ford 1954 ; Krieger 1944 ; McKern 1939 ; Rouse 1960 ; Spaulding 1953 ; Sullivan & Rozen 1985 ). As Adams & Adams stress, however, there was a disjuncture between the volatility of typological debates within archaeological theory and the mundane classificatory practices at archaeological sites that, at the time of their writing, had remained largely unchanged. Recent work, however, has sought to shift this relationship, using theory to transform these practices. Inspired in part by the ontological turn and informed by ethnographic insights from Indigenous descendent groups and textual interpretations of historical sources, new scholarship has revised intake categories and classifications themselves, building up alternative, coequal relational typologies that focus on “sets of objects rather than on single artifact classes or types” ( Zedeño 2009 , p. 415) and “the labile nature of material qualities and essences…that invite us to resee objects as dynamic and involved in ongoing and relational narratives” ( Jackson 2017 , p. 603).
Many of these same issues—the relationship between theory and method, the realness of categories—have structured debates about types in biological anthropology. While the post-1960s “new physical anthropology” shifted the subdiscipline's focus from type to population and away from descriptivism toward theory-driven questions about evolution and adaptation, vestiges of typological thinking remained ( Caspari 2003 ). Caspari (2018) points to the endurance of essentialist thinking and the continued search for real categories focused now at the molecular level rather than the skeletal level. Writing about osteology's transformation from racial science to skeletal biology and back again, Armelagos & Van Gerven (2003) argue that a narrow focus on methods has entrenched typological approaches by encouraging forms of applied descriptivism that reinforces racial categories rather than challenging them: “Rather than being obsessed with constructing racial classification, we should be examining the biological consequences of racial analysis” ( Armelagos & Van Gerven 2003 , p. 62). Stojanowski (2018) argues that the lack of anthropological training for geneticists working on ancient DNA and prehistoric migrations has led to the reproduction of typological thinking owing to the “primacy of methodology at the expense of asking different types of questions with our data” (p. 183). As anthropologists from across the subdisciplines have shown, these are not just epistemological issues, but political ones as well ( Norton et al. 2019 ), which can also be seen from the inception of the discipline itself.
While Boas famously rejected the prevailing racial typological theory of the late nineteenth century, ushering in a new paradigm of cultural holism and relativism that extended to how he and his students not only studied culture, difference, and change, but also displayed them in museum contexts ( Bennett et al. 2017 ), he did so using the same anthropometric techniques of skull measurement and type photography as did his opponents ( Maxwell 2013 ). As Caspari notes, racial science and early anthropology were one and the same; Boas “never really relinquished essentialist notions of major races—broad geographic entities—even as he questioned the validity of human types for smaller racial categories” ( Caspari 2003 , p. 68). In this way, his work and that of his students can be seen as a shift in number and kind of types and typologies rather than as a rejection of them outright. Indeed, early-twentieth-century cultural anthropologists were still invested in the ethnological project, finding ways to compare and classify cultures through cross-cultural categories, units, and features and, in this process, creating and refining types as necessary kinds of sorting categories. As holistic and functional analyses gave way to structural ones, cultural anthropologists shifted in how they used types and typologies, seeking to map cultural practices and organizations onto underlying cognitive patterns and language structures ( Keck 2009 , Lakoff 1987 , MacLaury 1991 ). This search to refine types waned, however, with the postmodern and poststructural turns. Fewer sociocultural anthropologists were interested in debating the explanatory power of types, seeking instead to deconstruct them.

Section: AGAINST TYPE: FROM TYPES TO FIGURES

As Barker et al. (2014) note,
At best, social types can map the diverse landscape of individuals populating a society and reveal the classificatory concerns of specific moments in a society, or as in Max Weber's concept of the ideal type, stress certain elements at the expense of others in order to facilitate comparison. At worst, social types can collapse into ideological stereotypes. (p. 3)

Yet, across its diversity, this work shares an interest in “the tropic quality of all material-semiotic processes” ( Haraway 1997 , p. 11) and the embodied and enacted effects of figures in unfolding, contingent social interactions. Barker et al. (2013) draw on Gestalt psychology to argue that the figure takes shape only in relation to its sociohistorical context, or ground, and that both are “in a constant, never-ending process of mutual production and immanent becoming” (p. 165). For Haraway (1997) , figures “involve at least some kind of displacement that can trouble identifications and certainties” (p. 11). Weismantel (2001) and de Koning & Vollebergh (2019) use similar language to describe figures as “haunting shadows that both shape senses of self and inspire counternarratives” ( de Koning & Vollebergh 2019 , p. 394) as they “hover above everyday life, distorting actual relations between people and recasting them in their own strange image” ( Weismantel 2001 , p. xxvi). Figures transform social interactions, operating not according to an abstract logic amenable to typological thinking, but according to a practical one that is embodied, enacted, and felt.

Section: EMBODIED TYPES: FROM TYPIFICATIONS TO TYPES

In this way, the literature on figures dovetails with earlier approaches rooted in practice-based social theory (e.g., symbolic interactionism, ethnomethodology, and practice theory) that argue that social interactions depend on the perception and organization of reality based on trust and routines [ Berger & Luckmann 1966 ; Garfinkel 1967 ; Giddens 1991 ; Goffman 1959 , 1972 ( 1955 ), 1986 ; Heritage 1988 ; Merleau-Ponty 2002 ( 1962 ); Schutz 1972 ; Simmel 1981 ]. Differing from rule-based understandings of social structures, trust-based approaches emphasize the conditional and subjunctive management styles people use to cope with the uncertainties of social interaction, to attain what Giddens (1991) describes as “ontological security,” or the “shared—unproven and unprovable—framework of reality” (p. 36). This literature draws on phenomenology and underscores the inescapable role of typification in everyday interactions, arguing that since the amount of social information available at any given time is potentially unlimited, individuals use bracketing, typification, social stereotyping, and the routinization of activities to manage the contingencies of daily social life. These routines are embodied: The body is both a repository for socialized dispositions ( Bourdieu 1977 , Mauss 1973 ) and a medium for the display and perception of these dispositions in social interactions [ Goffman 1959 , 1972 ( 1955 )]. These presentations and observations are compulsory, unavoidable features of social interactions, done largely out of awareness. The continuous, embodied, and nonconscious dimensions of these routines make typifications seem or feel natural and real, although they are ideologically constructed and received. Typifications are tacit, contextual, anticipatory, sedimented, adaptive, and fuzzy ( Fernandez 2016 , p. 41). As Segal (1999) notes, “When our sensory typifications have some reliability, it is thus not that there are objective signs of identity present in the world, but that our constructions of appearance and identity are components of a self-confirming and largely closed system” (p. 239). Thus, while typifications help individuals make sense of the world, they also narrow people's perspectives about what visual differences mean and look like, which, in turn, shape individuals’ social interactions, both real and imagined, with one another.
Activist-oriented visual culture scholars have shown how to intervene in typifying encounters by drawing attention to and short-circuiting their recuperative smoothness. For example, Garland-Thomson (2009) exhorts activists to redirect the impulse to look at novel sights in ways that enliven and draw attention to the contingencies of face-to-face encounters. Her critical disability studies framework centers the perspectives and experiences of starees, given their extensive face-management repertoires, rather than starers, to achieve this goal. Drawing on Rancière and Arendt, Mirzoeff's decolonial approach focuses on how “the sensory is deployed to make social, cultural, and above all political claims seem ‘natural’” ( Mirzoeff 2009 , p. 17) or, in the words of Mitchell (2005) , to create a pedagogy of “showing seeing.” This research squares with recent ethnographic collections that highlight the epistemological and representational challenges of showing “becoming,” in either their Deleuzian ( Biehl & Locke 2017 ) or phenomenological ( Ram & Houston 2015 ) orientations (see also Desjarlais & Throop 2011 ). This work has sought to move from typological representations to strategies that refuse categorization ( Luvaas 2016 ), challenge the idea of commensurability ( Povinelli 2001 ), or deconstruct and reconstruct categories as part of their method and representational strategy ( Cox 2015 , Jackson 2005 , Valentine 2007 ). As Valentine notes in his “ethnography of a category,” “Crucially, the limits of ‘transgender’ (as with the limits of ‘homosexuality’) are not simply the failure of the categories to account for a complex world. Rather, the reiteration of these categories in a wide range of day-to-day and institutional contexts is productive of that failure” ( Valentine 2007 , p. 233, emphasis in original).
Linguistic anthropologists have examined the pragmatics of typification and type production in relation to qualia ( Harkness 2015 , Reyes 2017 ), stance ( Keane 2011 ), participant-denoting discourse ( Wortham 2003 ), expressives ( Choksi 2020 ), and self-objectifying performance ( Lindfors 2019 ), providing microanalytic tools to isolate and study their mechanics—such as footing and stylization—and their effects. A key finding has been the constitutive role that discourse about types plays in instantiating them. As Reyes (2017) argues, “Talk about what constitutes an emblem of a type or a token of a type often purports to describe an already existing ontology. Yet such talk plays a necessary role in constituting (or troubling) an emblem-token-type-ontology configuration” (p. S104). Anthropologists have also sought to intervene in the popularization of “implicit bias” mediated through the language of our natural drive to sort, classify, and typify people ( Caspari 2018 ), which simultaneously absolves individual agency (i.e., one cannot help but do this) while also placing the onus on individuals to be aware of their unconscious biases, deflecting attention away from structural and institutional forces ( Kahn 2018 , Rosa & Díaz 2020 ). One way they have successfully reframed individualizing discussions of implicit bias is by showing how typifications are hardened, valorized, and embedded within institutional structures and made to seem natural.

Section: ETHNOGRAPHIES OF EXPERT TYPE PRODUCTION: FROM TYPIFICATIONS TO TYPOLOGIES

Ethnographies and anthropological analyses of experts engaged in parallel projects of type production offer a way of bridging scales between typologies and typifications. They show how types become rationalized within their respective fields and naturalized as social facts ( Shankar 2015 ). Here I review four broad areas of expertise—criminology and policing; policy and government; science and technology; and advertising and media—that anthropologists have engaged, highlighting both their role in human type production and their connection to broader anthropological ways of knowing. Using Goodwin's (1994) framework, I argue that both of these professional visions shape broader social and visual landscapes, institutionalizing ways of seeing that are recognized as more legitimate than others. I conclude by examining recent visual and arts-based approaches within and beyond the field that productively reframe classifications, types, and typologies, as well as recent design-informed theorizations of prototypes. I argue that these, alongside multidomain ethnographic analyses of expert type production, both within and beyond anthropology, together can form an emergent anthropology of types.
Given the centrality of typologies in early criminal anthropology ( Horn 2003 , Pugliese 2008 ), the anthropology of police and policing ( Fassin 2017 , Karpiak & Garriott 2018 , Martin 2018 ) is a rich site to explore its legacies and new manifestations. In his study of predictive policing, Maguire (2018) argues that this new algorithm-driven form is qualitatively different from previous kinds of police profiling. He charts a new lineage that still leads back to anthropology: University of California Los Angeles evolutionary anthropologist Jeffrey Brantingham used his research on hunter-gatherers to cofound PredPol, a software company that uses optimal foraging theory to predict where crime will happen. While PredPol and other technologies like it have been widely adopted by police forces, Maguire's ethnography among an urban UK police force shows how its approach and underlying logic apply unevenly to different types of crime, offering variable levels of security among the different neighborhoods it serves. His research also highlights the ambivalence that police officers have about its efficacy and how it has transformed their day-to-day work, showing the textured ways in which new technologies and logics are taken up and used by experts. In his applied research and work with the New York Police Department (NYPD), Bornstein (2015 , 2018 ) shows how supposedly color-blind policing logics and mandates—here, numbers-driven management and zero-tolerance policies—distort root causes of contemporary racial type production by police officers, preventing meaningful reforms, noting that “institutional forms of racism are interwoven with, but distinct from, cognitive racial bias that leads people to associate blackness with criminality” ( Bornstein 2015 , p. 51). Developing the concept “raciontologies,” Rosa & Díaz (2020) likewise distinguish between the institutional and the individual, arguing that “ontological statuses of bodies, practices, and various materialities are racially constituted in relation to the institutionalized modes of perception through which they are apprehended” (p. 121). Showing the ontologically transformative power of race, they point to the ways that typifications are materialized and enacted within institutions. Beliso-De Jesús (2020) traces these interweavings in her ethnographic analysis of US police academies and the molding of police recruits. She argues, “The police academy is embodied and ontological. White cis -hetero masculinity is constantly reinforced as the top of a presumed hierarchy of humanity through somatic intimacies and affirmations” ( Beliso-De Jesús 2020 , p. 154). Bornstein (2018) describes his attempts to intervene in these logics by teaching anthropology in the NYPD Police Leadership Certificate Program. He writes that he tries to “cultivate officers’ critical awareness of how distorting stereotypes encourage generalized racial suspicion and undermine public safety” ( Bornstein 2018 , p. 82).
Beyond policing algorithms, anthropologists have also begun to turn to numbers and the rise of what Merry (2016) calls “indicator culture” to understand how quantification (and with it, commensurability, categorization, and encoding) shapes new forms of governmentality ( Nelson 2015 ). As Merry (2016) argues, “Things that are seen as objective are measured, and others become accepted as measurable over time: they become real, not just constructs” (p. 214). It is significant that these quantified data both require and become forms of visualization. As Haraway (1997) explains, “Figurations are performative images that can be inhabited. Verbal or visual, figurations can be condensed maps of contestable worlds. All language, including mathematics, is figurative” (p. 11). This explanation dovetails with work by anthropologists, historians, and sociologists who have investigated shifting boundaries of Census categories, and other biopolitical ways of enumerating difference, and their impact on everyday racial reckoning ( Hinterberger 2012 , Maghbouleh 2017 , Strmic-Pawl et al. 2018 ).
Beyond policy and government, anthropologists have also examined the production of biotypes in science and technology. While sociologists, critical race theorists, and communication scholars have developed incisive analyses of digital biotypologies created through artificial intelligence (AI) and other algorithmic ways of knowing and critiques of implicit bias and the individuation of systematic racism ( Benjamin 2019 , Browne 2015 , Gates 2011 , Kahn 2018 , Magnet 2011 , Noble 2018 ), anthropologists have focused mostly on DNA, both through population genetics and genomic anthropological approaches and through their mediation via commercial ancestry DNA companies. TallBear (2013) and Fullwilley (2014) both conducted fieldwork in genomics laboratories, finding that new language of populations and professed liberal aims and agendas often clashed with the resulting reification and reproduction of racial categories and types. Torres (2019) and Roberts (2012) have shown how federal mandates for inclusion in biomedical research without a critical reflection on how race is used as a proxy have also contributed to reifying racial categories and types, pointing again to the importance of understanding science as a situated practice. Phelan et al. (2014) affirm that ancestry DNA consumers also interpret their genetic ancestry results in this way, while Pálsson (2012) has reframed ancestry DNA consumers as collaborators in building genetic databases, thereby blurring lay and expert knowledge. Hartigan (2013 , 2017 ) has pushed the work on DNA and types further, looking at the relationship between human and nonhuman genome projects and their uses of race and species transnationally. His work suggests the need to think more expansively about the origins and multiple, recursive trajectories of racial and other kinds of typological thinking and their legacies, as well as the stakes and directionality of subjectification and objectification.
Finally, anthropological research on advertising has shown how marketers produce not just commercial messages, but also populations as commercial types ( Dávila 2001 , Mazzarella 2003 , Miller 1997 , Moeran 1996 , Shankar 2015 ). That is, advertisers must first construct and sell groups of consumers as viable market segments before they can pitch ads that target those demographics. Dávila's pioneering work on the US Hispanic advertising industry describes the interrelationship between state statistics, such as US Census categories, and the emergence of new markets and tailored representations. She finds, however, that the need to defend Latinos as a viable market segment requires the exotification and essentialization of Latinos as a monolithic and culturally foreign group, which runs counter to producers’ and consumers’ attempts to challenge media stereotypes: “[S]uch representations are in fact produced in conversation and often in complicity with—rather than as a response or challenge to—dominant hierarchies of race, culture, and nationality” ( Dávila 2001 , p. 5). Shankar's investigation of the Asian American advertising industry more than a decade later finds that little has changed in terms of this kind of trade-off. She highlights how Asian American advertisers’ “intercultural affect and ethnoracial expertise rely on biomediated bodies that are conjured to serve a capitalist purpose” ( Shankar 2015 , p. 150). Using the concept of assemblage, Shankar (2015) underscores the contingency of and multiple levels at which these representations are created and interpreted, showing how, depending on the audience, these commercial categories, performances of ethnoracial expertise, and displays of diversity can “further particular notions of racialization, antiracism, activism, and social transformation” (p. 15) simultaneously. Her approach and careful attention to language materiality and the operation of diversity as qualisign show how Asian American advertisers and their creative work travel the circuit of typification–typology–type and back again. As Londoño (2015) and Murphy (2017) have shown, this work is achieved not only through representations of human types, but also through nonhuman letterforms, which carry racial and affective resonances.

Section: AN ANTHROPOLOGY OF TYPES

Anthropologists have used arts-based and experimental methods, in addition to ethnography, and often in tandem with it, to create visual representations ( Bray 2018 , Jain 2018 , Luvaas 2016 ), installations ( Cantarella et al. 2019 ), performances ( Kondo 2018 ), and design interventions ( Jönsson & Lenskjold 2018 ) that reframe anthropology's engagement with types and reenvision its epistemological foundations. I see this work as a key part of an anthropology of types, in that it provides methods for reflexively and self-consciously producing new types, tracing their continuities and transmutations across domains, connecting them to cross-subdisciplinary debates and intellectual genealogies, and explicitly theorizing their ethical, political, analytical, and methodological implications. Using concepts such as collections, prototypes, stereotypes, and ethnographic portraiture, this work has foregrounded the constructed nature of both typological and typifying ways of seeing.
For example, in the drawing series “Things that Art,” Jain (2018) creates new taxonomies and categories in multiple, seemingly absurd or surreal collections to refocus viewers’ attention on the construction of categories themselves, both as foundational to language and epistemology and also as always political, partial, and ultimately changeable. This multiplication and juxtaposition of categories echo the work that archaeologists are doing in developing decolonial, relational typologies that can be layered on top of existing ones to show their gaps and seams ( Gnecco & Langebaek 2014 , Jackson 2017 , Zedeño 2009 ).
Engaging the history of ethnographic portraiture, Bray and Luvaas's image-making practices seek to go beyond types, emphasizing the processual, dialogical dimensions of realist portrait painting ( Bray 2018 ) and the singularities that street style portraits represent ( Luvaas 2016 ). Luvaas (2019) details the impact that his process of becoming a street style blogger had on his everyday typifications, changing his thoughts, habits, and ways of seeing himself and others on the street, and how eager he was to leave these kinds of unthinking typifications behind. In a similar transformative process, Kondo details how becoming a dramaturg and playwright changed her awareness of how stereotypes function in theater performances. She writes that shifting from anthropologist and critic to inhabiting these roles “means that one is accountable for the politics of representation, even when one cannot completely control production or reception” ( Kondo 2018 , p. 234). This accountability and mutual vulnerability mirror the work of activist-oriented visual culture scholars such as Garland-Thomson (2009) who seek to add friction to face-to-face typifying interactions.
Anthropologists have also engaged prototypes—specifically nonproprietary, open-source design prototypes—to rethink anthropological theory ( Corsín Jiménez 2014 , 2018 ; Corsín Jiménez & Estalella 2017 ; Marcus 2014 ; Suchman et al. 2002 ). This work draws heavily on feminist science studies and focuses on “prototyping from a white-boxing perspective, where the emphasis is on how socio-technical practices constantly exfoliate, disclose and resource their capacities for agency and relation” ( Corsín Jiménez 2018 , p. 123, emphasis in original). It stresses prototypes’ multiple accountabilities ( Suchman et al. 2002 , p. 175), their future, open-ended orientations, and how they materialize a range of recursive possibilities. In this way, this work is congruent with practice-based approaches that theorize the fuzziness of typifications alongside other practical logics.
In an opposing orientation focused on revealing the construction of rigid typologies and politics of classification, data ethicist Kate Crawford and artist Trevor Paglen's (2019) platform ImageNet Roulette invites users to upload photos of themselves to have their AI model trained on the person categories of ImageNet return problematic classifications. As they note, “AI classifications of people are rarely made visible to the people being classified. ImageNet Roulette provides a glimpse into that process—and to show how things can go wrong.” This project instantiates the findings of critical algorithm studies ( Benjamin 2019 , Noble 2018 ). Like the earlier All Look Same? ( http://alllooksame.com/ ), an online portal that includes quizzes that challenge the reliability of test takers’ typifications by asking viewers to identify whether individuals depicted in a series of images are Chinese, Japanese, or Korean, ImageNet Roulette was developed from questions raised by facial recognition and machine learning, which the creators explicitly link back to early criminal anthropology.
An anthropology of types enlarges the frame of this work and pushes us to ask questions that cross domains and reveal our discipline's entangled histories and interconnected futures with them. An anthropology of types is capacious; it brings human and nonhuman types, stereotypes and ideal types, biotypes and prototypes, and typifications and typologies all together in a single frame. It facilitates tracing typification–typology–type trajectories and offers new reflexive modes of critiquing their naturalization and our disciplinary legacies in creating them.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

Thanks go to Todd Nicewonger and Susanna Rosenbaum for their constructive comments at every stage of the writing process; to Bambi Schieffelin for her incisive feedback and encouragement, particularly during the initial framing of this review; to Alan Sullivan, Heather Norton, Sarah Jackson, and Susan Allen for ongoing cross-subdisciplinary conversations about types in hallways, offices, and shared classrooms; to Ilana Gershon and Eugenia Kisin for their advice on approaching the genre; and to the reviewer for their helpful suggestions that broadened my reading. Of course, any errors or omissions are my own.

Section: literature cited

