Title: The Anthropology of Being Haunted: On the Emergence of an Anthropological Hauntology


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Since the appearance of Derrida's Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning and the New International in 1994, there has been an outpouring of writing in cultural studies around the themes of hauntology and spectralities. This article asks broadly whether a form of hauntology has emerged within anthropology; if so, when and how it has appeared; and what constitutes such a field as distinctive. This article asks what comprises being haunted as a specific affective state within anthropological writing, what theory of the subject is assumed by such writings, and what distinguishes ethnographic analyses that do not dismiss the presence of ghosts as simply cultural beliefs or literary fictions, as is common in cultural studies. It reviews the literature on the haunting remains of traumatic violence, examines writing that juxtaposes hauntological and ontological theorizing, describes the appearance of an incipient hauntological voice within ethnographic writing, and concludes with a discussion of the emergence of a hauntological ethics.

Section: INTRODUCTION

Since the appearance of Derrida's (1994) Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning and the New International (published in French as Spectres de Marx in 1993 and translated into English in 1994) there has been an extraordinary outpouring of writing within cultural studies, cultural criticism, and literary theory around the theme of hauntology or spectralities. Indeed, what has been widely described as a spectral turn ( Luckhurst 2002 ) in the 1990s led to the emergence of a body of writing dubbed “spectrality studies” ( Weinstock 2004 , p. 7), with haunting, specters, and ghosts as key “conceptual metaphors” ( Blanco & Peeren 2013a , p. 1). More than 30 essays representative of this work, with titles such as “The Spectral Turn,” “Spectropolitics: Ghosts of the Global Contemporary,” “Spectral Subjectivities: Gender, Sexuality, Race,” and “Haunted Historiographies,” published between 1992 and 2008, were drawn together by Blanco & Peeren in 2013 in The Spectralities Reader: Ghosts and Haunting in Contemporary Cultural Theory .
These essays represent the emergence of a lively field within cultural studies; yet anthropologist Klima (2019) writes, “Remarkably, there has been little uptake of hauntology in anthropology” (p. 25). While the authors of this review have drawn on the hauntology literature in our own work for more than a decade, it was also our impression when we began this review that we might find limited writings within anthropology that contribute to an anthropological hauntology. Indeed, when the editors of the Annual Review of Anthropology approached the first author about a review article, we all were uncertain whether there would be enough literature to warrant such a review. The authors thus began simply by asking what has been written by anthropologists with reference to haunting, hauntology, ghosts, and specters. Does this constitute a coherent body of work within anthropology, we asked, and is it related to writing in cultural studies?
An initial finding of our search of the literature was that new forms of attention to ghosts and haunting, reflective of work in the broader spectralities literature and often inspired by Derrida's Specters of Marx and Gordon's [2008 ( 1997 )] provocative Ghostly Matters: Haunting and the Sociological Imagination , began to emerge in anthropology a decade or so later than in cultural studies. However, there is now a robust body of writings, scattered widely across diverse domains within our discipline, in which ghosts and haunting are central to analytic framings. This then led to further questions: In what domains of anthropology is such writing found? What are the key framing questions and theoretical debates within this body of work? Does the appearance of writing about haunting reflect something deeper afoot in anthropology?
The publication in the September/October (2021) issue of Anthropology News of a collection of short essays under the simple heading “Ghosts” represents a coming out of a “new hauntology” within anthropology. With authors from across the subdisciplines of anthropology, and with a centerpiece titled “Ten Things about Ghosts and Haunting” ( Spooner-Lockyer & Kilroy-Marac 2021 )—which might easily be titled “A Manifesto for a New Anthropological Hauntology”—the essays represent a distinctive voice present in many of the works we have been reviewing. The inclusion of a powerful requiem by Strong (2021) for Delisha and Tree Africa and the children of the MOVE communal group, who were firebombed and murdered on May 13, 1985, reminds us that “the past haunts,” leaving “haunting remains,” not only for forensic anthropology and the city of Philadelphia but also for anthropologists more generally. 1 As anthropologists, we work in societies that are haunted by histories of colonialism, violence, and historical trauma. As scholars, advocates, and citizens, we live in a world haunted by slavery, racism, and ethnic and gender-based violence, by unprecedented levels of displacement of populations resulting from military violence, environmental degradation, and the making of surplus labor linked to neoliberal capitalism. We are acutely aware of the haunting presence of settler colonialism, of profound global inequalities, and of reactionary efforts to silence the past. Given these conditions, our efforts to position our voices as anthropologists, in research and ethnographic texts, provide an important context for the emergence of a new hauntological voice in anthropology.
Strong reminds us that remembering is linked to a renewed call for justice. It is important, thus, to reiterate that for anthropology, as for Derrida, attention to ghosts and haunting goes beyond philosophical or disciplinary debates. In the exordium to Specters of Marx , Derrida (1994 , p. xviii; italics in the original) writes movingly of the issues he is about to take up.
If I am getting ready to speak at length about ghosts, inheritance, and generations, generations of ghosts…it is in the name of justice .…It is necessary to speak of the ghost, indeed to the ghost and with it, from the moment that no ethics, no politics, whether revolutionary or not, seems possible and thinkable and just, that does not recognize in its principle the respect for those others who are no longer or for those others who are not yet there, presently living.

He goes on to acknowledge that this call for justice demands responsibility before the ghosts with whom we live, “be they victims of wars, political or other kinds of violence, nationalist, racist, colonialist, sexist, or other kinds of exterminations, victims of the oppression of capitalist imperialism or any of the forms of totalitarianism” (p. xviii). It is this larger context that suggests why a sense of haunting has made its way into anthropology so powerfully in recent years, what the ethical and practical stakes are for such writing, and why the language of ghosts, haunting, and uncanny presence seems increasingly apt for anthropological analysis.

Section: BEING HAUNTED AS AN AFFECTIVE STATE

Writing about the long effects of violence in contemporary societies or about ghosts is not new for anthropology. However, the use of haunting as an analytic category, particularly in the sense referred to in the spectralities literature, is rather new. What is the core meaning of this term as it is used analytically? We begin this review by asking what constitutes haunting as an affective state.
Freud [2003 ( 1919 )] opens his essay “The Uncanny” by identifying the term unheimlich , translated as “uncanny,” as a particular feeling state: “There is no doubt that this belongs to the realm of the frightening, of what evokes fear and dread.…Yet one may presume that there exists a specific affective nucleus, which justifies the use of a special conceptual term” (p. 123). Freud's essay is an investigation of what constitutes this “common nucleus.” Much of the writing on haunting begins by examining haunting as something that ghosts do rather than by asking the fundamental question of what it means to be or feel haunted. We begin by asking what might constitute the “affective nucleus” of being haunted.
Freud begins both by investigating the “semantic content” of the German word unheimlich and by assembling what it is about “persons and things, sense impressions, experiences and situations, that evokes in us a sense of the uncanny” (p. 124). Anthropologists begin their investigations similarly, exploring the semantic content associated with the experience of being haunted in the local settings in which they work, as well as by exploring what does the haunting. For English, it is important to note that in the Oxford English Dictionary ( OED ), the primary meaning of “to haunt” is “to frequent the company of (a person), to associate with habitually, to ‘run after.’” Figuratively, this refers to “unseen or immaterial visitants,” of two types: first, of “memories, care, feelings, thoughts: To visit frequently or habitually; to come up or present themselves as recurrent influences or impressions, esp. as causes of distraction or trouble; to pursue, molest”; and second, “ esp. Of imaginary or spiritual beings, ghosts, etc… to be haunted: to be subject to the visits and molestation of disembodied spirits” ( OED Online 2022 ; boldface in the original).
In ethnographic studies of haunting, what emerges is extraordinarily complex. While there is some sense to the distinction made by Lincoln & Lincoln (2015 , p. 200) between “primary haunting” as direct experiences of metaphysical entities and “secondary haunting” as a metaphorical use of the term, this neat distinction quickly breaks down in ethnographic analysis. It is also far from clear that the presence of ghosts as metaphysical entities is primary.
Turner (2021 , pp. 169–71; italics in the original), in a fine analysis of an Algerian popular Islamic ritual called dīwān , a nocturnal music and trance ritual of a Sufi order, asks what it means to be “musically haunted.” She responds by exploring haunting as a richly embodied “ affective phenomenon.” “[O]ne can be haunted by the deep bass-register melodies of historical figures, saints, prophets, spirits and spectres of the trans-Saharan slave trade. One can also be haunted by nondescript, atemporal painful feelings that may or may not have a connection to personal histories or identifiable events. Nevertheless, these feelings circulate in public, can invade a person and revisit over and over again.” The diverse affects and spiritual figures that appear in the ritual “were generated from and are still precipitated by multiple historical periods of violence, upheaval and suffering.” These rituals thus “attend to the numerous psychic and affective ways that the impacts of history and geopolitics are never entirely ‘in the past’.” Individuals resonate to different spiritual presences, but these, she says, are “‘emotional’ hauntings.”
Ethnographic writing such as this, which places the affective structure of being haunted at the center of the analysis, suggests the complexity of such an experience and therefore of methods for analyzing haunting—what Gordon [2008 ( 1997 ), p. 26] describes as “a method attentive to what is elusive, fantastic, contingent, and often barely there.” Different spiritual presences and their musical forms differentially evoke cruelty, sadness, and longing, or recurrent fear, dread, and ambiguous loss in the dīwān. Given the complexity of this affective structure across individuals and within and across cultures, we might ask whether there is a “common nucleus” to this sense of being haunted. We begin with several observations, which will be taken up in this review as we proceed.
The term haunting is associated, as the OED suggests, with “memories, feelings, thoughts” that “visit (or pursue) us frequently or habitually” and are sources of “trouble” ( OED Online 2022 ). As an affective experience, haunting is increasingly associated with troubling memories, especially those associated with trauma and injustice, but also with anxieties about futures. Individuals and communities are haunted “not only by a murderous past (the revenant ), but also by a future (the arrivant ) which anticipates equally murderous violence” ( Chiovenda & Chiovenda 2018 , p. 165; italics in the original). A haunting absence/presence may be represented by images, such as the raven in Stevenson's (2014) Inuit community and the descanso along roads in New Mexico marking the sites of deaths ( Garcia 2010 ). Such presences, like ghosts, are always out of space and time; “haunting unfolds in temporalities where present and past collapse” ( Langford 2016 , p. 3).
In settings in which ghosts and spirits are part of the everyday world, extremely common for the societies in which anthropologists work, local terms for haunting often refer to threatening ghosts, particularly of those who have died badly or whose spirits become trapped between presence and absence. Both forms of haunting—hauntings by memories and by ghosts—are common in the worlds in which anthropologists work. Indeed, the copresence of these forms of haunting is particularly important to the emergence of an anthropological hauntology.
Whether cultivated in ritual, evoked by stories or film, or appearing unexpectedly, haunting is “less a form of deliberate remembrance, than a condition of being accosted by the dead in immersive or oneiric encounters where temporality no longer maintains its chronicity,” Langford (2016 , p. 2; cf. 2013) writes. The Acehnese recognize intrusive memories of traumatic events, appearing in the present tense, as distinct from cultivated memory ( Good & Good 2017 ), using different verbal forms ( teringat/mengingat ). The sense of haunting as “being accosted” is consistent with Gordon's [2008 ( 1997 )] description of haunting as “a seething presence, acting on and often meddling with taken-for-granted realities” (p. 8).
Haunting shares with the uncanny what Freud [2003 ( 1919 ), p. 148] identifies as its essence, quoting Schelling: “something that should have remained hidden and has come into the open.” This “should have” does not refer exclusively to repression and the unconscious, as is primary for Freud's interpretation of the uncanny. It opens onto a wide range of silences and forces that hide (cf. B.J. Good 2015 , p. 63). “Haunting belongs to the structure of every hegemony” ( Derrida 1994 , p. 37). Power is associated with silencing the past ( Trouillot 1995 ). Painful memories are encrypted and passed along intergenerationally ( Abraham & Torok 1994 ). Bringing into the open that which is hidden may lead to “transformational recognition” [ Gordon 2008 ( 1997 ), p. 8]; it may also lead to powerful regressive forces being unleashed ( Good 2019a ).
Understanding and theorizing characteristics of the experience of being haunted, and asking seriously about the possibility of a “common nucleus” of the experience, require theories of the subject as one who can be haunted in the ways described here (cf. Hollan 2022 ). This is a subject who experiences losses as essential to development in the earliest phases of entering the realm of symbolic representation, losses that haunt subjective experience throughout life ( Rahimi 2021 ). 2 This is a subject who both knows and does not know in complex ways ( Good 2012 , 2019a ), for whom “the uncanniness of the ordinary” ( Cavell 1988 ) resides, as in Edgar Allen Poe's short story “The Purloined Letter,” in that which is hidden in plain sight. And this is a subject who meets ghosts in the social and political. “The ghost is not simply a dead or a missing person, but a social figure, and investigating it can lead to that dense site where history and subjectivity make social life” [ Gordon 2008 ( 1997 ), p. 8].
Finally, running throughout the literature we have been reviewing is the question, Who is being haunted? The ethnographer, those with whom the ethnographer resides, or both? In what way is the voice of the ethnographer a haunted voice? One finding that emerges in this review is new forms of ethnographic writing in which the ethnographic voice is haunted, producing what we might call hauntological ethnography. Langford (2016 , p. 2) writes about this quite beautifully: “I suggest that we might do the most justice to ghosts in allowing our scholarly work to be haunted – to be seized by ghostly images that do not so much accede to as exceed certain scholarly taxonomies. More specifically, I ask what we might learn from the power of ghosts to elude (and thereby expose the limits of) our often implicit commitments to historicism, hyper-rationalism, and humanism.”
In what follows, we review the emergence of a specifically anthropological hauntology, using these basic characteristics of haunting as an affective structure as a framework.

Section: HAUNTING PASTS, HAUNTED FUTURES

Anthropologists work in what Fischer (1999) has called “post-trauma societies,” in settings and with groups in which “decolonization, postcolonialism, and the reconstruction of societies after social trauma” (p. 455) are key historical experiences. Issues of settler colonialism and historical trauma, of the haunting remains of empire, colonial violence, and proxy wars, but also of histories of slavery, vicious internal violence across ethnic and political groups, and recurring conflict, are thus central to anthropological field studies and research. Little surprise, then, that the language of hauntology, as framed by both Derrida and Gordon, is taken up by anthropologists in ethnographic writing.
Older writings about postconflict societies and ethnonationalist violence, even some engaging earlier writings of Derrida ( Daniel 1996 , Feldman 1991 ), are critical to today's writings. But the use of the language of “haunting,” and analyses influenced by Specters of Marx , Gordon, and others working in this tradition, has become increasingly important within anthropological writing about mass violence. A partial list includes writings of the afterlives of the “American war” in Vietnam ( Gammeltoft 2013 , 2014a , b ; Gustafson 2009 ; Kwon 2008 ; Leshkowich 2008 ; Marouda 2017 ), the haunting of the unthinkable violence that war unleashed in Cambodia ( Bennett 2021 ; cf. Good 2021 ), and presence in memory of these wars for Southeast Asian refugees in North America ( Hinton et al. 2005 , 2009 , 2013 ; Langford 2013 ); the recent and ongoing religious and ethnic violence in Indonesia, including Bali, Karoland in Sumatra, and Aceh, haunted by the unresolved killings that brought Suharto to power in 1965 ( Dwyer 2009 ; Dwyer & Santikarma 2003 , 2007 ; B.J. Good 2015 , 2019a ; M.J.D.V. Good 2015 , 2019 ; Good & Good 2020 ; Lemelson 2015 ; Siegel 2006 ; Steedly 1993 ; Wieringa 2011 ); the long aftermath of both Japanese colonialism and the war between the North and South in Korea ( Cho 2008 , Han 2020 ), the war in Afghanistan ( Chiovenda 2019 , 2020 ; Chiovenda & Chiovenda 2018 ), the violence against Armenian communities ( Bandak 2019 ), and the terror faced by Palestinians ( Segal 2016 ); the years of violence in Haiti ( James 2008 , 2010 ) and Jamaica ( Thomas 2016 ); the mass killings in Rwanda ( Auchter 2014 , Hölscher et al. 2020 , Kagoyire et al. 2020 , Taylor 1999 ); the zombies and ghosts appearing in the aftermath of apartheid in South Africa ( Comaroff & Comaroff 2002 , 2016 ; Jones 2014 ) and in the Basque struggle in postdictatorial Spain ( Aretxaga 2008 ); and the presence of historical trauma as theorized by American Indian scholars ( Ball & O'Nell 2016 , Braveheart & DeBruyn 1998 , Kirmayer et al. 2014 ). All of these are writings based in intensive ethnographic work undertaken in the midst of violence or in its historical aftermath. While it is unfortunately impossible to engage one by one with this extraordinarily rich body of texts, each is written in the voice of an anthropological hauntology, valorizing “what is unseen and unspoken, what lies under the surface of open dialogue and public behavior, which often remains also unformulated and unarticulated by the subject…[and which] evokes anxiety and dread for reasons the subject cannot fully identify” ( Chiovenda 2019 , pp. 489–90).
This body of work links ghosts and haunting to several major bodies of theorizing. First, some place their work in explicit conversation with hauntological challenges to classic writings on history, disrupting historicist notions of the progress from known past to present to anticipated future. Langford (2016) expands on Morris's (2000 , p. 61) observation that “history eschews simultaneity” and thus “banish[es] ghosts and spirits and all those specters who testify to the folding and possible multiplicity of time” (cf. Morris 2013 ). “A phantasmic figure seemingly from the past and yet insisting on its own present-ness,” Langford (2016 , p. 2) writes, “is distinct from a remembered figure that bows to time's linearity.” Garcia (2010 , p. 110) places her ethnographic “elegy,” undertaken amid the painful presence of historical loss for the Hispano community in New Mexico, in conversation with Nietzsche [1997 ( 1874 )] [the past “returns as a ghost and disturbs the peace of a later moment” (p. 61)]. For many, Benjamin's [2003 ( 1940 )] classic “On the Concept of History” [“To articulate the past historically…means to seize hold of a memory as it flashes up at a moment of danger” (p. 391)] provides a significant framing.
Running throughout is a sense that the past is never settled ( Rahimi 2016 ). Part of the dread that Chiovenda identifies is the haunting sense that ghosts of past violence portend the future and are thus in Derrida's sense “out of time.” The horror of repetition, of the breakdown of the distinction between revenant and arrivant, is ever present in this writing. Bandak (2019) describes this powerfully for present-day Armenians in Syria, Bryant (2016) for Turkish Cypriots, and Trnka (2011) for the Indo-Fijian community in Fiji. The uncanniness of the present ( Bryant 2016 ) is shaped by the visceral experience that hauntings of the future are powerfully present, seething beneath the surface, even when unvoiced.
Second, much of this writing attends forcefully to silences and processes of silencing, to the “complex processes through which traumatic dimensions of contested historical experience are simultaneously kept hidden from view and made visible” ( Good 2019a , p. 419). Hauntological analyses provide methodologies for attending to “that which is not said overtly, to that which is unspeakable and unspoken, to that which appears at the margins of formal speech and everyday presentations of self, manifest in the Imaginary, in dissociated spaces, and individual dream time and coded in esoteric symbolic productions aimed at hiding as well as revealing” ( Good et al. 2008 , pp. 14–15; italics in the original). Haunting links the political and the psychological. “Haunting belongs to the structure of every hegemony” ( Derrida 1994 , p. 46); therefore, “politics is always haunted by those phenomena that it seeks to repress but which return as ghosts” ( Bubandt 2014 , p. 120; cf. Bear 2018 , Buyandelger 2018 ). Trouillot's (1995) Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History has become a classic reference for attending to how power shapes history and its silences. For much of this work, Gordon's [2008 ( 1997 )] Ghostly Matters has been particularly useful. “[H]aunting is one way in which abusive systems of power make themselves known…,” she writes (p. xvi). “[T]he appearance of specters or ghosts is one way…we are notified that what's been concealed is very much alive and present,” interfering with “those always incomplete forms of containment and repression ceaselessly directed toward us.” For Gordon, haunting “is distinctive for producing a something-to-be-done” (p. xvi).
Silencing not only is produced by political ideologies and formal representations of histories, but may reference the way individual trauma is hidden away as partially unconscious, experienced as posttrauma disorders (e.g., Açiksöz 2015 , Good & Good 2017 , Hinton & Good 2016 ; cf. Barak 2021 ), or belong to the intergenerational transmission of trauma. In a special issue of History and Anthropology on the anthropology of silences, Dragojlovic & Samuels (2021 , p. 417) ask “what it means to trace silences, and to include traces of silence in our ethnographic representations.” Kidron (2021) and Dragojlovic (2015a , b , 2021 ) investigate family histories of trauma transmitted intergenerationally largely through silence and refusal to speak—for Kidron, Israeli adult children of Holocaust survivors refusing to talk about their parents’ suffering to their own children; for Dragojlovic, Indisch families in which Dutch women married to Indonesian men silently bear a history of the ghostly figures of miscegenation and generations of shame, violence, and racism. These and many of the writings on generational trauma engage directly the seminal psychoanalytic writing of Abraham & Torok (1986 , 1994 ) on the way painful secrets are “encrypted,” become “phantoms,” and are passed along intergenerationally through silences ( Rahimi 2015 ). Based on their own experience and their research in the 1960s with adult children of Holocaust survivors, the authors argue that haunting effects are produced primarily not by the original trauma but by the fact that the original trauma has been hidden away as a secret, a fabrication that disregards the past (cf. Dragojlovic 2015b ). “What haunts us are not the dead, but gaps left within us by the secrets of others…the burial of an unspeakable fact…like a stranger within,” they write ( Abraham & Torok 1994 , p. 3). Only by being brought to the open—through psychoanalysis, for Abraham and Torok, and through invented rituals in the case Dragojlovic analyzes (cf. Pitaloka & Dutta 2021 )—can these past traumas be mourned and their haunting effects overcome.
The divergence of implications for Gordon's “something-to-be-done” from writings by Derrida in contrast to Abraham and Torok is significant ( Davis 2005 ). There is a sense of optimism in the writings of Gordon and of Abraham and Torok that addressing the ghost, releasing the painful phantom from its crypt, has the potential for historical redress and healing. Haunting may, in Gordon's [2008 ( 1997 )] words, produce “transformational recognition” (p. 8). However, Derrida is less optimistic, seeing ghosts as essential to subjectivity. We have suggested elsewhere ( Good 2019a , p. 423) that bringing into the open “that which should have remained hidden,” in Freud's terms, also has the potential to reawaken the ghosts of long-standing forces of racism and repression in a society, as the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, during the Trump presidency reminded Americans. 3 We would not suggest any reduction of the political to the psychological; however, the punishing superego response to the appearance of the libidinal seems relevant. What we are suggesting is that this domain remains critical for investigation and theorization of the complex relations between the psychological and the political.

Section: LIVING WITH GHOSTS: ONTOLOGY/HAUNTOLOGY

Unlike literary theorists, many anthropologists work in places where ancestors, ghosts, and spirits belong to the ontological everyday, where troubling, vengeful ghosts haunt individuals, families, communities, and spaces and where ghosts of past violence return literally to demand restitution from the living. Societies where most anthropologists work today are not the small, relatively culturally distinctive communities often associated with classic ethnographic studies of ghosts, but complex, highly urbanized nation states deeply engaged in the contemporary world of global capitalism and technologies, in religious, human rights, and gender movements, and in science and the humanities, all of which are invested in modernity claims; that is, the world Weber expected would undergo historical processes of disenchantment. It is in ethnographic writing about such contemporary settings, with their ghosts and hauntings, that anthropologists have drawn on Derrida, Gordon, and others, with haunting and hauntology as key terms.
“[I]n literary critical circles,” writes Davis (2005 , p. 373), “Derrida's rehabilitation of ghosts as a respectable subject of enquiry has proved to be extraordinarily fertile. Hauntology supplants its near-homonym ontology, replacing the priority of being and presence with the figure of the ghost as that which is neither present nor absent, neither dead nor alive.…It has nothing to do with whether or not one believes in ghosts,” Davis says, quoting Jameson (1999 , p. 39): “[A]ll it says…is that the living present is scarcely as self-sufficient as it claims to be.”
Such nonchalance about the status of ghosts is a position unavailable to contemporary ethnographers writing about places where ghosts and occult attacks on individuals and communities are common experiences. It should be of little surprise, then, that never fully absent from anthropological writing about ghosts and haunting is the problem of their ontological status and how to position the ethnographer and ethnographic texts in relation to this. It should be equally unsurprising that engagement with the so-called ontological turn in anthropology should be a part of this conversation.
Lincoln & Lincoln (2015) have attempted to demarcate two distinct domains as central to “the new hauntology” among anthropologists. Using case studies from Gustafsson's (2009) War and Shadows: The Haunting of Vietnam and the analysis of the figure of the yanggongju , comfort woman or war bride, in Cho's (2008) Haunting the Korean Diaspora: Shame, Secrecy, and the Forgotten War as paradigmatic, Lincoln & Lincoln (2015) call for clearly distinguishing “primary” and “secondary” haunting as “ideal-typical scenarios” (p. 200). Individuals afflicted by primary haunting “recognize the reality and autonomy of metaphysical entities,” whereas secondary haunting recognizes “entities” in the “textual residues of horrific historic events” or “as tropes for collective intrapsychic states and experience” (p. 200) related to such events, for Lincoln and Lincoln. We have suggested that even as ideal types, the neat distinction between these two modes of haunting breaks down and that for much anthropological writing, haunting as an affective experience is primary, whether or not this is experienced as metaphysical entities—such as ghosts and spirits—in the local social and cultural worlds in which anthropologists work. This distinction, however, suggests important theoretical framings of anthropological writing on haunting.
Writing about what it means to live among ghosts raises classic questions, linked recently to debates about how to represent (apparently) distinctive and parallel ontological worlds ( Descola 2013 , Latour 2013 , Viveiros de Castro 1998 ; cf. Fischer's 2018 critique). Fine monographs on intrusive ghosts in Thailand—Klima's ( 2019 ) Ethnography #9 and Johnson's ( 2014 ) Ghosts of the New City: Spirits, Urbanity, and the Ruins of Progress in Chiang Mai —acknowledge the importance of this literature in recognizing the ontological reality of these presences within Thailand before moving on to framing their analyses in hauntological terms. Anthropologist Argyrou (2017) , in an important essay explicitly juxtaposing ontology and hauntology, argues that maintaining a commitment to the premise of human or psychic unity while acknowledging and taking seriously radically different truth claims about nature and the world (including the presence of ghosts), rather than assigning such “beliefs” (cf. Good 1994 ) to a prior stage of human development or other forms of ethnocentrism, is a perennial problem facing ethnographic writing, and that the recent proclamations of an ontological turn are but the latest effort to deal with this problematic (cf. Ladwig 2012 , 2013 ). Argyrou suggests that anthropological writing of this kind is itself haunted in Derrida's sense and that this body of writing provides little new as a way forward.
Space allows only brief acknowledgment of several issues brought to the fore by this juxtaposition of the ontological and hauntological. While some writings are linked explicitly to the return of ghosts of those who died as the result of mass violence, others take up the appearance of ghosts in quite different contexts. A special issue of Medical Anthropology addresses “haunted hospitals” (see in particular Kehr 2018 , Pinto 2018 , Street 2018 , Varley & Varma 2018 ; cf. Walter 2014 ). Taneja (2013 , p. 141) writes creatively of “Jinnealogy” from the ruins of Delhi, drawing on Pandolfo's (2009 , p. 77) analysis of cures of the jinn as “other vocabularies of being, alterity and loss,” to argue for analysis as a “poetics of bearing witness to the postcolonial condition of everyday life in Delhi.” Johnson (2014) provides a fine analysis of the “ghosts of the new city” that haunt the ruins of modern construction complexes in Thailand, gated housing projects for the upper middle classes, halted during the Asian monetary crisis. His analysis of haunting amid the ruins of imagined futures is a reminder that Specters of Marx was written shortly after the fall of the Soviet Union and the loss of the idealism of imagined socialist futures (cf. Bernstein 2019 ), and that haunting is particularly powerful amid what Stoler (2008) calls “imperial debris” and Johnson (2014) describes as the “impossibility of progress.” “Haunted futures” is thus a powerful image, whether in contemporary music ( Fisher 2014 ), among artists as intellectuals trying to reimagine futures ( Fischer 2022 ), or in societies facing economic collapse or the calamitous futures of global warming.
Anthropologists face the perennial problem of positioning themselves and their writing in worlds that assume different ontological premises. This is not unique to writings about haunting ghosts. Theorizing the reenchantment of modernity ( Dube 2010 , Tappe et al. 2016 ), multiple modernities ( Mitchell 2000 ; cf. Good 2012 ), the persistent enchantment of capitalism ( Bear 2018 , Comaroff & Comaroff 2002 , Klima 2019 ), and studies of contemporary religious movements, all written with Max Weber's claims in the background, frames contemporary ways of taking up the challenge posed by claims of an ontological turn.
We suggest at the end of this section that writing in an explicitly hauntological voice provides a powerful alternative to the ontological voice in ethnography. Note, however, how critical these same issues are in debates within contemporary, multicultural/multireligious societies ( Long 2010 ). In Indonesia, a kyai (an Islamic expert and head of a pesantren , or Islamic school) from East Java announced he was sending 1,000 ghosts to prevent violence during a mass demonstration against corruption in Jakarta in 2009. Bubandt (2012 , 2014 , 2019 ) writes about the strong online response, from both modern secularists and rationalist Muslims, ridiculing the kyai for embarrassing Indonesia. The very title of Kitiarsa's (2003) essay, “You May Not Believe, but Never Offend the Spirits,” is a reminder that ghosts thrive in settings that are far from ontologically pure, and that many live in relation to spirits “in the subjunctive mode” ( Good & Good 1994 ). Indeed, as Tappe et al. (2016 , p. 3) write, “Ghosts operate as social agents across ontological boundaries, often forming an uncanny, non-mediated presence.”
It is in such settings that horror movies have thrived as a genre of popular culture. In Southeast Asia, these films have been increasingly drawn into ethnographic analyses ( Baumann 2016 , Bräunlein & Lauser 2016 , Fischer 2023 , Kitiarsa 2011 , Steedly 2013 ). Steedly (2013) argued that through Indonesian horror films, “today's youth endeavor to come to terms with a suppressed national past that can no longer remain buried nor entirely come to light” (p. 268; cf. Good & Good 2020 ). Baumann (2016) suggests that such films are produced for “knowing spectators” (cf. Ingawanij 2006 , p. 155) who recognize the ghost-images on the basis of “atheoretical knowledge that is inscribed in their bodies” (p. 150); he analyzes the critical political issues of Thai identity addressed through one such film. Derrida (1994) often argued that new technologies will be productive of ghosts. “I believe…that the future belongs to ghosts, and that modern image technology, cinema, telecommunications, etc., are only increasing the power of ghosts” (quoted in Smith & Vokes 2008 , p. 283).
Finally, we return to a central finding of this review—the emergence of a hauntological voice in some pieces of ethnographic writing. We have suggested that the appearance of haunting as a significant ethnographic category, in conversation with writings of Derrida, Gordon, and others, has changed the ways that ethnographers write, providing an alternative to more classic ethnographic writing struggling with ontological questions. And we suggested in the Introduction that for parts of this writing, haunting is not simply an experiential force in societies in which anthropologists work; it is also shared by ethnographers. Gordon (1990 , p. 496) writes of herself, “The focus within psychoanalysis on questions of desire, power, fantasy, memory, helps me to understand why I am haunted by a woman ghost; why the memory of her absence in a photo…makes me attentive to the systematic exclusions produced by the assumptions and practices of a normalized science.” In a lovely, short account of a study of “two revenants – a man and a ghost – who haunt the Fann Psychiatric Clinic in Dakar,” Kilroy-Marac (2014 , p. 255) discovers the haunting presence of Henri Collomb, the founder of the clinic, through the regular presence—and finally absence—of a former patient of Dr. Collomb. Writing on his years of work in Rajasthan, McDowell (2019 , p. 501) describes his own experiences of being pursued by ghosts, suggesting “ghosts might point anthropology toward a more anxious relationship with utterance and an ethics of voice that allows for a haunted subject.” Ng (2020) opens her recent book on China, A Time of Lost Gods: Mediumship, Madness, and the Ghost After Mao , with her own haunting experience with a spirit medium and then carries forward an analysis of the haunting presence of Mao into the current era via her study of spirit mediums, engaging “the return of histories through ghostly entities, prying open the meanings of the present and refiguring its potentiality” (p. 81). Perhaps the most complete example is Klima's (2019) Ethnography #9 , which follows on his previous more classical ethnography The Funeral Casino ( Klima 2002 ). Here he writes what he suggests might be considered a “gothic ethnography,” in which he moves back and forth between his own voice and that of a young female ghost, linking the world of local Thai ghosts who speak through mediums, the spectral world of global capitalism (and casinos), and the anthropologist's world, ultimately raising the central question of voice—of when ethnographers’ voices are theirs and when that very voice is one of ghosts speaking through the ethnographer. In the end we may be seeing the emergence of not only an “anthropological hauntology” but a “hauntological anthropology.”

Section: TOWARD A HAUNTOLOGICAL ETHICS

We introduced this review by suggesting that a general sense of ethical haunting provides the context for the emergence of an anthropological hauntology, referencing the argument that runs throughout Derrida's writing that a conversation with and about ghosts is essentially a conversation about justice. The first author of this review has argued that too much writing on ethics assumes a rational subject, making decisions about “the good” amid conflicting norms in complex situations. This includes some recent writings suggesting an ethical turn in anthropology [see Good (2019b) for a discussion of the positions developed by Robbins (2013) and Zigon & Throop (2014) ]. This review begins from an alternative position—from an assumption that the self is fundamentally haunted, that we can never be more than partially aware of much that constitutes and grounds our actions, that our social and historical positionality shapes much of what we do, and that ethics must begin from quite a different point than the assumption of a rational self ( Good 2019a , 2019b ; Rahimi 2021 , pp. 67–74; Hollan 2022 ). Butler (2005) formulates this position, in relation to Nietzsche's (1989 [ 1887 ]) On the Genealogy of Morals , in terms of the demand “to give an account of ourselves.” This giving an account, for Butler, is a response to the question of our role in causing suffering in others, a quasi-legal challenge; thus, no self-narrative can ever be adequate. But for Butler, the problem is deeper. Butler assumes a barred self, with limited self-knowledge, a self with unconscious desires, motives, drives, and defenses, asking how ethics can be grounded in such an understanding of the ethical subject. Although Butler (2005) sets out to demonstrate that “a theory of subject formation that acknowledges the limits of self-knowledge can serve a conception of ethics and, indeed, responsibility” (p. 19), for an anthropological hauntology her formulation of the question is more important than her answer.
Writings on hauntology assume no single theory of the subject. 4 However, the haunting awareness of anthropology and anthropologists of the enormous inequalities of the worlds we move across and the historical injustices that shape the world in which we live and work provides a grounding for the emergence of an anthropological hauntology. A hauntological ethics asks how we can possibly live moral lives amid such haunting. It is perhaps the awareness that we live in times that “no ethics, no politics,…seems possible and thinkable and just” ( Derrida 1994 , p. xviii) that has made anthropologists turn to notions such as aspiration and hope ( Lear 2006 , Singh 2011 ). It is the acknowledgment of the fundamental place of irrationality, violence, and historical memory in the worlds in which we live, and thus an engagement with the dark side ( Rorty 2001 ) and its ghosts, that provides the basis for a hauntological ethics.
Attention to ghosts, to that which we, as well as members of societies in which we work, experience as uncanny or haunting, is critical for understanding how societies deal with violence and injustice. Remembering and forgetting, and re-remembering amid efforts to exorcise memory, are continuous processes for individuals as well as societies. Ultimately, Derrida (1994 , pp. xviii–xix) reminds us, the ghosts of violence cannot be effaced. “To learn to live with ghosts,” and to live “more justly”—this is the difficult and often troubling task at hand. Engaging this learning requires, as Derrida (1994 , p. xviii; italics in the original) writes, “a politics of memory, of inheritance, and of generations.” One task of scholars and activists alike is to participate in this process of learning to live with ghosts more justly. Issues such as these, we suggest, are fundamental to the development of an anthropological hauntology.

Section: disclosure statement

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

We thank our many colleagues who have participated in workshops, panels, and discussions on the issue of haunting and hauntology in anthropology over a number of years. We thank the editors of the Annual Review of Anthropology for the opportunity to undertake this review and for their comments on drafts of this review.

Section: literature cited

