Title: Music, Language, Aurality: Latin American and Caribbean Resoundings


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Recent work in anthropology has attended to the imbrication of music, sound, listening, and language in research on, and from, Latin America and the Caribbean, as part of a broader movement across regions. In this article, we argue that these relations have their own intellectual genealogies in Latin America and the Caribbean, which have often been neglected in studies written about the region. We focus on recent theorization of aurality—the immediate and mediated practices of listening that construct perceptions of nature, bodies, voices, and technologies. We provide an overview of regional discourses on the interrelations of voice, orality, and writing, and then we discuss the aural turn in four areas: race; migration; socialization and youth cultures; and epistemologies of history, memory, and heritage. We put different bodies of discourse into dialogue as a means of charting a path toward decolonial (inter)disciplinary transformations that are built on other histories, vocalities, and modes of knowledge.

Section: INTRODUCTION

The imbrication of music, sound, listening, and language has been historically central to ways of thinking about Latin America and the Caribbean. The theorization of orality, language, and the politics of inscription has also historically articulated key regional problematics regarding power, poetics, and culture [ Brathwaite 1984 , Glissant 1989 (1981) , de Andrade 1991 (1928) , Martín Barbero 1993 (1987) , Ortiz 1995 (1940) , Rama 1996 (1984) ]. More recently, we see a shift toward a focus on listening, music, voice, the sensorial, the body, and the materiality of the sonic that recasts the historical relation between orality and aurality through a critique of the racialized, gendered, and colonial dimensions of earlier formulations ( Estévez Trujiillo 2008 , Ochoa Gautier 2014 , Liska 2017 , Campos Fonseca 2018 ). The recognition and critique of the region's historical “phonocentrism” ( Ramos 2010 ) have arisen alongside and in dialogue with other approaches, such as explorations of literary, semiotic, and sonic questions about the intersection of voice, poetry, and music in song ( Tatit 1998 , Matos et al. 2001 ). Youth media have also been a prominent theme addressed by linguistic and cultural anthropology, media studies, and cultural studies in Latin America and the Caribbean ( Winocur 2009 , Reguillo 2014 , Vila 2014 , de León 2018 ). Discourses of linguistic anthropology have been crucially shaped by the histories and performances of vocalities in Latin America and the Caribbean through classic works, which we do not have space to discuss here. Continued interest in the cultural aesthetics and politics of communication within and beyond the region is apparent in recent conceptualizations of a multimodal semiotics of “language-music” with holistic attention to spoken, written, and sounded texts ( Faudree 2012 ), as well as anthropologies of voice that bring together material discourses on sound and political discourses on representation ( Weidman 2014 ).
Different modes of framing scholarship carry different histories and genealogies. We understand the constitution of Latin America and the Caribbean through the interaction of “entangled histories” of empire ( Cañizares-Esguerra 2018 ) and the material, discursive, and performative histories of exchange that are central to the formation of modernity and its “otherwise” ( Restrepo & Escobar 2005 ). We focus in this article on the intersections of music, language, and/or listening that appear in work on, and from, Latin America and the Caribbean, more than studies of sound and soundscapes alone. Nevertheless, we use the term resounding in the article's title as an aural correlate of revision and as a multivalent index of audibility ( Sterne 2003 , Moreno 2016 ), resonance ( Erlmann 2010 ), and the visceral materiality of affect ( Gray 2013 , Jiménez 2014 ). Our review is slanted toward Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking areas of Latin America and their diasporas, though we also make connections to other music/language domains. 1
Given the early colonization of the Americas and their prominence in networks of migration and media, Latin American and Caribbean research raises crucial questions for how paradigms of culture, power, history, communication, and praxis are framed in anthropology. The foundational paradigms of US linguistic anthropology, as a privileged discipline for thinking about the voice, emerged from a particular notion of fieldwork and, in interactionist approaches, the initial privileging of spoken discourse over written discourse. In spite of linguistic anthropology's embrace of diverse cultural contexts, the range of theoretical sources has often been limited. In contrast, we understand the production of discourses on the intersection of music, language, and listening in Latin America and the Caribbean to be dispersed across disciplinary terrains and interdisciplinary histories of thought ( Ochoa Gautier 2006 , Santamaría Delgado 2007 ). We therefore bring together bodies of work that have potential for dialogue, even if they have emerged from different paradigms.
We use the term aurality to encompass immediate and mediated practices of listening that construct perceptions and understandings of nature, bodies, voices, and technologies in particular moments and places. It is related to a multiplicity of recent concepts such as aural public sphere ( Ochoa Gautier 2006 ), acoustic dispositif ( Ramos 2010 ), auditory writing ( Librandi-Rocha 2018 ), audioeuphoria ( Jiménez 2014 ), musicography ( Pavez Ojeda 2016 ), and thinking voice ( Fiol-Matta 2017 ), among others. Though ideologies of listening were embedded in the earliest colonial writings, until recently they received less attention than concepts of orality. Orality was initially associated with European notions of tradition and the perceived absence of written communication among Europe's others, both of which contributed to the constitution of the modern and in more recent times to discussions of popular culture. In contrast to the literature on voice and aurality in English ( Sterne 2003 ), in Latin America and the Caribbean we do not find a linear trajectory in which aurality displaces orality as a concept. The rise of studies focused on listening continues alongside new reflections on the oral. This coexistence of orality and aurality as areas of inquiry has to do with the centrality of the voice in the formation of notions of tradition and popular culture at the urban level, but also with the entanglement of narrative and song in Indigenous expressive genres. More broadly, the concept of aurality attends to the ways that colonial histories, along with sounds and voices otherwise, form “acoustic assemblages” ( Ochoa Gautier 2014 , p. 22) which seep into and restructure the paradigms that appear to contain or exclude them. Thus, attention to aurality as alterity entails a radical reframing that highlights the potential of different forms of knowledge to restructure the boundaries, methods, and epistemologies of disciplinarity.
In the following section, we provide a broad regional context for understanding the historical relations between voice, orality, and writing and their movement to sound, listening, and the so-called ontological turn in Latin America and the Caribbean. We then review recent work that attends to music, language, and aurality under four thematic headings: race; migration; socialization and youth cultures; and epistemologies of history, memory, and heritage. While this review is oriented toward a particular intervention, more attention to regional histories and paradigms of language can expand and transform anthropological theory and practice at a moment of intensified demands for decolonization.

Section: ORALITY, WRITING, LISTENING: REGIONAL FRAMEWORKS

In this section, we highlight a historical trajectory that explores why the relation between orality and listening was so central to Latin America and the Caribbean. From the early twentieth century, the problematic of the relation between orality, audibility, and inscription was constitutive of the conceptualization of Latin America and the Caribbean as a region. This theorization was articulated in a diversity of genres, not only research publications but also fiction, chronicles, and manifestos, which defy (or challenge) first-world genealogies and assumptions. Carpentier [1995 (1949) ] developed his notion of the “marvelous American real” as he adapted European discourses on the arts to his observations and listenings in the Caribbean (especially Cuba and Haiti), which he documented in his research on music and remixed into his fiction writing ( Chornik 2015 ). Following studies of Afro-Cuban music and ritual, Ortiz [1995 (1940) ] developed the concept of “transculturation” in a text that explored the “counterpoint” of sugar and tobacco's economic, political, biological, and cultural dimensions in a colonial theory of the Caribbean that critiqued notions of acculturation. This concept has been especially influential, for example, in Rama's [2012 (1982) ] work on “narrative transculturation,” which addressed the imbrication of music, language, and sound worlds arising from the intimacy of colonial relations.
A key reference point is Rama's formulation of “the lettered city”: an order of signs, first established during the colonial era, in which Europe-based writing systems structured “vast designs” of power, governmentality, and modernity in the region [ Rama 1996 (1984) ]. Extensive Latin American critical work has deconstructed the relations between writing, orality, media, modernity, and power. Much of this work has centered on the nineteenth and early twentieth century, when the political formation of newly independent criollo elites was articulated through the relations between philology, emergent media, and the professionalization of the writer [ Ramos 2001 (1989) , Süssekind 1997 (1987) , González-Stephan 2002 ]. 2
The textualities of the lettered city have been challenged by attention to Indigenous literacies and their relations to other modalities of communication [ Hanks 2010 , Salomon & Niño-Murcia 2011 , Rappaport & Cummins 2012 , Cornejo Polar 2013 (1994) , de León 2018 ]. For example, Lienhard [2003 (1991) ] describes an autochthonous “multimedial orality” that includes word, voice, gesture, music, and choreography in addition to other semiotic systems, such as record keeping through Andean khipu knots (pp. 22, 32). Though it draws on different intellectual genealogies, Faudree's (2013) ethnography of Mazatec language revival movements in Mexico is significant here in its focus on the interrelations of speech, writing, and song. Faudree identifies a division between belletristic Indigenous language production in metropolitan locations and everyday Indigenous literacy in communities with active Mazatec speakers. Song is a key arena of practice where Mazatec language revival movements bridge broad and local political and social needs. Despite tensions between them, in aggregate these movements point toward “new possibilities for national belonging” ( Faudree 2013 , p. 239).
Another discourse focused on indigeneity is the place of the voice, listening, and sound in debates about the biopolitics of life and the so-called ontological turn in the region [ Stolze Lima 1999 , Kohn 2013 , Bessire 2014 , Viveiros de Castro 2014 (2009) , Lagrou 2018 ]. In some of this work, practices of listening to different beings, living and dead, become crucial to understanding ontological questions regarding conceptualizations of personhood, cosmology, and interbeing relations ( Stolze Lima 1999 , Viveiros de Castro 2011 , Descola 2013 ). Other work attends to the implications of such anthropological rethinking of ontology for the relations between music, narrative, myth, and materiality, understood as intertwined expressive dimensions that articulate conceptions and critiques of culture and nature ( Arnold & Yapita 1998 , Stobart 2006 , Montardo Oliveira 2009 , Brabec de Mori et al. 2015 ). The prominence of ontological arguments about nature and culture, as well as critical responses addressing the biopolitics of Indigenous life ( Bessire 2014 ), suggests a reckoning around multiplying, intersecting crises of humanity, capitalism, climate, and the environment.
Contemporary discourses on music and song are especially indebted to studies of media in the region. The intersection between communications (as media studies are conceived in Latin America) and communicative practices is also noteworthy (e.g., Winocur 2003 , 2005 , 2009 ). The relations among audiovisual media, the popular, orality, and memory were central to the rise of debates on the nature of (post)modernity in the late 1980s [ Martín Barbero 1993 (1987) , García Canclini 1995 (1990) ]. These works theorized the tension between the folkloric and the mediatic in the region, where “the popular” simultaneously invokes a social category (the people), an aesthetic (the oral), a process of massification and urbanization (the people as the urban working masses, the proletariat), and a problematic of media and mediations (the rise of radio, the record, etc.). They built on Latin American and Caribbean histories of theorizing mixtures and thus anticipated the problem of hybridity and (post)modernity in culture much earlier than in English literature on the topic [ García Canclini 1995 (1990) ].
Although these works did not focus on popular music, beginning in the 1990s they influenced the intensification of histories of popular music and media ( Santamaría-Delgado 2014 , Cañardo 2017 , Ochoa Escobar 2018 ), conceptual critiques of music ( Mendívil 2016 ), and theorization of the relation between music and communications ( de Araújo Duarte Valente 2017 ). A Latin American branch of the International Association for the Study of Popular Music, created in 2000, spearheaded the study of the conceptualization and significance of popular music and its relation to media [ Tupinambá de Ulhôa 2012 , González 2018 (2013) ]. Much work on popular music across the region, but particularly in Brazil, was generated by a critique of modernity and modernism ( Wisnik 1989 , Vianna 1999 , Travassos 2000 , Sandroni 2001 ). Also in Brazil, the intersection of music and literary critique has been influential in generating a body of work on the semiotics of song ( Tatit 1998 , Travassos 2000 ). More broadly, recent work has highlighted the complex global politics of sound media in the historical constitution of the region and its discourses of modernization ( Bronfman 2016 , Ospina Romero 2019 ).
New work centered on a politics of sound, the body, and the sensorial moves decisively away from the lettered city and from a sociology of popular music. This paradigmatic shift is linked to the rise of sound studies in the region and explores a social critique of race, class, and gender centered on the relations among voice; the politics of the sensorial; and questions of audibility, emplacement, and embodiment ( Ochoa Gautier 2014 , Tatro 2014 , Chávez 2017 , Fiol-Matta 2017 , Birenbaum Quintero 2018 , Bieletto-Bueno 2019 , Chaves & Iazzetta 2019 , Domínguez Ruiz 2019 , Robbins 2019 , Amado 2020 ). Finally, recent publications on experimentalisms in the region highlight a multiplicity of understandings and uses of the voice, a recurrent blurring of perceived boundaries between popular and elite, and the creation of regional networks that have articulated avant-garde discourses ( Alonso-Minutti et al. 2018 , Herrera 2020 ). Other work emphasizes the recourse to popular song and vocal music in the definition of experimentalism and sound art ( Quevedo 2018 ) and in radical avant-garde traditions of Blackness ( Albuquerque 2019 ). Rethinking what experimentalism means proposes not a new twist to notions of hybridity, but rather a critique of using ideologies of mixture as a primary lens.
Keeping in mind these broad trajectories and foundational concepts in the region, we turn now to more focused discussion of recent work at the intersection of music, language, and aurality in the following sections on race; migration; socialization and youth cultures; and history, memory, and heritage.

Section: HEARING RACE, RACIALIZATION, AND THE (POST)NATION

Above we noted the uneven uptake of Latin American thought in anthropology and cultural studies. Nevertheless, Caribbean and related Afro-diasporic thought attending to music, language, and listening has been deeply influential (though not always recognized) in modern paradigms for analyzing race, colonialism, and communication. This influence can be traced, for example, from Frantz Fanon and Édouard Glissant to Stuart Hall and Paul Gilroy to the broad impact of their works. Intersections between Anglo-American cultural studies, linguistic anthropology, and recent work on race in Latin America ( Restrepo 2012 ) have increasingly enabled hearing concrete processes of racialization and denaturalizing assumptions of the visibility of race. Recent work also reveals a shift from analyzing the historical constitution of ideologies of race and nation to analyzing the fragmentation and contestation of these ideologies.
In an impactful study of Latinx youth in Chicago, Rosa (2019 , p. 2) has emphasized the “co-naturalization of language and race” through embodied practices, especially listening from different subject positions. He includes musical genres among other “forms of emblematicity” (p. 27) in the semiotic operations through which listening subjects produce categories that “come to be experienced as empirically perceivable” (p. 5). Sound is central to his conceptualization of “inverted Spanglish,” an in-group practice that “involves the use of Spanish lexical items pronounced with English phonology within a strip of speech understood as ‘English'” (p. 165). This communicative practice is not only a strategy for articulating a multiplicity of form and identity, but also a challenge to racist structures of marginalization and exclusion.
Roth-Gordon (2009 , 2017) focuses on the audibility of race in speech and media interaction among urban youth in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. She uses the term “conversational sampling” to denote the linguistic practice through which youth quote from popular, politically conscious rap songs in their everyday speech. More broadly, sampling has its origins in the “cut ‘n’ mix” aesthetic of Afro-diasporic musical practices ( Hebdige 1987 ), hip-hop culture, and parallel developments or offshoots that foreground layering and mixing of live and mediated speech, rhythm, and sound ( Madrid 2008 , Rivera et al. 2009 ). The political significance of these practices comes through in ethnographies such as Goett's (2017) book on race and gender in Afro-Nicaraguan activism, which draws on narrative and music (especially Caribbean dancehall) to analyze the imbrication of subjective experience, diasporic identifications, racialization, and oppositional consciousness.
Other recent work examines the construction and reproduction of race through performance and embodiment. Sovik (2009) challenges historical discourse on mixture in Brazil through a critique of whitening and white authority in Brazilian popular music. Wirtz (2014) analyzes race through the lens of Afro-Cuban folkloric performance, including the enregisterment of bozal , a representation of slave speech, through historical and contemporary practices of listening, speaking, and writing. Wirtz conceptualizes race as a “strategically deployable shifter” (p. 66) and a powerful metacultural frame that accrues weight through repetition and entextualization. 3 Birenbaum Quintero (2018) argues for the mutual constitution of concepts of race and concepts of music, dance, and sound in his genealogical study of the Colombian Pacific. He attends ethnographically to music/language relations such as vocal timbre in speech and song and conceives of rhythmic patterns and performance as conversation. This work suggests the coexistence, alternation, and sometimes merging of different regimes of sound and meaning, which cannot be reduced to the logics of modernization, folklorization, or neoliberal culturalization, as powerful as these are.
It is, in part, this sense of overflowing the boundaries of given regimes that brings this work into contemporary discourses of aurality. Earlier scholars studied the confluence of music with ideologies of race and nation in particular places and genres, often revealing their historical contingency. Recent years have seen more attention to the rupture of nationalist imaginaries, as well as a reactionary retreat toward homologies of race and nation in public discourse of the United States and elsewhere. In conceptualizing “postnational musical identities,” Corona & Madrid (2008 , p. 4) do not refer to the “impossibility of the nation-state but rather to the urgency of its rearticulation in relation to the current needs of those citizens it once attempted to discursively homogenize.” For Chávez (2017 , p. 56), postnationalism provides “a means of looking toward the ways in which vulnerable and marginalized communities fashion identities beyond the nation-state.”
The coherence of race/nation/language constructions was always challenged by Caribbean Creole contexts. Camal (2019) analyzes postnationalism and “creolized aurality” through gwoka music of the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe, one of several French territories that decolonized through an ambivalent integration into the French state. Here, Creole postnationalism is “an ambivalent double citizenship that reconciles a strictly political and material belonging to the French state and a cultural belonging to a Guadeloupean nation within that state” ( Camal 2019 , p. 168). Camal interprets the “poetics of colonial aurality” as an interplay of forces that leads to “social and semiotic fluidity and ambiguity” (p. 33). Managan (2012 , 2016) connects the contestations of Guadeloupean nationalism and performance to empirical and critical perspectives on Creole linguistics. She notes Prudent's critique of “the positivist desire to find structure and rules at any price in everyday speech, when one works in a context marked by social, racial, symbolic and other conflicts, without explicitly referring to these elements” (Prudent 1981, translated in Managan 2016 , p. 268). Guilbault & Cape (2014) explore the poetics of voice, storytelling, listening, and labor as crucial to understanding lives in music, moving from a national focus to a biographical one. Colón-Montijo (2017) also builds on the relation between storytelling, lives, and labor, recasting Puerto Rican singer Maelo's vocalization through a politics of mutuality that challenges discrete Afro-Caribbean histories by entangling different modes of listening to his vocal improvisations in Panama, Venezuela, and Puerto Rico.
Connecting this discussion to earlier work in the Caribbean, we highlight the potential for a renewed relation among Creole linguistics, poetics, aurality, musicality, and decolonial politics. Glissant countered simplistic notions of language creolization and the folklorization of orality in his philosophy of vocal sounds, which proposed an anti-racist and decolonial poetics. In conceptualizing a boundless landscape of historical excess provoked by slavery and colonial struggle, Glissant [1989 (1981) ] described “the word as uncertainty, the word as whisper, noise, a sonorous barrier to the silence imposed by darkness” (p. 162). Brathwaite's (1984) discussion of what he called “nation language” in Caribbean contexts was also deeply embedded in poetics, music, orality, and aurality. He suggested that the “total expression” of nation language involves interactive performance skills, tied to the creativity and sociality of people who survived colonial trauma through relations of interdependence ( Brathwaite 1984 , pp. 18–19). These relations also resound in recent work on migration, as discussed below.

Section: MIGRATION, LISTENERSHIP, SCALE

Discussions of aurality and migration build on long histories of music, song, language, and border crossing in a broad range of contexts, from the pathbreaking work of Paredes on the US–Mexico border (1958) to recent work on the Amazonian border between Brazil, Peru, and Colombia ( Marín Osorio 2020 ). We focus here on recent publications that contribute to theorizing listenership, spacetime configurations, and related scalar processes involving mediated forms and figures.
While important distinctions can be made between studies focusing on the circulation of music and those focusing on the movement of people, recent work shows how both these phenomena profoundly shape subjectivities and publics, including for those who may not be migrants themselves ( Olmos Aguilera 2012 ). Several recent ethnographies attend to migration and the formation or fragmentation of listening publics. Dent (2009) shows how Brazilian musical styles indexing rurality were linked to domestic migration and the formation of multiple publics with overlapping commitments to nostalgia. He posits a Brazilian rural chronotope that critiques the ideologies of linear progress promoted under dictatorial as well as neoliberal regimes. Tucker (2013 , 2019) analyzes the shifting terrain of music, media, listenership, and the formation of new publics in Peru, including discussions of Andean migration, class mobility, DJ talk, and the emergence of Indigenous consciousness. He conceives of genre formation as the forging of “a new coalition of sound, ideology, and listenership” ( Tucker 2013 , p. 113). Monte [2021 (2015) ] analyzes temporal as well as spatial displacement in the fragmented modernities of a peripheral capital city (Managua, Nicaragua) through attention to aurality, poetics, music, and overlapping spheres of “trans-migration.”
In theorizing aurality in the context of transnational migration, a pivotal work is Chávez's (2017) ethnography of the social pathways and soundings of the poetic genre huapango arribeño , moving across the US–Mexico border. For Chávez (2017) , the open threshold of sound (versus vision) bridges the material and immaterial dimensions of experience and “pierces the artificial divisions between things” (p. 234). Nevertheless, he argues, the notion of soundscape is geographically bounded and fails to capture how music/poetics/sounds move and connect people and places across space and time. Media constructions have a powerful impact here, as Chávez (2017) suggests, in theorizing the “ranchero chrono-trope,” which involves “the spatiotemporality of essentialist representations of Mexican culture” (p. 45). Yet overall, this work reveals how the everyday, embodied practices of voicing and listening become strategies for connection and survival across the violent structures of the twenty-first-century nation-state.
The ever-increasing dehumanization and forced displacement enacted by current political regimes temper the possibilities of music or voice as a survival strategy. Luiselli's (2017) testimonial account as a translator for migrant children's asylum interviews demonstrates the limits of the word and voice in extreme conditions of alienation, displacement, and silencing. Addressing this work, Ramos (2017) cautions against placing children in a prediscursive state; rather, he suggests, the presumed universality of childhood and legibility of law work together to mask the exclusions of citizenship regimes. Luiselli's (2019) novel Lost Children Archive provides more echoes of the vocality and narrativity of children, as the author combines ideas about stories, sound, documentary memory, and displacement (p. 185). This cross-genre exploration of children's voices can be read in productive dialogue with linguistic anthropological research that documents the creativity of youths’ translinguistic discourse, language brokering, and performance of voices and figures ( Mendoza-Denton 2008 , 2016 ; Reynolds & Orellana 2015 ; Rosa 2019 ).
Studies of migration and media can contribute to analyses of scalar processes ( Carr & Lempert 2016 ), which include semiotic practices such as the invocation of chronotopes, as discussed above, or recursivity. Mendoza-Denton builds on Irvine and Gal's theory of “fractal recursivity” to analyze “hemispheric localism”: “the projection of neighborhood-based, spatialized discourses of ‘turf’ onto broader domains that play out debates over race, immigration, modernity, and globalization” ( Mendoza-Denton 2008 , p. 104). These processes often involve mediated styles and figures ( Mendoza-Denton 2016 ). Rosa (2019) also shows how social actors invoke immediate and mediated frames of reference through voices, forms, and figures. More work is needed to examine how integrations of musical and linguistic form and style afford scalar processes, which are embedded in dense webs of interaction, signification, and power ( Vila 2000 , Swinehart 2018 ). Not only anthropological approaches but also textual, stylistic, and media-based studies of music can become resources for understanding scalar processes in migrant contexts, among others ( Rivera et al. 2009 , Fernández L'Hoeste & Vila 2013 ). The politics of scaling also needs to be kept in focus, both in terms of access versus exclusion and, more literally, when media facilitate mass mobilizations that challenge established orders.

Section: SOCIALIZATION AND YOUTH CULTURES

Folklore has historically been a key site for articulating discourses about music, language, and aurality across Latin America and the Caribbean, both in nation-building projects and in early studies of the circulation of song variants. These discourses often included children's forms of communication because domestic spaces were considered closer to tradition in the constitution of modernity ( Bauman & Briggs 2003 ). Recent discourses about music and childhood in the region have foregrounded Indigenous cultural activism ( Barrett 2016 , Goubert 2019 ) and collaborative community projects involving media and performance ( Araújo 2008 ). Song, poetics, play, and media often become incorporated into pedagogies of youth empowerment, creating spaces for theorization-in-action and activism. 4
As Minks (2013) points out, the language socialization paradigm within linguistic anthropology initially drew on concepts of verbal art and performance, in dialogue with reconceptualizations of folklore. De León's foundational work with Zinacantec Mayan children in southern Mexico demonstrates the socialization of affect and metalinguistic play through gaze, stance, and vocalization ( de León 2005 , 2007 ), more recently moving into the realm of mediated communication among youth ( de León 2018 ). In studies of Mayan children in Guatemala, Reynolds theorizes children's creativity in “practices of the imagination” that enregister and re-voice historical forms and genres through performance ( Reynolds 2002 , p. 6; 2010 ). Minks's (2013) study of “vocal play” among Miskitu children in Nicaragua challenges purist notions of indigeneity, arguing that heterogeneous forms of communication facilitate new political subjectivities and intercultural solidarities. Paugh (2014) examines shifting language ideologies, multilingual socialization, and performance on the Caribbean island of Dominica, showing how official language revitalization programs can inadvertently marginalize rural speakers of an endangered language. These works, among others, highlight the intersecting inequities of class, race, gender, and generation that shape the practices and politics of language maintenance, transformation, and shift.
Recent work also attends to the overlapping multiplicity of aural spheres of interpellation, with youth cultures often linked to popular music genres. Vianna (1997) theorizes the interrelationships among media, sound, loudness, youth, and discourse as a politics of excess that challenges the modes of understanding sonorities as distinct in musical modernities. Vila offers a narrative theory of identity construction through the study of youth discourse about music ( Vila 2000 , 2014 ; Vila et al. 2011 ). Reguillo (2014) tracks youths’ online discourse about music and examines processes of “errant surfing” that demonstrate the contingency and multiplicity of music–identity relations in the digital era. Mendoza-Denton (2008 , 2016) traces the relations among sound, voice, language, music, embodied stance, and visual display in a multimodal semiotics of youth culture. Youth vocalities and narrativities are especially significant for their innovation and variability, which continually expand the politics of identification and communication, as a range of recent work suggests ( Rivera et al. 2009 , Goett 2017 , Roth-Gordon 2017 , de León 2018 , Rosa 2019 ). On a cautionary note, studies of marginalized youth practices are susceptible to objectification and exoticization, which reproduce received categories and their positioning in hierarchies of power. As Rosa (2019) argues, this objectification is a frequent problem in analyses of urban youth cultures, which aim to make difference intelligible to dominant groups without challenging underlying systems that marginalize, interpellate, and stigmatize—systems that are not external to academic production but rather encompass it.

Section: EPISTEMOLOGIES OF HISTORY, MEMORY, AND HERITAGE

A focus on aurality calls for rigorous inquiry into the epistemic genealogies that have shaped the politics of knowledge and disciplinarity. Ochoa Gautier (2014) analyzes nineteenth-century Colombian sources to trace the formation of “audile techniques used for disciplining the music-language relation in the global/colonial history of knowledge” (p. 210). She identifies discourses of vocality, eloquence, etymology, and orthography as “anthropotechnologies” ( Ludueña Romandini 2010 ) that articulated the fuzzy boundaries between the human and the nonhuman in the early colonial period. Ochoa Gautier explores how different figures of the nineteenth century articulated notions of orality and vocality through practices of listening that yielded a historical politics of the sensorial as well as the voice. Key to these processes were “acoustic assemblages,” co-constituted practices of listening and inscription that proliferate in cross-cultural situations. On the one hand, some colonial discourses aimed to discipline human voices into acceptable subject positions through emerging governmentalities and through the aestheticization of vocality in literature and folklore. Yet, on the other hand, we find a rich tradition of practices and politics of the entanglement of the aural and the oral that defy the very tenets of the lettered city in their sensorial, material, and literary inscription.
Anthropological as well as historical work initially constructed a dichotomy between memory (as oral, embodied tradition) and history (as textual archives and written analyses of them). Lienhard, among others, has shown that a rigid division between voice and writing is misleading. Indigenous writing systems documented at the time of European conquest were often mnemonic systems encoding the past that entailed the voice to produce meaning—an “archiving word” coexisting with the “living word” [ Lienhard 2003 (1991) , p. 66]. While Taylor (2003) has been influential in reclaiming embodied repertoires, recent scholarship has turned more deliberately toward the archive. This new work reads against the grain of authoritative texts, listening for voices and relationships within and between them ( Garcia 2017 , Moore 2018 , Herrera 2020 , Minks 2020 , Palomino 2020 , Rios 2020 ). As an alternative approach, Fiol-Matta (2017 , p. 7) proposes an “archive of voice” that moves away from the empiricism of historical sources and origins, which are especially uneven and unheard for female singers and musicians. The recognition of memory processes has also been tied to the question of truth commissions and the unveiling of dictatorial regimes, which problematize relations between musical history, sound, and written juridical history [ Napolitano 2010 (2001) , Buch et al. 2016 ]. Other work recuperates popular music histories that have been largely ignored because they were not explicitly political ( Party 2009 ).
The categories of history and memory have been blurred in Latin American institutions that support open-access digital archives (of visual, textual, and sonic culture) under the banner of “memory” (for example, “Memoria Chilena” of the Biblioteca Nacional de Chile, and “Memoria Centroamericana” of the Instituto de Historia de Nicaragua y Centroamérica). Other projects, led by academics as well as cultural activists, combine research, digitization, performance, and curation of musical and other archives (e.g., Karmy 2017 , Vatin 2018 , Goubert 2019 , Gordillo Brockmann 2020 ). 5 These movements of recuperating and curating public memory can also be related to trajectories of thinking about the circulation and uses of historical recordings ( Waxer 2002 , Ospina Romero 2019 , Luker 2022 ).
Finally, heritage has become a prominent public discourse invoking history and memory in national and international domains (e.g., Samson & Sandroni 2013 ), often drawing on earlier discourses on folklore. Heritage regimes are increasingly tied to discourses of multiculturalism, development, and marketization that may restrict, rather than enable, political transformations ( Luker 2016 , Birenbaum Quintero 2018 , Camal 2019 ). Yet, as Tucker (2019) suggests, critical analysis runs the risk of mistaking the discourses of neoliberal multiculturalism for what music or language does in politics and social life. Movements of cultural and linguistic heritage often take on heterogeneous voices with different relations and effects ( Garrett 2007 , Feliciano-Santos 2017 ). Recognition and representation, when achieved, have their own political consequences that are not necessarily contained by the structure of heritage regimes—again, the capacity of aurality to overflow boundaries.

Section: CONCLUSION

In a moving tribute to Michel-Rolph Trouillot, Puerto Rican anthropologist Yarimar Bonilla tells the story of how she once asked Trouillot, her advisor, how he would describe himself to others. Bonilla (2014) says that “the question seemed relevant given his disciplinary promiscuity” (p. 163). Trouillot answered, “I'd tell them I'm a songwriter” ( Bonilla 2014 , p. 163). This story poetically sums up one of the central points of this review: the centrality of the relations among music, language, and listening for theorizing Latin America and the Caribbean. This terrain cannot be restricted to anthropological methods because it emerged from intersecting genealogies of voice, word, and sound that destabilized anthropological paradigms of tradition and modernity.
The recognition of these relations calls for decolonizing processes at multiple levels. On the one hand, dominant paradigms of anthropology and ethnomusicology have tended to neglect theoretical production from Latin America and the Caribbean while celebrating acoustic analysis that amplified the sonic alterity of particular bodies and voices. These studies would benefit from Rivera Cusicanqui's calls, among others, for a decolonization of gesture, acts, and language, especially through the resources of bilingualism (going far beyond strictly linguistic matters), which can create a more equitable dialogue with other sites of thinking [ Rivera Cusicanqui 2014 (2010) , p. 70].
On the other hand, the significance of this theoretical terrain of widespread disciplinary resonances, while emerging historically from the region, cannot be limited to a discrete, regional operation. What are the possibilities of theoretical restructurings coming from Latin America and the Caribbean that are explicitly shaped by the contexts of their production? The initial articulation of postcolonial theory in the United States came primarily from South Asia and Africa and, arguably, did carry some of these generative contexts into new discourses. Bakhtin's theories have proven highly adaptable to Latin American and Caribbean contexts; however, ironically, they tend to move without the sociohistorical context of their production, whereas theories of voice, power, and heterogeneity emerging from Latin America and the Caribbean are often still neglected. US and European anthropological lineages have also neglected the generative interaction between their founding figures and intellectuals from peripheral locations, such as in the relationship between Bronisław Malinowski and Fernando Ortiz ( Coronil 1995 , González Alcantud 2008 ) or that between Franz Boas and Manuel Gamio ( de la Peña 1996 ), to mention two of the most obvious.
Orality is a way of speaking about the voice (or, at times, the mouth) that has a long tradition in the encounter between colonizer and colonized. In Latin America and the Caribbean, a range of intellectuals inscribed orality in different kinds of texts—from newspaper chronicles to novels to poetry to ethnography. In the process, subaltern voices were corralled, purified, and categorized for ideological and aesthetic motives, as folklore or patrimony or primitivism. Aurality compels us to articulate how writers of various kinds have heard and represented the sounds and voices of others in their works. It compels us to interrogate our own modes of listening, interpretation, and translation. Following Rosa (2019) , we can say that subaltern groups are constructed and positioned in hierarchies not as a consequence of their modes of vocality, but rather as a consequence of the perception and power of the listener. These structures of enclosure are never complete because key to the idea of aurality is the impossibility of containing voices and sounds within their assigned categories ( Ochoa Gautier 2014 ). Thus, as a particular configuration of power arrives at an apparent breaking point, contestations over race, migration, and history are intensified and multiplied through mutual interaction. Such is the process of long-term change, through which our current moments of voicing and listening will become part of the history and memory of the future.

Section: disclosure statement

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

We thank Kristina Wirtz for her feedback on a draft of this article.

Section: literature cited

