Title: Doing Fieldwork Without Knowing It


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

This perspective article explores the ways in which I was doing fieldwork without being aware of it from the time I began to speak and spoke English to my mother and Spanish to my father. This life experience taught me central concepts in anthropology, such as cultural relativity, and made me fascinated with the field before I was formally able to study it.


Section: INTRODUCTION

On April 15, 1941, I was born in Champaign, Illinois, where my dad was earning a PhD in Latin American and Mexican literature at the University of Illinois. It was not until many years later that I learned that my dad was one of the first generation of academics working in the United States to make their field of study Mexican and Latin American literature as opposed to the literature of Spain. When I was four, my dad began to teach at the University of Wisconsin and we moved to Madison. I was enchanted by snowy winters in Madison and enjoyed the schools there. Classmates who were also good students would compete with me for grades in fierce, yet friendly rivalries. Other than from my father's colleagues, I heard no Spanish in Madison.

Section: MADISON, WISCONSIN

I did what in retrospect seems like anthropological fieldwork from the time I began to speak. I spoke Spanish with my father and English with my mother. Growing up in Madison with a Mexican father and an Anglo mother, I found that the notions of cultural and linguistic relativity were part of my taken-for-granted everyday life until my parents proudly showed off my bilingual abilities to their friends. Performing Spanish made me feel more uncomfortable than proud. I knew I was not like the neighborhood kids I played with. They spoke only English, even those whose parents spoke German at home.
When I turned six, I abruptly forgot Spanish from one day to the next. My daily routine at that time was to sit on my dad's lap when he returned home from work and tell him in Spanish about my day. One day while telling him about having gone to the zoo with my mom, I stopped short because I could not find the word “elefante” in Spanish. It was as if my mind was a screen that suddenly went blank. Strangely enough, the word I could not find was cognate with the English word “elephant.” This loss was traumatic. As I have written elsewhere ( Rosaldo 2019 , p. 7), my loss of Spanish felt as if my tongue had been pulled out by the root. It was as if all sense of who I was had been ripped away. I felt that speaking Spanish and English was my birthright, my center of gravity. And, suddenly, my Spanish was gone. It was the price of abruptly becoming monolingual in order to be like the neighborhood kids I played with.

Section: TUCSON, ARIZONA

In 1955, after I had completed one semester of eighth grade, we moved to Tucson, Arizona, because the climate there was much better for my brother who had severe asthma. The move was a jolt for me at age 12. I was shocked at junior high school to hear many of my new classmates speak Spanish to one another. I had come to feel in Madison that speaking Spanish was something to be proud of, even though, or perhaps especially because, I had forgotten the language. In Tucson, I quickly learned that speaking Spanish carried a stigma. I remember hearing classmates say derogatory things about Mexicans, then tell me, “Don't worry, we don't mean you.” I understood that they found my presence impossible to reconcile with their prejudice. I also discovered that the punishment for speaking Spanish on the playground was swats. The junior high school boy who spoke Spanish would have to grab his ankles, raise his butt in the air, and allow a teacher, usually a physical education instructor, to take a wooden board and give him swats on the butt. I saw only boys, not girls, get swats. This never happened to me, but I was horrified and wounded nonetheless. The message for Mexican American students was perfectly clear. You and your native language are held in contempt by your teachers, who want you to forget Spanish and speak only English.
During my sophomore year at Tucson High School, I was invited to join the Chasers, a group of twelve guys, counting me. All were Mexican American, except for one who was Jewish. I had played sandlot football with these guys and was happy to be invited to join them officially. I knew from our football games that the Chasers were caring friends and delighted in joking and having fun. In fact, one of our favorite activities was decorating the home of one of the guys with colored crepe paper in preparation for one of our parties. At the parties, we danced to 1950s rock music with our girlfriends.
For me, a major challenge of being with the Chasers consisted of learning el trato , how to treat other guys and girls. I learned, for example, how to greet the guys (a slight lift of the chin) and how to say goodbye as a party was ending. I bade farewell to each person present, one by one, Mexican American style. In Anglo Madison, I had been taught to slip away quietly without a farewell, so as not to break up the party. I needed to learn how to be the person I was working on becoming, a Mexican American. I already knew how to be a cousin to my Mexican cousins in Mexico City, but that was not what I needed in Tucson. I was once again doing fieldwork without knowing that's what I was doing. I had to get it right because I was intent on “going native,” on becoming Mexican American. I had learned in Tucson that Anglos and Mexican Americans would see me, as I was in the process of seeing myself, as Mexican American, an identity I was determined to embrace. Because of my past in Madison, I had a lot to learn. I worked on becoming Mexican American through careful observation and by listening with full attention. Being who I was becoming was not easy. It required exacting fieldwork, and it was a deep pleasure. Fifty years later, I wrote a book of anthropoetry about the Chasers.
There was language. I sometimes foolishly thought it would be there, where I left it, waiting for me. The sounds were familiar and I felt at home among them. I was obsessed with recuperating my Spanish, studying grammar and reading Mexican novels and history. I was utterly dedicated to making the language that was my birthright my own, to making it a place where I felt at home. Luckily for me, my paternal grandmother, Mama Emilia, spent summers with us, both in Guadalajara, Mexico, and in Tucson. Mama Emilia spoke no English, so anything I could muster in Spanish was welcome and beyond criticism. In speaking with Mama Emilia, I felt my tongue loosen as I spoke more and more Spanish. I talked and talked with her as she made chilaquiles, budin azteca, and arroz con pollo. It was easier to talk about cooking than to cook. I was delighted with our conversations, getting to know her stories. Through this process of learning, I came to feel at home in Spanish. During my senior year at Tucson High School, I began talking to my dad in Spanish. Rightly or wrongly, it seemed a high bar to speak Spanish with him. I felt I had to speak perfectly. I came to feel I had reached my goal. As if to confirm that sense, I scored 800 on the SAT Spanish test for college entrance.

Section: UNDERGRADUATE YEARS

The next year, 1959–1960, I became a freshman at Harvard University and took the Introduction to Anthropology course from Beatrice Whiting. My discussion section was led by Laura Nader. In section meetings, each student was required to speak in the first person and act as if he or she were a member of one of the following three groups: Nuer, Tikopia, or Navajo. In discussion section, we talked about such topics as subsistence, family and kinship, supernatural beings, and so on. In the freshman class, my closest friend was a remarkable young Navajo man named Al Begay. The night before each section meeting, he and I would stay up late talking about his family and relatives or whatever the topic of discussion was for that week in my anthropology course. It was an enormous gift for me. I learned a great deal and valued and cared deeply about what I was learning. I thought I was pulling the wool over the instructor's eyes and did not realize that yet again I was doing fieldwork without knowing it. I was in fact pulling the wool over my own eyes because I was talking with (interviewing) my close friend and learning more about Navajo lifeways than I would have had I done the assigned course reading for that week. My debt to Al Begay has lasted a lifetime, and I remain deeply grateful. I was fortunate enough to be funded to do supervised field research in Ecuador and Peru during the summers after my sophomore and junior years.
The semester I took Introduction to Cultural Anthropology, I also enrolled in Introduction to Spanish Literature. In the latter course, I was introduced to the eminent Spanish cultural historian Américo Castro, who wrote about Spanish culture and character based on his close readings of literary texts and historical documents. The theoretical inspiration for his approach was the nineteenth-century German hermeneutic philosopher, historian, psychologist, and sociologist Wilhelm Dilthey (1833–1911), who, I later learned, was cited by Ruth Benedict as a significant precursor in formulating the concept of culture as developed by Franz Boas, who in turn was foremost among others in creating the tradition of American cultural anthropology [see Margaret Mead's (1959 , pp. 210–11) An Anthropologist at Work: Writings of Ruth Benedict ]. I realized that placing culture in history rather than seeing it as unchanging was crucial to the depth I found in Castro's studies of Spanish culture, a depth I did not find in ethnographies set in an unchanging present. Thus my undergraduate major in Spanish history and literature was an excellent conceptual and methodological preparation for a professional career in cultural anthropology. The historical imagination I acquired from studying history and literature shaped my desire to historicize throughout my career as a cultural anthropologist.
After graduating from college, I spent the following year, 1963–1964, in Spain and learned that under fascist dictator Francisco Franco there was no hope of Spanish scholars of history or literary studies being developed during my generation. Courses in history and literature were taught at the Central University of Madrid as fascist propaganda rather than as genuine forms of inquiry. My assessment of the probable absence of Spanish colleagues in my generation was accurate. That was my reason for deciding not to continue in literary studies.

Section: GRADUATE SCHOOL

I chose graduate study in anthropology. As a graduate student in Social Anthropology at Harvard, I was told that I would have two choices. I could focus on either American ethnoscience or British social anthropology. I learned about ethnoscience primarily from Brent Berlin, and I learned about British social anthropology from David Maybury-Lewis, Tom Beidelman, and James Fox. In the summers of 1965 and 1966, I did fieldwork on a weekend ritual for a saint, Esquipulas, among Tzotzil speakers in Zinacantán, near San Cristóbal, Chiapas, as part of the Harvard research project there (see Rosaldo 1968 ). During my second year in graduate school, a small group of us did two reading courses with Visiting Professor Munro Edmonson, first on a historical approach to Mesoamerican Studies and then on major figures in the history of American cultural anthropology, which I had not previously studied. During my third year of graduate study, I discovered how much I could learn through my work teaching undergraduates. I was a tutor in Social Studies, a program in social thought where the sophomore year was devoted to the study of Marx, Weber, Durkheim, and Freud. I taught this famed quartet throughout my career.
Michelle Rosaldo and I married and conducted summer field research in Zinacantán, Chiapas, in 1964. For our dissertation research, we turned from Chiapas to the Philippines. Evon Vogt continued as our faculty advisor, and Harold Conklin directed our field research among the Ilongots of northern Luzon (1967–1969). My dissertation was titled “Ilongot Social Organization.” Michelle's dissertation was “Context and Metaphor in Ilongot Oral Tradition.”

Section: FACULTY YEARS AT STANFORD

After completing my PhD, I was appointed to the faculty in anthropology at Stanford University in fall 1970. The late 1960s and the early 1970s were marked at Stanford and across the United States by demonstrations against the war in Vietnam and by civil rights movements intensified by the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., on April 4, 1968. King notably delivered his speech on “The Other America” at Stanford in April 1967. Chicano mobilizations were organized in part by Cesar Chavez and the United Farm Workers. In addition, Chicano middle school and high school student walkouts (“blowouts”) in East Los Angeles mobilized many Chicanos. Feminism also became increasingly militant as a social force during this period.
I became actively involved in campus politics that grew out of the Chicano movement. When a conflict broke out between white faculty and Chicano graduate students who were involved in a joint research project between the Stanford School of Medicine and the Department of Communications, Chicano graduate students asked me to mediate between them and the faculty in this conflict. I asked Jerry Porras, a Chicano faculty member from the Business School, to work with me on this arduous intervention.
In 1974, Michelle Rosaldo and I returned to the Philippines for a follow-up year of field research among the Ilongots. Michelle deepened her sociolinguistic work ( M.Z. Rosaldo 1980 ). I devoted the year to developing a chronology of the Ilongot remembered past, which was a daunting task because I needed to identify places where people had lived. The Ilongots dated the past by listing the places where they had lived. The difficulty was that they often designated a single place by four or five different names (the name of a nearby rock or tree, a hill, a stream where they got drinking water, and so on). I verified the places where people had lived by making models of the local terrain in sandy soil. After making these maps and getting close to completing my chronology, I asked people to tell me who had a good memory. I then used such information as the birth order of children to complete the chronology. A chronology, of course, is not a history, but the latter is not possible without the former.
In 1975–1976, Michelle and I spent a transformative year at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. We participated in a memorable yearlong seminar there with anthropologists and social historians. Clifford Geertz and Victor Turner were the senior members of the seminar. French social historians William Sewell and William Reddy were wonderful interlocutors who took time at ping-pong games outside the seminar to teach me about social history, the uses and art of narrative, and the journal Past and Present , as well as such major figures as E.P. Thompson and Joan Scott. I came to the Institute for Advanced Study with the intention of doing a history of the Ilongots that followed the path on which I had started as an undergraduate when I had studied the notion of historical generations. When I gave a presentation on my working analysis of Ilongot society, Clifford Geertz suggested that I peruse Norman Ryder's (1965) pertinent essay on cohort analysis. My work on the historical analysis of Ilongot society eventually resulted in the publication of Ilongot Headhunting, 1883–1974: A Study in Society and History ( R. Rosaldo 1980 ).
During the 1980s, my involvement in the Chicano movement deepened at Stanford, but it took a turn, as it did for many Chicano scholars, toward academic research. My knowledge of anthropological work on Chicanos came to fruition when I did a review essay for the Annual Review of Anthropology ( Rosaldo 1985 ). I knew a handful of Chicano anthropologists and asked each of them to tell me the names of, and contact information for, other scholars who had done research on Chicanos. It was like a chain letter. I asked them to send the pages from their vitae that listed their publications. This approach, I later learned, is called the snowball method. I was surprised to discover how much research on Chicanos there was in anthropology, much more than even people in the field thought.

Section: RACE, GENDER, AND SEXUALITY

In the late 1980s, I worked and reworked the manuscript that became Culture and Truth: The Remaking of Social Analysis ( Rosaldo 1989 ). I read more than my four pillars—Marx, Weber, Durkheim, Freud—and studied E.P. Thompson and Raymond Williams as I took to heart their motto, “always historicize.” I considered race as a category of analysis as I pored over the writings of Stuart Hall and Paul Gilroy. I also studied the work of feminist theorists—Gloria Anzaldúa, Audre Lorde, and Adrienne Rich—who had written insightfully on the intersections of race, gender, and sexuality.
In the 1990s, I formed an interdisciplinary team of researchers (in anthropology, education, political science, history, literature, cultural studies, community advocacy, and law) called the Latino Cultural Studies Working Group, which was using qualitative methods to conduct investigations in San Jose, Watsonville, and Los Angeles, California, in New York City, New York, and in San Antonio, Texas (see Flores & Benmayor 1997 ). The project selected the concept of cultural citizenship as its object of study because it brought into focus a set of issues around belonging and not belonging, being a full citizen and a second class one, that we wanted to explore. The term cultural citizenship referred to the right to be different and belong. In interviews to elicit the damaging cultural practices that we wished to uncover, we would ask subjects to depict occasions where they felt like second-class citizens. One woman, for example, said a decisive moment for her was when, in her religious group, she realized that she was participating in rituals of her own exclusion. The project's main contribution was that it trained a number of young scholars of color in ethnographic methods. These scholars went on to write dissertations and books based on their research.
In the 1980s, I taught in the Culture, Ideas, and Values (CIV) program at Stanford, which was the successor to the Western Culture (Great Books) course there. Together with Latin Americanist Mary Louise Pratt and classicist Gregson Davis, we mounted a course that was organized around juxtapositions of texts from diverse traditions. I would place, for example, the Navajo life history Son of Old Man Hat alongside Zora Neale Hurston's novel Their Eyes Were Watching God and Augustine's Confessions . It is worth adding that Hurston was especially appropriate for me to teach because she was a novelist who had studied folklore and anthropology with eminent anthropologist Franz Boas (see Cotera 2008 ). In teaching this course, I was well served by my training in both literary studies and cultural anthropology.

Section: ANTROPOESÍA

In 1996, I suffered a stroke induced by severe stress from warfare in the department I was chairing. As I was resting from the cerebral hemorrhage I suffered, poems began to appear to me. I could see them, written longhand in purple ink with fine penmanship (not mine). After resisting the poems for a few days, I began to write them down. Poetry came in search of me. I did not choose it. I simply accepted. Once I committed to this form of self-expression, my partner, Mary Louise Pratt, told me of a poetry reading at a nearby Lutheran church. I asked one of the participants if they were part of a poetry group. He told me of a local poetry group called Waverly Writers, which I later joined. I also found a poetry teacher who worked with me individually once a month. I took weekend workshops with distinguished poets. I also did readings of my own work for audiences of fellow poets. I threw myself into the culture of poetry and yet again “went native,” becoming a poet.
The first book of poetry I published was bilingual, Spanish and English, facing pages. Its title was Prayer to Spider Woman/Rezo a la mujer araña ( Rosaldo 2003 ). It was published in Saltillo, northern Mexico. In 2004, it won the American Book Award from the Before Columbus Foundation. This publication came after an extraordinary year (1998–1999) Mary Louise Pratt and I spent at a research institute [Centro de Investigaciones y Estudios Superiores en Antropologia Social (CIESAS) Occidente] in Guadalajara, Mexico, where I taught and gave seminars and lectures in Spanish. A number of my essays were translated and published in Spanish ( Díaz Cruz 2006 ) as a result of our stay in Mexico. I wrote poetry almost exclusively in Spanish that year.
In 2012, I published a collection of poems titled Diego Luna's Insider Tips ( Rosaldo 2012 ). These poems were written individually on separate occasions. In an effort to characterize my life, the poems dealt with matters such as race, loss, severe illness, and Mexican American coming of age. I had become enchanted with poetry because it allowed me to speak about major life matters that I found more difficult to address with appropriate feeling in prose.
In 2014, I published The Day of Shelly's Death: The Poetry and Ethnography of Grief ( Rosaldo 2014 ). I was not able to write these poems telling of the accidental death of my then wife, Michelle Rosaldo, until 28 years after her death on October 11, 1981. This work was a whole new poetic undertaking, which I called antropoesía, meaning that it was in verse and that it was trying to meet the standards of accuracy and accountability that ethnography demanded of the social world depicted in the poems.
As I described in the beginning of this perspective article, The Chasers ( Rosaldo 2019 ) could have been subtitled The Making of an Anthropologist because it depicts how, when I was a Chaser, I was like a fieldworker, observing and listening with full attention so as to fit in and “go native,” becoming Mexican American. The book of poems is based on my memories and written transcripts of videotaped interviews that I conducted with the Chasers and three of our non-Chaser friends. I wrote these as prose poems because the long lines and my multiple revisions created the kind of musicality I sought in verse. This work was another experiment in antropoesía, closer to an actual interview-based ethnography than my previous effort. It was no doubt crucial in conducting these interviews that I had known the Chasers for more than 50 years. Maybe the experience of having lived the often controversial change in anthropology, the reinvention of ethnographic writing, has allowed me to embrace the creativity that the field now allows.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I am grateful to my partner Mary Louise Pratt for comments and technical help on this perspective article.

Section: literature cited

