Title: The Work of Boundaries: Critical Cartographies and the Archaeological Record of the Relatively Recent Past


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Discussions of boundaries have enjoyed a renaissance in anthropological archaeology of recent years, especially as conversations surrounding forced migration and border walls look toward the material record for clarification about what borders are and what they do. Since 1995, when the Annual Review of Anthropology last addressed a similar issue, numerous methodological and conceptual changes in the field have led to a large proliferation in the literature. By framing this review around the work of boundaries, I signal two trends in the field of archaeology with conceptual and methodological implications. The first trend is the increased centrality of materiality as a theoretical register as new questions relating to object agency, human/nonhuman boundaries, and new models of environmental archaeology have populated the literature. In such climates it is important to focus on boundaries as a kind of assemblage of actants that takes on agencies beyond notions of territory. Associated border, crossing, transnational, and refuge assemblages are discussed. The second trend is the increased attention to boundary work in archaeology. In this article I review one thread of that literature, critical cartographies, and how they have used the archaeological record to develop radical renditions of political space where boundaries are involved. I focus on scholarship surrounding the relatively recent past (ca. 1200 CE to the present).

Section: INTRODUCTION

Discussions of boundaries have enjoyed a renaissance in anthropological archaeology, especially as people look toward the past for clarification about what borders are and what they do. In the news and public discourse, the work of boundaries is everywhere: revanchist national policies that claim to reclaim territory in the mold of Putin's invasion of Ukraine, attempts to reassert notions of territory as in the case of Brexit, the resurgence in nationalism within nation-states (Catalonia and Scotland, to name a few), and expressions of national identity through physical work to materially inscribe borders such as the Trump wall. At the same time, humans and nonhumans have been on the move in seemingly unprecedented ways—sometimes of their own volition but often against their will. The COVID-19 pandemic has made plain the links between such boundary work and the differential distribution of life-saving resources in which social identity is a discriminating factor. It also clearly demonstrates how nonhuman actors are part of the work of boundaries. If our subfield is to remain a viable avenue for addressing inequalities, recent events demand an evaluation of how we map the work of boundaries in the past.
In recent years, archaeologists working in a host of contexts have begun to adopt critical cartography as a toolset to expand our understanding of human experience, especially related to the work of boundaries. Critical cartography emerged from arguments in geography, urban planning, and other related fields that stressed the dynamic and situated work of power in cartography and other forms of knowledge production about geography ( Cosgrove 1983 , Harley 2002 ). Geographers and historians note that maps are never passive or objective representations of space ( Massey 1994 , Rankin 2020 ). Like most discursive practices, maps define the nature of spaces they represent and naturalize those definitions by presenting themselves as common sense ( Monmonier 1996 ). As such, mapping is a political act ( Harris & Hazen 2005 ). To map is to make a particular claim about space through its representation. Mapping has been wielded as a tool of state violence from the colonial period through today, as seen in recent uses of global positioning system (GPS) technology ( Barnes 2008 ). Stressing the work that mapping does, scholars have adopted an assemblage of practices, including participatory geographic information systems (GIS), deep-mapping, do-it-yourself (DIY) mapping, and counter-mapping.
By expanding the subject positions involved in their making and centering the relationship between power and knowledge, this assemblage of practices pushes back against cartographic representations that materialize dominant ideologies. While Peluso (1995) first employed the term counter-mapping to explain the process of Indigenous land claims in cartographic accounts, work by artists, scholars, and activists predate the name. Surrealists ( MoMA 2015 ; see also Wood 2010 ), Situationists (see Lynch 1964 ), and radical cartography ( Bunge 1971 ; see Rankin 2016 ) have been creating radical representations to counter dominant ideologies and imagine new futures for some time ( Rocheleau 2005 ). Drawing on Black, Feminist, and Indigenous scholarship that challenges social, economic, and political inequalities ( Hawthorne 2019 , Hunt & Stevenson 2017 , Kwan 2002 , Massey 1994 , McKittrick & Woods 2007 , Simpson 2014 ), collectives such as Mapping Back ( http://mappingback.org ), Native Land Digital ( https://native-land.ca ), and Guerilla Cartography ( https://www.guerrillacartography.org ) challenge assumptions about the nature of place and its materialization in maps by producing radical representations of space. As such, archaeologists have been quick to adopt such practices in mapping relatively recent ( González-Tennant 2016 ) and ancient ( Jackson et al. 2019 ) contexts to visualize those excluded in the cartographies of the relatively powerful ( Byrne 2016 ). While such approaches are not without some caution ( Schneider & Hayes 2020 ), such a toolset brings a critical perspective to the work of boundaries.
Archaeologists have discussed the work of boundaries by either mapping or counter-mapping territoriality and mobility. Territory is usefully defined as an “object aggregate” of land, natural resources, and human modifications of which there is a claim of control ( Zedeño 2016 ). Territoriality is the set of relations around such claims ( Parker 2006 , 2012 ). VanValkenburgh & Osborne (2012 , p. 12) define territoriality along five axes—most germane to this discussion is the degree to which territories are uniformly bounded. Similarly, mobility is not just the movement of ideas, objects, nonhuman animals, and people across landscapes but also a set of attitudes, emotions, and positions regarding that movement (see Van Dommelen 2014 ; Snead et al. 2009 , pp. 13–17). We can distinguish between the mobilities that reinforce public discourses surrounding territory (supply chains, military mobilization, exile, or containment) and the mobilities that have the potential to subvert relations of power surrounding territory (illicit or illegal trade, forced migration, raiding). Using territoriality and mobility as two dimensions that archaeologists have used to map and counter-map boundaries, I concentrate on examples from scholarship focused on the past 1,000 years published in the past two decades. After reviewing recent developments in the field, I examine border assemblages, crossing assemblages, transnational assemblages, and refuge assemblages to discuss what people do to make space and what space does to make people.

Section: WORKING BOUNDARIES SINCE 1995

This review focuses on the work of archaeologists mapping critical cartographies in both implicit and explicit ways since 1995, when the Annual Review of Anthropology last addressed this issue in Volume 24 under the theme Border Issues. In their article “Frontiers and Boundaries in Archaeological Perspective,” Lightfoot & Martinez (1995 , p. 472) argued that border zones were “socially charged places where innovative cultural constructs are created and transformed,” where archaeologists can scrutinize social identity in space and through time through the material record. It is worth noting two major theoretical trends in archaeology since 1995. First, the emergence of the new materialism as a theoretical register expanded the relationships explored and the agencies (human and nonhuman) involved in the work of boundaries. The second major trend has been the increased centrality of social archaeology. Because agents in various positions vis-à-vis power have a complicated relationship with borders, not all boundaries are the same nor do all people relate to boundaries in the same way ( Smith 2015 ).
Since 1995, novel methods in laboratory techniques that help determine the movement of ancient peoples or things, including ancient DNA, stable isotope analysis, and compositional characterization, have also become standard. Specifically, LA-ICPMS (laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry) ( Bloch 2016 , Gentelli 2019 , Klesner et al. 2019 ) and pXRF (portable X-ray fluorescence) ( Craig 2021 , Dussubieux & Walder 2015 , Fischer & Hsieh 2017 ) have facilitated numerous studies that focus on characterizations within a particular region, where things that do not match are considered imports. In addition, studies of human migration mobility have proliferated with the development of stable isotope analysis and ancient DNA. For example, studies combine stable isotope analyses of human and nonhuman remains ( Laffoon et al. 2014 ) with population genetics ( Fernandes et al. 2021 , Nägele et al. 2020 ) to map histories of Caribbean humanization and the mobilities of its Indigenous peoples in the distant and more recent pasts. Despite claims that “archaeological understanding of migration or movement as a ‘multilayered process’ is practically nonexistent” ( Van Dommelen 2014 , p. 479), the kinds of understandings population genetics generates about the African Diaspora in the Caribbean Basin ( Schroeder et al. 2015 ) challenge assumptions researchers have traditionally brought to discussions of race ( Abel & Schroeder 2020 , Benn Torres et al. 2019 ).
There have also been major developments in geospatial technologies. These technologies increase the detection of archaeological features that may be relevant to the work of boundaries. Archaeologists traditionally projected boundaries into the past through analyses that model resource defensibility and cultural processes. The availability of GIS has allowed researchers to use increasingly elaborate models to describe affordances of the landscape ( Brewster et al. 2003 ), evaluate different hypotheses of regional and interregional interaction ( Kantner 2004 ), and model past intervisibility to understand the cultural processes of placemaking ( Llobera 2007 , Supernant 2014 ). Archaeologists have also used survey-based approaches that locate and map archaeological remains such as boundary ditches, walls, and fortifications. Advancements in remote sensing, including publicly available satellite imagery, multispectral data, LiDAR (light detection and ranging), and drone photography, have buttressed these efforts ( Chase et al. 2012 , Harmon et al. 2006 , Khalaf & Insoll 2019 , Lasaponara & Masini 2007 ). Such information allows for the analysis of landscape features in relation to each other more efficiently and on larger and larger scales ( Harrower 2016 , Kosiba & Hunter 2017 ). Yet, as VanValkenburgh & Dufton (2020) have pointed out, such big data is not without its blind spots, again highlighting that our methodological choices have political implications.
Archaeologists have adopted various practices, including counter-mapping ( Byrne 2016 ), participatory GIS ( Purser 2012 ), and deep-mapping ( Pearson & Shanks 2001 , p. 65), to counter the tendency of such technologies to reproduce cartographic and historical accounts of the relatively powerful. The proliferation of DIY digital mapping tools, such as ESRI's “Story Maps” and the publicly available Knight Lab maps, has facilitated these practices. The Texas Freedom Colonies Project (2022) , developed by urban planner Andrea Roberts, is an example of a counter-map that engages the stakeholders as knowledge producers, interpreters, and storytellers. For archaeologists concerned with more distant pasts, a counter-map is a reality presented as a counter to mappings of dominant narratives and relies on the spatial representations and practices of the relatively powerless in rendering radical uses of space ( González-Tennant 2016 ). Collaborative GIS and counter-mapping are not without criticism about whose voices get included in rendering such spaces and about assumptions surrounding the degree to which archaeological data can represent past denizens’ landscapes ( Larrain & McCall 2019 ). Collectives of scholars, such as the Society of Black Archaeologists (see Agbe-Davies 2022 ), work to create collaborative projects and solidarities that dislodge unequal relationships between researchers and stakeholders ( Flewellen et al. 2021 ). Counter-mapping extends these goals to respect the diversity of experiences between people as they negotiate political space.

Section: BORDER ASSEMBLAGES

In his article reviewing Hicks & Mallet's (2019) book about the migrant encampment colloquially known as “The Jungle” in Calais, France, Hamilakis (2019) introduces the term border assemblage to describe the material agents of boundaries, including razor wire, prefab housing, and UN tents, that cofunction to delineate borders. Border assemblages present the most direct way that archaeologists have mapped political space in the recent and more distant pasts. In archaeological practice, the term border encompasses a broad range of symbolic, political, and economic investments dividing one thing from another. However, identifying what these are is itself a difficult task. On the one hand, archaeologists have downplayed the physicality of borders where hardened, preclusive infrastructure inscribed in the built landscape represents one kind of political frontier ( Alconini 2016 ). On the other hand, archaeologists paradoxically seem to see evidence of borders everywhere. Happily, a consensus is slowly growing around a set of four principles and terms in the analysis of borders ( Parker 2006 , Smith 2003 , VanValkenburgh & Osborne 2012 ).
The first principle widely held by archaeologists is the necessity of avoiding logical inferences that equate the presence of built border features with the stability of political territory and constraints on mobility and, conversely, that equate the lack of built border features with an absence of territorial claims or rampant mobility. Archaeologists traditionally focused on territory, the limits of sovereign control, and the materialization of territory through the built landscape and physical features such as rivers, mountain ranges, or bodies of water. Indeed, a gloss of the archaeological record shows that border walls were never effective in controlling population movement or defending territory. Take, for example, the Pale (1169 CE), which was a raised ditch separating an English Norman settlement in Ireland ( Barry 1987 , p. 18). Like other linear features, including Hadrian's Wall and the Great Wall of China, the Pale was not a single feature but an assemblage of infrastructures that blinked in and out of existence from the twelfth century onward ( Klingelhofer 2010 ). The physical ditch itself and the political divisions into Irish and English identities were driven by its residents, opportunistically enrolling the Irish or English leaders for their ends ( Power 2012 ). As an archaeological phenomenon, it is debatable whether the Pale ever “really existed” as a continuous boundary. More importantly, it was an idea that played out in politics, past and present ( Horning 2006 , p. 185). In this sense, it is an accurate analog to the proliferation of border walls in the contemporary world. McGuire (2013) notes that in the transnational community of Ambos Nogales on the US–Mexico border, where a wall does exist, it “facilitates and limits the agency” (p. 466) of people living there. As McGuire notes, walls do not secure a border that separates what was previously a single community but create conditions for differential treatment of borders and their permeability.
The second principle is that border assemblages are not just defensive lines materialized in the landscape, such as ditches, fences, or walls ( Alconini 2008 ). In ancient polities (see Parker 2012 for a discussion of Assyria) and modern contexts (see Hamilakis 2022 for a discussion of Moria), border assemblages are not confined to the borders themselves. They are a nested assemblage of features, including entry gates, militarized outposts, and systems of surveillance, such as checkpoints, guard towers, and human and nonhuman intelligence. Border assemblages also include evidence of force used to impose boundaries. In their excavations of looted tombs at Bil'in in the West Bank, Al-Houdalieh and colleagues (2017 , p. 223) documented the assemblages created when Israel erected the separation wall, which effectively took away 60% of the villages’ land. Assemblages included evidence of violence enacted by official forces, such as rubber bullets, shell casings, and tear-gas canisters. They also included evidence of improvised weapons of those resisting, such as glass bottles altered into Molotov cocktails, reminding us that boundaries are never settled accounts.
The third principle is that what constitutes relationships to territory in the present may not be the same in other times or places. Attending to context, therefore, is paramount. Representations of polities, peoples, or territories may or may not be bounded, contiguous, or material. Rather than fixed political geographies, spatial representations index fluid relations of territory in which “situated practice within [a] territory enacts social and political ties” ( VanValkenburgh & Osborne 2012 , p. 13). Most cartographic depictions of past empires use polygons to display the territorial limits of a particular polity's power. Smith (2005) argues that spatial representations, such as maps, stelae, and walls, may not be the best way to draw comparisons between polities whose economies were as diverse as the Roman, Incan, and Mauryan empires. Rather, node-based models recast the dimensions of territoriality associated with polities, shed light on “variances in state-level activity,” and provide a matrix through which to understand how territorial space was differently experienced ( Smith 2005 , p. 846). Such remappings of political space introduce new ways to think about comparisons across time and space. Drawing on Liverani's (1988) observations that the Assyrian Empire was not “a spread of land, but a network of communications over which material goods are carried” (p. 86), Bernbeck (2010) draws comparisons to the United States in the late twentieth century. Bernbeck argues that both systems relied on military bases that enabled domination over alien territories. Whereas the Assyrian Empire asserted hegemony over several centuries, Bernbeck observes that US hegemony has been more fleeting.
The fourth principle is that border assemblages are not inert features in the landscape. Social scientists, including anthropologists and archaeologists, have shown that boundaries have unstated rationales and effects ( Soto 2018 ). Hamilakis's (2022) discussion of the techno-politics encountered by migrants at Moria, a refugee camp located on the Greek island of Lesvos, is exceptional in this account. The materiality of razor wire, checkpoints, and guard doors merges “humanitarianism and securitism” as one element in a nested assemblage that is “also an apparatus of classification, labeling, grouping, and segregation” ( Hamilakis 2022 , p. 218). These effects are documented in human–nonhuman relations, where border walls and fences with their own ecologies ( Jakes et al. 2018 ) affect physiology, movement, population distribution, and community composition, ultimately leading to ecosystem process alteration and human effects ( McInturff et al. 2020 , p. 971). The materiality of and agency of border assemblages become an important lens through which to explore how forms of power are inscribed on bodies (race, class, gender, disability, age). De León's (2015) critique of US border policy maps the ways in which border assemblages create spatial conditions that allow for violence to be both enacted and hidden. As a policy, Prevention Through Deterrence (PTD) enlists a hybrid collective of nonhuman actants that include aerial drones, 100-degree weather, scorpions, carrion, and bored agents to deter people from crossing through the Sonoran Desert (p. 39; see also De León 2012 ). The cases of US and EU border policy remind us that, as forms of power inscribed on the landscape (as in the case of boundary walls), border assemblages are technologies of social differentiation.

Section: CROSSING ASSEMBLAGES

In her contribution to the forum entitled “Archaeology as Bearing Witness” ( Hauser et al. 2018 ), Battle-Baptiste describes coming across the remnants of a capsized boat in the Bahamas that once carried Haitians attempting to enter the United States via the eastern seaboard of the United States. Alongside the hull were those things necessary to make the crossing between islands, “discarded clothes, empty water bottles, frayed rope, chipped paint, a tattered sail” ( Hauser et al. 2018 , p. 537). Border assemblages presume their opposite: crossing assemblages. The relationship between past and present crossings is especially fraught when questioning the salience of the territories that archaeologists map. On the one hand, there has been persistent interest in mapping crossings as movement between places. For example, the materiality of contemporary displacement and forced removal is a large topic recently reviewed for this journal by McGuire (2020) . On the other hand, the distinction between lines in space and frontiers as ambiguous zones of possibility is traceable to eighteenth-century European political arithmetic that set principles about political, economic, and theological matters in absolute terms ( Anderson 1996 ). Whereas most maps of North America show relatively few lines representing the boundary between Canada, the United States, and Mexico, a map of sovereign territories of First Nations in the continent shows a mosaic of territories ( https://native-land.ca/ ), thereby introducing ambiguity into the claims upon which the three nation-states are premised. More than one scholar ( Bernardini & Fowles 2011 , St. John & Ferris 2019 , Wilcox 2014 ) makes the point that lines drawn by Europeans between the fifteenth and twentieth centuries to distinguish one territory from the next did not go unchallenged by the mobilities of people who had been residing in those landscapes and waterscapes for millennia. Others distinguish the concept of mobility (see Greenblatt et al. 2009 ) and migration as a common fact of life for humans ( Cameron 2013 ) from the crossings that form in social, political, and historical contexts ( Mullin 2011 ). Another core issue concerns the relationship between mobility and boundaries. The current emphasis on territoriality to clarify political space appears to be a relatively recent and Eurocentric narrative, with numerous ethnographic and archaeological examples of people emphasizing mobility—the set of attitudes, emotions, and positions regarding that movement through the landscape ( Bender 2001 ). Counter-mapping mobility foregrounds the radical depiction of space and facilitates an integrated approach to mapping crossing assemblages.
Contemporary crossing assemblages encompass various phenomena associated with the twinned phenomena of massive human displacement and the proliferation of border walls between the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Most archaeological research on displacement focuses on transformations through destruction in the years before and after World War II ( González-Ruibal 2008 ), the economic inequalities structured around the Global North and South, vulnerabilities brought about by the climate crisis, instability of food sovereignty, and violence in conflict zones directly or indirectly caused by the US-led “war on terror.” Although there is a danger in creating what Hamilakis (2016) refers to as “refugee porn” (p. 134; see also Soto 2018 ) by fixating on crossing assemblages, counter-mapping does offer analytical insight, especially as it relates to the experience of crossing borders. The Undocumented Migration Project (UMP) is significant as one of the few long-term studies that have employed archaeological, ethnographic, and forensic methodologies to examine the permeability of borders, objects, and people as they cross the Sonoran Desert ( De León 2012 ) to counter-map US surveillance along the border. The UMP follows a tradition of geography critical of GIS because of its genealogical association with the US military-industrial complex (see Barnes 2008 ). GIS's most popular avatar, ESRI, continues to be entwined with US Border Patrol surveillance, especially as it relates to the PTD that “naturalizes the border and differentiates human from nonhuman security” ( Stewart et al. 2016 , p. 161). Assemblages of the crossing, including worn shoes, water bottles altered to reduce border patrol scrutiny, and palliative and medical treatments detailed through traditional archaeological methods, reveal a landscape of suffering ( Gokee et al. 2020 ) and how such analyses of the Sonoran Desert provide a critical perspective on how “a landscape has been designed and built” ( Stewart et al. 2016 , p. 173).
In North America, archaeologists have documented long-standing and vibrant zones of interaction and mobility in regions now bisected by contemporary political borders ( Cameron 2013 ). Aided by a rich archaeological record and sophisticated use of the direct historical approach, scholars in the southwestern United States have reconstructed how moving about the land was differentially experienced ( Mills et al. 2018 ). This archive of human experience includes biographic imagery people used to navigate through enemy territory or take advantage of local resources such as game ( Montgomery & Fowles 2020 , p. 201). Such assemblages show an added risk of being a stranger in a strange land. Between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries, the archaeological record demonstrates that migrants moving into unknown regions faced considerable interpersonal violence ( Fowles 2013 , p. 113). Critically, pathways—in the form of trails, causeways, roadways, and waterways—are among many elements of the assemblages that archaeologists have documented (see contributions in Snead et al. 2009 ). Supernant's analysis of Indigenous landscapes and mobilities in western Canada argues that many of the criteria through which archaeologists interpret spatial relations in the archaeological record are premised on Western and modern assumptions such as the defensibility of locales ( Martindale & Supernant 2009 ), the location of paths that people used ( Supernant 2014 ), and maritime movement ( Gustas & Supernant 2017 ). For example, least-cost path analyses rarely align with trails often documented through an archaeological survey. Additionally, new studies should consider the role played by landscape affordances, such as snow cover and daylight, and social infrastructure, including memory, kinship, and family networks. Most importantly, new studies should frame themselves through collaborative projects.
To talk about crossings, one must also consider geographies that extend beyond land's end. Take the example of maritime boundaries instituted by colonial powers, which Tagliacozzo (2009) notes are very “porous.” Attempts to enforce the boundaries through military force and legitimize the boundaries through laws and treatises did not dissolve trade so much as signal the failure of imagination on the part of colonial powers. While archaeologies of eighteenth-century colonial contexts counter-map assemblages by tracking the movement of legally proscribed trade goods as they transgress political boundaries, they have not always considered who were the agents that moved those goods ( Deagan 2007 , Hartnett & Dawdy 2013 , Hauser 2011 ). In the Caribbean, Indigenous peoples employed channels between islands as causeways between neighboring communities, facilitating trade, political alliances, and social solidarities for over a millennium ( Hofman et al. 2020 ). When Europeans colonized the archipelago between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries, they imposed boundaries in the channels to distinguish sovereign territories and colonies. Despite these lines on a map, Indigenous residents remained highly mobile, activating social, religious, and trading networks that had existed for centuries ( Hulme 2007 ). Although mobilities of goods, peoples, and ideas could at times reinforce colonial power relations, they also formed a counterpoint to European political geography, facilitating alliances between varied subaltern communities, including Indigenous, Maroon, and enslaved peoples of African descent ( Hauser 2021 ).

Section: TRANSNATIONAL ASSEMBLAGES

In describing the dwellings of peoples displaced in the aftermath of the 1947 Partition of India and Pakistan, Riggs & Jatt (2017) make the simple but important observation that undocumented migration must not begin and end with crossings, but must include postjourney existence within material landscapes where belonging is cultivated through “a propinquity through dwelling” ( Jatt & Riggs 2021 ). Transnational assemblages are not always about boundaries, and research on boundaries is not always transnational. However, the transnational stress on how boundaries and states are unstable and defined by what they exclude puts the two in conversation ( Cobb & DePratter 2012 ). Transnational theory emerged from scholarly attempts to document how people on the move build solidarities that link their country of origin and their country of settlement. Transnational theory about boundaries is perhaps best described as a postcolonial intervention into area studies. It is often associated with Ferguson & Gupta's (2002) classic intervention about transnational governmentality that seeks to broaden the scale of the local. Transnational approaches to archaeology follow this line of thought, especially in consideration of diaspora ( Lilley 2007 ), power and its effects ( Hauser 2011 ), heritage ( Lafrenz Samuels 2016 ), and environmental justice ( Douglass & Cooper 2020 ). A central project has been a critique of the scale through which diasporic communities are viewed as a counter-map to how the state and the nation define boundaries. Whereas the mapping of border assemblages implies a particular relationship between territory and subjects, the analysis of transnational assemblages seeks to counter-map the relationship between territory and subject positions.
A principal assumption of transnational archaeology is that ideologies presuming the nation-state have shaped the production of archaeological knowledge instead of making the presence of the nation-state a topic of archaeological inquiry. Objects, landscapes, and peoples are thus interpreted through an ongoing dialectic in which patterns are identified and misidentified based on scales of analysis, affecting not only the representation of boundaries but the very foundations under which they are assumed to exist (see Brighton 2009 ). These incongruities are often interpreted as blind spots that reflect and reproduce the lines that divide as well as act as one hallmark of the modern world ( Hall 2000 ). Archaeologists have adopted (from ethnographic practice) multisited archaeology as an approach to “broaden the scope of relationships along historically identifiable routes, and via material traces” ( Ryzewski 2012 , p. 250) and to map transnational assemblages ( Ross 2013 ). The analysis of diaspora and home in California and Qianxiang, China, by Voss and colleagues (2018 , p. 422) powerfully shows that transnational assemblages of ideas and objects circulate through clans and associations and thereby extend the notion of the home village. This observation echoes Ho's (2004 , p. 210) discussion of Hadrami Yemeni kinship and epistolary networks about transnational communities forming a “view from the other boat,” where they are locals yet remain cosmopolitans with vital connections across the ocean.
More broadly, many archaeologists have turned to the transnational stress on diaspora to counter-map communities of belonging and place between and beyond border zones that archaeologists often use to render cultural-historical space. Diaspora continues to be an important framework through which the experiences of enslaved people of African descent and their children have been documented in the Americas ( Ogundiran & Falola 2007 , Singleton 1999 ). Scholars focused on the Indian Ocean have introduced a far more complicated mapping of the diaspora, especially as related to the matrices of power under which the African Diaspora is understood (see Oka & Kusimba 2008 , Seetah 2016 ). Those who work on assemblages deposited in the relatively recent past (ca. 1500 CE to the present) are aided by a rich multilingual documentary record as well as oral histories. These studies provide an important counterpoint to model-driven approaches to migration ( Van Dommelen 2014 ). Examining landscapes of South Asian indentured labor in nineteenth-century Mauritius, Haines (2021) shows how plantation ecologies and environmental change both necessitated labor migration from South Asia and changed how people who were part of that diaspora interacted with and within those new landscapes. Because some migrants did return to South Asia, those ecological engagements and changes shaped landscapes in a collectively identified homeland.
Other archaeologists have turned to transnational heritage to consider the ways that boundaries are at work in both producing global inequalities and rendering such forces less visible. Heritage objects lead transnational lives. Kersel (2007) maps the circuitous paths through which antiquities wind up in museums and private collections to challenge geographies of heritage when national boundaries are no longer taken for granted. Of course, European colonial appropriations and acquisitions during the early modern period reveal interconnected object histories among communities in disparate parts of the world. However, as Flewellen (2017) points out in the case of South Asian textiles and their role in the heritage of the African Diaspora, differences in digital infrastructure mean that many parts of the globe, especially where that heritage is most relevant, remain obscured, despite museums’ attempts to provide open access through digital technologies. As such, transnational, multisited archaeologies are not without their challenges. Rizvi (2020) , among others ( MacEachern 2010 , Meskell 2018 ), documents how economic development and social empowerment projects often implicate archaeological remains and how such projects are composed of transnational workforces. Working in the context of the United Arab Emirates, Rizvi uses counter-mapping as a tool to reimagine archaeological engagements with heritage extraction where local communities are redefined beyond the narrow confine of ethnicity ( https://fikrabiennial.com/departments/department-of-mapping-margins/ ).

Section: REFUGE ASSEMBLAGES

Whereas border assemblages represent the clearest example of archaeologists engaged in mapping both territory and mobility, refuge assemblages are often represented through counter-mapping relationships with territory and movement that were often illegible to the state or its agents. Any archaeological consideration of political space has worked in the specter of Scott's (2009 , 2017 ) studies of resistance, geography, and the state, especially as it relates to geography ( Acabado 2017 , Hauser & Armstrong 2012 ). In the context of Southeast Asia, Scott (2009) maps an alternative past for the inhabitants of Zomia in Southeast Asia who flee undertakings of the state, including “slavery, conscription, taxes, corvée labor, epidemics, and warfare” (p. ix). They carve out refuges through farming practices, egalitarian politics, and other tactics that counter state-driven discussions of territory and movement. Archaeological studies of refuge assemblages have concentrated (though not exclusively) on two contexts: Indigenous cartographies in the wake of Spanish colonial efforts in the Pacific Rim and the geographies that people racialized as Black asserted for themselves in the context of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century plantation slavery.
The study of refuge assemblages in the Pacific Rim has been driven largely by the investigation of Indigenous landscapes in the penumbra of Spanish colonialism. As such, it ties into a much larger body of literature on Indigenous survivance in North America ( Atalay 2006 , Silliman 2014 , Vizenor 2008 ). The rise of colonial modes of governance, and its embodiment in everyday life, has long been a focus of archaeological inquiry into Spanish colonialism in commissioned settlements such as pueblos, missions, haciendas, and presidios ( Voss 2008 ). Settlements and landscapes contemporary to, but on the penumbra of, colonial enclaves were considered sites of irregular scrutiny and anxious incursion on the part of colonial authorities. Archaeological investigations of refuge sites like those in California ( Schneider 2021 ) and the Philippines ( Acabado 2017 , 2018 ) provide counter-maps of the early modern world's political economies and ecologies. Initial research focused on identifying the geographic characteristics that distinguished refuge zones: regions that would be considered “marginal” by colonial enterprises, locations that offer little access to agents of colonial scrutiny, and positions that are defendable to military incursion ( Scott 2009 , p. 178). However, refuge assemblages—in the form of landscape modifications and soils as well as material, botanical, and faunal remains—push back against assumptions that “friction terrain” allowed Indigenous people to keep the colonial state at arm's distance ( Scott 2009 , p. 195). In the Philippines, the Ifugao did not continue to rely on wet-taro cultivation, which was a form of escape agriculture, but instead shifted to wet-rice cultivation. This transformation, along with increased demand for ritual animals and greater extralocal wealth, formed material and social infrastructures for resistance but also brought refuge and colonial center—Indigenous and colonizer—into economic interdependencies of consequence, but in ways that coopted colonialism for their own purposes ( Acabado 2018 ). In the context of colonial California, Schneider & Panich (2019) argue that refuge assemblages allow a mapping of the colonial landscape from the outside-in. Characterization of obsidian ( Panich et al. 2018 ) and faunal remains ( Schneider 2015 ) shows how refuges—as an “indigenous hinterland” including “commemorative trips to shell mounds”—provided “contexts for continuity and adjustment among Indian communities making social, material, and economic choices in the wake of missionization” ( Schneider 2015 , p. 695).
In the Atlantic World, Weik (2012) describes and synthesizes major refuge sites and their implications for larger engagements in discussions of antislavery resistance. Communities that engaged in acts of resistance and survivance between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries took advantage of spaces considered marginal by plantation societies in Jamaica ( Agorsah 1994 ), Brazil ( Funari 2003 ), Florida ( Weik 2012 ), and Virginia ( Sayers 2014 ). In doing so, they activated ( LaRoche 2014 , p. 103) “geographies of resistance” where “Maroon communities functioned as the diaspora's first free Black settlements” hidden in plain sight. However, the archaeological study of Black refuge is not restricted to Maroon communities. LaRoche (2014) investigates assemblages associated with free Black settlements to map larger geographies of resistance. Pushing back against dominant narratives depicting the Underground Railroad and the preceding movement as largely the product of white benevolence, LaRoche's (2014) careful mapping of free Black settlements in the Midwest shows how churches of African American communities were the “first stepping-stones of an internal, church-based path to salvation and freedom” for individuals and family members fleeing enslavement (p. 3). Landscape features of resistance geographies included accessibility to waterways, clandestine spaces such as caves and furnaces, and proximity to sympathetic white communities such as Quakers and abolitionists. Coupled with a transnational perspective, as suggested above, refugia reterritorializes communities through the circulation of humans, biota, and objects within contested landscapes.
One emerging research agenda in the study of refuge assemblages is the documentation of differentiated experiences of free and enslaved people racialized as Black in plantation landscapes relative to those of white denizens. Drawing from work by scholars, primarily geographers ( Camp 2002 , Hawthorne 2019 , McKittrick 2013 ), to address the spatial and racial violence of the plantation, archaeologists have used Black geographies to assess historical and spatial accounts of plantation assemblages stemming largely from white, male planter narratives that create cohesive yet misleading historical accounts ( Flewellen 2017 ). For example, Battle-Baptiste (2017) maps plantations into three distinct loci of experience: the “Captive African Domestic Sphere,” the “Labor Sphere,” and the “Wilderness,” where the wilderness becomes a site of refuge and interaction. In Dominica, in the eastern Caribbean, archaeologists excavated trash deposits from regimented plantation housing, which reveal ( a ) commercial and social interaction between enslaved laborers with island Maroons and the Indigenous Kalinago that led to political action on at least two occasions ( Hauser 2021 ); ( b ) landscape modifications and species selection in the gardens of enslaved laborers in the wilderness sphere that managed the predicaments of commercial agriculture such as soil loss ( Oas & Hauser 2017 ); and ( c ) the farming, provisioning, and fishing practices of the enslaved in which the hinterland they negotiated became abiotic as well as a social refuge for species quickly endangered on neighboring islands ( Wallman & Oas 2020 ). Such refuge assemblages did not end with the legal abolishment of slavery ( Harris 2019 ).
The archaeology of refuge sites in the Atlantic World, on the Pacific Rim, or elsewhere is an empirical project grounded in the very work that archaeologists do quite well: catchment analyses, settlement patterns, and the juxtaposition of models against the material record obtained and analyzed through multiple methods and scales. As such, counter-mapping territories and movements associated with refuge assemblages is a deeply empirical project. Whereas border assemblages represent the most legible example of territoriality and attempt to control movement on the landscape, refuge assemblages are perhaps the most mercurial; that is, they were rarely legible to the relatively powerful and, when successful, evaded their scrutiny entirely. As a result, documenting these assemblages requires close attention to the archaeological record. It also requires the imagination of an archaeological community that moves beyond the standard theoretical toolkits used to analyze big data. Illustrating the power of a well-asked question of well-studied data is Dunnavant's (2021) modeling of the maritime movements of people who removed themselves from sites of their enslavement for short periods of time (petite marronage) or permanently (grand marronage) in the Danish West Indies. Dunnavant's argument moves beyond the variables typically used to interpret big data through GIS. The variables employed tend to favor the generation and inclusion of conceptual frames, in this case, fugitivity and oceanic literacy. By doing so, Dunnavant creates a counter-map highlighting the potential routes that marronage took across imperial boundaries while revealing the generalizing tendencies of big data and its nonneutrality toward elite ideologies.

Section: CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

The occupational hazard of working on archaeological topics associated with the relatively recent past is to suffer the accusation of particularity in conditions that delimit broader goals of an anthropological archaeology. In the forum article, “Grand Challenges for Archaeology,” Kintigh and colleagues (2014) define scientific topics with high funding potential. The topics created through a method of crowdsourcing were ultimately edited by a panel convened by the National Science Foundation. As Cobb argues ( 2014 ), such articles are a product of boundary work. Boundary work, described by sociologists, is the “attribution of selected characteristics to an institution of science for the purposes of creating a social boundary” ( Gieryn 1983 , p. 782). For Cobb, such exercises are blind to relations of power that inform scopes of inquiry and, in so doing, diminish the wide variety of research activities at play today. Research concentrating on crossing, transnational, or refuge assemblages would all have to translate questions into topics introduced by Kintigh and colleagues in ways that might denude the stakes of the research introduced by the scholar. However, as many have pointed out in the past few years ( d'Alpoim Guedes et al. 2021 , Franklin et al. 2020 ), many of these topics have highlighted the relevancy of archaeology in inquiries unexpected by Kintigh and his colleagues. Perhaps what is due is a counter-mapping of archaeology's “Grand Challenges.”

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I thank those colleagues who generously shared their time, insights, and knowledge with me in the construction of this review, including Anna Agbe-Davies, Lindsay Bloch, Charles Cobb, Timothy Earle, Matthew Johnson, Melissa Rosenzweig, Hannes Schroeder, and Barbara Voss.

Section: land acknowledgment

I acknowledge that this article was written while employed at Northwestern University and conducting primary research in Dominica. Northwestern resides on the ancestral lands of the Three Fires—Ojibwe, Odawa, and Potawatomi—as well as the historic lands of the Ho-Chunk, Menominee, and Miami. Dominica is an ancestral home to the Kalinago and its interior was a site of refuge for many peoples seeking safe haven from enslavement and genocide.

Section: literature cited

