Title: Prehistory of Kinship


Section: 

This article is part of a special theme on Kinship. For a list of other articles in this theme, see https://www.annualreviews.org/toc/anthro/51/1

Section: ABSTRACT

As observed in recent centuries, the contemporary variety of kinship systems reflects millennia of human migration, cultural inheritance, adaptation, and diversification. This review describes key developments in prehistoric kinship, from matricentric hominin evolution to the Neolithic transition to agriculture and the heterogeneous resilience of matriliny. Starting with our hominin ancestors, kinship evolved among a cooperative breeding species to multilevel group structure among human hunter-gatherers, to substantial kinship changes brought on by the origins of intensified farming, to permanent settlements and unequal resource access. This review takes the approach that new forms of subsistence facilitated new equations of reproductive success, which changed cultural norms of kinship systems and heritable wealth. Subsequently, the formation of complex societies diminished kinship as the primary organizing principle of society. The article describes new methodologies and theoretical developments, along with critiques of bioarchaeological interpretations of prehistoric kinship.

Section: INTRODUCTION

A subject of anthropology since the nineteenth century, kinship has been the fabric of society throughout human prehistory. For hundreds of thousands of years, kinship has structured behaviors through social relations and identities across space and time. The remarkable range of kinship systems, observed in recent centuries, reflects millennia of cultural inheritance, adaptation, and diversification. How did it get here? It began with hominin ancestors, whose cooperative breeding made complex kinship possible, and it diversified through various transformations of subsistence, technology, and social complexity.
Recent interest in past kinship has come to reflect a range of research ranging from gender, sexuality, and social history to evolutionary theory ( Apicella et al. 2012 , Cronk & Gerkey 2007 , Ember 2011 , Ensor 2011 , Hrdy 2009 , Jordan et al. 2009 , Levine 2008 , Moravec et al. 2018 , Shenk et al. 2019 ). The wide range of evidence—new and old ethnographies, archaeology, genetics, linguistics—requires a hermeneutic approach toward the inevitable layers of bias in each record. For historical ethnography, one hermeneutic layer was the observer. Visiting the Trobriand Islands a century ago, Malinowski (1932) described a kinship system he had not seen in his Austro-Hungarian upbringing, in which a woman “retains a great measure of independence, and her husband has to treat her well and with consideration. If he does not,…she can leave him for good.” Equally removed from his home culture, the Flemish missionary Willem van Ruysbroeck (1210–1270), visiting Karakorum in the thirteenth century, described Mongol women holding significant authority, driving carts, and managing livestock flocks and trade, with rights to refuse marriage in the polygynous kinship system. Though couched in each observer's perspective, the corpus of historical accounts opens windows onto unique, often now disappeared systems of kinship that had evolved locally for millennia.
Without the benefit of historical observation, the study of prehistoric kinship is limited not only by the granular and material nature of prehistoric record but also by additional hermeneutic layers of interpretation, including past versus present, other cultures, site formation processes, genetic/linguistic evolution, and archaeologists themselves in their society ( Shanks & Hodder 1995 ). Since the twentieth century, processual archaeologists have employed ethnography and the direct historical approach to infer patterns of kinship in the remains of houses, mortuary practices, and pottery distributions ( Earle 2008 , Miller et al. 2021 ). By the late twentieth century, as archaeological research into ancient kinship ebbed, genetic research began to fill the gap. Before ancient DNA (aDNA) was an established method, gene frequencies among modern populations indicated that patrilocality had predominated during Europe since the Neolithic, because modern Y-chromosome variants were more geographically localized than mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) ( Seielstad et al. 1998 ). Subsequently, genetic studies of modern populations—comparing within-population and between-population diversity in mtDNA (matriline) versus Y-chromosome DNA (patriline)—revealed both matrilocal and patrilocal patterns in different regions of the Neolithic and post-Neolithic world ( Goldberg et al. 2017 , Hamilton et al. 2005 , Kayser et al. 2001 , Kutanan et al. 2019 , Oota et al. 2001 , Rasteiro et al. 2012 ).
These studies renewed interest in ancient kinship through advances in analysis of aDNA, isotopes, and cultural phylogenetics. As discussed in this review, cultural phylogenetics aims to reconstruct ancestral kinship systems from the structured variation in their ethnographically recorded descendants. Isotopic analysis of human remains offers a more direct analysis of sex-biased mobility from ancient skeletons, which is related to social organization when interpreted in concert with burial goods and practices, heritable skeletal traits, and other contextual information ( Bentley et al. 2008 , 2012 , 2021 ; Huffer et al. 2022 ; Knipper et al. 2017 ). Following advances in biodistance statistics ( Alt et al. 2013 ), aDNA analysis of human remains provides unprecedentedly direct evidence of relatedness, such as co-burials of genetic twins in the Upper Paleolithic ( Teschler-Nicola et al. 2020 ) or “family” members in the Neolithic ( Haak et al. 2008 , Simón et al. 2011 , Yaka et al. 2021 ).
These analytical capacities have also invigorated debate over whether biological relatedness should be a proxy for kinship. Critiques highlight the cross-cultural diversity of kinship beliefs, constructed identities, agency, gender norms, experiences, systems of marriage, and family formation ( Brück 2021 , Ensor et al. 2017 , Johnson & Paul 2016 , Levine 2008 , Robb & Harris 2018 , Souvatzi 2017 , Stojanowski & Duncan 2015 ). Intersex status has been culturally recognized across traditional societies ( Hegarty et al. 2018 , Petersen 2020 ) and can sometimes be suggested in the archaeological record, such as in 4,000-year-old figurines of the Indus Valley Civilization ( Clark 2017 ). This recognition reflects biology ( Capel 2017 ); in the modern human fetus, the gonad initiates differentiation (at approximately 6 weeks) as an ovary or a testis, depending on variable expression of at least 25 different genes, such that perhaps 2% of infants (estimates vary) are born with intersex traits ( Ainsworth 2015 , Petersen 2020 ).
At present, however, most skeletal evidence interpreted toward prehistoric kinship relies on sex determinations, based on skeletal morphology (e.g., pelvis or cranial features), in the categories of female, male, and indeterminate. Inferences of prehistoric matrilocality or patrilocality are based on skeletons of one sex being statistically more likely than the other to exhibit local isotopic signatures (e.g., Bentley et al. 2021 , Knipper et al. 2017 , Sjögren et al. 2020 ). As chromosomes can be XXY, XYY, or other combinations, future aDNA techniques could revolutionize the determination of intersex individuals from human remains. Because the cells within an individual can have a different sex ( Ainsworth 2015 ), this determination will be complex; current determinations often use aggregate measures such as the overall ratio of X to Y chromosomes recovered from an individual's DNA (e.g., Heenstierna-Jonson et al. 2017 ).
These new techniques may help unify approaches to ancient kinship, ranging from social construction to biological relatedness. At a larger scale, kinship is a cultural adaptation that coevolved over millennia with human subsistence and collective economy. Invoking multiple forms of evidence, this review covers recent research on prehistoric kinship in a broad chronology. The cultural norms of kinship systems affected reproductive success, migration, and heritable wealth. Subsequently, the formation of complex societies—often with dense, urban settlements and far-reaching trade networks—diminished kinship as the primary organizing principle of society. The next sections describe key developments in prehistoric kinship: ( a ) hominin evolution, ( b ) Neo-lithic transition to agriculture, ( c ) the heterogeneous resilience of matriliny, and ( d ) early states (briefly, as this topic leads beyond the scope of this review). The final section discusses the recent critique of bioarchaeological interpretations and how it might be resolved in future research.

Section: EVOLUTIONARY ORIGINS

Among hominins, prehistoric kinship systems coevolved with brain size—with metabolic energy freed from the gut by cooking food ( Aiello & Wheeler 1995 , Wrangham et al. 1999 )—to handle complex social relations of cooperatively breeding species with a long developmental childhood and long life span ( Chapais 2014 , Dunbar & Shultz 2017 , Hill et al. 2011 , Hrdy 2009 ). Current paleoanthropological evidence does not indicate substantial sexual dimorphism among Homo ancestors ( Larsen 2003 , Martin et al. 2021 ).
Inferences about the evolution of kinship among such a uniquely social species focus on how parental investment differs between mothers and fathers in terms of inclusive fitness, namely reproductive success of shared genes (e.g., Cronk & Gerkey 2007 ). As nonhuman primates exhibit preferential bonds with familiar matrilineal kin ( Cerrito & DeCasien 2021 , Chapais 2014 , Widdig 2007 ), ancestral social structure likely centered on mothers and the provisioning of their young, in whom they are highly invested ( Du & Mace 2019 , Hawkes 2004 , Hrdy 2009 , Low 2005 , Mace 2013 , Shenk et al. 2019 ).
Additionally, the mother's kin are a vital component of maternal investment. Across societies, alloparenting—infant care by nonparents—typically involves the mother's kin, whose investment in the mother and her children can subsequently be returned ( Hrdy 2009 , Perry & Daly 2017 , Sear & Mace 2008 ). Female kin help one another in various ways, ultimately enhancing the survival of daughters and granddaughters ( Hrdy 2009 , Sear & Mace 2008 ). This helps explain why human females have evolved to live for decades after menopause, as grandmothers helping their daughters look after their granddaughters enhance their own inclusive fitness ( Apicella & Silk 2019 , Hawkes 2004 ).
There may be evidence of female status and supportive kin networks in the Late Paleolithic. One possible example is the Upper Paleolithic site of Dolní V stonice (circa 26,000 bp ), where the famous Venus figurine was discovered among other figurines of animals and a disabled younger female was buried with two genetically related others ( Alt et al. 1997 , Formicola et al. 2001 ). Interestingly, morphological feminization exhibited in fossil crania—smaller brow ridges, longer faces, and thinner and rounder skulls—over the last 80,000 years suggests a decrease in human testosterone and an increase in serotonin levels ( Cieri et al. 2014 ). Such hormonal changes would imply that late Paleolithic behavior evolved toward reduced aggression, increased social tolerance, and cooperation ( Raghanti et al. 2018 )—trends that would be conducive to alloparenting.
The reciprocity inherent in alloparenting suggests a foundation for the uniquely human capacities for cooperation, theory of mind, and collective attention ( Dunbar & Shultz 2017 , Shteynberg et al. 2020 , Tomasello 2019 , Voorhees et al. 2020 ). Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) experiments by Hein et al. (2016) reveal that cooperation based on direct empathy invokes different brain regions (anterior insula and anterior cingulate cortex) than when based on indirect reciprocity (anterior insula, anterior cingulate cortex, and ventral striatum). This finding suggests the possibility that the more complex capacity for indirect reciprocity—delayed returns from doing one's part for the group—evolved later than direct reciprocity, which is more immediate (“Help now!”). This capacity, surely a result of brain–culture coevolution, might date to the reorganization of the frontal lobe of Homo between 1.5 and 1.7 million years ago ( Beaudet 2021 , Ponce de León et al. 2021 ).
These capacities for cooperation and indirect reciprocity would have leveraged larger networks of kin, both biological and practical. Although nonhuman primates exhibit in- and out-group dynamics and network hierarchy ( Campbell & de Waal 2014 , Hill et al. 2008 ), humans engage in multilevel, nested structures of alliances via lifetime bonds with dispersed kin, affines, and nonkin ( Chapais 2014 , Dunbar & Shultz 2017 , Fox 1983 , Hamilton et al. 2007 , Hill et al. 2011 ). The recursive nature of kin relations (e.g., “the partner of my mother's sister's daughter”) may have coevolved with working memory and numeracy—as evidenced in Middle Stone Age tools, ornaments, and number markings ( d'Errico et al. 2018 , Voorhees et al. 2020 , Wynn & Coolidge 2010 ). As culturally specific kinship rules became more adaptive through cumulative cultural evolution ( Hill et al. 2014 ), kinship terminologies helped people recognize extended kin and interact appropriately in exchange networks ( Hrdy 2009 , Jones 2010 , Lansing et al. 2017 , Marshall 1957 ).
Such exchange networks with extended kin groups would be crucial for survival of hominins at low population densities, reducing risk from local resource shortfalls ( Chapais 2014 , Hrdy 2009 , Tomasello 2019 ). With hundreds of individuals in one's kin and extrakin network ( Hill et al. 2014 ), exchange systems surely invoked indirect reciprocity via second- or third-degree contacts. The evolved cognitive capacity for indirect reciprocity is suggested by fMRI studies ( Falk & Bassett 2017 ) as well as ethnographically among hunter-gatherers ( Apicella & Silk 2019 , Hill et al. 2011 ). Interestingly, both neural synchronicity in fMRI studies ( Parkinson et al. 2018 ) and gift amounts between hunter-gatherers ( Apicella et al. 2012 ) decline with social distance in a similar manner: from highest with direct contacts to lowest with third-degree contacts ( Figure 1 ). In both measures, anticorrelation at three degrees of separation suggests intergroup differences.

Figure 1 Click to view


Figure 1 Click to view

Section: NEOLITHIC KINSHIP

If Paleolithic kinship systems were fluid, then unilineal kinship and residence rules eventually emerged in particular times and places. These changes were probably subsequent to the origins of agriculture (e.g., Ember 2011 , Hrdy 2009 , Mace 2013 , Larsen et al. 2019 ), but not necessarily immediately. Although cereals were consumed and cultivated for thousands of years before the Neolithic ( Snir et al. 2015 ), the domestication of plants and animals eventually brought permanent settlements, heritable wealth, and social networks structured by increasing sedentism. The earliest structures were often semisubterranean round houses, as at ‘Ain Mallaha in the Levant (circa 14,000 bp ) or at Cishan, northern China (circa 10,000 bp ) ( Lu et al. 2009 ).
The earliest Near Eastern farming villages often featured a densely populated, potentially communal design that may have facilitated a diversity of kinship practices ( Yaka et al. 2021 ). Unlike the evident patrilocality of late Neolithic sites much later, in Central Europe (see below and the sidebar titled Kinship in Early Neolithic Central Europe), the early Neolithic sites of the Fertile Crescent do not exhibit clear signs of unilineal kinship. At Abu Hureyra after about 8,300 bce , with domestic sheep and goats and closely spaced rectangular mud-brick houses separated by courtyards, there is little differentiation of burials by sex ( Moore et al. 2000 , p. 495). Large household complexes with communal courtyards can bring female kin together as multifamily compounds, facilitating collective child-rearing, and enable males to fulfill obligations to both affinal and blood kin ( Ensor et al. 2017 , Fox 1983 , Mace 2013 , Rodning 2011 , Souvatzi 2017 ). In the Mosuo society of southwestern China, for example, such courtyard-centered living spaces belong to the grandmother as the most important person in the household, whose members share child care responsibilities along with food, farming, and domestic work ( Wu et al. 2013 ). At the Pre-Pottery Neolithic site of Basta in Jordan (7500–7000 cal bce ), with densely packed houses and evidence for regional exchange of raw materials, burials indicate nonspecific endogamy by anomalously frequent inherited dental traits (absence of maxillary lateral incisors), and variation of strontium isotope signatures reflect little residential mobility of either sex ( Alt et al. 2013 ). Close genetic relatives were common among co-burials in Aşkl and Boncuklu in Anatolia, as determined from ancient genomes in human remains ( Yaka et al. 2021 ).
KINSHIP IN EARLY NEOLITHIC CENTRAL EUROPE
As a proxy for residential mobility, isotope measurements in tooth enamel from archaeological burials in Neolithic and early Bronze Age Central Europe have repeatedly indicated female exogamy—local strontium and/or oxygen isotopic signatures are statistically more frequent among male than female skeletons. This pattern occurs earliest at Linearbandkeramik (LBK) cemeteries across Central Europe. Among LBK adult males, the co-association between local isotope signatures and distinctive stone adzes suggests patrilineage-related differential access to land resources ( Bentley et al. 2002 , 2012 ; Bickle & Whittle 2013 ). These adzes, found mainly with males, were used for woodwork, butchery, and hunting, whereas flaked tools, usually found with females, were used on animal skins and possibly fabrics—an inferred sexual division of activity that changed along the direction of the spread of farming ( Masclans et al. 2021 ). Importantly, patrilocality in Neolithic Central Europe does not necessitate gender inequality; in fact, female skeletons at these sites demonstrate arm strength (evidenced by humeral rigidity) comparable to that of today's “semi-elite rowers” ( Macintosh et al. 2017 ), and a diversity of material objects in their graves ( Masclans et al. 2021 ) suggest rigorous manual labor and a wider variety of activities than males.

At the early farming village of Çatalhöyük in Anatolia, from circa 7500 bce , mixed signals appear to reflect embryonic, complex changes in kinship over centuries of occupation. Famous for its female figurines, Çatalhöyük is where the plastered skull of a male was placed within the earlier burial of an old adult female ( Haddow & Knüsel 2017 ) ( Figure 2 ). The densely packed mud-brick architecture at Çatalhöyük would allow women a fluidity of access to their female kin. If this fluidity was matrilocal, then biodistances among females should cluster as a population but not within any household ( Corruccini & Shimada 2002 ). The kinship signals at Çatalhöyük are mixed. On one hand, heritable dental traits in 266 human remains indicate greater variability among females than males ( Larsen et al. 2015 , Pilloud & Larsen 2011 ). On the other hand, there is little spatial patterning across Çatalhöyük in the occurrence of burials under house floors ( Carleton et al. 2013 ) and a lack of sex differentiation in dietary isotopes in the human remains ( Larsen et al. 2015 ). Also, ancient genomic DNA evidence shows that children buried within or around the same houses were rarely close genetic relatives ( Yaka et al. 2021 ). Overall, genetic evidence indicates a diversity of kinship concepts in Neolithic Anatolia, perhaps as unilineal kinship developed.

Figure 2 Click to view


As agriculture dispersed into central Europe, unilineal kinship systems likely developed. Detailed study of prehistoric kinship in Europe has advanced with multiple lines of evidence—linguistic, genetic, bioarchaeological, and material—that point to patrilineal/patrilocal kinship in the Neolithic and Bronze Age (see the sidebar titled Kinship in Early Neolithic Central Europe). This hypothesis began to predominate in the late 1990s, when the geographic distribution of (female) mtDNA among modern European populations was discovered to be more dispersed than that of (male) Y-chromosome DNA ( Rasteiro et al. 2012 , Seielstad et al. 1998 ). Subsequently, cultural-linguistic phylogenetic analyses supported virilocal or patrilocal residence for proto-Indo-Europeans ( Fortunato 2011 , Fortunato & Jordan 2010 ). A pattern of female exogamy in Europe is evidenced from the late Neolithic to the early Bronze Age ( Bentley et al. 2002 , 2012 ; Knipper et al. 2017 ; Žegarac et al. 2021 ). Among 104 individuals from these eras buried in southern Germany, 10 parent–offspring pairs were detected by genome-wide aDNA. Nine of these offspring were adult males, consistent with patrilocal residence ( Mittnik et al. 2019 ). Men with close relatives were buried with weapons, unlike those without close relatives ( Mittnik et al. 2019 ). The teeth of high-status women, who were buried with ornate headdresses and jewelry, yielded nonlocal strontium and oxygen isotope signatures, whereas the poorer burials yielded local isotope signatures ( Mittnik et al. 2019 ).
Isotopic and aDNA evidence also appear to suggest small patrilocal families in Neolithic to Bronze Age Europe ( Bentley et al. 2008 , Haak et al. 2008 , Sjögren et al. 2020 ). Among Corded Ware graves at Eulau, where the men and children had local strontium isotope signatures (consistent with patrilocality), one multiple grave (Grave 99) contained a nonlocal female and a local male, genetically unrelated, closely entwined with two boys who shared the mtDNA and Y-chromosome DNA, respectively, of their apparent mother and father ( Haak et al. 2008 , Meyer et al. 2012 ). While these are general patterns, diversity and heterogeneity existed across the continent and within communities ( Bickle & Whittle 2013 , Bickle et al. 2011 , Frieman & Hofmann 2019 , Žegarac et al. 2021 ). Eulau Grave 98, for example, contained an adult woman with three children unrelated to her by mtDNA ( Meyer et al. 2012 ).
Unilineal kinship systems would likely have affected forms of houses and other structures. Small stand-alone dwellings can be more conducive to bilateral kinship or patriliny ( Ensor et al. 2017 , Porčić 2010 ), as the house can isolate the mother from her kin and lessen paternity uncertainty ( Anderson 2006 , Scelza 2011 , Strassmann et al. 2012 ). In the Central European Neolithic, stand-alone long houses introduced a built environment that, like the “history houses” of Çatalhöyük ( Hodder 2016 ), extended the collective continuity of place and lineage ( Bradley 2001 ). In Neolithic Poland, houses were built on ancestral LBK household sites 1,000 years older, and new burials were dug within the foundations of ancestral houses abandoned centuries earlier, as in a Brześć Kujawski grave dating to around 4400 bce dug into a pit of an older LBK house from around 5300 bce ( Pyzel 2019 ). This memory of household location suggests unilineal kinship. In the Yangshao Neolithic village of Banpo, in fifth millennium bce China, the spatial clustering of rectangular timber houses suggests planned development of the village by kinship lineages ( Gao & Lee 1993 ). Banpo has been interpreted as patrilineal ( Chen 2014 ) because underrepresentation of females in collective graves reveals a sex ratio biased against females ( Gao & Lee 1993 ). There was surely heterogeneity, however. At Liangwangcheng (circa 3000–2500 bce ), late Neolithic China, certain older females with high-status diets (inferred from isotopes) were buried distinctively with jade, pottery, and red pigment ( Dong et al. 2019 ).
Patrilocality is typically associated with resources that can be monopolized, like land and livestock, seemingly tilting the cultural evolutionary balance toward son-biased inheritance ( Ember 2011 , Scelza 2011 , Sear & Mace 2008 ). Early Neolithic Europe (see the sidebar titled Kinship in Early Neolithic Central Europe) was characterized by unequal access to productive land ( Bentley et al. 2012 ), as well as specialized subsistence ( Bentley et al. 2008 ). At the early Neolithic village of Vaihingen, Germany, certain groups (evidenced by distinctive pottery designs) had better access to resources, as indicated by plant remains ( Bogaard et al. 2011 ). aDNA and isotopic evidence indicate that heritable inequality and patriliny continued into the European Bronze Age and beyond ( Kohler et al. 2017 , Mittnik et al. 2019 , Simón et al. 2011 ).
In terms of heritable resources, keeping cattle may have helped to catalyze this transition in many Neolithic kinship systems ( Opie et al. 2014 ). As land and/or livestock became an inherited resource, property rights facilitated long memories of domestic space. This interpretation invokes a theory in human behavioral ecology that matriliny is more associated with horticulture and that cattle—the “enemy of matriliny”—facilitate patriliny (e.g., Holden et al. 2003 , Shenk et al. 2019 ). For example, cultural phylogenetics (see the sidebar titled Prehistoric Kinship Evolution and Cultural Phylogenetics) indicates that the dispersal of Bantu-speaking cattle herders of West Africa drove a kinship transition from matriliny to patriliny ( Holden & Mace 2003 ). In the original Bantu phylogenetic study ( Holden et al. 2003 ), the transition probabilities were that if a matrilineal group acquired livestock, it had a 27% chance of becoming patrilineal in the next phylogenetic step, whereas a patrilineal group herding livestock had little likelihood (0.2%) of reverting to matriliny. This study is supported by further evidence that livestock herding (especially cattle) was incompatible with matriliny in prehistory ( Opie et al. 2014 , Shenk et al. 2019 ).
PREHISTORIC KINSHIP EVOLUTION AND CULTURAL PHYLOGENETICS
Cultural phylogenetics combines language and ethnographic data to infer how specific cultural practices—such as kinship system and livestock herding—might have changed along the branches of a linguistic history. A distribution of plausible language trees—such as Indo-European, Austronesian, or Bantu—serves as a proxy for group descent, in order to test how other changes happened along the same branching history. Seminal studies situated on the Bantu language tree ( Holden & Mace 2003 , Holden et al. 2003 ) used the ethnographic record on livestock herding and marital residence systems (e.g., patrilineal Gabra camel herders, matrilineal Chewa horticulturalists). At each juncture of the language tree, a linguistic group could be in one of four states—matrilineal versus patrilineal and having livestock versus not—with each change modeled as a subsequent juncture (e.g., from matriliny and livestock to patriliny and livestock). After comparing thousands of simulation results to the observed societies at the branch tips, Bayesian phylogenetic analysis yields the set of transition likelihoods among the four states. Cultural phylogenetic techniques can reveal the likelihood of cultural states at the convergence, or root, of the tree, including the origins of major agricultural dispersals (e.g., Fortunato & Jordan 2010 , Moravec et al. 2018 ).

Applying similar phylogenetic comparative methods to Indo-European languages, Fortunato (2011) modeled cross-cultural data on three different residence strategies (e.g., Afghan and Bengali as virilocal, Russian and Spanish as neolocal), revealing that Proto-Indo-European-speaking societies were likely virilocal, though not strongly “patricentric.” These cultural phylogenetic results are broadly consistent with the archaeological, isotopic, and genetic evidence mentioned above. Interestingly, among human remains of late Neolithic and early Bronze Age Yamnaya pastoralists from the Pontic–Caspian steppes ( Haak et al. 2015 ), a male migration bias is indicated by aDNA (lower ratio of X-chromosomal to autosomal ancestry) in 16 late Neolithic/Bronze Age human remains, as compared to 20 Neolithic, pre-Yamnaya individuals ( Goldberg et al. 2017 ).
In Eurasia, as the transition to intensified agriculture brought higher population densities, unequal access to resources gave rise to inherited wealth ( Kohler et al. 2017 ). As agriculture intensified and the Neolithic landscape became more densely populated—albeit with “boom and bust” cycles ( Shennan et al. 2013 )—hereditary inequality may have fueled intergroup violence ( Schroeder et al. 2019 ). In small-scale societies, intergroup conflicts typically involve low fatality rates, and influential individuals, who can prevent disputes from escalating, gain status, wealth, and allies (e.g., Glowacki et al. 2020 ). In Neolithic Central Europe, intergroup violence appears episodic rather than endemic. In Central and Northern Europe, late Neolithic mass burial pits, which typically contain adult males and children but often relatively few adult females, appear to be the result of violent village raids in which women were taken as captives ( Meyer et al. 2015 , Wild et al. 2004 ). Among the remains of more than 30 people in the mass burial pit of Talheim in Germany, circa 5000 bce , the local group (in terms of strontium, carbon, and oxygen isotopes) included four adult men and eight children but no adult women ( Bentley et al. 2008 ). At Koszyce in Poland, circa 3,000 bce , among the human remains of 15 men, women, and children—killed by blows to the head, but carefully buried with grave goods and with four instances of mothers buried with their children—mtDNA analysis revealed six different maternal lineages, whereas all males carried the same Y-chromosome haplotype, suggesting patriliny ( Schroeder et al. 2019 ).
These findings are consistent with multiple lines of evidence (see the sidebar titled Kinship in Early Neolithic Central Europe) for patriliny in Neolithic Central Europe. By the late Neolithic, patrilocality appears to have emerged in multiple regions as a common rule of residence ( Ember 2011 ). There is significant diversity across Europe ( Bickle & Whittle 2013 , Masclans et al. 2021 ). Whereas Bronze Age burials in Central Europe exhibit differences between females and males ( Robb & Harris 2018 ), those of Bronze Age southeastern Europe suggest that females inherited status more readily than males did ( Žegarac et al. 2021 ). Demographic expansions of rice farmers from southern China ( Kutanan et al. 2019 , Oota et al. 2001 ), where patrilineal group households were common historically ( Fox 1983 , Mace 2013 ), may have spread patrilineal kinship.
The findings of patriliny in Neolithic and Bronze Age Europe should be viewed as an anomaly, in the sense of unique cross-cultural prehistory (especially given that there is less archaeological evidence from before the Neolithic). On other continents, agrarian kinship systems were more heterogeneous, as the ethnographic record reveals. North America, with a large diversity of indigenous kinship systems, was peopled between 23,000 and 12,000 years ago, with genetic ancestry from Upper Paleolithic Siberia before 25,000 years ago amid extended kinship networks on the order of several hundred people ( Sikora et al. 2019 ). Over the millennia of diversification following the peopling of the Americas, more successful exogamous kinship groups expanded through demographic advantage over smaller groups ( Ensor 2011 , Ensor et al. 2017 ). As a result, the ethnographic record of indigenous North American kinship shows exceptional diversity. It was not always the case in the New World that spouses are buried together in the same cemetery ( Ensor 2011 , Rodning 2011 ), and men in matrilineal societies might be returned to their natal cemetery for burial ( Ensor et al. 2017 ). Under Hopi matriliny, women usually resided in their natal group, but men also could retain rights to their natal descent group. In contrast, under Iroquois matriliny, men depended on their wives for rights to land ( Bentley et al. 2009 and references therein). This diversity is a reminder that prehistoric kinship was also a social construct ( Johnson & Paul 2016 ) that happens not to preserve as well as skeletons in the archaeological record.
Figure 2 Click to view

Section: THE RESILIENCE OF MATRILINY

The evidence for patriliny/patrilocality in Neolithic Eurasia and Africa could help explain why, thousands of years later, matriliny would be relatively uncommon, appearing in only one-sixth of societies in the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample, versus two-fifths patrilineal ( Shenk et al. 2019 ). One hypothesis is that the spread of agriculture catalyzed the loss of matrilineal cultures on multiple continents ( Holden et al. 2003 , Hrdy 2009 , Mace 2013 , Shenk et al. 2019 ). Major subsistence transitions likely facilitated kinship changes, including postmarital residence systems, ultimately because they changed the division of wealth, labor, and access mothers had to reproductive help from their female kin ( Hrdy 2009 , Mace 2013 , Sear & Mace 2008 , Shenk et al. 2019 ). Matrilocality tends to localize women's labor (and patrilocality to localize men's labor), and horticultural societies often promote female status as women inherit economic power such that the residence pattern lends itself to female solidarity ( Ember 2011 , Hage & Marck 2003 , Holden et al. 2003 , Marlowe 2004 , Martin & Voorhies 1975 , Miller et al. 2021 ).
We might therefore expect to see the heterogeneous persistence of matriliny beyond the origins of major Neolithic dispersals. The diversity of kinship in Pacific, Melanesian, and Island Southeast Asian societies illustrates the scope of possibility ( Brück 2021 , Miller et al. 2021 , Souvatzi 2017 ). Much of this Pacific diversity in kinship likely developed in the past 5,000 years, with each major language group having its own unique history ( Moravec et al. 2018 , Rácz et al. 2020 ). In Island Southeast Asia, linguistic ( Hage & Marck 2003 ) and cultural phylogenetic evidence (see the sidebar titled Prehistoric Kinship Evolution and Cultural Phylogenetics) suggests that the initial Austronesian dispersal across the western Pacific Ocean originated with matrilineal groups ( Jordan et al. 2009 ). Jordan et al. (2009) used the Austronesian language phylogeny of 400 Austronesian languages, based on 210 cognate words with an estimated root age of 5800–4750 bp , as the ancestral pathway on which to predict the ethnographic data on marital residence in 135 regional societies. In the Bayesian phylogenetic analysis, Western Proto-Malayo-Polynesian, the oldest subbranch of Austronesian, was very likely to have originated among matrilocal societies ( Jordan et al. 2009 ). After the Austronesian dispersal, postmarital residence systems in Island Southeast Asia were apparently fluid, transitioning back and forth between states on a timescale of centuries (e.g., Headland & Reid 1989 ).
In coastal societies, prolonged male absence for fishing, trade, or long-distance voyaging may favor daughter-biased parental investment and, hence, matrilocal residence and matrilineal descent ( Ember 2011 , Hage & Marck 2003 , Jordan et al. 2009 ). Maritime trade could also increase the economic value of craft specialization by women. In coastal/deltaic sites of Mainland Southeast Asia, from the second to first millennium bce , strontium isotope signatures in archaeological teeth tended to vary more among males than females, consistent with matrilocality, but that was not generally the pattern at inland sites of the region ( Bentley et al. 2021 ). Ancient matriliny may have persisted among certain descendant groups in Mainland Southeast Asia, as evidenced by greater diversity of Y-chromosome haplotypes compared with mtDNA haplotypes ( Hamilton et al. 2005 , Oota et al. 2001 ).
Because kinship-based wealth inheritance correlates with reproductive success ( Borgerhoff Mulder et al. 2009 , Kohler et al. 2017 , Mace 2008 ), matrilineal descent could have been resilient where there were high levels of paternity uncertainty—high levels of extrapair paternity can be common in some societies ( Scelza et al. 2020 , Sear 2021 )—hence an incentive to invest in daughters ( Holden et al. 2003 , Mattison et al. 2016 ). In Sweden, there is evidence that residential mobility patterns shifted toward a more matrifocal, or at least less patrilocal, society leading up to the Viking Age. Among 141 archaeological burials from Sweden, dating between approximately 3400–2600 and 2200–1100 cal bce , males tended to exhibit local strontium ratios during the Neolithic, but by the Bronze Age it was the females who had the most (semi)local signatures ( Blank et al. 2021 ). These shifts invite a reevaluation of female status and kinship in Iron Age European societies, such as the potentially matrifocal groups of the Early European Iron Age and the Celtic Vix burial ( Pope 2022 ). Detailed DNA and isotopic evidence reveal that by the late Neolithic and early Bronze Age, high-status adult women originated from elsewhere than those in the poorer burials ( Mittnik et al. 2019 ).
In boat burials at Salme in Estonia, circa 750 ce , where 41 male victims of violent death were buried with high-status weaponry, strontium isotope signatures suggest the men came from Sweden, while ancient genomic DNA analysis indicates they were mainly closely related kin, including four brothers buried side by side ( Margaryan et al. 2020 and references therein). Among the Scandinavian Vikings, who generally shared genetic ancestry with Bronze Age Europeans ( Margaryan et al. 2020 ), women held high-status roles, including as warriors ( Jarman 2021 ). The spectacular Viking ship burial at Oseberg, around 834 ce , contained two elderly women in a ship made of riveted strakes of oak, fitted for 30 rowers, along with ornate golden carved heads, tapestries, sledges, beds, a wagon, horses, dogs, cows, kitchen wares, and ship and farm equipment ( Jarman 2021 ). At Solør, Norway, a 19-year-old female, likely killed by a battle wound to the head, was buried with a sword, spear, battle axe, and arrows. At the Viking Age market village of Birka, a 30-year-old warrior (known as Bj 581)—conspicuously buried with a full suite of iron weapons, gaming pieces, and the imported silver cap tassels of a leader—was recently identified as female by aDNA (99.9% X chromosome) and osteology of the pelvis ( Heenstierna-Jonson et al. 2017 ). Since the 1889 excavation of this warrior, she had been assumed to be male. The determination that Bj 581 was female has sparked a reassessment of women in Viking society, as well as of gendered roles in warfare more generally ( Moen & Walsh 2021 ).

Section: EARLY STATES, BRIEFLY

The Viking and Pacific societies are examples of how globalized maritime interaction could transform kinship. While the details of early states are beyond the scope of this review, complex societies tend to be where political power is obtained through networks outside kinship bonds, favoring neolocality and the investment by elite parents in the education and/or status of their children, as opposed to the use of children as labor assets (e.g., Mace 2008 ). At the elite level, kinship may continue to regulate interpolity power relations and long-distance exchange of prestige items ( Ensor 2011 ). As wealth inequality increased by orders of magnitude from Neolithic levels through intergenerational wealth transmission ( Borgerhoff Mulder et al. 2009 , Kohler et al. 2017 ), authority came to be based on territory, ownership versus labor, and enforced hierarchy, rather than on kinship ( Ames 2008 , Leppard 2019 ). As elites emerged, their kin-based authority facilitated the redistribution of resources that would have limited the scale of wealth inequality ( Leppard 2019 , Smith et al. 2010 ). In complex chiefdoms with storable surplus, wealth and political power were accumulated through extended kin networks ( Johnson & Earle 2000 ). As early state societies scaled up further, however, as a consequence of trade and institutionalized inequality, other pathways to power came to replace kinship, including enforced hierarchy, division of labor, and authority based on territory ( Ames 2008 , Johnson & Earle 2000 ).
Bioarchaeology is increasingly used as a means to study prehistoric kinship from human remains, with major recent developments in aDNA analysis (e.g., Schroeder et al. 2019 , Teschler-Nicola et al. 2020 ) and assessment of sex-specific mobility using isotopic analysis (e.g., Bentley et al. 2002 , Knipper et al. 2017 , Sjögren et al. 2020 ). Combined with indicators of genetic relatedness—heritable dental traits or aDNA—the isotopic differences within Neolithic communities can suggest different hereditary specializations, such as stock herders ( Bentley et al. 2008 , Schroeder et al. 2019 ). These methods add to the established tool kit of genetic phylogeography of contemporary populations (e.g., Kutanan et al. 2019 , Oota et al. 2001 , Rasteiro et al. 2012 ) and heritable phenotypic traits of sexed skeletons, including more than 100 heritable dental traits ( Alt et al. 2013 , Corruccini & Shimada 2002 , Huffer et al. 2022 , Meyer et al. 2012 , Pilloud & Larsen 2011 ). In such measures from a sample of sexed skeletons, a general expectation is that the more mobile sex will exhibit lower intersite but greater intrasite variation ( Alt et al. 2013 ), often with larger differences for patrilocal versus matrilocal populations ( Ensor et al. 2017 , Hamilton et al. 2005 ). Bilateral or neolocal kinship systems would have spouses buried in the same cemetery but also few expected differences between sexes in terms of mobility or within-group biodistances ( Ensor et al. 2017 ).
These are very general expectations, not human universals. Numerous archaeologists have pushed back on the conflation of kinship and genetic relatedness by pointing to the great variety in gender norms and in cultural concepts of relatedness and kinship ( Brück 2021 , Frieman & Hofmann 2019 , Masclans et al. 2021 , Robb & Harris 2018 ). They caution against drawing heteronormative conclusions—being too quick to identify nuclear families (e.g., Sear 2021 , Simón et al. 2011 ) or calling a prehistoric society “patriarchal”—as a result of Western biases ( Ensor 2021 , Souvatzi 2017 ). As mentioned above, aDNA may soon enable direct study of intersex individuals from human remains, or perhaps even indicate cases where a single individual possessed two sets of DNA with different sex development ( James et al. 2011 ). In any case, as Ensor (2021 , p. 241) points out, “geneticists should not confuse kinship (the subject) with genetic relationships (their materials).”
Overall, human behavioral ecology and neuroscience offer a framework for translating new forms of evidence—from aDNA, isotopes, and bioarchaeology, together with cultural phylogenetics leveraging cross-cultural databases [e.g., the Database of Places, Languages, Culture and Environment ( https://d-place.org ) and the Human Relations Area Files ( https://hraf.yale.edu )]—into a more sophisticated study of prehistoric kinship. These methods have so far only touched upon the complexities of human kinship systems, including the underresearched roles of intersex individuals in the past; underresearched ancient societies in South America, Africa, and Asia; and the undeniable diversity of prehistoric kinship systems beyond the more easily defined unilineal categories. Perhaps the most difficult question to resolve is the role of practical (i.e., nonbiological) kinship in the past, as living human relationships do not necessarily leave traces in DNA, isotopes, or the human brain. Rising to the challenge, anthropologists have been insightful and productive in predicting what patterns practical kinship might leave in archaeological burials ( Alt et al. 2013 , Ensor et al. 2017 , Johnson & Paul 2016 , Larsen et al. 2019 ), settlement patterns ( Ember 2011 , Souvatzi 2017 ), and material culture ( Masclans et al. 2021 , Robb & Harris 2018 ). The future is promising; in a digital era when many question the nature of social relationships, the confluence of new theory and evidence on prehistoric kinship and its evolution offers much-needed perspective on what it has meant to be human.
Bioarchaeology is increasingly used as a means to study prehistoric kinship from human remains, with major recent developments in aDNA analysis (e.g., Schroeder et al. 2019 , Teschler-Nicola et al. 2020 ) and assessment of sex-specific mobility using isotopic analysis (e.g., Bentley et al. 2002 , Knipper et al. 2017 , Sjögren et al. 2020 ). Combined with indicators of genetic relatedness—heritable dental traits or aDNA—the isotopic differences within Neolithic communities can suggest different hereditary specializations, such as stock herders ( Bentley et al. 2008 , Schroeder et al. 2019 ). These methods add to the established tool kit of genetic phylogeography of contemporary populations (e.g., Kutanan et al. 2019 , Oota et al. 2001 , Rasteiro et al. 2012 ) and heritable phenotypic traits of sexed skeletons, including more than 100 heritable dental traits ( Alt et al. 2013 , Corruccini & Shimada 2002 , Huffer et al. 2022 , Meyer et al. 2012 , Pilloud & Larsen 2011 ). In such measures from a sample of sexed skeletons, a general expectation is that the more mobile sex will exhibit lower intersite but greater intrasite variation ( Alt et al. 2013 ), often with larger differences for patrilocal versus matrilocal populations ( Ensor et al. 2017 , Hamilton et al. 2005 ). Bilateral or neolocal kinship systems would have spouses buried in the same cemetery but also few expected differences between sexes in terms of mobility or within-group biodistances ( Ensor et al. 2017 ).
These are very general expectations, not human universals. Numerous archaeologists have pushed back on the conflation of kinship and genetic relatedness by pointing to the great variety in gender norms and in cultural concepts of relatedness and kinship ( Brück 2021 , Frieman & Hofmann 2019 , Masclans et al. 2021 , Robb & Harris 2018 ). They caution against drawing heteronormative conclusions—being too quick to identify nuclear families (e.g., Sear 2021 , Simón et al. 2011 ) or calling a prehistoric society “patriarchal”—as a result of Western biases ( Ensor 2021 , Souvatzi 2017 ). As mentioned above, aDNA may soon enable direct study of intersex individuals from human remains, or perhaps even indicate cases where a single individual possessed two sets of DNA with different sex development ( James et al. 2011 ). In any case, as Ensor (2021 , p. 241) points out, “geneticists should not confuse kinship (the subject) with genetic relationships (their materials).”
Overall, human behavioral ecology and neuroscience offer a framework for translating new forms of evidence—from aDNA, isotopes, and bioarchaeology, together with cultural phylogenetics leveraging cross-cultural databases [e.g., the Database of Places, Languages, Culture and Environment ( https://d-place.org ) and the Human Relations Area Files ( https://hraf.yale.edu )]—into a more sophisticated study of prehistoric kinship. These methods have so far only touched upon the complexities of human kinship systems, including the underresearched roles of intersex individuals in the past; underresearched ancient societies in South America, Africa, and Asia; and the undeniable diversity of prehistoric kinship systems beyond the more easily defined unilineal categories. Perhaps the most difficult question to resolve is the role of practical (i.e., nonbiological) kinship in the past, as living human relationships do not necessarily leave traces in DNA, isotopes, or the human brain. Rising to the challenge, anthropologists have been insightful and productive in predicting what patterns practical kinship might leave in archaeological burials ( Alt et al. 2013 , Ensor et al. 2017 , Johnson & Paul 2016 , Larsen et al. 2019 ), settlement patterns ( Ember 2011 , Souvatzi 2017 ), and material culture ( Masclans et al. 2021 , Robb & Harris 2018 ). The future is promising; in a digital era when many question the nature of social relationships, the confluence of new theory and evidence on prehistoric kinship and its evolution offers much-needed perspective on what it has meant to be human.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I am very grateful to Rebecca Sear, Penny Bickle, and Jamie Tehrani for helpful comments and insights.

Section: literature cited

