Title: Anthropology and Psychoanalysis: The Looping Effects of Persons and Social Worlds


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

This article reviews work in anthropology over the last 30 years that has been informed by psychoanalysis, much of it drawing on contemporary schools of psychoanalytic thought that further develop or even directly challenge some of the fundamental assumptions of the original Freudian corpus. It assumes that what happens at the margins or horizons of human consciousness, as a body of work, should be closely examined and included in anthropological theorizing rather than ignored or downplayed, and it examines how such states of consciousness both affect and are affected by entanglements with the world. Focal topics of the review include work on dreams, fantasies, and imaginal thought; loss and melancholia; aspects of emotional suffering, distress, and alienation; the effects of transference and countertransference on fieldwork; the sense of being haunted by personal and social injustices; and how the contingencies of self-awareness affect the development of ethics and morality.

Section: INTRODUCTION

It has been more than 30 years since the Annual Review of Anthropology last published a review of work in anthropology that has been informed by psychoanalysis (see Paul 1989 ). There are likely several reasons for this gap. One is that anthropology is a vast discipline with many different bodies of work competing for attention and worthy of review and evaluation. Another is that in many parts of the academy, anthropology and psychoanalysis are still thought of as two entirely separate enterprises, the former having to do with the social, political, cultural, economic, gendered, racial, and biological factors that shape and constrain people's actual behavior in the world, and the latter having to do with what are often thought of as the relatively private desires and imaginative wishes and fantasies of individual people. Of course, desires, fantasies, and imaginative thought are themselves significant if underappreciated and understudied types of human behavior that affect and are affected by social engagements of all types, yet they are nevertheless often thought of as distinct from the kind of behaviors most anthropologists study.
The long hiatus might also be related to the ambivalence that some anthropologists still feel toward psychoanalysis, as Groark (2019) discusses in his recent article in Current Anthropology . Groark notes that while a host of anthropologists dating back to Boas have been intrigued with and have utilized many aspects of psychoanalytic thinking, especially its more clinically focused observations and descriptions, many have also remained turned off by the kind of psychoanalytically inspired sociological theorizing that either exaggerated the universality of certain psychological dispositions or overemphasized the psychological differences between groups of people while underemphasizing the psychological variations within them.
In any case, work in psychoanalytically informed anthropology has indeed continued over these past 30 years, much of it drawing on contemporary schools of psychoanalytic thought that further refine and develop or even directly challenge some of the fundamental assumptions of the original Freudian corpus. For example, rather than presume that other people and objects in the phenomenal field gain their emotional significance and meaning for subjects to the extent that they help these subjects satisfy some of their most important self-contained and inherent wishes and desires, many “relational” psychoanalysts (see especially Mitchell 1988 , 2000 ) presume the reverse. For these relational psychoanalysts, it is emotional attachments and identifications with other people and meanings, intersubjective fusions and interrelationships of one with others, that help constitute the very wishes and desires, whether problematic or not, that subjects experience ( Hollan 2012 )—a conceptual rendering that readily lends itself to the social and relational focus of much contemporary anthropological research. These newer schools of psychoanalytic thought, including Lacanian approaches of various kinds, are well represented in the psychoanalytically informed anthropological research of the last 30 years and in the 3 special issues of the journal Ethos during this period that have focused specifically on psychoanalysis ( Willen & Seeman 2012a , 1 Gammeltoft & Segal 2016a 2 ) or which have been inspired by such core psychoanalytic concepts as trauma and the uncanny ( Good & Rahimi 2019 3 ).
My review here cannot hope to include all the anthropological work over the last 30 years that has been informed in some way by psychoanalysis or that has tried to address explicitly the relationship between anthropology and psychoanalysis ( Obeyesekere 1990 , Paul 1990 , Herdt & Stoller 1990 , Ewing 1992 , Heald & Deluz 1994 , Johnson & Price-Williams 1996 , Levine & Sharma 1997 , Chodorow 1999 , Weiner 1999 , Molino 2004 , Mimica 2006 , Moore 2007 , Levine 2010 , Corin 2012 , Csordas 2012 , Jackson 2012 , Throop 2012 , Willen & Seeman 2012a , Denham 2014 , Schechter 2014 , Smadja 2015 , Gammeltoft & Segal 2016a ). Rather, I attempt only to identify some major themes or topics that have emerged from all this work using a smaller number of studies to exemplify these larger themes. However, all the work I review here attempts, in one way or another, to capture or gesture toward the kinds of human experiences and behaviors to which Freud and many other psychoanalysts of various schools have drawn our attention: the vagaries and dynamics of unconscious or preconscious mental, emotional, and imaginative activity; defensive maneuvers to maintain self-esteem and identity; the ways in which social experiences become internalized by people and, in turn, how people externalize and project aspects of their own emotions and perceptions onto the social world; and how past emotional experiences affect present and future ones and, in turn, how the present moment reconfigures memories and recollections of the past. As Gammeltoft & Segal (2016b) suggest, the point is to “illustrate how anthropological analysis can be enriched by a psychoanalytically attuned attention to events that unfold at the margins of individual consciousness and at the edges of collective life; to the socially submerged and suppressed” (p. 406).
This review covers a number of these understudied or ignored aspects of human experience and how they affect and are affected by social and relational entanglements, including work on dreams, fantasies, and imaginal thought; loss and melancholia; aspects of emotional suffering, distress, and alienation; the effects of transference and countertransference on fieldwork; the sense of being haunted by personal and social injustices; and how the contingencies of self-awareness affect the development of ethics and morality.

Section: DREAMS, FANTASIES, AND IMAGINAL THOUGHT

All people use imagination and imaginal thought and representations to dream at night and to daydream and to fantasize about themselves and the world around them. However, such aspects of human experience are mentioned only rarely in most anthropological research and ethnographies, despite the fact that such thought and representation are highly valued by many of the social, cultural, and religious groups that anthropologists study. The limited work that has been done on such topics is often informed by Freud's insight in The Interpretation of Dreams that imaginal forms of consciousness may both reveal and conceal important aspects of how people relate to their social worlds ( Ewing 2006 ), even if only to take issue with that insight or to further refine it in some way ( Lohmann 2003 ; Mageo 2003 , 2011 ; Stewart 2004 , 2017 ; Bulkeley 2008 ; Mittermaier 2011 ; Stevenson 2014 ; Pandolfo 2018 ; Mageo & Sheriff 2021 ).
Much of the more recent work on dreams and dreaming per se, for example, demonstrates that dreams are about much more than the disguised fulfillment of wishes related to childhood and that they cannot be properly understood or appreciated apart from the social, cultural, historical, and political contexts in which they are always deeply entangled. The influence of the social context on dreaming is most obvious with regard to the manifest content of dream images and scenarios, such content being more directly revealing of a dreamer's entanglements with the social world that Freud assumed in The Interpretation of Dreams ( Hollan 2003b , 2004a , 2005 , 2008 , 2014 , 2017 ). Content may vary impressively from conversations with God or other religious figures or spiritual beings ( Hollan & Wellenkamp 1994 , 1996 ; Hollan 1995 , 2014 ; Lohmann 2003 , 2021 ; Groark 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2013 , 2017 ; Mittermaier 2011 , 2021 ) to cultural and historical anxieties of various kinds ( Stewart 2017 , Newsom 2021 , Sheriff 2021b ) to images of social dislocation and discrimination ( Mageo 2011 , 2021 ; Bulkeley 2021 ). Yet beyond this variation in manifest content, social context also directly affects how dreams are categorized, used, expressed, and actually experienced by people, depending on whether the dreams are considered nonsense, a prophetic message, social gnosis, or something else. While some groups of people have been taking dreams seriously for hundreds of years and have developed sophisticated typologies of dreaming phenomenology and how it may or may not be related to waking life and experience ( Mittermaier 2011 , 2021 ; Bulkeley 2021 ; Groark 2021 ; Knauft 2021 ), all the recent research on dreams suggests that social and cultural ideas about dreams directly shape experiences of dreaming, making dreams more or less central to a way of life and even affecting how sharp or fuzzy the boundary between dreaming and waking states is perceived and experienced to be ( Thompson 2015 , Knauft 2021 ).
Equally significant, however, are the ways in which dreaming experiences and the imaginative processes on which they draw feed back into social and cultural worlds ( Obeyesekere 1981 , 1990 ), sometimes validating and reproducing those worlds—as when dreams of religious or spiritual figures validate the very existence of those figures and the values or practices they represent ( Lohmann 2003 , 2021 ; Groark 2009 ; Stewart 2017 ; Knauft 2021 ; Mittermaier 2021 ), sometimes imaginatively playing with and transforming elements of those worlds ( Bulkeley 2021 ) and sometimes exposing those worlds’ contradictions, ironies, inconsistencies, and impending crises ( Lear 2006 ; Mageo 2011 , 2021 ; Stevenson 2014 ; Newsom 2021 ; Sheriff 2021b ), among other things. By emphasizing the feedback loops between dreaming and social and cultural contexts, current ethnographic research on dreaming illuminates some of “the processes by which individuals, imaginative capacities, and dynamic cultures cocreate the human world” ( Sheriff 2021a , p. 23).
The imaginative processes involved in dreaming suggest that dreams rarely, if ever, merely reflect or directly mirror the social worlds with which they are entangled. Rather, dreamers engage, parse, image, and reassemble aspects of their social and experiential worlds, including time and memory, in ways that are often highly ambiguous ( Hollan 2017 ). Some of these imaginal transformations resemble quite closely those identified by Freud in The Interpretation of Dreams , including condensation in images and scenes and the telescoping of time, place, emotion, and experience. Although evidence strongly indicates that Freud was correct in proposing that the ambiguity of dream images may be used at times to conceal troubling thoughts and feelings from self-consciousness ( Groark 2009 , 2017 ; Denham 2020 ), there is also reason to believe that such ambiguity may also arise from the processes of dream and imaginal formation themselves ( Stevenson 2014 , Pandolfo 2018 ), through mimesis ( Mageo 2021 ), memory consolidation ( Lohmann 2021 ), and play ( Bulkeley 2021 ), among other possibilities.
It is the very density, hallucinatory vividness, and ambiguity of dreams and other forms of imaginal thought, allowing them to hold and express a variety of sometimes contradictory or ambivalent thoughts, feelings, and sensations, that make them attractive and mesmerizing to people at times. Such imaginal forms of thought and communication allow us to know things in different ways, consciously and less than consciously, and to know and not know things at the same time. Although resisting most conventional forms of anthropological analysis, imaginal forms gesture toward important aspects of human experience and modes of attunement to the world beyond words and other forms of discursive thought, including doubt, hesitancy, uncertainty, and even death and nonexistence. As Stevenson reminds us, people “do not always want the truth in the form of facts or information; we often want it in the form of an image. What we want, perhaps, is the opacity of an image that can match the density of our feelings. We want something to hold us” ( Stevenson 2014 , p. 13). Recognizing the hold that images can have for people, Pandolfo (2018) analyzes the paintings and drawings of a Moroccan man who suffers periodic psychotic episodes. For Ilyas, psychosis “meant being seized and becoming undone” ( Pandolfo 2018 , p. 150). His paintings become the memory traces or imprints of such seizures and undoings. They give Ilyas an imaginal “space that could become the stage of a confrontation in which his very existence was at stake” but in which he also becomes “the subject of his madness” ( Pandolfo 2018 , p. 151), thus allowing him the possibility of dialogue with his own symptoms and dysphoria.
Imaginal forms of thought and communication also occur in fantasies, daydreams, and reverie, though only a handful have answered Obeyesekere's (1981) call in Medusa's Hair: An Essay on Personal Symbols and Religious Experience for a comparative study of the roles that cultures, technologies, and institutions play in articulating, suppressing, exploiting, or denying human fantasies and imaginative thought ( Hollan 2022a ). Sangren (2013) analyzes Chinese patriarchy as in part an “instituted fantasy” in which the valorization of ancestor worship and filial piety veils the role of women as the primary producers and reproducers of the family in the real world and of sons as agents or protagonists in filial action. Although patrilineal fantasies are ultimately unrealizable, they nevertheless animate Chinese family life and are an important constituent of Chinese realities. Along similar lines, Gammeltoft (2016) discusses how some Vietnamese women use state-supported fantasies of “the happy family” to maintain an illusion of domestic tranquility and belonging, despite their positioning as outsiders within their husbands’ families and their not uncommon experiences of living with husbands who can be disloyal, cruel, and abusive. Such fantasies—focusing on shared joys, intense love of children, and myriads forms of mutual care—undergird more conscious efforts to avoid shaming and to maintain a proper “face” in family and community affairs. Relatedly, Borneman (2011) recommends receptiveness to interlocutors’ daydreams and states of reverie, in particular, to gain a better understanding of their wishes and anxieties, which in the case of some of his Syrian interlocutors included transgressions of genealogical and gender orders, the excitement of Internet pornography, and the seductions of modern lifestyles.

Section: MELANCHOLIC SUBJECTS

“Mourning and Melancholia” is often referenced as the place where Freud (1917) makes the distinction between normal mourning processes, those that come to a natural end as attachment to an object that has been lost diminishes and attachment to new objects begin, and melancholia, the state in which mourning is ceaseless because a person's attachment to a lost object is not withdrawn but rather is imaginatively maintained through the process of identification, in which aspects of the lost object are taken into the self. Freud originally thought of melancholia as mostly a pathological state because it emerges from an ambivalent stance toward the lost object and is often characterized by harsh self-criticism, depressive affect, and loss of interest in the world. In later work, however, Freud (1960) came to realize that identification with lost objects was more common than he and other psychoanalysts had first imagined and that such sedimented losses and accretions into self-awareness were important aspects of character formation and development.
Although Freud's original paper has been criticized by anthropologists and others for the sharp distinction drawn between normal and abnormal mourning and for the implication of a relatively straightforward stepped process to the resolution of normal grief ( Brison & Leavitt 1995 ), more recent work has underscored and further developed a part of the original paper that is often overlooked: Freud's observation that melancholia may result not only from the loss of a person, but from “the loss of some abstraction which has taken the place of one, such as one's country, liberty, ideal, and so on” ( Freud 1917 , p. 243). Garcia (2010) has used this observation to discuss how dispossessions of land, culture, and livelihoods stretching back hundreds of years have played into the pervasive sense of loss experienced by many of the Hispano heroin users she worked with in northern New Mexico and why, beyond the institutional structures of drug courts and rehabilitation programs, they so often sense these losses to be inalterable and without end. In contrast to Freud, though, Garcia suggests that the melancholic refusal of some of her subjects to abandon the past, including its many personal, historical, and material losses, may be enacted as an ethical commitment to acknowledge the losses of the past and to watch over them rather than as a problem to be overcome. As she puts it, “Seeing and experiencing the past as painful—and to not appropriate, forget, or sublimate this pain for other purposes—is likewise a way of living in the world. In other words, there is meaning in melancholia, meaning in wounds that haven't healed, perhaps may never heal” ( Garcia 2010 , p. 110).
Segal (2016) also uses the observation that melancholia may result from the loss of an “abstraction,” but, in her case, to identify a change in Palestinian political mood from the time of the first Intifada from 1987 to 1993 to that of the second uprising, roughly 10 years later. During the earlier period, passionate commitment to the goal of achieving statehood allowed most Palestinians to endure personal and collective sacrifices under the Israeli occupation with fortitude and hopefulness. But when the second Intifada led to a political stalemate and even more conflict, some people became ambivalent about the sacrifices being made for statehood, ambivalence being a key variable in the development of melancholia according to Freud. On the one hand, many found that they could not easily give up the public fight for political recognition and statehood, but on the other hand, they no longer had confidence that they could or would eventually win the fight or that the fight was worth the emotional and material price they were paying. This ambivalent attachment to the goal of statehood “keeps its adherents in a repetitive temporal fold from which they are unable to escape, because they are obliged and compelled to keep fighting for a state that does not seem to materialize” ( Segal 2016 , p. 464)—a situation that Segal characterizes as melancholic.
Inner recognition that an ideal may never be obtainable also plays a part in the “racial melancholia” described and analyzed by Eng & Han (2019) in their book on the social and psychic lives of Asian Americans. Although Eng, a professor of English, and Han, a psychotherapist, are not anthropologists, much like any psychological or psychoanalytic anthropologist, they are interested in how subjectivities are affected by social experiences and vice versa and, in their case, especially in how Asian Americans are affected by contemporary American concepts and practices of race that privilege ideals of whiteness. On the basis of extended case studies of Asian American students and psychotherapy clients, Eng & Han argue that though Asian Americans are often praised and stereotyped as being the “model minority,” their full incorporation into U.S. society is blocked by a system of race that still privileges whiteness as an ideal, thereby relegating nonwhites and people of color, including Asian Americans, to something that is less than the ideal. It is the irresolution of this racial process that places Asian American assimilation into a melancholic framework:
[M]elancholia describes an unresolved process that usefully describe[s] the compromised immigration and assimilation of Asian Americans into the national fabric. The suspended assimilation, the inability to blend into the American melting pot, suggests that for Asian Americans ideals of whiteness are perpetually strained—continually estranged. They remain at an unattainable distance, at once a compelling fantasy and a lost ideal. ( Eng & Han 2019 , p. 36)


Section: EXPLORATIONS OF IDENTITY, SUBJECTIVITY, AND EMOTIONAL AND BODILY DISTRESS

A cornerstone of psychoanalytic theory is that human consciousness is divided into parts that are more or less conscious and that these various parts may come into conflict with one another ( Hollan 2000 ). Although this observation has been used by scholars such as Spiro (1984 , 1987 ) and Obeyesekere (1981 , 1990 ) to analyze how people may use widely shared symbols, beliefs, or institutions to express, repress, sublimate, rationalize, or resolve wishes, fears, or desires that they may have at an unconscious level, the notion of divided consciousness has also been helpful to anthropologists examining periods of social and cultural hybridity, especially in postcolonial contexts ( Good et al. 2008 ), and their impact on identity and subjectivity. Ewing (1997) uses Lacanian psychoanalysis in particular—with its ideas of a decentered subject split by the entry into language and a symbolic order and alienated from its own desire—to help identify a reflexive, critical consciousness in Pakistani Sufi traditions that emerges not as a unique product of modernity or the capitalist system per se, as often suggested, but rather from the attempt to think through and reconcile the existence of a variety of competing discourses within Sufism and between Sufism and other traditions and ideologies. Along similar lines, Lipset (2017) argues that the alienation he found among many Murik men in the lower Sepik River area of New Guinea not only was due to their exposure to modernity and its colonial and postcolonial developments, but also was related to a Lacanian-like alienation from desire and the cultural world more generally, including the men's own indigenous culture. This dual alienation, as he refers to it, having both debilitating and productive consequences for men, is amplified by a Bakhtinian dialogism among a variety of indigenous and modern “voices,” struggling with and against each other and giving “rise to unpredictable, complicated chains of masculine signification” ( Lipset 2017 , p. 5).
Chiovenda (2019 , 2020 ) highlights a different type of divided self in his study of masculinity in contemporary Afghanistan. He examines how a group of Pashtun men coming of age in a context of nearly continuous conflict and violence variously experience and attempt to negotiate relatively rigid cultural expectations and tenets that they comport themselves as “strong,” potentially aggressive males, especially when reacting to perceived threat or insult. Despite their apparent outward conformity to many of these expectations, Chiovenda shows, through the use of open-ended, psychodynamically oriented interviews, that many of the men experience inner conflict and ambivalence about their displays of heteronormative masculinity, including the active avoidance of such displays when possible, while others imagine changing or completely escaping such norms through immigration or in other ways.
Since Freud's early work on hysteria, psychoanalysts of all schools have also assumed that emotions, physical and psychological symptoms of various kinds, and alternating states of consciousness, including sometimes dramatic changes in consciousness, may carry meanings for the people manifesting these states, and for the rest of us. This is true even when those meanings may be highly condensed, obscure, and less than conscious, and even when those meanings do not always lead to insight or wisdom ( Lear 2017 ). Many psychoanalysts also assume that these alternating states of bodily and emotional awareness may be illuminating of human consciousness and its potentialities and vulnerabilities more generally, even if these states may lead to great suffering at times. This perspective remains attractive to anthropologists who share with psychoanalysts the interest in making unfamiliar aspects of human behavior more comprehensible, especially behavior that might otherwise evoke fear, dread, bafflement, pathologizing, condemnation, or worse.
In Knot of the Soul: Madness, Psychoanalysis, Islam , Pandolfo (2018) uses Freud and Lacan as well as the teachings of a Qur'anic scholar and therapist to illuminate formations of madness and despair in contemporary Morocco. In doing so, she explores apparent homologies between psychoanalysis and Islamic traditions, in particular the resonances between “the problematic of the internal otherness of desire in Islamic ethical-medical practices” and “Lacan's reflection on the ethics of psychoanalysis as a mode of engagement with the drive and its surplus enjoyment ( jouissance ), and as an ‘art of the limit,’ akin to the mystical play of courtly love” ( Pandolfo 2018 , p. 12). Likewise, Rahimi draws on Lacan in his studies of mental illness, hauntology, and political subjectivity in contemporary Turkey ( Rahimi 2015 , 2019 , 2021 ). Using notions of “object cause of desire” and the primacy of lack as a prerequisite to the establishment of desire, among other Lacanian concepts, Rahimi examines how the entanglements of politics, culture, economics, gender, and desire structure the development of subjectivity and consciousness, and also how such entanglements may unravel into states of uncanniness, disorder, and confusion. He argues that one can find meanings in these interplays of desire and social world, even if those meanings may become highly idiosyncratic at times, as in schizophrenia and other psychotic states. As a further example, Good (2012) reports the case of Anto, a young Javanese man whose brief psychotic episode at 19 remained puzzling until it was recognized by Good's Indonesian colleague that for many years, he had been missing his father, who abandoned the family when Anto was 4 years old and about whom Anto's mother had refused to speak. With the recognition of unresolved grief over a lost father, which had remained largely unspoken and expressed only in veiled ways, many of Anto's behaviors during his psychotic episode—such as his aggravated anger toward his mother and his ongoing struggles with indecisiveness and lack of self-confidence—became less puzzling and more comprehensible.
Perhaps the best evidence that psychoanalytic listening and perspectives can help uncover meanings in even very disordered states of consciousness and psychosis comes from the law professor and psychoanalyst, Elyn Saks. In Saks's (2007) autoethnography of her own lifelong struggles with psychosis and schizophrenia, The Center Cannot Hold , Saks credits the radical tolerance and empathy that psychoanalysis promotes by allowing her to begin to make sense of some of her own delusions and fantasies. It did so, in part, she suggests, by allowing her to talk openly and think about, without fear or judgment, any of the feelings or experiences she might be having, however odd, and by helping her to understand the processes through which she was incorporating aspects of the social world into her own consciousness, while also projecting some of her own thoughts and feelings into the world around her.

Section: TRANSFERENCE AND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE IN FIELDWORK

Ever since Devereux's (1967) landmark study of the role of transference and countertransference in anthropological fieldwork, anthropologists have examined the ways in which their subjects’ emotional reactions to themselves and their own reactions toward their subjects have affected, for good and ill, the collection and analysis of field data. Notable earlier examples of this psychoanalytically influenced sensibility include Briggs (1970) , Kracke (1978) , Crapanzano (1980) , Obeyesekere (1981) , and Rosaldo (1989) . But the question of how transference and countertransference might affect fieldwork remains a central area of concern for many ethnographers. For example, the special issue of Clio's Psyche ( Denham 2014 ) devoted to psychoanalytic anthropology begins with a section entitled, “Reflecting on How We Know,” in which five anthropologists discuss examples of transference and countertransference from their own and others’ fieldwork. Themes that emerge from this section reflect the interests and concerns of other contemporary anthropologists ( Hollan 2016 ), including how dreams of either the anthropologist or their subjects may illuminate research relationships and topics ( Hollan 2003a , 2014 ; Chapin 2014 ; McCoy 2019 ; Robben 2020 ), how power differentials between anthropologists or other researchers and subjects affect the research relationship and collection of data ( Anderson 2014 , Eickelkamp 2014 ), and how contexts of violence and their aftermaths affect what and how things are told to the anthropologist and whether the anthropologist reacts to what is being told or observed with fear, avoidance, credulity, or incredulity ( Anderson 2014 , Khan 2014 , Chiovenda 2020 , Robben 2020 ). In all these cases, anthropologists and subjects serve as emotional containers for each other, and the challenge for the anthropologist is to work through these emotional exchanges and intersubjective encounters in a way that leads to innovative observations and analysis, rather than to avoidance or to facile explanations based on conventional theories or authority ( Borneman 2014 ).

Section: HAUNTOLOGY

One of the most recent uses of psychoanalytic theory to inform anthropological research is in hauntology, the study of how individuals and societies may be haunted by troubling events or experiences that ostensibly have passed or that are being socially repressed or denied, yet register in consciousness in indirect ways that simultaneously conceal and reveal aspects of troubling events or experiences—a process that Freud (2003) discusses in his paper, “The Uncanny.” The term hauntology was first coined by Derrida (1994) in his book, Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, The Work of Mourning, and The New International, in which he develops the notion that socially and politically erased or suppressed ideas and experiences, such as Marxism, may yet reemerge as spectral-like forces that continue to haunt social life and which demand our attention and concern. The term was later picked up and used by scholars in cultural studies ( del Pilar Blanco & Peeren 2013 ) and a number of other disciplines to refer to social phenomena that are difficult to describe and theorize, yet distinct from haunting by actual ghosts ( Lincoln & Lincoln 2015 ). One of the foundational texts for the study of hauntology in the social sciences is Avery Gordon's (2008) book, Ghostly Matters: Haunting and the Sociological Imagination . Gordon, a sociologist, uses psychoanalysis and the haunting metaphor to analyze aspects of social life and subjectivity that tend to be either ignored or underappreciated in more mainstream social science research. She is especially concerned with how anomalous, ghostly traces of past injustices, exclusions, and invisibilities that are often related to modernity, colonial or postcolonial contexts, racism, globalization, or neoliberalism linger into the present in the form of material and symbolic inequalities, frustrations, demoralizations, and insecurities of various types. For Gordon (2008) , “The ghost is not simply a dead or missing person, but a social figure, and investigating it can lead to that dense site where history and subjectivity make social life” (p. 8).
The study of hauntology is developing in anthropology as well ( Good et al. 2022 ). In a recent special issue of the journal Ethos , Good & Rahimi (2019) and their colleagues theorize the spectral in psychological anthropology. Drawing on Derrida and Gordon as well as Freud and a variety of psychoanalytic concepts, the articles in this issue all attempt, in one way or another, to show how subjectivity and the psychological are related to the political and how the political, in turn, is related to subjectivity and the psychological ( Good et al. 2008 , B.J. Good 2019 ). They examine these connections by paying close attention “to that which is not said overtly, to that which is unspeakable and unspoken, to that which appears at the margins of formal speech and everyday presentations of self, manifest in the Imaginary, in dissociated spaces, and in individual dream time and coded in esoteric symbolic productions aimed at hiding as well as revealing” ( Good et al. 2008 , pp. 14–15, emphasis in original). Such socially, culturally, and politically suppressed fragments of consciousness are often experienced in uncanny ways, and though hidden, relatively inert, and inconsequential most of the time, they have the potential to erupt into everyday consciousness and behavior if or when the forces of suppression weaken or change. While Gordon argues that the ghosts of past social and political injustices clamor for a recognition that will not be denied, imparting a “charged strangeness,” a “seething,” a “something to be done” into the place or persons being haunted, I offer the cautionary note that
[t]he dynamic balance between the forces of emotional expression and those of avoidance, denial, and repression is precarious, but easily tipped towards the latter. Which is why, contrary to Gordon's claims, the appearance of ghosts…are actually so rare, and why even when people's emotional dynamics do allow ghosts to emerge occasionally, they so often disappear again as quickly as they came. It also explains why two people in the same cultural or historical moment can differ as to whether they experience a haunting or not, because what helps one person express or contain feelings of regret, remorse, or guilt may not help another or might actually strengthen his or her counter forces of denial and repression. ( Hollan 2019 , p. 459)


Section: ETHICS AND THE CONTINGENCIES AND LIMITATIONS OF SELF-AWARENESS

Psychoanalysis is well known for pointing out the limits of human self-awareness and for noting how our partial self-ignorance begins with the impingements of other people, norms, and language long before we are fully self-conscious and self-reflexive, leading to an opacity about our own origins and the very constitution of ourselves that can never be filled in or overcome ( Butler 2005 ). This partial self-ignorance then continues throughout our lives as we use various defensive strategies, evasions, wishful thinking, rationalizations, and repressions to defend ourselves against painful or troubling thoughts, feelings, or urges, especially those that may threaten our regard for or respect of self. Yet through its focus on the imaginative capacities of humans—in dreams, daydreams, fantasies, free associations, etc.—psychoanalysis also underscores how people may transcend their limited knowledge of themselves and create new ways of thinking, feeling, and being. Such insights have ethical implications, and a number of anthropologists and others are drawing on one or another of them to examine how ethics are developed, maintained, or transformed in different times and places.
In Radical Hope: Ethics in the Face of Cultural Devastation , for example, Lear (2006) examines how the Crow chief, Plenty Coups, attempted to live and to lead his people following the Crow nation's loss of land, culture, and livelihood, which occurred with the coming of the U.S. Army and settlers near the turn of the nineteenth century. Lear is concerned with how Plenty Coups could imagine himself and his people into a future in which all traditional means of organizing and valuing life had been destroyed. He credits the Crow appreciation of dreams and Plenty Coups's dreaming abilities, in particular, with enabling the Crow to grasp the harsh realities of their precarious situation while also imagining the capacities and habits of mind that they would need in order to navigate a future unmoored from the present. Despite all the tragic losses, Plenty Coups maintained enough “illusion” about the world and its possibilities, in the psychoanalyst Winnicott's [1965 , 1996 (1971) ] sense of the term, to persevere with courage and to become an exemplary leader.
Pinto (2019) also pursues this connection between imaginative capacities and the development of ethics. She examines a psychoanalytic exchange occurring in the early to mid-1940s between Mrs. A., a young, urban, upper-class Indian Hindu woman and her University of Edinburgh–trained psychoanalyst friend, Dr. Dev Satya Nand. Pinto's analysis focuses on how Mrs. A. uses Hindu mythical figures to think through the conflicts and contradictions of desire and ethics within which she finds herself entangled, especially those surrounding her unhappy marriage and her upper-class life of privilege during the heyday of Indian nationalism and anticolonial aspirations. It is the psychoanalytic methodology of Satya Nand—with its emphasis on free associations, day and night dreaming, and relaxed states of “reminiscence,” “contemplation,” and “musing”—that illuminates how Mrs. A. imaginatively combines, opposes, and reshuffles mythical figures and other cultural and historical material in ways that potentiate them and enable them to capture and to express the ethical dilemmas and “counter-” or alternative ethics of a mid-twentieth-century Indian Hindu woman who is thinking and experiencing beyond the boundaries of conventional morality.
Although Lear emphasizes that the desire and imaginative outreach of humans into the world are related to our finiteness, vulnerability, and limited self-awareness throughout life, he and Pinto both underscore how such limitations may, ironically, generate creative leaps in ethical thinking and behavior. In this view of how a limitation may become a type of virtue, they share Butler's relatively optimistic perspective that while self-ignorance and self-blindness, of the kind that psychoanalysis has documented so well, are vulnerabilities that may lead us to prey on others or be preyed on ourselves, they may also, if openly acknowledged and explored, lead to ethical dispositions of humility, generosity, and care toward others and ourselves: “I will need to be forgiven for what I could not have fully known, and I will be under a similar obligation to offer forgiveness to others, who are also constituted in partial opacity to themselves” ( Butler 2005 , p. 42).
In contrast, B.J. Good (2019) is less sanguine. In a world haunted by the legacies of colonialism, violence, racism, and social inequalities of many kinds, he warns us not to forget the damage that we can do to others and ourselves as a result of our self-blindness: “If the fundamental issues of the unconscious, of irrationality, violence, and historical memory are not made central to this work, if it does not engage the Dark Side and its ghosts, the ‘ethical turn’ will fail to address the most critical issues facing anthropologists” (B.J. Good 2019 , p. 423). The challenge, then, is to document and analyze not only how people strive to maintain goodness ( Robbins 2013 ) and hope ( Mattingly 2010 , 2014 ) for themselves and others, but also the myriad ways in which they undermine such efforts, often while claiming or rationalizing otherwise.

Section: CONCLUDING THOUGHTS: LOOPING EFFECTS OF PEOPLE AND SOCIAL CONTEXTS

As I conclude this review, I am working in the morning after about eight hours of sleep, during which I was dreaming intermittently, while at other times I was completely without self-awareness. Although I have only vague recollections of most of that dreaming and loss of self, I do remember one dream in which my now deceased father played a significant role. I find myself especially affected by this dream because I rarely dream about my father, and I am wondering why I had this dream last night. And for the purposes of this article, I am wondering how the emotional mood and associated thoughts, fantasies, and memories that this dream has created for me will affect what I now write and communicate to the reader here. I could, of course, conclude this article without mentioning this dream and its effects on my consciousness and mood, but I would then be giving the impression that my dreams, memories, fantasies, and altered states of consciousness, as in sleep and in other contexts, have little if anything to do with my everyday behavior and academic work, which would be quite misleading.
All the work reviewed here, though obviously quite varied, shares this view, inspired largely by a variety of psychoanalytic theories, that what happens at the margins of our everyday consciousness—in dreams, daydreams, fantasies, revelries, altered and alternative states of consciousness, including psychosis, etc.—is a significant aspect of human behavior that should be closely examined and included in anthropological theorizing rather than ignored or downplayed. Much of this work also shares the view that this examination of how such varied states of consciousness are affected and mediated by social worlds, and in turn how they feed back into and transform those worlds, entails the close study and analysis of individual people and their varied states of self-awareness and consciousness, or lack thereof ( Obeyesekere 1981 , 1990 ; Paul 2020 ). That is, it requires the investigation, individual by individual, of what it is to be “psychically alive” as a human being ( Chodorow 2020 , p. 252).
To be clear, the close study of individual lives and their social and cultural psychodynamics ( Mageo 2015 ; Groark 2017 , 2019 ) is not the naive study or promotion of individualism or its ideological and sociopolitical correlates. It is the study, in a variety of social contexts, of the degrees to which and the ways in which individual people actually internalize and are moved by the norms and structures of their behavioral environments ( Hallowell 1955 ) or not. It entails the recognition and underscoring of the existential fact that, even within the same small family or community, things happen to one person that do not happen to another and that this difference in developmental histories continues to leave its mark on how people interpret and interact with the world around them ( Spiro 1951 , Schwartz 1978 , Hollan 2012 ). Behavioral environments shape and influence people in important ways, but people, in turn, through their variable, sometimes conflict-ridden responses to such environments, are constantly shaping and making a world for themselves and others, especially in how they embody and express emotionally their social, cultural, and political positionings. Other specific people and their specific embodied characteristics and attitudes are always one of the key features of anyone's immediate behavioral environment and significant mediators of how anyone comes to experience any aspect of the social world, including material and structural ones. The Toraja elder, Nene'na Tandi, was such a mediator when he brought attention to and amplified notions of ancestral and spiritual retribution for those around him as he struggled throughout his life to accept his own sense of guilt and regret for the harm he had done to others as a youth ( Hollan 2022b ). These are the looping effects of person, context, and structure: Context and structure affect people, but people, in turn, transform that context and structure for themselves and others through their actions, inactions, and imaginative and interpretive capacities.
At the level of analysis informed by psychoanalytic observations, the world of social types—whether of race, class, gender, ethnicity, religion, or otherwise—blurs into populations of people who have embodied their behavioral environments in developmentally unique ways, acting and reacting to one another in ways that are much more contingent, dynamic, and emergent than often thought. Such analyses and the dynamic social ecologies they capture resonate strongly in some ways with Bateson's (1972) effort to elucidate an overall “ecology of mind,” one in which conscious self-awareness plays a relatively small part and one in which the hubris of conscious purpose on the part of humans may lead to disastrous outcomes, when such purposes become disconnected from or in conflict with other parts of the ecology, including less conscious states of awareness such as dreams, fantasies, and imaginative thought. Bateson did not, however, address individual and cultural psychodynamics and development ( Hollan 2004b ), as do many of the studies reviewed here, all of which add yet another layer to the complexity and dynamism of social ecologies.
Much contemporary psychoanalytically informed anthropological research is also consonant with James's (2019) observation that “[p]rima facie the world is a pluralism” (p. viii) and his view that people's ideas and practices are more closely tied to or follow from their desires, proclivities, and unique positioning in the world than commonly thought. For both James and many of the authors reviewed here, individual people are sites of emergent streams of consciousnesses, some of which are submerged or less than focal, in which impingements from the world meet the experientially shaped imaginative capacities of the person, a meeting in which both world and person may (or may not) be transformed. Many of the authors reviewed here would also likely agree with James, then, that the human condition is a dynamic, emergent one in which every person, everywhere, has something to contribute:
No two of us have identical difficulties, nor should we be expected to work out identical solutions. Each, from his [sic] peculiar angle of observation, takes in a certain sphere of fact and trouble, which each must deal with in a unique manner… Each attitude being a syllable in human nature's total message, it takes the whole of us to spell the meaning out completely. ( James 1982 , p. 487)

Because it takes “the whole of us” to spell out the potentialities and limits of human life, including those parts of us that are unconscious or only at the margins and fringes of consciousness, psychoanalytically informed research will remain an important part of the anthropological project, even if we may not always enjoy, or wish to reform, the image of ourselves that it presents to us.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: literature cited

