Title: Disappointment


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

In recent years, disappointment has emerged as a prominent topic of anthropological inquiry and theorization. We explore this disciplinary interest in order to probe the conditions that have made it possible, the lines of inquiry it opens up, and the self-reflexive critiques it underscores. Running throughout the anthropological literature on disappointment is a pressing concern with the messy, unpredictable, and friction-laden dimensions of social life, dimensions that eschew easy categorization in terms of the heroic/abject, agentive/passive, macro/micro, righteous/wrong-headed, or progressive/reactionary. After exploring the conditions that underlie disappointment, we discuss comparison, poetics, and slog as three domains of its anthropological analysis, highlighting key methodological innovations, ethnographic genres, and research questions within each area. We close with reflections on disappointment within the discipline, focusing on the experience of field research, the moral optimism of the discipline, and the institutional conditions that shape knowledge production and professional life.

Section: 1. WHAT IS DISAPPOINTMENT AND WHY SHOULD ANTHROPOLOGISTS CARE?

When people speak of disappointment, they articulate fine-grained perspectives on the messy, friction-filled, and unsatisfying gap between lived experiences and expectations that have not come to pass. They also articulate politically and ethically charged perspectives on the conditions of possibility that structure that gap in the first place. In so doing, people unsettle their relationships with themselves and with others, with institutions and roles, and even with deities and normative principles. Disappointment, then, is a space of disquiet in which moral certitude and political righteousness are troubled, if not upended, by a world that is not what it should be. Various terms can capture this problematic: betrayal, despair, disenchantment, disillusion, dismay, dissatisfaction, exhaustion, failure, frustration, and more. Working across this varied terminology, we show how anthropological attunement to disappointment sheds light on the often overlooked social and political import that inheres within this unnerving mode of discontent.
From one perspective, disappointment stands as a shared vocabulary for dealing with the failures and exclusions of affective, experiential, and political projects. However, the specificities of any given experience of disappointment index unequal, even antagonistic, positions within a hierarchical, highly differentiated world. While disappointment frequently emerges out of the conflicts that arise as people navigate across fields of activity or normative domains, it can also come to constitute a culturally recognized repertoire of generic devices honed to diagnose, name, and analyze widely shared experiences and sentiments. Grappling with disappointment thus requires that we continually ask, Who is disappointed? In what or whom? How do people express and narrate it, and to what end? These questions remind us that disappointment is always relational and situated. Just as importantly, they remind us that disappointment is a radically underdetermined stance that can give rise to wide-ranging ethical, political, subjective, and social commitments. Disappointment can spur violent, revanchist movements as much as it can spur emancipatory projects. It can catalyze apathy but also reinvigorate commitment. It can be expressed in the moods of humor or cynicism, lament or condemnation, resignation or rebellion. And it lays the ground for new relations even as it cleaves people from their existing identifications, assumptions, and alliances.
Anthropology traces these unpredictable turns in the social life of disappointment. It explores the embodied and affective ways that people inhabit unmet expectations, desires, and demands. It reveals the power of comparison as a form of judgment and as a strategy for political mobilization. It focuses on the pace, labor, and aesthetics of dwelling in impasses and double binds. In so doing, the anthropology of disappointment charts new avenues for analyzing the things that disappoint people, be they markets or states, normative categories or kinfolk, or even the material frailty of one's own body. It also charts the contours of our discipline as one constituted by and caught up in hopeful regimes of knowledge, governance, and ethics that inevitably produce their own disappointments.
In this review we articulate connections and resonances across seemingly divergent contexts to bring the social life of disappointment into view. Rather than organize the review by cognate terms or sociohistorical features, we bundle scholarly work within four domains around which the study of disappointment has coalesced. In Section 2, we lay out the historical conditions that have allowed disappointment to emerge as a point of thematic interest and as a diagnostic of the afterlives of modernist progress. In Section 3, we explore how people position themselves in comparative relation to institutions and norms in critical, aspirational, and disciplinary moods. Section 4 lingers on the phenomenology of disappointment and the kinds of multimodal evidence that anthropologists take to signal and voice disappointment, while Section 5 focuses on the slowed-down and constricted spatiotemporal dynamics of disappointment as people try to find ways to live in irresolvability. Last, Section 6 considers the constitutive role that disappointment plays in anthropological fieldwork, analysis, and self-reflexive critique. Coming from two field sites (postsocialist Serbia and postcrisis Argentina) where the sense of disappointment saturated everyday life, we take a schematic approach that foregrounds this often taken-for-granted sentiment and renders it available to theorization.

Section: 2. CONDITIONS OF DISAPPOINTMENT

Disappointed, disaffected, and disillusioned individuals have long appeared in the pages of ethnographic monographs. Take, for example, Malinowski's [ 1954 ( 1925 )] description of magic as the anxious attempt to avoid a disappointing harvest, or Turner's ( 1957 ) account of failed community projects and individual aspirations. Or consider the many anthropologists who have taken their own disappointment—in their society's bellicosity ( Pemberton 1994 ) or in capitalist modernity tout court ( Taussig 1980 )—as a motive force for their research. However, in recent decades, the many failures of modern governance projects to deliver on their promises of social betterment have led anthropologists to direct more explicit attention to disappointment and to approach it as an index of generative, complex, and often unpredictable points of friction in the logics of social reproduction. Disappointment, then, has become more than an item of topical interest. It has also come to operate as a diagnostic tool for interrogating the uneven aftermaths of progress.
Disappointment is certainly prevalent in contexts of post-Fordism, postsocialism, and postdevelopment, all of which are defined by the sense of living in the material and ideational wake of failed future-oriented projects of collective advancement undergirded by state governance, economic growth, and sacrificial ideologies of investment and abandonment (e.g., Allison 2013 , Buck-Morss 2000 , Ferguson 1999 , Kroijer et al. 2021 , Muehlebach & Shoshan 2012 ). An often overlooked “historical emotion” ( Gilbert 2019 ), disappointment saturates these aftermaths and establishes uncanny resonances between, for example, the shortages of heat in Chicago's public housing ( Fennell 2015 ), the lack of water in Soweto's (Johannesburg, South Africa) poorest neighborhoods ( Von Schnitzler 2016 ), and the routine breakdowns of infrastructure in the city of Vinh (Vietnam) ( Schwenkel 2015 ). In such contexts, crumbling modernization projects—“ruins” ( Stoler 2013 ), “remains” ( Nadkarni 2020 ), and “rubble” ( Gordillo 2014 )—as well as artistic depictions of never-materialized development plans ( Yarrow 2017 ) emerge as affectively charged sites through which people experience and theorize a present that is neither what they expected nor what they were promised.
In contexts where the violent exclusion from the promises of modernity is nothing new, disappointment figures not as a lament for failed promises but as a call to reject the very terms of those promises. This is the case, for example, when people “disengage from state processes” through a logic of “Black fugitivity” in the United States ( Sojoyner 2017 , p. 527). Such movements of disengagement and disinvestment confront longue durée histories of enslavement and anti-Blackness to frame the universalizing claims of progressive modernity as having been premised all along on exclusionary logics ( Thomas 2019 ). Indigenous experiences of settler colonialism and dispossession can also generate indictments not only of particular state and market institutions but also of the ideal values that underwrite those institutions’ claims to legitimacy. Far from being a dead end, those indictments can open up new possibilities, as is the case with the “radical pessimism” that spurs the political imagination of many Indigenous Guatemalans along volatile and multidirectional lines ( Copeland 2019 ). Indeed, by interrogating “painful, disappointing, immobilising stories of so many failed attempts at justice,” people can learn to turn away from the promises of justice and recognition in an act of refusal that enacts “revenge [on] the conceit of easy politics” ( Simpson 2014 , p. 29).
Disappointment also suffuses postrevolutionary, postcolonial, and postconflict contexts. In many cases, disappointment is the ethos of new democracies ( Greenberg 2014 ). Rule of law or transitional justice often fails to deliver substantive equality or reconciliation ( Clarke 2009 , Shaw & Waldorf 2010 ). Meaningful democracy seems impossibly distant in postrevolutionary El Salvador, for example ( Moodie 2010 ), as well as in postrevolutionary Georgia ( Frederiksen 2018 ) and Bolivia ( Goodale 2019 ), where actual politics betrays or muddies the ideals of the revolution. The same is the case in newly independent Uzbekistan, where the gulf between rosy propaganda and lived reality can be filled only with cynicism and distrust ( Kendzior 2011 ). In Haiti, meanwhile, the long-term history of ongoing crises, both big and small, produces “a future in which the only certainty seems to be that there will be yet more disaster” ( Beckett 2020 , p. 17). In many places shaped by the enduring legacies of colonialism, a sense of “postcolonial disenchantment” ( Bonilla 2015 , p. 3) or of the “tragedy of colonial enlightenment” ( Scott 2004 ) signals the sharp limitations of political sovereignty, while the “binds of emancipation” ( Bardawil 2020 ) present actors and analysts alike with “agonizing dilemmas and bitter disappointments” ( Robotham 1997 , p. 357). In these contexts, “the future appears phantasmatic, as if it were a space inhabited by ghosts from the past and ideal dreams, and the present unfolds as a dense field of nervous agitation, constantly entangled in multiplying constraints, a conglomeration of contradictory tendencies and actions leading to no clear destination” ( Coronil 2011 , p. 247). The historicity of disappointment within such conditions is thus bound up with the ways people maneuver in and through the uneven terrain of lives lived “post,” among dashed expectations, unstable presents, and uncertain futures. Constituting those maneuvers are modalities of silence and expression, action and inaction, and practices of comparison.

Section: 3. DISAPPOINTING COMPARISONS

It is the work of comparison—the tacking back and forth between what is and what ought to be—that generates the phantasmatic and affectively charged experience of disappointment. Of course, not all comparisons produce disappointment. But a focus on disappointing comparison has proven especially productive for the anthropological analysis of embodiment and subjectivity, as well as of institutions, bureaucracies, and governance. Works in these fields show that it is through disappointing comparisons that people triangulate heterogeneous experiences and global conjunctures, thus knitting together domains of experience and patterned relations of power across the “porous boundaries” of multiple social orders ( Gershon 2019 ). In nesting similarities and distinctions into fractally recursive relations ( Gal & Irvine 2000 ), especially through scalar metaphors of time and space ( Carr & Lempert 2016 ), disappointing comparisons connect experiences of subjectivity to structural conditions.
For example, when people read global histories of exploitation and vulnerability through the “scalar intertext” of bodies ( Agard-Jones 2013 , p. 184), they compare their desire for well-being to the inequalities written into their bodies at the cellular level. Disabled Turkish military conscripts map disappointment through their absent limbs, marking the gaps between normative, sovereign masculinity and their stigmatization as gender-nonconforming bodies ( Açiksöz 2019 ). Bodies are also shaped by failures of statecraft that produce dismay over a fraying postrevolutionary medical system that once guaranteed health care as a basic right ( Brotherton 2012 ) and by the catastrophes of modern technoscientific projects that redefine citizenship via illness and vulnerability ( Petryna 2002 ). Learning to be disappointed in your own body can be a path to becoming a neoliberal subject, for example, via Nike fitness apps that encourage young Russians to compare unfit socialist bodies to fit postsocialist ones ( Krupp 2021 ). Corporations and biotech projects harness such anxieties and desires to mine value from the comparative gap between health and decline ( Dumit 2012 ) and from the racial economy of normal and failing bodies ( Wolf-Meyer 2015 ).
These sorts of anxious comparisons, which harness, fortify, and exploit value hierarchies, produce disappointment not only in the body but also in the nation. For example, the logic and language of markets turn initiatives for democracy and rights into zero-sum competitions for investment, aid, and political influence, pitting people (and states) against each other within hierarchies of worthiness ( Paley 2001 , Fadlalla 2018 ). Relatedly, indices of democratic capacity shape national branding and image ( Graan 2010 ), often for mass-mediated audiences ( Bishara 2012 ). Ideas about failed nations and states also shape people's intimate senses of self, as when people link personal ethical shortcomings to a country deemed not normal ( Fehérváry 2013 ). In short, comparative hierarchies of humanity saturate selves with a sense of failure, suspicion, and disappointment in decidedly unequal ways [ Fanon 2008 ( 1952 )]. Such globally circulating and institutionally enforced distinctions set the stage for multidirectional, layered, and contradictory experiences of disappointment. For example, Polish aid workers assess their own democratic capacity and political modernity against those of their African recipients, even as they are fully aware that their Western European counterparts are likewise assessing Polish capacity as second world donors ( Drążkiewicz 2020 ). This in-between position enrolls Eastern Europeans in comparative logics of white supremacy, reinforcing their inability to ever be fully Western ( Dzenovska 2018 ) and producing a sort of “suspended agency” defined by inclusion “in the racialized and class-based politics” of the Global North and exclusion “from actual participation…due to structural constraints” (C. Brković, manuscript under review). Such disappointing comparisons reproduce modernity's regional, taxonomic, and developmentalist distinctions of East/West, North/South, and so on, fusing affective experiences to salient global hierarchies in continuously renewed ways ( Lowe 2015 ).
In this context, the comparative space between token and type becomes a modality of governance, particularly with respect to normative forms of belonging that are inhabited and enacted through embodied and discursive performance ( Parla 2009 , Paz 2018 ). The allocation of rights frequently comes down to discretionary assessments of people as worthy or disappointing instances of ideal types. Judges assess the truth in people's narratives of harm or suffering ( Gribaldo 2014 , Rosas 2019 ); bureaucrats and nongovernmental organization workers mediate who is a real refugee among those seeking asylum ( Cabot 2014 ). As people evaluate the authenticity of gendered, racialized subjects, registers of suspicion or distrust reanimate structural hierarchies and produce disappointment in a population so as to justify operations of state power. The figure of the failed racialized subject, for example, comes to authorize carceral forms of state intervention through policing, surveillance, and even torture ( Ralph 2020 ). Twin policies of disinvestment and policing concretize disappointment through material and social infrastructures ( Alves 2018 ), further naturalizing inequality by framing some people as perpetually in need of improvement ( Lea 2020 , Li 2007 ). For example, “disappointing Indigenous” subjects become “objects of worry” ( Cowlishaw 2003 , p. 107) that generate especially acute genres of moral fantasy and lament, which underpin colonial, settler colonial, and late liberal governance.
Bureaucracies and governmental institutions produce somewhat different sets of disappointing comparisons. Anthropological analysis of bureaucracies often centers the gap ( Hoag 2011 ) between claims of expertise and transparency and the messiness of politics and law ( Ballestero 2019 , Hetherington 2011 ). Disappointment emerges, for example, in the experiential and temporal mismatch between an immediate or distant threat—a man-eating leopard ( Mathur 2016 ) or an anticipated future nuclear disaster ( Watanabe 2021 )—and the inadequate state protections on offer. International bureaucracies routinely generate dissatisfaction in their very attempts to improve the human condition, such as those “palaces of hope” responsible for creating perfect worlds through imperfect means ( Niezen & Sapignoli 2017 ). Similarly, human rights institutions frame the horizons of possibility in a hopeful language of justice and peace but deliver technocratic responses entangled in conflictual material and ethical registers ( Billaud & Cowan 2020 , Merry 2016 ). In sum, disappointment shadows these projects because they are tasked with making abstract promises concrete, but they can only pursue those promises in incomplete, unsatisfying, and even perverse ways that threaten their own legitimacy.
Yet disappointment can also make it possible for people to refuse the mode of comparison that frames nonnormative lives as failed. In such cases, disappointment can set in motion dynamic forms of action that proceed not by solving frustration but by discovering ways to navigate contradictory spaces. Such is the case with young Mexican hackers who reconfigure their disenchantment in politics by using the alternative affordances of code ( Beltran 2020 ). Refusing comparison to the norm can also open spaces for queer solidarities and kinships ( Çalışkan 2019 ) or alternative pasts and futures ( Ramberg 2016 ). In other words, generative refusals ( McGranahan 2016 ) of the terms on offer can transform disappointing comparative logics into political beginnings so that the failure to measure up brings the norm, rather than the self, into question. In all these ways, people situate themselves and others in comparative relation to a world haunted by expectations and failures, hauntings that are embodied and expressed through poetic form.

Section: 4. POETICS OF DISAPPOINTMENT

Anthropological accounts of disappointment are full of rich, evocative descriptions that present disappointing comparisons as thoroughly embodied sensual experiences. The “puddles [that] become knee-deep and swampy” in a postsocialist Siberian village ( Ssorin-Chaikov 2016 , p. 693). The “deep rumbling of an engine” as an ambulance retrieves the corpse of an elderly person who died alone in Kyoto ( Danely 2019 , p. 213), a lonely death set against the backdrop of a “series of macrosocial events of failure, destruction, and loss […as well as] another, equally profound kind of loss: the loss of the mystery of sociality” ( Nozawa 2015 , pp. 394–95). The melancholic, abject intimacy of “a wide plateau in the midst of an island appearing rather dry, burned by the sun, exhibiting various shades of yellow and brown” ( Navaro-Yashin 2009 , p. 10). The odors of defendants who “smelled of decay” in the courtrooms of Harare's Rotten Row and index the repression and corruption of the justice system ( Verheul 2020 , p. 265). Apartments full of “jumbled things and bodies” and “exuberant performances of […] fabulosity” that facilitate self-care in conditions of precarity ( Manalansan 2018 , pp. 501–2). The “eerily luminous vehicle that traverses the wasteland beneath elevated highways and circles the billboarded sites of new housing developments” in an unevenly electrified New Delhi ( Coleman 2017 , pp. 174–75). This discursive emphasis on material, bodily, and aesthetic dynamics is not simply lyrical adornment. Rather, marked attention to the poetics of disappointment—to the forms that it takes and to the things in the world that signal and catalyze it—compels us to deal with the complex and ambivalent nature of people's experiences with disappointment. It also disabuses us of any notion of disappointment as a purely ideational or cognitive state.
It is in the specificity of those varied experiences of disappointment that its poetic expression becomes especially marked. Russian veterans stage their “trauma, confusion, and disillusionment” as a grim commodity so that the state will provide material support in exchange for bodily injuries in apparently pointless wars in Afghanistan and Chechnya ( Oushakine 2009 , p. 187). In response to the sense of endemic corruption in Ghana, many artists concern themselves less with “political change than with making fun of the present” through cynical humor ( Daswani 2020 , p. 108). Meanwhile, in a homeless shelter in Detroit, young Black girls “read disappointment and thwarted plans […] and respond with their own self-possessed, and often politically informed, choreography, […integrating] practices of improvisation, borrowing, and sampling to disassemble and reconstruct current social realities” ( Cox 2015 , p. 30). As these varied examples show, disappointment can be articulated in a wide range of ethnographic voices, from the relatively elite inhabitants of São Paulo's gated communities ( Caldeira 2001 ) to the educated but insecure middle class of South Korea ( Song 2014 ) to the marginalized trash pickers on the outskirts of Rio de Janeiro ( Millar 2018 ). Disappointment can prompt people to try to disengage from rigid social norms ( Remmert 2020 ) just as much as it can fortify people's struggles to live up to normative demands ( Beekers & Kloos 2017 , Hayden & Muir 2022 ). These discordant voices are by no means in harmony with one another. In fact, the voicing of disappointment is always internally varied, fractured, and inharmonious not only along sociological contours but also within the subjectivity of a given speaker. Indeed, the voicing of disappointment involves, by definition, the splintering of perspectives, as one simultaneously sees and feels the appeal of a particular promise and the pain of its unfulfilled condition. Disappointment, then, is explicitly “double-voiced” ( Bakhtin 1981 ) in that the subjectivity of the speaker is shot through with that of others: past, present, and future; real and imagined; embraced and disavowed. Holding these voices in tension with one another, people's oscillation across different stances, genres, and registers shows disappointment to be a space of dynamic tension and potential rather than a settled, passive mood. Indeed, like its close cousin, despair, disappointment is a “ dialectical passion that can never fully let go of hope, its familiar and estranged other” ( Chowdhury 2019 , p. 172; emphasis in original); it is a “restless and energetic passion that is too typically thought without political value” ( Marasco 2015 , p. 3).
The poetic devices through which people express this unsettled discomfort are of the very same kind as those that the ethnographer deploys in attempting to bring its import into view. As author, the anthropologist anticipates readers taking up the text and circulating its ideas and language through future conversations and writings. Folded into the text itself, those anticipated voicings shape the line of argument, the evidence marshaled, and the poetic devices of the ethnography. Take, for example, Hurston's ( 2018 ) careful presentation of the autobiography of Oluale Kossola, the last living survivor of the transatlantic slave trade. Transcribed to preserve the specificities of Kossola's speech, the work allows his voice to emerge as the embodied experience of the historical events he describes so that those events are echoed and underscored in the very form of their articulation. Or consider Tambar's ( 2016 ) unnerving discussion of minoritized political actors in Turkey twisting and turning the temporality of the Gezi Park protests of 2013 so as to ask, paradoxically, whether a history of minority-targeted state “violence might serve as the ground on which to produce an alternate figure of a political community to come” (p. 34). Or scan the lines of poetry about the troubled “aftermaths of solidarity” and the “shame” of forgetting “who dug deep into the fresh red mud / to make those miniature wares / meant to travel back with me. / The ones my daughter refuses to hold,” lines that Silber (2011) interweaves into her ethnography of postrevolutionary El Salvador (pp. 135–36).
Whether in quotidian expressions or ethnographic descriptions, the poetics of disappointment are bound up with “chronotopic displacements and cross-chronotope alignments” ( Agha 2007 , p. 324). In other words, as people take up conflicting roles as actor, agent, subject, and narrator, they project, consolidate, but also trouble the spatial and temporal relations that ground the bundles of norms, social types, registers, voices, and genres that make up any given social world ( Dick 2018 , Wirtz 2016 ). Along the way, poetic forms serve as the material through which aspirations and failures work themselves out historically. Such is the case, Strassler (2020) argues, in newly democratic Indonesia, where the photograph, once a fetish of transparency, became an exemplar of manipulation, invested with both disappointment and ludic experimentation. This sort of play within and across poetic forms throws into relief the contours of power regimes and the limits of imaginable horizons, giving rise equally—and sometimes simultaneously—to humor and to distress, to cynicism and to engagement, to critique and to complicity, to complaint and to chagrin (e.g., Boyer & Yurchak 2010 , Glaser 2020 , Molé 2013 , Yeh 2017 ). In short, far from producing uniformity, the poetics of disappointment give rise to a highly varied affective, political, and social terrain. Of key import therefore is how people navigate their way through this dynamic terrain, typically in a rhythm that is neither heroic nor abject, but, quite simply, a slog.

Section: 5. SLOGGING THROUGH DISAPPOINTMENT

How can one act in the absence of clear futures, in an opaque, muddy present that feels like moving through “jelly, slush, and red mist” ( Živković 2000 )? How does one grapple with life defined by a paradoxically routine experience of crisis as ordinary, banal, and thoroughly disillusioning ( Muir 2021 )? For the most part, people slog through those unsatisfying times and amorphous spaces by creating materially grounded ways of “reassembling the shards” ( Dunn 2018 , p. 22) of life, sociality, and meaning in the context of the “nothing” (p. 91) that goes hand in hand with crisis, violence, or displacement. While a sense of immobility and “stuckedness” ( Hage 2009 ) can accompany disappointment, people also create movement and perspective through forms of action, however constrained, compromised, or lacking in a definitive experience of agency. An anthropology of slog matches this pace. It avoids the redemption of suffering found in the “virtue of precarity” ( Rajković 2018 , p. 49) by staying with experiences of dissatisfaction and demoralization that can be alternately, or even simultaneously, painful and comfortably familiar.
Slogging through disappointment can produce experiments with time, as people devise locally meaningful forms of action within, but not mastery over, disappointing conditions ( Mains 2007 , O'Neill 2017 ). For example, young unemployed Indian men turn waiting, or “timepass,” into a performance of masculine sociality ( Jeffrey 2010 ). Somewhat differently, people slog through cycles of debt, responding to short-term obligations without resolving long-term indebtedness, thereby producing further disillusionment and mistrust ( Dalsgård 2017 ). In such cases, slog is a way to hedge or play with multiple temporal orders, managing disappointment while ensuring its future reproduction. In this sense, it is a mode of action that neither sidesteps nor wholly recapitulates normative relationships to progress and agency.
A similar relation to progress and agency inheres in what Wool (2020) theorizes as “open grief,” a way not of finding closure but of contending with the loss of what we thought we were supposed to want, to do, to be, or to feel. Under such conditions, people get by. In Naples, they elaborate “the art of making do” ( Pine 2012 ) and in postindustrial cities such as Detroit, they engage in do-it-yourself activities to manage the near-complete withdrawal of public services ( Kinder 2016 ). People learn to inhabit an unsatisfying “meantime,” waiting for public transportation that never comes while still yearning for something better ( Jansen 2015 ). An ambivalent approach, slogging through life allows people to engage the contradictory feelings that arise in “shit times,” without necessarily resorting to narratives of resolution or redemption ( Álvarez Astacio et al. 2021 ). Slog, then, works as a kind of pragmatic agency in the face of tasks deemed impossible as people learn not only how to “act in appropriate ways […but also how to] embrac[e] a certain way of thinking about acting with a special attention to the limits of any one act's or actor's efficacy” ( Carr 2015 , p. 258).
As a kind of action that takes place within ill-fitting and incommensurable needs and desires, slog produces its own awkward and situated knowledge. For example, Bhutanese refugees experience relocation to the United States not as an end to displacement but as a transformation of its conditions; they slog through difficult conditions in camps as a way to prepare for the anticipated disappointment of a precarious future in grueling, low-waged lives in the United States ( Adhikari 2021 ). Slogging can also be a way to live and learn from those unsatisfying experiences to which people nonetheless remain attached in a logic of “cruel optimism” ( Berlant 2011 ). This is the case when compulsive gamblers play not to win but to stay “in that machine zone where nothing else matters” and where understanding leads not to escape but to navigating an unwinnable game ( Schüll 2012 , p. 2). Throughout, slog produces an alternately compelling and dissatisfying experiential space-time. It is a mode of action through which people hedge a dissatisfying present against an uncertain future and carry out “experiments with being otherwise that are rooted in the multi-faceted burdens of the present, but which also seek ways through or around these burdens” ( Feldman 2016 , p. 420).
The politics of slog leverages this spatiotemporal orientation to life's disappointments. In such an approach, “slow moving political action” offers glimpses of “a present suspended by ruptures and futures desired and yet to be imagined” ( Kurtović & Sargsyan 2019 , p. 2). The pace of slog marks the experience of “banging your head against a brick wall” of habits, institutions, and relations of power while nonetheless making unexpected, if limited, room for action ( Ahmed 2012 , p. 175). It describes the rhythm of activists learning to work with and represent the flow of time so as to make the slow violence of environmental harm more visible ( Ahmann 2018 ). Mundane practices of solidarity can be tinged with frustration, and even pain, requiring activists to commit and recommit to their politics with no end in sight ( Razsa 2015 ). In this sense, slog is antithetical to the romance of revolutionary time, as we see in Winegar's ( 2012 ) account of women missing the experience of revolutionary protest at Tahrir Square because they commit to the necessary, but decidedly unromantic, labor of social care at home. Accepting that politics is a slog with no clear or consistent end can make room for “ugly feelings” ( Ngai 2007 ) like cynicism ( Allen 2013 , Vine 2020 ) and boredom ( Casati 2016 ) while still finding ways to act. Resolving contradictory stances and staying ethically consistent can be so exhausting it makes any kind of action seem impossible, as for animal rights activists in India who constantly confront the limits and boundaries of their ethical commitments ( Dave 2017 ). Yet slogging through can sometimes also turn failure into a political resource to mobilize collective action ( Musallam 2019 ). Disappointment and exhaustion can even be a language through which people collectively name and identify the small and imperfect actions that keep politics in motion ( Greenberg 2020 ).
If, as Zigon (2017) has suggested, politics begins with disappointment, the nature of that politics is radically underdetermined. Slog helps us focus on the ad hoc engagements shaped by disillusion with extant institutions and the very notion of democratic participation ( Kelty 2019 ). Such disappointment, frustration, or betrayal can cut right, as with populist forms of politics grounded in integralist forms of belonging ( Holmes 2000 ) or the angry rejection of political institutions and elites ( Maskovsky & Bjork-James 2019 , Pasieska 2017 ). It can also cut left, as with antiforeclosure and antieviction activists pushed by the financial crisis of 2008 to work toward “a more humane, decommodified model of housing and home than the one rooted in the free market” ( Maskovsky 2022 ). At other times, disappointment is neither left nor right but entails alignments, solidarities, and exclusions that muddy the very distinctions through which we understand politics ( Kalb 2009 ). Whether left, right, or beyond, a disappointed politics often begins with an exit from relations as structured by formal political institutions, with people slogging their way through more indeterminate, often highly localized, networks of care, representation, or political expression ( Koch 2016 ).

Section: 6. DISAPPOINTMENT AND THE DISCIPLINE

Disappointment is not only a phenomenon that anthropologists find in the social worlds they analyze. It also inheres within the affective, epistemic, and ethico-political dynamics of the discipline itself. In this last substantive section, we consider how anthropological disappointment has emerged from anthropology's constitution as a field science, its mandate vis-à-vis other disciplines, and its position within broader social relations of inequality and power. We do so by turning our framing questions onto ourselves: How and in what are anthropologists disappointed? What assumptions and investments does that disappointment reveal? And how is disappointment expressed within the discipline, and to what end?
It has become a disciplinary platitude that fieldwork is frequently—even paradigmatically—messy, confusing, and conflictual. In earlier iterations of ethnography, the fieldworker's dissatisfaction often marked an ostensible failure on the part of research subjects to inspire sufficiently rousing or attractive visions of other ways of being in the world [e.g., Lévi-Strauss 1961 ( 1955 )]. However, more recent reflections have framed that disappointment as an index of fieldwork's generative capacities to upend research expectations and analytical categories. When confronted with beliefs and behaviors that the fieldworker finds abhorrent, for example, disappointment can point the way toward a fuller understanding of what nurtures those proclivities and renders them so hostile to reform or remediation ( Shoshan 2016 ). Disappointment can highlight relationships of complicity ( Wright 2018 ) and self-censorship ( Atienza 2018 ) that constitute the field as an affectively conflictual space of guilt, love, anger, indebtedness, and melancholia ( High 2011 ). Acknowledging and lingering in the ethical muddiness of fieldwork can be a process that is as disheartening as it is generative, as in Verdery's ( 2018 ) retrospective ethnography of her time as a young researcher in communist Romania. Grappling with the subsequent realization that some of the people to whom she was closest were actually informers for the Romanian secret police, Verdery refuses the stance of morally outraged betrayal and instead contends with the way that her own naivete shaped the compromised positions of everyone involved in both ethnographic and state knowledge production. Accounts such as these reframe the field as a space of disappointment, constituting anthropology as a self-reflexively critical endeavor that demands a highly detailed and open-ended approach to knowledge. It is one that easily provokes a loss or disavowal of ethnographic confidence ( Fortun 2001 ).
Disappointment also permeates anthropology because of the discipline's structural position within the division of academic labor, that is, its mandate to fill the “savage slot” ( Trouillot 2003 , p. 7). In its most radical guise, Graeber (2004) argues, anthropology fulfills that mandate by emphasizing the cultivation of a “keen awareness of the very range of human possibilities” (p. 11) to which we should turn as we try to imagine “better worlds” (p. 13). Indeed, many anthropologists structure their research with the goal of discovering “spaces of hope” ( Harvey 2000 ) in marginal, overlooked, and interstitial locations. However, that very impulse exposes the anthropologist to the risk of disappointment, for spaces of hopeful alterity can easily reveal themselves to be shot through with unexpected pettiness, inequities, or compromises (e.g., Greene 2016 , Schuster 2010 , Stephen & Collier 1997 ). Some have asserted that we need to redouble our efforts to construct an “anthropology of the good” ( Robbins 2013 ) rather than focus on “the harsh and brutal dimensions of human experience” ( Ortner 2016 , p. 49). Contradicting such calls for a reinvigorated anthropology, works that center disappointment linger self-reflexively in the very limits of anthropological knowledge. Starn (1991) , for example, contends that an obsession with Indigenous tradition prevented anthropologists from noticing the surge of support for the Shining Path in rural Peru. Somewhat differently, Urcioli (2018) , among others (e.g., Ahmed 2012 ), has argued that commitments to diversity (anthropological or otherwise) within the context of structurally racist and neoliberal institutions do little to generate the material conditions for creating better futures. Holding open the tension between the promise and actuality of anthropological knowledge, such works instantiate Hankins's ( 2015 ) characterization of anthropology as a discipline grounded in both “a future-oriented moral optimism reliant on the projection of an other and a deep skepticism of that very project” (p. 554).
Despite a venerable tradition of discipline-internal critiques (e.g., Asad 1973 , Harrison 1997 ), anthropological skepticism has long tended to receive less emphasis than moral optimism. A slew of recent work seeks to correct that imbalance by issuing the imperative to focus on “disenchantment and other dark themes […] as a way to push back against the failed promise of modernity and secularism” ( Cantero 2017 , p. 310; Faust & Peiffer 2021 ) within the discipline and beyond. One response to that imperative has been to scrutinize the structural, institutional, and political commitments of anthropology to lay bare the very real constraints on what is sayable and imaginable within the discipline's ostensibly open field of inquiry ( Deeb & Winegar 2016 ). Another response has been a heightened attention to anthropology as a domain of labor that is no less subject to widespread logics of precaritization and exploitation than any other ( Thorkelson 2016 ). And, most recently, a chorus of voices (e.g., Beliso-De Jesús & Pierre 2019 , Shange 2019 , Smalls et al. 2021 ) have replied to that imperative by, in the words of Jobson (2020) , inviting us all to explore the “case for letting anthropology burn” so as to usher in “a reckoning with the pitfalls of anthropology as a ‘white public space’ that maintains a liberal myth of perfectibility” (p. 265).
Across these three sets of dynamics, anthropologists inhabit an ethos of disappointment that we share with our interlocutors. For anthropologist and interlocutor alike, disappointment unfolds in open-ended fashion, allowing us to learn from inhabiting unresolvable contradictions, from managing the frustration and slow pace of change, and from reckoning with our continued attachments to unattainable and even harmful myths and ideals. In this way, disappointment affords the possibility of generating new genres of critique not to perfect the discipline but to understand its limits and conditions of possibility.

Section: 7. CONCLUSIONS

We began this review by noting that expressions of disappointment can become prevalent to the point of seeming commonsensical. Disappointment can thus recede into the background of everyday life and of anthropological analysis. However, bringing disappointment squarely into view offers a way to linger in the generative complexities of social life across interlocking domains of experience. It compels us to approach the ways people critique the world around them and aspire to something more, or just something else. In disappointment we see restlessness and possibility, an inability to settle down and a refusal to settle for less.
Shot through with the multivocality of shared, yet radically underdetermined, concepts and registers and bound up with the unequal distribution of harm, disappointment is especially germane to historical conjunctures shaped by common projects that simultaneously inspire progressive solidarities and reentrench violent exclusions. Disappointment asks us to interrogate who can expect what from whom and on what grounds. Attending to it allows us to see more clearly systems of rewards, investments, and entitlements as well as unequal access to the promises of a good, or even just a better, life. Its actions are those of churning, slogging, waiting, and wandering. Its poetics are of cynicism, ambivalence, irony, and frustration. Its politics are volatile, capable of cutting left or right but especially prone to muddying those very distinctions. Disappointment is thus best understood not in terms of agency or structure, passivity or resistance. Rather, we can best approach disappointment by thinking in terms of the inadequacy of existing life-worlds, the ghosts of aspirational temporalities, and the continued grip of the categories and conditions that give rise to disappointing comparisons. Its analysis therefore demands that we attend to ways of being in the world that are saturated with undecidability, irresolution, uncertainty, and dissatisfaction.
In foregrounding these concerns, the analysis of disappointment also offers anthropologists a path to a productive form of analytic humility. Disappointment indexes the unavoidable friction between the world and the categories through which we, as much as our ethnographic interlocutors, seek to understand it. In this sense, it demands that we linger on the incapacity of anthropological concepts to grasp social life definitively—not in a spirit of despondency but in a spirit of curiosity, as we find ourselves poked and prodded into unpredictable, even messy, conclusions.

Section: disclosure statement

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

For their careful readings and thoughtful suggestions of works to include in this review, we thank Tiana Bakić Hayden, Ilana Gershon, Kelda Jamison, Alejandra Leal, Alejandro Paz, Nitzan Shoshan, Kabir Tambar, and Rihan Yeh. We also thank Zarino Lanni and Zhenzhou “Andy” Tan for their thorough research assistance. Finally, we thank Susan Gal for her encouragement and guidance.

Section: literature cited

