Title: Pidgins and Creoles: Debates and Issues


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

This article identifies and presents the main debates and issues that are generating interest in the field of creole studies. It is composed of two main sections. The first one presents the debates currently stimulating creolistics: the nature of pidgins and creoles and the relation between the two, the sociological and typological distinction between pidgins and creoles, the various theories explaining their origin, and their transformation through time. The second part raises issues linked to the social life of these languages, an area of research that, though present since the beginning of creolistics, has remained limited. Using the framework of linguistic ideology, this review surveys the social status of pidgins and creoles, the prejudices that exclude them from being used at schools, and their lack of linguistic legitimacy. It concludes with a discussion of pidgins and creoles on social media.

Section: INTRODUCTION

Pidgins and creoles are languages that developed during sporadic or prolonged economic and cultural contacts between people who did not speak the same language and in social situations that made it impossible for one existing language to be used as a common language. Most of the pidgins and creoles we know today developed in association with European colonization (sixteenth to nineteenth century); among workers in mines and on the plantations of the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans; and in association with the large displacement of workers or slaves across vast distances over long periods of time. Early definitions distinguished pidgins from creoles in terms of their structure and use. Accordingly, pidgins were rudimentary auxiliary languages used in limited sociocultural contexts, such as trade, for instance. By contrast, creoles were more elaborate and more stable and were acquired as the mother tongue of native speakers and used in all aspects of daily life. More recent definitions distinguish pidgins from creoles in terms of their function in a speech community: Pidgins are secondary languages in a community, whereas creoles are the main language of a community.
In the 30 years since my original review ( Jourdan 1991 ) on pidgins and creoles, and that of Baptista (2005) in this forum, many once burning issues have pretty much been settled or at least have faded as central topics of current interest: Bickerton's bioprogram hypothesis, which had been so instrumental in energizing the field when it appeared back in 1981 (see also Bickerton 1984 ), has now been put to rest. It proposed that the innate linguistic capacities of children, applied to the unstable pidgin they receive as linguistic input, transform the pidgins into creoles. Few still believe that the emergence of creoles is a direct and exclusive expression of default parameters set by children as first language speakers. Other processes are at work, as I show below. The role played by adolescents and adults in creolization has also become clearer (various chapters in Arends 1995 , Lefebvre 1996 , Roberts 2000 , Sankoff 1994 ) and so has the place of culture ( Jourdan 2000 , 2008 ), history ( McWhorter 2000b , Roberts 2004 , and papers in Schwegler et al. 2016 , Singler 2008 ), and demography ( Arends 2008 , Singler 1995 ) in the emergence of most pidgins and creoles. Terminology has also become more focused; although it is open to much debate, as discussed below, we have a better understanding of what pidgins and creoles are and what distinguishes them from each other socially, though not all scholars agree on what distinguishes them linguistically from each other and from other languages (see Bakker 2008 , Jourdan 1991 , Lefebvre 1996 for a discussion). Some scholars refer to them as P/Cs, short for pidgins/creoles, and I do so here. Other issues, such as the respective roles that P/Cs play in the emergence of substrate languages (the native languages of workers/slaves) and superstrate languages (those spoken by people in positions of authority over the workers), are still salient. But new issues are developing, such as the status of P/Cs, their roles in education, and their presence in the digital world.
What has been striking during these last 30 years is the treasure trove of data on P/Cs that has been unearthed. But the most important sources of data produced in that period are the World Atlas of Language Structure (WALS) edited by Haspelmath et al. (2005) and the comparative Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures (APICS) edited by Michaelis et al. (2013) . APICS contains extensive data on 76 pidgins, creoles, and mixed languages and now serves as the basis of comparative studies of them.
In this review, I limit myself, out of necessity, to some of the issues of contemporary creole studies that generate discussion or debate among creolists and that would be of interest to anthropologists, and I focus on areas of research that give us glimpses of further changes to come.

Section: A FEW DEBATES AND ISSUES

A few debates are currently stimulating the field of creolistics. First, in an important paper, Bakker (2008) teases out the differences between pidgins and creoles, with the goal of showing how they differ from each other socially and linguistically. He adds a category of so-called “pidgincreoles” that includes extended Melanesian pidgins and African varieties such as Vernacular Liberian English. While scholars such as Bakker (2008 , 2014) and Mühlhäusler (1986) argue that most if not all creoles developed from a pidgin stage, others such as Aboh (2016) , Ansaldo & Matthews (2007) , and Mufwene (2001 , 2008 , 2020 ) argue that creoles always emerged directly without an intervening pidgin stage (for a detailed review, see Velupillai 2015 ). By eliminating the Melanesian pidgins, and others such as Sango or Aboriginal Kriol from the pidgin category, one also removes the best examples of pidgins turning into creoles. They emerged in the second half of the nineteenth century, and while some varieties remained restricted to exchanges between linguistic groups, other varieties became more widely used across communities, though always as a second language. However, their transition from pidgins to creoles (i.e., to the main language of a community) as of the 1970s is recent and has been well documented ( Crowley 1990 , Jourdan & Keesing 1997 , Mühlhäusler 1976 , Sankoff & Laberge 1973 ). Two extensive typological studies of P/Cs in a comparative perspective ( Bakker et al. 2017 , Blasi et al. 2017 ) seem to reach different results (see also Michaelis & Haspelmath 2020 ) as to whether pidgins turn into creoles or whether creoles develop directly. On that basis, we might conclude that the life course of P/Cs differs across regions and varies according to historical moments of their emergence, which would be a reasonable assessment.
Given what we know of the historical situations around the world in the time periods when these languages emerged (seventeenth to nineteenth century), a consensus has developed around the hypothesis that pidgins ( Baker 1995 ) and creoles developed gradually rather than abruptly among populations that may have been very diverse linguistically in some places (e.g., Hawaiian Creole) and less so in others (e.g., Caribbean creoles) (see Arends 1995 and most of the papers in Selbach et al. 2009 ) and, in many cases, with concomitant bilingualism and multilingualism in the initial periods. Working with my own data on Solomon Islands Pijin and following an argument made by Sankoff & Laberge (1973) about the role of children in the transformation of Tok Pisin in Papua New Guinea, I made the argument ( Jourdan 1991 ) that adults and children played different roles in creolization, particularly in the early stages: Parents were innovators and children more regularizers (see also Singler 2006 for a similar claim). Kouwenberg's (2017) recent paper on Berbice Dutch shows that this claim cannot be made for all situations and all creoles. Her study is a good reminder that we should be wary of universal explanations. At any rate, a pidgin is an auxiliary language, speakers always having their own mother tongue to fall back on; by comparison, a creole is the main language of a community, whether or not children speak it as a mother tongue. This functional definition puts emphasis on the social life of these languages and not on their typology. As I explained above, the same language can therefore exist as a pidgin and as a creole in the same society. For instance, the pidgins of Papua New Guinea (Tok Pisin), Solomon Islands (Pijin), and Vanuatu (Bislama) are second languages for the rural population; however, given the high degree of multilingualism in these countries, they have become the main language of the urban centers (and the mother tongue of now two generations of urbanites). In some cases, the linguistic line between the pidgin and the creole version of a language is very tenuous, as with the Melanesian pidgincreoles for instance ( Jourdan 1991 , Smith 2002 ).
A second debate concerns the typological nature of P/Cs and what is now known as the creole debate. When McWhorter (1998 , 2001) suggested several years ago and reiterated in 2013 that “there is a group of languages that are identifiable as born recently from pidgins on the basis of certain features” ( McWhorter 2013 , p. 378), he triggered a rich but at times rather heated debate. This approach has also been defended over the years by Bakker (2014 , 2015) , Bakker et al. (2011) , and Parkvall (2008) in various papers. Labeled “creole exceptionalism” by DeGraff (2001) , the hypothesis is that P/Cs are, as a group of languages, sufficiently different typologically from other languages of the world (and despite some differences among them) to be grouped together. The idea that creoles represent exceptional languages typologically is vehemently challenged, though for different reasons (theoretical or ideological), by scholars such as Aboh (2016) , Aboh & Smith (2009) , Aboh & Ansaldo (2007) , DeGraff (2002 , 2005) , and Mufwene (2001) , who argue that creoles are not structurally different from other languages. It is only on the basis of their sociohistory that they can be grouped together. I suppose that the fundamental question is, If it were not for the sociohistorical conditions of their birth, would we be justified in considering P/Cs as a special category worth investigating? In other words, are we inferring that special sociohistorical events will leave a linguistic trace or that they will shape the languages that were produced by them?
The debate, which has become virulent at times, is still open, with recent papers, rejoinders, and books ( Bakker et al. 2017 , McWhorter 2018a ) being published by all sides. For recent summaries and analyses of the creole debate, see Kouwenberg & Singler (2018) and Kilani-Schoch (2019) . One thing is sure, however: Some creolists, for fear of being caught up in the debate, are keeping away from this topic; others have lost an interest in this aspect of creolistics and are moving on.
A third debate concerns the social variables and cognitive processes leading to the emergence of P/Cs. Social variables include geographic regions, types of social contexts in which P/Cs developed (plantations, homesteads, mines, forts, trading posts), the nature of contacts between cultural groups (sporadic or regular or prolonged), the degree and nature of contact with superstrate languages at different moments in the history of P/Cs, the size of workforce, the degree of multilingualism, the types of social relationships within the groups, the gender ratio, and the effect of work on the development of community and vocabulary. Cognitive processes involve the influence of substrate and superstrate languages (for calquing, see Keesing 1988 ), relabeling/relexification ( Lefebvre 1998 , 2008 , 2011 ; Lefebvre & Lumsden 1989 ), semantic imitation ( Michaelis & Haspelmath 2020 ), grammaticalization ( Bruyn 2008 , McWhorter 2018b ), and patterns of second language acquisition (SLA) ( Siegel 2006 , 2008b ; Plag 2008 ). In light of the diversity and richness of the data available today, it is now well established that superstratist, substratist, second language (L2) acquisition processes, and universalist hypotheses do not need to be mutually exclusive and may have interacted during the emergence of P/Cs. This notion should not come as a surprise. Early on, Schuchardt commented on the multiplicity of processes involved in the makeup of creoles, as Baptista (2016) and Selbach (2020) remind us. Various scholars have raised that point since. Responding to Bickerton's bioprogram, Mufwene (1986) argued that universalist theories and substratist hypotheses complement each other. In 2008, Kouwenberg & Singler (2008b , p. 7) commented that “no single mechanism fully accounts for pidgin and creole genesis.” Van den Berg & Selbach (2009) and Mufwene (2016) also discuss this theme. The one-shoe-fits-all model therefore does not work. The field has moved away from overarching theories that sought to provide a single explanation for the apparition and development of all the P/Cs of the world.
It cannot be disputed any longer that substrate languages have contributed significantly to the development of P/Cs. Though the idea has been present for some time (see Keesing 1988 , Mufwene 1986 , Singler 1988 ), one of the most sustained engagements with it is Lefebvre's (1993 , 1996 , 1998 , 2011 , 2014) extensive data-driven, theoretical research program on the comparison between the Gbé languages and Haitian Creole since the 1990s, showing the importance of substrates in the emergence of Haitian Creole (and later Saramaccan and Papiamentu). Not all scholars have agreed with the relabeling-based model of creole genesis that she developed ( DeGraff 2002 , Mufwene 2001 , Singler 1996 ). To theorize the role of substrates in the emergence of creoles, Mufwene (1996) proposed the concept of “founder principle” (p. 84), which entails “how structural features of creoles have been predetermined to a large extent (but not exclusively) by the characteristics of the vernaculars spoken by the populations that founded the colonies in which they developed.” These characteristics would represent a feature pool available to the creole makers as they develop the creole. For a critique of that approach, see McWhorter (2018a) . Books by Thomason & Kaufman (1992) and collections of articles edited by Ansaldo et al. (2007) , Michaelis (2008) , and Lefebvre (2011) have demonstrated the role of substrate languages in the making of P/Cs. For instance, the Melanesian pidgins inherited from their substrates, the Austronesian languages, structural and semantic features such as serial verbs, predicate markers, transitive suffixes, and pronominal systems. What used to be referred to as “substratomaniac” by Bickerton (1981) and Chaudenson (2012) , among others, is now part of the creolistic canon. For the Pacific, works by Crowley (1990) , Keesing (1991) , Meyerhoff (2008 , 2009) , and Siegel (2008a) establish the role of substrates clearly with regard to Melanesian pidgins. For the Atlantic, among others, the works of scholars such as Holm & Patrick (2007) , Lefebvre (1998 , 2011) , Migge (2005 , 2011) , and Kihm (2011) and, for the Seychelles, the work of Michaelis (2008) attest to the importance of substrates in creole formation. In recent years, this research has shifted to Portuguese-based creoles and their link to their African substrates (see Jacobs 2009 , Quint & Tavares 2019 ).
Additional research shows that the superstrates have also played a part in the genesis of the structures of P/Cs. For instance, Aboh & DeGraff (2014) propose that French syntax also contributed to Haitian Creole. Writing about Suriname, Migge (2011) explains that there may be some partial calquing from the substrates but that the creole is the result of a mixed process that includes “influence from the superstrate and from language-internal change” (p. 156). Writing about the French-based creoles of the Indian Ocean, Chaudenson (1992) and Chaudenson & Mufwene (2001) prefer to think that these emerged out of a series of approximations of the lexifier (through partial acquisition) and that the substrate languages involved were, in reality, adstrates. And of course, as Winford (2003) reminds us, there could be more than one substrate language. These examples should not surprise us: From the moment that P/Cs were developed, their makers (and subsequent speakers) were part of very complex and changing social scenes, and they saw the successive presence of different social and linguistic inputs. These have likely varied with the social conditions prevailing at the time that the languages were developed and coalesced, but also throughout their life courses, which Mufwene (2001) calls language ecologies.
But what about the lexicon? Several creolists have long asserted that for most creoles, the substrates supply the grammar and the superstrates supply the lexicon, though Selbach (2008) , writing about the historical language Lingua Franca spoken off the Barbary Coast, explains that this assertion is not always the case. This model holds well in cases of culture interruptus, as in the Atlantic contexts of creole formation for instance, where, except for a few words here and there, almost all the lexicon comes from the superstrate(s) or from adstrates, as in the case of Sranan ( Sebba 2000 ). It holds less well, however, for the Pacific pidgins, where cultural continuity and localization (the return of pidgin speakers to their place of origin at the end of indenture) ensured that about 20% of the lexicon for languages such as Bislama ( Crowley 1990 ) and Solomon Pijin ( Tryon & Charpentier 2004 ) derive from substrate languages. Not surprisingly, these lexical items concern cultural matters not covered by the lexifier, English. Ponsonnet's (2018) study of proximity and difference between Barunga Kriol and the Dalabon (Australia) lexicon of emotion draws our attention to the importance of investigating semantics (less readily accessible than form) when investigating the links between a creole and a potential substrate.
If the one-shoe-fits-all explanatory model of creole genesis is disregarded, one can still propose regional umbrella frameworks, as Sessarego (2015) does for the lack of Spanish creoles in South America. Building on McWhorter's ( 2000b ) book on the same theme, Sessarego develops what he calls the “legal hypothesis of creole genesis”: The lack of Spanish creoles in South America may be due to the legal dimensions that defined the conditions of slavery in Spanish-speaking South America. Distinct processes may also take place simultaneously, or in sequence, with more or less impact. A useful example comes from Antigua, where Garlaza Ballester (2016) documents preplantation and plantation settings developing in sequence, each having different demographic and social makeups and allowing for the development of L2 acquisition processes for the preplantation settings and restructuring and creolization for the other. This situation is reminiscent of Chaudenson's (1992 , 2012) analysis of the development of French-based creoles in the Indian Ocean: Two sociodemographic phases resulted in two different linguistic phenomena of which only the second leads to creolization. In their study of the Língua de Preto in Portugal, Kihm & Rougé (2013) argue also that “untutored L2 acquisition by adults played a crucial role in creole formation” (p. 203). The case of Melanesian P/Cs is also enlightening: They may have been the products, as Crowley (1990) , Keesing (1991) , Sankoff (1984 , 1994) , and Siegel (2008a ,b) propose, of a variety of processes (grammaticalization of discursive forms, semantics of the lexifier, SLA processes, transfer from substrates) that intervened at different moments in the history of these languages. These processes are not mutually exclusive, but rather they reinforce each other to produce the Melanesian P/Cs we now know, as Meyerhoff (2008) makes abundantly clear.
With the massive amount of data now available, it becomes clear that one given creole may have been the result of various cognitive processes, with greater or lesser influence on these processes at different moments in creole makers’ social history ( Jourdan 1991 ). Or as Baptista (2016) puts it, “Different histories with distinct linguistic and societal ecologies mean different processes and different outcomes” (p. 386).
The last debate concerns the transformation of creoles since their emergence. Important questions remain. Do they distance themselves from their lexifiers as they evolve, as Alleyne (1996) , Chaudenson (1992) , and Mufwene (1992) argued? Are they open to substrate reinforcement, as has been proposed for Melanesian pidgins ( Sankoff 1994 ; Siegel 2008a , 2011 ) after the return of workers in their places of origin and once these workers were in regular contact with the local languages? Do they take on a life of their own, independent from substrate and lexifier, through further expansion and regularization of grammatical paradigms ( Jourdan 2009 ) and grammaticalization of discourse features ( Bruyn 2008 , Meyerhoff 2009 , Sankoff & Brown 1976 )? Writing about grammaticalization in creoles, and of plural markings in particular, Michaelis (2020) explained, on the basis of a comparative study, that the “restructuring and renewal processes in creole languages have left their unique footprints: the unusual amount of newly grammaticalized structures often entails variable marking.” In other words, grammaticalization does not always lead to the same results.
Do P/Cs become more like their lexifiers when they coexist with them in the same sociolinguistic niche, a process referred to as decreolization? In his detailed reassessment of the creole continuum (a linear model of creole evolution in the life course leading to the coexistence of several varieties) in the Caribbean, Winford (1997) reinforces the idea that variation in creoles is not the result of any decreolization but that it was present from the moment of coalescence of P/Cs. This point is well argued by Lefebvre (1998) and Siegel (2008a) , among others, who developed detailed theories on how the leveling of these varieties took place when the creoles stabilized. We know that variation is characteristic of creoles as it is of any other language and that it is not always easy to describe it with the usual concepts of code-switching, repertoire, continuum, and the like. In other words, the creole continuum may be a sociolinguistic construct ( Winford 1997 ) rather than an objective reality. Research by Patrick (1999 , 2008) on variation in Jamaican Creole, by Garrett (2000) on the emergence of a formal register in Saint Lucia, by Migge & Léglise (2011) on the development of new language varieties, by Meyerhoff (2009) , by Jourdan & Angeli (2014) , and in Hinrich & Farquharson's (2011) edited collection on variation in the Caribbean, among others, show that the transformation of creoles does not necessarily follow a set pattern. Recently, Mayeux (2019) explained, with regard to Louisiana Creole, that change induced from contact with the lexifier “does not proceed in a creole specific fashion” (p. iii). Do these studies hint at the possibilities that P/Cs evolve the way other languages do? It seems so, as evidenced by the studies that challenge the straitjacket represented by the continuum model and showcase the flexibility of creoles, as well as the dynamisms of sociolinguistic interactions.

Section: CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS

The theoretical debates about P/Cs described above, and the importance attached to them in the field of creole studies, have diverted the focus of many creolists away from how these languages are used socially. Except for the work of a few trailblazers such as Alleyne, Escure, Rickford, Sankoff, Tabouret-Keller, and Winford, the bulk of the work done on P/Cs in the past century focused on the linguistic and sociohistoric dimensions of their genesis. It concentrated also on their syntax and morphology, on their typology, and on the description of rules rather than on social constraints to explain the data. This work was important and groundbreaking and transformed creole studies into one of the very exciting fields of linguistics. Yet this bias led to a rather monolithic vision of P/Cs (and of the societies they were part of), an approach that harks back to the time when one could describe a language as an entity with easily definable contours. In addition, the fact that we keep referring to them as a small set probably contributes to the reinforcement of that impression. The emphasis on these topics, however important, took scholars away from other pressing issues. In her column written in the Journal of Pidgin and Creole Languages , Migge (2020 ; see also Farquharson & Migge 2017a ) urges creolists to embrace the study of creoles from the point of view of discourse, sociolinguistics, or linguistic ideologies to bring creole linguistics into larger contemporary debates in social science.
And she is correct. As we know, new languages are not simply a matter of linguistic components that can be put together like a jigsaw puzzle; they are the direct outcomes of social processes, negotiations of meaning, power relationships between individuals, and creative frictions, as Tsing (2005) would put it, between cultural systems of thought and language, all this constrained by the pragmatics of having to communicate simply and efficiently with people who speak different languages. I argue that linguistic outcomes are social outcomes. Over the years, important new issues progressively emerged that shed more light on the status of P/Cs as languages of communication more so than as objects of linguistic study. One of these issues is the status of P/Cs.
As with other minorized and nonwritten languages, P/Cs have a history of being denigrated: Labels such as jargon, broken English, charabia, and little-X were attached to them until late in their history by colonial administrators who, in general, did not recognize them as real languages. As we know, naming things, places, languages, and ethnic groups is part of the business of empires ( Calvet 1979 , DeGraff 2005 , Errington 2001 , Faraclas 2020 , Heller & McElhinny 2017 , Léglise & Migge 2006 ). Former colonial ideologies perdure even after decolonization and spread in the postcolonial social space. And speakers’ attitudes often reveal deep ambivalence toward their own languages, as has been reported by Beckford Wassink (1999) for Jamaica, Escure (1991) for Belize, Migge & Léglise (2015) for Guyana and Suriname, and Fleischmann Schwartz & Nick (2018) for Seychelles. For instance, writing about the language ideologies prevalent among schoolchildren in Suriname, Migge & Léglise (2015) find that children do not express overt negative attitudes toward any local language, but that these languages “clearly are assigned social values” (p. 37). And Fleischmann Schwartz & Nick (2018) , writing about teachers’ language attitudes in Seychelles, conclude, “Indeed, if there is one major lesson which can be learnt from this investigation, it is that teachers, despite their formal education, are by no means immune to the many negative stereotypes and misconceptions that still exist about minority languages” (p. 192). However, Mühlheisen [2017 (2001) ] explains that in Trinidad these ambivalences are likely to change when speakers’ lives change. And research by Beckford Wassink (1999) in Jamaica reports speakers’ positive attitudes toward Jamaican Creole. Scholars working in the Pacific also comment on the changes in attitudes and ideologies that accompany social change in these places. As Eades & Siegel (1999) reported for Kriol in Australia, Romaine (1999) and Snyder-Frey (2013) for Hawaiian Creole, Smith (2002) for Tok Pisin, Jourdan & Angeli (2014) for Solomon Islands Pijin, and Vandeputte-Tavo (2013) for Vanuatu, one notes a diversity of linguistic ideologies (and emotional affiliations to the language) that run at times along class and education lines and identity politics and at times along the rural–urban continuum. Scholars also note the development of urban normative standards for speaking creoles: Some regional varieties are becoming objects of derision from urban speakers (see Jourdan & Angeli 2014 for Solomon Islands Pijin and Valdman et al. 2015 for Haitian). Scholars also comment on the influence of that “standard” or “way of speaking” on regional varieties away from urban centers. Issues of language loyalty and language purism become significantly present in conversations and interviews. I argue that one way to know that a language has “made it” socially is to pay attention to the various linguistic attitudes that develop concomitantly to the spread and cultural rooting of the language in communities: These ideologies appear when the language's existence and presence reach speakers’ consciousness and become symbols of sameness or difference.
Sociolinguistic studies of variation in creoles have effloresced. Whereas issues of identity were present in early works on creoles, such as the work of Lepage & Tabouret-Keller (1985) , they have now become more prominent and have been enriched with discussions of linguistic ideologies that bring to light how these shape people's practices and linguistic affiliation. Research by Garrett (2005) on language socialization and language shift in Saint Lucia, Meyerhoff & Walker's (2013) work describing speech styles on Bequia, Migge's (2005) study of variation in formal situations among Pamaka, Migge & Léglise's (2015) analysis of the sociolinguistic situation of the Maroon creoles in Guyana, Paugh's (2012) research on language practice among children as they shift from Patwa to English in Dominica, Patrick's (1999) now-classic study of variation in the mesolect in Jamaica, Smith's (2002) long-term research among children in Papua New Guinea, and Meakins's (2012) study in Gurindji Kriol, which teases out the distinction between code-switching and mixed language, all delve into the linguistic ideologies that shape enregisterment ( Agha 2003 ) and enlanguagement ( Jourdan 2008 ). They also show how sociolinguistic differentiation progressively establishes itself and how speakers develop attitudes and value judgments on what constitutes a true exemplar of their language. This development indexes speakers’ awareness of the various ways of speaking their language and of social differences. It also illustrates the development of normativity and the presence of power relationships expressed in language. This emerging ideology is particularly the case in postcolonial situations where multilingualism is the norm (as in Nigeria and Sierra Leone, for instance) more than the exception and where creoles, once more, come to play the role of language brokers ( Agbo & Plag 2020 , Ménard 2018 ). But wherever they are, contact languages lack economic and political power, which renders them vulnerable ( Garrett 2006 , 2012 ). And while we are familiar with creoles being potential language killers when speakers shift away from ancestral languages and become monolingual users of creoles, as when Taiap speakers shift toward Tok Pisin in Papua New Guinea ( Kulick 2020 ), we are less familiar with situations where language ideologies are leading speakers to shift away from the creole to the official language, as in the case of Cavita Chabacano in the Philippines ( Lesho 2018 ) or in the case of Kriol in Belize ( Abtahian 2017 ). In some cases, the shift puts the contact language in danger of disappearing, as Lee (2020) explains in her review of the loss of contact languages.
A few centuries after the birth of many P/Cs, and many decades after the introduction of schools in creolophone countries, one makes an interesting observation: Except for a few of these countries, creoles are not used as a medium of instruction in schools (see Siegel 1999 , 2005 for a survey).
The widespread resistance to using creoles in schools, despite the existence of standardization tools such as dictionaries and grammars, is inherently ideological and comes from residual prejudices that were inherited from the colonial period. Colonizers typically perceived P/Cs as the broken form of the lexifier. They thought that encouraging the use of P/Cs at school would create interference with the latter and would prevent the students from acquiring the lexifier properly. These prejudices often carry on today among the postcolonial elites and are instilled in the population through schooling ( Migge et al. 2010 , Siegel 2005 ). The result is that speakers often denigrate their own languages ( Smith 2002 ) or do not agree on what the “real” creole is ( Moll 2015 , Schieffelin & Doucet 1994 ), on which variety to implement in school ( Devonish & Carpenter 2007 , Willans 2017 ), and whether using creoles at school is worth doing ( Fleischmann Schwartz & Nick 2018 ). Opponents of the use of creoles at school claim that these languages are linguistically problematic (limited lexicon of P/Cs, lack of lexical precision, unstable grammar, etc.), though Stanwood (2014) shows that this discourse can be countered easily. They also argue that creoles are socially compromised: For one, they would encourage ghettoization, and second, they hark back to the time of slavery or indentured labor. Proponents of creoles in school argue that the cognitive, social, linguistic, and educational advantages trump their disadvantages ( Angelo 2020 ; Owodally 2015 ; Siegel 1999 , 2005 ). But one of the main problems faced by creoles is their symbolic invisibility; that is, they are used, but no one really takes them seriously. Lately, some pidgin and creole speakers started to defend the right to use creoles at school, as a fundamental human right, arguing that children have the right to be educated in their first language ( Brown-Blake 2008 , DeGraff 2020 , Willans 2017 ).
While governments hesitate to implement written creoles at school, however, these languages flourish on the Internet, in social media, and in text messages. Scholars such as Handman (2013) , Moll (2015) , and Vandeputte (2018) , for instance, report that instead of writing messages exclusively in the language in which they are officially literate, urban speakers of Tok Pisin, Jamaican Creole, and Bislama opt to write in their respective creoles, and in many cases they code-switch between the lexifier and the creole. Thus the code they use when texting is very similar to the code they use when speaking. But they are also developing their own spelling system and applying to it the principles typical of textspeak (economy of spelling, emoticons, exuberant punctuation, and initials) ( Crystal 2006 ). This practice is interesting on a few levels. First, as with writing, texting is also driven by the technology: Both the surface we write on and the tool we write with constrain how we write. We may expect that when the technology changes, texting might be affected. Second, by using P/Cs (languages they use only when speaking) for these types of exchanges, speakers clearly associate communication on these social networks with orality ( Crystal 2006 ). Computer-mediated communication, as Hinrichs (2006) explains with regard to the use of Jamaican Creole by young people, encodes in writing patterns of language use. Although some have claimed that textspeak, or the use of texting as speech, is a genuine genre of writing ( McCullogh 2019 ), and that it may have created a spelling divide in English and other languages, textspeak in creoles is different: It is establishing a new spelling standard for these languages that are otherwise almost never written by their speakers. While ignoring the standardization conventions set for these languages, creole speakers participate in a form of grassroot literacy, a bottom-up literacy that develops through use. It differs radically from, and in Handman's (2013) terms it subverts, the top-down standardization developed by creolists and missionaries as instantiated in the dictionaries and word lists they compiled. Third, in some cases, and as reported by Moll (2015) with regard to Jamaican Creole and Miller (2014) regarding Juba Arabic, a sort of citizen metalinguistics emerges among users: Notions of what constitutes true Jamaican or true Juba Arabic surface, as participants work out the graphemes they find more legitimate and more representative of their language. But what seems important to users is that orthography is an object not only of convention but also of negotiation. The dynamism and creativity of creole users seem to favor efficacy over standardized form. Fourth, these new spelling conventions develop within social networks and signal that the user has insider status. Just as speech reveals one's belonging to a community of linguistic practice, so does texting. Texters use morphophonemic levels that assume considerable knowledge on the part of their interlocutors. My informants in the Solomon Islands explain that people belonging to what I call different “communities of texting practices” understand each other: Diversity does not seem to hinder communication. And after some time, while leveling diffuses across these textspell communities, flexibility and diversity of forms continue to exist, without breaks in communication.
Can we use what is happening on the Web to cast some light on what may have happened at the time of the coalescence of the creoles we study today? Out of a diversity of forms proposed and used by textspeakers come more dominant forms (economic, easy, transparent) that are adopted across the textspell communities through negotiation. A point of irony does not escape us: While educators are banning creoles from schools, texting gives creoles and their speakers the legitimacy and visibility associated with written languages and contributes largely to the development of creoles as written systems of communication.
As with other minorized and nonwritten languages, P/Cs have a history of being denigrated: Labels such as jargon, broken English, charabia, and little-X were attached to them until late in their history by colonial administrators who, in general, did not recognize them as real languages. As we know, naming things, places, languages, and ethnic groups is part of the business of empires ( Calvet 1979 , DeGraff 2005 , Errington 2001 , Faraclas 2020 , Heller & McElhinny 2017 , Léglise & Migge 2006 ). Former colonial ideologies perdure even after decolonization and spread in the postcolonial social space. And speakers’ attitudes often reveal deep ambivalence toward their own languages, as has been reported by Beckford Wassink (1999) for Jamaica, Escure (1991) for Belize, Migge & Léglise (2015) for Guyana and Suriname, and Fleischmann Schwartz & Nick (2018) for Seychelles. For instance, writing about the language ideologies prevalent among schoolchildren in Suriname, Migge & Léglise (2015) find that children do not express overt negative attitudes toward any local language, but that these languages “clearly are assigned social values” (p. 37). And Fleischmann Schwartz & Nick (2018) , writing about teachers’ language attitudes in Seychelles, conclude, “Indeed, if there is one major lesson which can be learnt from this investigation, it is that teachers, despite their formal education, are by no means immune to the many negative stereotypes and misconceptions that still exist about minority languages” (p. 192). However, Mühlheisen [2017 (2001) ] explains that in Trinidad these ambivalences are likely to change when speakers’ lives change. And research by Beckford Wassink (1999) in Jamaica reports speakers’ positive attitudes toward Jamaican Creole. Scholars working in the Pacific also comment on the changes in attitudes and ideologies that accompany social change in these places. As Eades & Siegel (1999) reported for Kriol in Australia, Romaine (1999) and Snyder-Frey (2013) for Hawaiian Creole, Smith (2002) for Tok Pisin, Jourdan & Angeli (2014) for Solomon Islands Pijin, and Vandeputte-Tavo (2013) for Vanuatu, one notes a diversity of linguistic ideologies (and emotional affiliations to the language) that run at times along class and education lines and identity politics and at times along the rural–urban continuum. Scholars also note the development of urban normative standards for speaking creoles: Some regional varieties are becoming objects of derision from urban speakers (see Jourdan & Angeli 2014 for Solomon Islands Pijin and Valdman et al. 2015 for Haitian). Scholars also comment on the influence of that “standard” or “way of speaking” on regional varieties away from urban centers. Issues of language loyalty and language purism become significantly present in conversations and interviews. I argue that one way to know that a language has “made it” socially is to pay attention to the various linguistic attitudes that develop concomitantly to the spread and cultural rooting of the language in communities: These ideologies appear when the language's existence and presence reach speakers’ consciousness and become symbols of sameness or difference.
Sociolinguistic studies of variation in creoles have effloresced. Whereas issues of identity were present in early works on creoles, such as the work of Lepage & Tabouret-Keller (1985) , they have now become more prominent and have been enriched with discussions of linguistic ideologies that bring to light how these shape people's practices and linguistic affiliation. Research by Garrett (2005) on language socialization and language shift in Saint Lucia, Meyerhoff & Walker's (2013) work describing speech styles on Bequia, Migge's (2005) study of variation in formal situations among Pamaka, Migge & Léglise's (2015) analysis of the sociolinguistic situation of the Maroon creoles in Guyana, Paugh's (2012) research on language practice among children as they shift from Patwa to English in Dominica, Patrick's (1999) now-classic study of variation in the mesolect in Jamaica, Smith's (2002) long-term research among children in Papua New Guinea, and Meakins's (2012) study in Gurindji Kriol, which teases out the distinction between code-switching and mixed language, all delve into the linguistic ideologies that shape enregisterment ( Agha 2003 ) and enlanguagement ( Jourdan 2008 ). They also show how sociolinguistic differentiation progressively establishes itself and how speakers develop attitudes and value judgments on what constitutes a true exemplar of their language. This development indexes speakers’ awareness of the various ways of speaking their language and of social differences. It also illustrates the development of normativity and the presence of power relationships expressed in language. This emerging ideology is particularly the case in postcolonial situations where multilingualism is the norm (as in Nigeria and Sierra Leone, for instance) more than the exception and where creoles, once more, come to play the role of language brokers ( Agbo & Plag 2020 , Ménard 2018 ). But wherever they are, contact languages lack economic and political power, which renders them vulnerable ( Garrett 2006 , 2012 ). And while we are familiar with creoles being potential language killers when speakers shift away from ancestral languages and become monolingual users of creoles, as when Taiap speakers shift toward Tok Pisin in Papua New Guinea ( Kulick 2020 ), we are less familiar with situations where language ideologies are leading speakers to shift away from the creole to the official language, as in the case of Cavita Chabacano in the Philippines ( Lesho 2018 ) or in the case of Kriol in Belize ( Abtahian 2017 ). In some cases, the shift puts the contact language in danger of disappearing, as Lee (2020) explains in her review of the loss of contact languages.
A few centuries after the birth of many P/Cs, and many decades after the introduction of schools in creolophone countries, one makes an interesting observation: Except for a few of these countries, creoles are not used as a medium of instruction in schools (see Siegel 1999 , 2005 for a survey).
The widespread resistance to using creoles in schools, despite the existence of standardization tools such as dictionaries and grammars, is inherently ideological and comes from residual prejudices that were inherited from the colonial period. Colonizers typically perceived P/Cs as the broken form of the lexifier. They thought that encouraging the use of P/Cs at school would create interference with the latter and would prevent the students from acquiring the lexifier properly. These prejudices often carry on today among the postcolonial elites and are instilled in the population through schooling ( Migge et al. 2010 , Siegel 2005 ). The result is that speakers often denigrate their own languages ( Smith 2002 ) or do not agree on what the “real” creole is ( Moll 2015 , Schieffelin & Doucet 1994 ), on which variety to implement in school ( Devonish & Carpenter 2007 , Willans 2017 ), and whether using creoles at school is worth doing ( Fleischmann Schwartz & Nick 2018 ). Opponents of the use of creoles at school claim that these languages are linguistically problematic (limited lexicon of P/Cs, lack of lexical precision, unstable grammar, etc.), though Stanwood (2014) shows that this discourse can be countered easily. They also argue that creoles are socially compromised: For one, they would encourage ghettoization, and second, they hark back to the time of slavery or indentured labor. Proponents of creoles in school argue that the cognitive, social, linguistic, and educational advantages trump their disadvantages ( Angelo 2020 ; Owodally 2015 ; Siegel 1999 , 2005 ). But one of the main problems faced by creoles is their symbolic invisibility; that is, they are used, but no one really takes them seriously. Lately, some pidgin and creole speakers started to defend the right to use creoles at school, as a fundamental human right, arguing that children have the right to be educated in their first language ( Brown-Blake 2008 , DeGraff 2020 , Willans 2017 ).
While governments hesitate to implement written creoles at school, however, these languages flourish on the Internet, in social media, and in text messages. Scholars such as Handman (2013) , Moll (2015) , and Vandeputte (2018) , for instance, report that instead of writing messages exclusively in the language in which they are officially literate, urban speakers of Tok Pisin, Jamaican Creole, and Bislama opt to write in their respective creoles, and in many cases they code-switch between the lexifier and the creole. Thus the code they use when texting is very similar to the code they use when speaking. But they are also developing their own spelling system and applying to it the principles typical of textspeak (economy of spelling, emoticons, exuberant punctuation, and initials) ( Crystal 2006 ). This practice is interesting on a few levels. First, as with writing, texting is also driven by the technology: Both the surface we write on and the tool we write with constrain how we write. We may expect that when the technology changes, texting might be affected. Second, by using P/Cs (languages they use only when speaking) for these types of exchanges, speakers clearly associate communication on these social networks with orality ( Crystal 2006 ). Computer-mediated communication, as Hinrichs (2006) explains with regard to the use of Jamaican Creole by young people, encodes in writing patterns of language use. Although some have claimed that textspeak, or the use of texting as speech, is a genuine genre of writing ( McCullogh 2019 ), and that it may have created a spelling divide in English and other languages, textspeak in creoles is different: It is establishing a new spelling standard for these languages that are otherwise almost never written by their speakers. While ignoring the standardization conventions set for these languages, creole speakers participate in a form of grassroot literacy, a bottom-up literacy that develops through use. It differs radically from, and in Handman's (2013) terms it subverts, the top-down standardization developed by creolists and missionaries as instantiated in the dictionaries and word lists they compiled. Third, in some cases, and as reported by Moll (2015) with regard to Jamaican Creole and Miller (2014) regarding Juba Arabic, a sort of citizen metalinguistics emerges among users: Notions of what constitutes true Jamaican or true Juba Arabic surface, as participants work out the graphemes they find more legitimate and more representative of their language. But what seems important to users is that orthography is an object not only of convention but also of negotiation. The dynamism and creativity of creole users seem to favor efficacy over standardized form. Fourth, these new spelling conventions develop within social networks and signal that the user has insider status. Just as speech reveals one's belonging to a community of linguistic practice, so does texting. Texters use morphophonemic levels that assume considerable knowledge on the part of their interlocutors. My informants in the Solomon Islands explain that people belonging to what I call different “communities of texting practices” understand each other: Diversity does not seem to hinder communication. And after some time, while leveling diffuses across these textspell communities, flexibility and diversity of forms continue to exist, without breaks in communication.
Can we use what is happening on the Web to cast some light on what may have happened at the time of the coalescence of the creoles we study today? Out of a diversity of forms proposed and used by textspeakers come more dominant forms (economic, easy, transparent) that are adopted across the textspell communities through negotiation. A point of irony does not escape us: While educators are banning creoles from schools, texting gives creoles and their speakers the legitimacy and visibility associated with written languages and contributes largely to the development of creoles as written systems of communication.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I thank John Benjamins Publishing Company for granting me universal access to their ejournals and ebooks while university libraries were closed owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. I am grateful to Peter Bakker, Claire Lefebvre, Bettina Migge, Rachel Selbach, and Kevin Tuite for their comments on an earlier version of this article. Of course, shortcomings are mine only.

Section: literature cited

