Title: African American Archaeology, for Now


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

A focus on institutions frames this examination of the archaeology of African America. While initially emphasizing the institution of slavery and theories of Black difference, the field today has a much wider scope. Researchers engaged in this work critically examine past and present-day institutions. As such, this review also considers the place of African American archaeology in engaged scholarship, critical theory, and self-reflexive practice. As in past reviews, the emphasis is on the United States, with occasional references to important work in the rest of the African diaspora. African American archaeology is shown to be inextricably interwoven with scholarly work in North American archaeology, African American studies, heritage studies, and social theory.

Section: INTRODUCTION

In assessing the state of what he called “Negro history,” Arthur Schomburg observed “the Negro historian to-day digs under the spot where his predecessor stood and argued” ( Schomburg 1925 , p. 232). Then, as now, excavation served as a powerful metaphor for uncovering information that had been obscured, reassembling what had been scattered. Roughly a century later, of course, researchers quite literally examine the Black past by digging. This enterprise is organized, as Schomburg would have appreciated, systematically and scientifically. It is a part of what we call “archaeology.”
This article may be read as an update to or continuation of earlier Annual Review of Anthropology articles concerning archaeologies of African America. Like several previous authors ( Leone et al. 2005 , Orser 1998 , Singleton 1995 ), I limit my focus to the United States, with occasional references to important work in other parts of the African diaspora. The central argument of this review is that recent archaeologies of African America can be well understood through the lens of “institutions.”
The previous reviews showed that attention to institutions is not entirely new. In fact, the institution of slavery was front and center in much of the early archaeological scholarship on African America, as researchers considered living conditions, roles, and power, as well as the new cultural forms that were engendered in that crucible. Singleton (1995) outlined how archaeologists sought to understand how such domains as foodways, social hierarchies, and folk beliefs and practices were deployed by people enmeshed in a “total institution” par excellence (for the concept of the total institution, see the section titled Archaeologies of the Peculiar Institution, below). As indicated by Orser (1998) , several decades after the first systematic explorations of plantation slavery, a shift toward the concept of diaspora acknowledged the growing number of archaeological studies beyond North America and beyond slavery. The language of diaspora also signaled continued attention to the African roots of American identities and cultures. Archaeologists engaged in concerted efforts to understand marronage , and other forms of resistance to slavery, while also beginning to critically contemplate the concept of race and its corollary institution, racism . It also became increasingly common for researchers to discuss the significance of archaeological research for contemporary society ( Orser 1998 ). In describing the emergence of an African Diasporic bioarchaeology, Blakey (2001) laid out the contrast between forensic and biocultural approaches. He also explained the significance of the ever-greater prominence of African Americans as clients and producers of bioarchaeological scholarship. The review is a social history of bioarchaeology as it exists at the intersection of the interests and scholarly traditions of African Diaspora studies, sociocultural anthropology, history, physical anthropology, and archaeology ( Blakey 2001 ). Leone et al. (2005) drew attention to archaeologists who were examining acts of African American refusal. These manifested in landscapes such as the Underground Railroad, or in individual artifacts, the kinds of items associated with sensibilities, identities, and logics originating in Africa or arising in opposition to regimes of enslavement and anti-Blackness ( Leone et al. 2005 ).
This review uses the institution as a lens through which to consider recent archaeologies of African America. We begin with new research on enslavement 1 emerging from the institutional spaces in which African American archaeologies first gained a foothold. Next come the new institutional frameworks within which scholars operate and the expanding range of topics they study. Then, we turn to the institutions that shaped Black lives in the past, followed by institution building within archaeology itself. The conclusion examines the relationship between substantive studies, the disciplines, theory, and practice. Thus, the institutions addressed in this review are those that existed in the past, alongside a critical assessment of the ways in which present-day institutions structure archaeological practice.
One can think of institutions, whether past or present, as “formal” (plantations, schools, museums) or “social” (households, gender, the academy) ( Hejtmanek 2016 ). Far from being mutually exclusive, both formal and social institutions serve to “create and maintain the social body through action on individual bodies, souls, and minds” ( De Cunzo 2006 , p. 182). Though archaeologies of institutions tend to emphasize institutions’ formal aspects ( Beisaw & Gibb 2009 ), it might be useful to think of any institution as having both formal and social facets. Institutions are the mechanisms by which people are organized into society ( Hejtmanek 2016 ). To accomplish this end, institutions classify, prescribe behaviors, survey, and discipline ( De Cunzo 2006 , p. 182). But the flip side to the power of the institution, even one as totalizing as slavery, is resistance and transgression ( Chan 2007 , LaRoche 2014 , Sayers 2014 , Weik 2012 ).

Section: ARCHAEOLOGIES OF THE PECULIAR INSTITUTION

As Singleton observed, there has been a long tradition of archaeology sponsored by formal institutions (historical societies, meeting houses, churches) dedicated to preserving knowledge about African Americans living in freedom ( Singleton 1995 , pp. 121–22), so slavery was never the only focus of early instances of African American archaeology. But an initial emphasis on slavery is hardly surprising if we note that many of the institutions that produced major, influential studies in African American archaeology were frequently plantations owned by Founding Fathers of the United States, national monuments and parks, and outdoor history museums presenting national narratives of the United States from the sixteenth through the nineteenth centuries.
One could argue that, for many people, slavery would have been experienced as a total institution. Goffman (1961) describes the necessary characteristics of the form:
First, all aspects of life are conducted in the same place and under the same single authority. Second, each phase of the member's daily activity is carried on in the immediate company of a large batch of others, all of whom are treated alike and required to do the same thing together. Third, all phases of the day's activities are tightly scheduled…the whole sequence of activities being imposed from above by a system of explicit formal rulings and a body of officials. Finally, the various enforced activities are brought together into a single rational plan purportedly designed to fulfill the official aims of institution. (p. 6)

Slavery, as it manifested in the modern Western world, was not necessarily a total institution, but living in slavery was to be part of a specific formal institution (a plantation, a quarter, a workshop) that was totalizing in its scope. At the same time, we must take seriously the fact that even while enslaved, or otherwise subject to formal institutions not of their choosing, people were part of social institutions such as families, religious communities, and households ( Battle-Baptiste 2007 , Beaudry & Berkland 2007 , Franklin 2020 ).
Current work moves beyond a focus on slave/free binaries or comparisons between European American and African American lifeways. Analyses of artifact or feature patterning (for example, the meaning of black and white beads or subfloor pits) provide ever more convincing evidence of practices with parallels in West African societies ( Davidson 2020 , Samford 2007 ). At the same time, there is a growing appreciation for the multiplicity of factors that might lead enslaved people to deploy material culture in distinctive ways ( Brown 2015 ). Archaeologists investigate whether, for example, proximity to one's owner could drive the search for magical forms of protection ( Agbe-Davies 2017 ) and how such forms existed in productive tension with protestant Christianity ( Leone 2020 ). Frequently, more than mere presence or association is required to demonstrate that the artifacts to which archaeologists attach “African” or “traditional” meanings actually held such meanings in the past ( Cantwell & Wall 2015 , Davidson 2014 , Fennell 2007 ).
Likewise, artifacts such as cowries, once thought of primarily as “Africanisms,” have been reinserted into the worldwide networks of circulation that engendered the association between Africans and the shells in the first place ( Heath 2016 ; for more on the West African context, see Ogundiran 2014 ). Colonowares, the subject of intense debates about whether they were the products of potters of Native or African descent, are now often understood as the products of colonialism ( Cobb & DePratter 2012 , Galke 2009 ), as originally proposed by Ferguson (1980) . With subfloor pits, found widely under dwellings occupied by people enslaved in the Chesapeake, analysts have considered the extent to which they functioned as group or individual storage features, or in magical and religious activities, and how the conditions of enslavement, including evolving labor regimes and demographic shifts, shaped the usefulness of such features over time ( Neiman 2008 , Samford 2007 ).
Many of these new analyses have been made possible by efforts such as the Digital Archaeological Archive of Comparative Slavery (DAACS), “a Web-based initiative designed to foster intersite, comparative archaeological research on slavery” ( https://www.daacs.org/aboutdaacs/ ). In bringing together on a single platform data from dozens of archaeological sites from the Chesapeake to the Caribbean, DAACS facilitates comparative projects and analyses that require larger samples, longer time frames, or greater geographical diversity than a single site could provide ( Galle 2017 ). This large, and significantly, standardized data set has supported fine-grained and systematic investigations of, for example, how enslaved people engaged with the consumer revolution. In a study across eight plantations, Galle (2010) identified metal buttons and refined ceramics as costly items that served not only mundane functions, but also as signals of social worth to other residents of a plantation. These artifacts were thus part of the process of community building and household formation. An examination of ubiquitous and simple straight pins reveals how people enslaved at Mount Vernon participated in the consumer revolution in ways simultaneously comparable to (in terms of access to specific items), distinctive from (in terms of the items’ functions), and entangled with (in terms of the tasks that extracted labor value from the enslaved) those of their enslavers ( Breen 2017 ). Thus, we see that while the archaeological programs of institutions originated in the search for new insights about America's ruling class, the focus has since widened, if not shifted, 2 to address the lives of the enslaved people whose labor created and underpinned that elite group.
Of course, the institution of slavery was not confined to the US South, and archaeology has been instrumental in bringing that point home to a wider audience. The African Burial Ground (ABG) project in New York City produced many important innovations in the areas of bioarchaeology, urban archaeology, public/participatory archaeology, and restorative justice ( Blakey 2010 , Jackson et al. 2004 ). The project had a major impact on popular (and scholarly) perceptions of where slavery existed, the embodied consequences of enslavement ( Blakey & Rankin-Hill 2016 , Mack & Blakey 2004 ), the roles that descendants and other publics can have in shaping research agendas ( Blakey 2020 ), and the aspects of African American culture that have roots in West Africa ( Perry et al. 2009 ).

Section: EXPANDING MANDATES

Much of the early essential work of identifying, recording, and salvaging African American sites was undertaken within nationalist museums, by cultural resource management firms prompted by historic preservation legislation, at the behest of African American activists, or some combination of these ( Singleton 2010 , p. 122). However, as the range of institutions engaged in African American archaeology has broadened and deepened, new research standpoints have emerged. This upswing in work on lives after or beyond enslavement can be attributed to several factors. One is that historical archaeologists 3 are increasingly taking on projects in regions and time periods beyond the territories, colonies, and states in which slavery had once been legal, where slavery was not the initial frame of reference. Perhaps more significant is the growing influence of descendants and other African American stakeholders who want to learn about a full range of pasts, not only enslavement ( Jackson 2011 ; Leone 2005 , p. 122). Finally, scholarly approaches to contemporary inequality, such as critical race theory, compel an examination of anti-Blackness and racism not only in the pre-Emancipation past but also in the more proximate inequalities of the late nineteenth through the twenty-first centuries ( Agbe-Davies 2015 , Battle-Baptiste 2011 , Epperson 2004 , Flewellen et al. 2021a , Franklin et al. 2020 , González-Tennant 2018 , McDavid 2007 , McDavid & McGhee 2010 ). It is no longer sufficient to only look back to the plantation; all sites, all eras, are now fair game (for more on the expansive significance of critical race theory for archaeology, see Fong et al. 2022 , in this volume). A growing number of researchers investigate the processes by which people sought temporary or permanent freedom; navigated the transition from legalized slavery to Emancipation; and formed communities that responded to ongoing racism, structural inequality, and violence.
Long-term Maroon settlements have received less attention in the United States than elsewhere, for example, in Brazil ( Ferreira 2015 ) or the Caribbean ( Agorsah 2007 , Dunnavant 2021 ). The Great Dismal Swamp remains an important exception. Extensive survey and excavation have revealed a Maroon presence ∼1600–1860, as well as pre- and post-Emancipation labor camps inhabited by African American workers ( Sayers 2014 ). Weik's (2012) examination of Pilaklikaha emphasizes the processes of ethnogenesis that brought the community into being and the multiple pathways (escape from enslavement elsewhere in the southeast being only one of them) that brought people of African ancestry into Seminole territory. At both sites, mass-produced, imported goods demonstrate ongoing interactions between residents and the wider world. Sitting relatively lightly on the landscape and intentionally difficult to find, Maroon communities nonetheless represent enduring social institutions. Each served as a rebuke and a challenge to the plantation societies that surrounded it, leading eventually, in the case of Pilaklikaha, to destruction (for more on similar archaeologies of refuge, see Hauser 2022 , this volume).
Some refugees from enslavement participated in networks that we now call collectively the Underground Railroad. LaRoche traces this phenomenon across the landscape of the US Midwest, demonstrating how settlements and individual households—of free African Americans as well as others—constituted a network, or constellation of networks, that helped people to escape slavery ( LaRoche 2014 ). Small communities of African Americans were frequently the first points of entry as people made their way from slave to free states in the decades leading up to the American Civil War. Archaeological evidence anchors these settlements to the modern landscape, but oral history is the key to establishing any site's connection to the larger system of resistance to the institution of slavery ( LaRoche 2011 ).
One such community, a fully incorporated town, was established by a man whose own route out of slavery required self-purchase. Research at New Philadelphia interrogated the meaning of race on the Illinois frontier, before and after the Emancipation Proclamation, and into the present ( Shackel 2011 ). There, archaeologists uncovered the material evidence demonstrating Frank McWorter's use of the law and the instruments of government to ensure his own rights as a free person and the survival of this multiracial town in a region that was ostensibly “free” territory, but by no means friendly or safe ( Fennell 2010 , Martin & Martin 2010 ). Formal institutions in the town included its school ( Agbe-Davies & Martin 2013 , Helton 2010 ). Members of McWorter's family both used and maintained the networks of the Underground Railroad ( Alkalimat 2010 , LaRoche 2014 , Weik 2012 ).
Archaeologists called to sites thought to be nodes within the network find highly suggestive associations—a modified cistern, a cold cellar with evidence of intermittent occupation—that seldom resemble the purpose-built tunnels or signaling quilts of the popular imagination ( Delle 2019 ). “Archaeological evidence of such a clandestine operation has been ephemeral, extremely limited, inconclusive, and easily explained away” ( LaRoche 2011 , p. 623). One of the best-known agents of the Underground Railroad has also come under the archaeological gaze. However, research at the home of Harriet Tubman focuses on her life in retirement, in which she operated a farm and a brickworks and founded an institution—a charitable home for the aged ( Armstrong 2011 , 2022 ).
Barnes & Steen (2012) offer an approach for examining the lives of people navigating the transition from slavery to freedom: community. Studying Gullah communities, Barnes & Steen argue that a focus on the community, rather than the household or the region, as the unit of analysis draws attention to sites and questions that would otherwise be overlooked. This strategy helps to mitigate the problem of the structural forces within archaeology (an emphasis on landowners rather than renters, and on highly visible sites with more extensive architectural remains, larger numbers of artifacts, or more substantial grave markers) that bias our data sets away from sites associated with freedmen and their immediate descendants ( Barile 2004 , Lee & Bruseth 2008 ).
Using a community focus also draws attention to the places—independent municipalities, neighborhoods, and rural settlements—where African Americans concentrated, often because anti-Black racism in American society undermined their humanity and citizenship ( Boroughs 2021 , Fennell 2017 , González-Tennant 2018 , Matthews & McGovern 2018 , McDavid 2011 , Morris 2017 , Mullins 2017 ). Rosewood, Florida, may offer the most stark example of the kinds of threats that communities faced from the wider American society. The town was obliterated in an explosion of racially motivated violence in 1923. Through collaboration with survivors and their descendants, and using innovative methods such as critical geographic information systems and virtual reality reconstructions ( González-Tennant 2016 , González-Tennant & González-Tennant 2016 ), archaeologists are revealing the premassacre lives of the town's residents as well as providing new knowledge about the event itself and its repercussions into the present.
In addition to spectacular violence, archaeology also reveals patterns of structural, one might say “slow,” violence ( Logan 2016 , Mullins et al. 2020 , Ward 2015 ), including its enactment by governments and their constituent institutions. For example, infrastructure such as highways and railroads act to isolate and encapsulate thriving African American communities ( Fennell 2011 ). Confronting “the university” as an institution, archaeologists have investigated how expansionist campus development erases and displaces African American communities ( Mullins & Jones 2011 ).
Of course, “the university” is also exemplified by Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Researchers and students based at one such institution—Howard University—have undertaken projects that diversify and complicate our understanding of African America, while transforming our approaches. Nicodemus was an “exoduster” settlement established by African Americans in the US Midwest during the waning years of Reconstruction. There the Howard-led team used soil color, particle size, and micromorphological data to identify the sod blocks used by the town's founders to build their homes ( Presley & Bugarin 2016 ). A team working in Texas examined the entangled lives of Buffalo Soldiers and members of Indigenous Apache nations as they struggled for control during the westward expansion of the United States ( King 2008 ; for more on the entanglement of Indigenous and Africa-descended people via settler colonialism, see Montgomery 2022 , in this volume). Heeding calls to acknowledge the authority of the ethical client, calls that originated with colleagues from HBCUs ( Mack & Blakey 2004 ), archaeologists now frequently team up with the organizations that represent the interests of local and descendant communities ( Matthews 2020 ).

Section: BLACK PASTS AND ASSOCIATED INSTITUTIONS

Institutions articulate shared interests, order sociopolitical and economic interactions, manage conflict, and make interactions more predictable, while they formalize power relations and relations in general ( DeMarrais & Earle 2017 ). Racism is simultaneously a social institution in its own right and a force that structures other institutions as people are put into categories, those categories are ranked, and resources are transferred from the lower-ranked to the more highly ranked categories ( Hill 2008 , pp. 20–21). Because one of racism's manifestations in the United States has been separation, many of the institutions (formal and social) in which African Americans have participated have been segregated, organizing African American lives apart from those of other Americans. In other instances, the African American experience of society-wide institutions was shaped by ideologies of race (for more on race, residential segregation, and pluralism in the United States, see Fong et al. 2022 , this volume).
Above, we have already examined several instances where African American people formed distinct settlements. These may have had roots in a founder's vision of a frontier (New Philadelphia, Nicodemus) or developed alongside and among others who were hostile to African American interests (Rosewood, the Dismal Swamp). Another kind of settlement emerged in response to engagement with the US military. Freedmen's colonies and other, initially temporary, habitations that were products of the rupture of the American Civil War sometimes matured into long-term communities ( Scott 2018 , Steen 2011 , Wheaton 2002 ).
Archaeological research brings to light Black pasts in spaces where knowledge of an African American presence has been ignored or silenced as, for example, part of a more general erasure of slavery in the Northeast ( Delle 2019 , Martin 2018 , Matthews 2020 , Paynter & Battle-Baptiste 2019 ). Places such as the intermountain west ( White 2017 ), Appalachia and the Blue Ridge of Virginia ( Barnes 2011a , Horning 2022 ), and the Ozarks ( Brandon 2013 ) are commonly understood as “white” spaces, despite the long-term presence of people of color, including African Americans. White (2017) shows how a “Black” (in fact, racially mixed) community was vital to the construction of whiteness and the perpetuation of racial hierarchies in the wider city of Boise, Idaho. Horning (2022) self-reflexively examines how her earlier emphasis on the twentieth-century eviction of white families from what became Shenandoah National Park drew attention away from the role of African Americans in building the region's agricultural wealth and transportation networks. Slavery was an inconvenient contradiction to a narrative of “white self-sufficiency [which] aims to absolve valley inhabitants of any responsibility for slavery and racism [and] is not supported by the evidence” ( Horning 2022 , p. 38).
Horning notes that on the rare occasions that African American life appears in the official histories, it is often in the form of the churches and schools founded by Black people. African Americans did indeed establish formal institutions of many kinds throughout the United States, including schools, churches, fraternal organizations, and mutual aid societies. As we know, institutions are not only about authority and power; they also provide aid. They can exist to help as well as to detain ( De Cunzo 2006 , p. 182). The organs of civil society that African Americans encountered were often wholly separate from those of other Americans, either because they were excluded by segregationist ideologies or because they demanded organizations that would explicitly work against the racist structures and white supremacist principles that infuse so many American institutions.
Cemeteries are one kind of site where these structures and principles have been examined extensively. For example, Edwards-Ingram (2021) outlines the factors that influenced where within the town of Williamsburg, Virginia, Africans and African Americans were buried and also how those interred were remembered, from the seventeenth through the twenty-first centuries. Grave markers and the layout of God's Acre revealed the changing treatment accorded those Brethren and strangers who happened to be of African descent, as the Moravian community of Salem reconciled their theories of salvation with the logics that underpinned slavery in North Carolina ( Ferguson 2011 ). Data from the contemporaneous cemetery at the First African Baptist Church of Philadelphia, an institution founded and controlled by people of African descent, is used to tell a very different story. Biohistorical analyses of the burials themselves reveal a “cultural buffering system” that worked to keep that population “healthier than their enslaved and emancipated counterparts” ( Rankin-Hill 2016 , p. 147). Several of the burials from the First African Baptist Church included artifacts in contexts that suggest associations with widely shared belief systems, if not organized religion—shoes on coffin lids and coins near the head of the deceased. Researchers now consider the ways in which these practices, long thought of as potential Africanisms, represent the pursuit of security ( Leone 2020 , Planto 2021 ) and are connected to belief systems from Europe as well as from Africa ( Davidson 2010 ).
Social and formal institutions also meet in the nexus of health care and medicine. Racism, like slavery, negatively affected the health of African Americans ( Franklin & Wilson 2020 , Teague & Davidson 2011 ). Black people were among the most vulnerable as people flocked to cities and encountered the waterborne and foodborne diseases associated with overcrowding and poor sanitation. When it came to accessing an emergent system of health care (i.e., hospitals), gender, employment status, and age intersected with race to produce especially poor outcomes for some ( Dunnavant 2017 ). In response, African Americans formed benevolent associations ( Rankin-Hill 2016 ), institutions that would then provide necessary services that were otherwise unobtainable, or hopelessly enmeshed in the white supremacist logics of the wider society. Health may in fact be thought of as an arena of power, for example, as when only physical conditions that disrupted a slave owner's profits were officially understood as “illness” or when responses to the inhumanity of enslavement, such as running away, were medicalized and pathologized and thereby used as evidence of racial inferiority ( Lee 2017 ).
We see the intertwined and multilayered nature of institutions again in studies of gender roles and women's experiences, especially “motherwork” ( Collins 2019 , p. 168). Women's social reproduction ranged from maintaining family continuity and facilitating the intergenerational transmission of culture during enslavement ( Battle-Baptiste 2011 ), to managing reproductive health ( Barnes 2021 ), to midwifing babies into the world, and to caring for mothers pre- and postpartum ( Wilkie 2003 ). Lee's analysis of household economies shows how the work of women, offering room and board for pay, was integrated into the household routine and provides a new way of thinking about artifacts often associated only with middle-class fine dining ( Lee 2019 ). The labor that these artifacts represent was an important source of income for families whose adult men were away working in maritime industries, even though that labor remained largely invisible in the instruments of state institutions, such as the US Census.
Labor, class, and education form another set of tightly intertwined institutional arenas. Schools manifested in physical form ambitions for future generations and assertions of citizenship. Of course, class position and wealth played a role in who was able to attend school as well as in the resources that were devoted to a school ( Agbe-Davies & Martin 2013 ; Beisaw & Gibb 2009 ; Praetzellis & Praetzellis 2012 , p. 348). Studies of Black wealth and entrepreneurship contradict stubborn narratives about poverty ( Fennell 2010 ; Handsman 2019 ; Lee 2019 , 2020 ; Mullins et al. 2011 ; Shackel 2011 ). Studies of midcentury suburban landscapes serve to balance our stereotypes of contemporary African America as exclusively “urban” ( Mullins 2017 ). We should note, however, that most studies of class remain focused on the home and, to a lesser extent, the community, rather than on the workplace. Interesting exceptions have been examinations of the lives of African Americans serving in the armed forces (for example, King 2008 , Wilkie 2021 ). In the future, we will likely see more literature published at the intersections of African diaspora archaeology and the robust subfields of industrial archaeology ( Fennell 2021 ) or the archaeology of incarceration ( Westmont 2021 ), each of which concerns class, work, labor, and, crucially, freedom.
Institutions do indeed “leave archaeological traces to the extent that they are associated with buildings, rituals, meeting places, objects, and symbols” ( DeMarrais & Earle 2017 , p. 196). And these institutions (along with institutionalized inequality) “take form through social structures such as neighborhoods, schools, jobs, religious institutions, recreational facilities and…marketplaces” ( Collins 2019 , p. 183). Furthermore, these institutions are intertwined across domains and across the flimsy boundary between formal and social. It's institutions all the way down ( De Cunzo 2006 , p. 176). 4

Section: INSTITUTION BUILDING IN THE DISCIPLINE

Many of the methodological and theoretical innovations that now characterize African American archaeology come from being receptive to and inspired by demands emerging from social movements. Certainly, the team working at the ABG, in collaboration with their ethical client—the descendant community—has transformed African American archaeology and archaeology in general ( Blakey 2010 , 2020 ; LaRoche 2011 ; Mack & Blakey 2004 ). Public demands for accountability continue to shape disciplinary practice, reaching a new national and global crescendo with the increasing influence of social movements such as Black Lives Matter and Rhodes Must Fall. Especially important in the US context are reactions against the anti-Blackness manifested in Confederate memorial landscapes, public shows of force by the far right, and extrajudicial killings by police ( Flewellen et al. 2021a , p. 230; Odewale & Slocum 2020 ; for more on archaeology against white supremacy and settler colonialism, see Fong et al. 2022 and Montgomery 2022 , in this volume).
For the Estate Little Princess project in the US Virgin Islands, the co–principal investigators (PIs) work with Afro-Crucians in the local and descendant community to interpret that National Register site on their own terms, with attention to forms of significance specific to that context ( Flewellen et al. 2021b ). Integral to the foundation of the community-based research was the community deliberately developed among the archaeologists, all Black, several of them early-career scholars, all with a commitment to engaged research. Through its very operation, the project critiques prevailing notions of ownership and individualism inherent in research structures, instead foregrounding “interdependence” among researchers as well as between archaeologists and their collaborators. Many of the co-PIs were also early leaders of the Society of Black Archaeologists (SBA), an institutional manifestation of the ethos that underlies such endeavors.
Formed in 2011, the SBA seeks to be
a strong network of archaeologists that advocates to ensure the proper treatment of African and African diaspora material culture, promotes more people of African descent to enter the field of archaeology, ensures community collaborations, raises and addresses concerns related to African peoples worldwide, and highlights the past and present achievements and contributions people of African descent have made to the field of archaeology. ( Soc. Black Archaeol. 2021 )

Central to the organization's mission is the participation by people of African descent in archaeology—both as professionals and as members of communities affected by archaeological research. The SBA engages in multiple programs to encourage and support Black and African people in archaeology. For example, through collaboration with sister organizations such as the National Association of Black Scuba Divers and Diving with a Purpose, the SBA is having a significant impact on scholarship concerning the underwater heritage of the transatlantic slave trade (see also McGhee 2007 , Moore & Malcom 2008 , Webster 2008 ). Another program demonstrates through oral history and archival projects the contributions to the field that have already been made by Black and African people (see also Battle-Baptiste 2011 , Blakey 2020 , Jeppson 2007 , Little 2007 ).
Another way in which African American archaeology has been institutionalized is in the founding of a standalone journal, the Journal of African Diaspora Archaeology and Heritage ( JADAH ). Since 2012, the journal has “engaged scholarly, professional, and community perspectives on the social dynamics and historical legacies” of “African descendant populations and cultures across the globe” ( Fennell 2012 , p. 5). JADAH has proved an important venue for interdisciplinary and international scholarship, with a strong showing of sites and scholars beyond mainland North America.
Archaeologists have, concurrent with the development of new structures, turned their attention to existing institutional structures. For example, Bugarin et al. (2010) decried the loss of the anthropology program at Howard University. They described the likely impact of the closure on a field that, while more racially diverse than it was a generation ago, still does not reflect the societies from which anthropologists and archaeologists come ( Gifford-Gonzalez & Agbe-Davies 2012 , White & Draycott 2020 ). Elsewhere, however, Howard faculty observe ( Bugarin & King 2011 ) that archaeology remains an active presence on the campus, with faculty research projects that include African American archaeology (see the section titled Expanding Mandates, above) and students from HBCUs entering the field as professionals, including, it should be noted, key founders and leaders of the SBA.
Such a small proportion of respondents to surveys of larger organizations such as the Society for American Archaeology (SAA) or the Society for Historical Archaeology (SHA) claim BIPOC identities (Black, Indigenous, or person of color) that it is difficult to establish a picture of that subset of the profession. A recent survey of the SBA membership will likely be more informative. Respondents to the SBA survey who chose to identify with only a single racial or ethnic category were 55% “African American or Black,” compared with 0.5% of respondents to a 2020 survey of the SAA (2020) . Distribution of postsecondary degrees is statistically similar across the two surveys, and both have devoted significant effort to understanding problems concerning inclusion and inequality in archaeology. Going forward, the SBA data can be used to explore the perspectives and insights of a much larger number of Black people who care about archaeology than are included in the SAA instrument. 5
Of course, some of these SBA members may be nonarchaeologists, people who are, for other reasons, interested in protecting the material legacy of African American people. Building on the practices and commitments developed by researchers at the ABG, other organizations, such as the Black Cemetery Network, have formed to support communities working to protect the final resting places of previous generations of African Americans, to “fight the erasure…of black cemeteries” ( Black Cemet. Netw. 2021 ). Like the SHA and the SBA, they disseminate information about how to approach and protect neglected or newly discovered burial sites. These groups, and others, have lent support to proposed federal legislation (H.R. 6805, February 2022, S. 3667) that would create an African American Burial Grounds Network within the National Park Service. If enacted, the law would “authorize the National Park Service to coordinate and facilitate Federal activities and non-Federal activities to identify, interpret, research, preserve, and record unmarked, previously abandoned, underserved, and other African-American burial grounds” ( https://www.congress.gov/117/bills/hr6805/BILLS-117hr6805ih.xml ).

Section: CONCLUSION

African American archaeology has become inextricably interwoven with scholarly work in North American archaeology, African American studies, heritage studies, and social theory. Prosaically, Singleton's piece on African American archaeology in North American Archaeology is one of only four chapters concerning the postcontact era ( Singleton 2005 ) . Symbolically, sankofa , the central metaphor for Little's Historical Archaeology: Why the Past Matters , is inspired by materials recovered from the ABG: “the concept of reclaiming the past and understanding how the present came to be so that we can move forward” ( Little 2007 , p. 15).
As already discussed, with respect to archaeological methods, African American archaeology has been at the forefront of collaborative research (see, in addition, Franklin & Lee 2020 , Jenkins 2022 , Reeves 2022 , Westmont 2021 ), digital innovation ( González-Tennant 2016 , González-Tennant & González-Tennant 2016 ), and even an expanded understanding of what constitutes “archaeological” data ( Arjona 2017 , Dunnavant 2017 ; for more on how sites associated with the African diaspora push the boundaries of what is possible in archaeology, see Hauser 2022 , in this volume).
When, as Franklin et al. (2020) describe, the twin pandemics of COVID-19 and racism converged in the spring of 2020, archaeologists engaged in disciplinary soul-searching and considered publicly the wicked problem of anti-Blackness in American society, its relationship to a more broadly defined structural racism, and, perhaps for the first time, what any of this has to do with them. In addition to issuing statements of solidarity in the vein of many other institutions and corporations, archaeologists and anthropologists reflected on the implications of racial inequality for their own practice. Again, the essential contributions of African American archaeology to archaeology at large became clear. The SAA assembled pieces from its publication archive on “Race, Inequality, and Decolonization.” The Wenner-Gren Foundation, along with the SBA and several other partners, sponsored a number of virtual panels, including the series “From the Margins to the Mainstream: Black and Indigenous Futures in Archaeology” that touched on themes such as restorative justice, monuments, and ecologies (for more on the mutual significance of Indigenous archaeology for African American archaeology, and vice versa, see Montgomery 2022 , in this volume). Archaeologists and anthropologists who are also teachers brought together resources like the #TulsaSyllabus ( Odewale & Slocum 2020 ).
Connections with North American anthropology can be seen in contributions to special issues of Transforming Anthropology and Current Anthropology , which bring together anthropologists across the subfields to consider, in one case, critical public archaeology and Black feminist theory, addressing not only exploitation and inequality, but also the strength and resilience of African-descended people ( Lee & Scott 2019 ). Another example centers the institution of slavery in the emergence of colonialism and modern forms of knowledge production, while also centering archaeology among the scholarly fields that examine this legacy ( Thiaw & Mack 2020 ).
African American archaeology continues to share close ties with other realms of heritage work. Critical reflexivity remains an important mode of practice for those engaged in the archaeological study of the African American past. Archaeologists have had cause to reflect on how African American archives, memories, landscapes, and material culture are excluded from popular and institutionalized histories ( Barnes 2011b , Matthews 2020 ). Techniques such as countermapping and the technologies of “new heritage” ( González-Tennant & González-Tennant 2016 ; Hauser 2022 , in this volume) provide new analytical frameworks for analysis and build the authority of descendant and local communities into the structures of research, while enhancing accessibility for, and connections with, new audiences.
Institutions such as government agencies can be part of the infrastructure of erasure and silencing ( Babiarz 2011 , Barile 2004 ). Critiques of cultural resource management and heritage work more generally point out potential archaeological complicity in the process. They also note the possibilities inherent in critical self-reflection and a reorientation of interpretive focus that includes greater familiarity with scholarship on, by, and from the African diaspora. They urge the adoption of interpretive frameworks that study African America on its own terms and not only in relation to, or in monolithic comparison with, white America through such prior frameworks as acculturation, poverty, and domination ( Flewellen 2017 ; Jackson 2011 , 2012 ; Joseph 2004 ; LaRoche 2011 ).
Archaeologists interested in African America have engaged a number of transdisciplinary realms of theory, including critical race theory and whiteness ( Bell 2005 , Epperson 2004 , González-Tennant & González-Tennant 2016 , McDavid 2007 , Palmer 2011 , Palus 2011 , White 2017 ), semiotics and pragmatism ( Agbe-Davies 2016 , 2017 ; Dawdy 2005 ; Jeppson 2007 ; McDavid 2002 ; Morris 2017 ; Planto 2021 ), and, most notably, Black feminist theory (see above, but also Burnett 2022 , Flewellen et al. 2021a , Franklin 2020 , Franklin & Wilson 2020 , González-Tennant 2018 , Sterling 2015 , Watkins 2020 ).
As in Schomburg's day, archaeology continues to serve as a metaphor for retrieval, reassembly, archiving, and remembering what has been forgotten, erased, or buried ( Hanchard 2008 ). As archaeologists work with and attend to the institutions that shaped past lives as well as our own practice, we begin to move beyond the pursuit of ever more detailed illustrations of African American life and toward a practice that “consciously counters dominant narratives or takes either racialization or racist stereotypes as its targets” ( Mullins 2008 , p. 108).
Of course, we stand on the shoulders of giants. Almost a century ago, Schomburg noted that “as the study of the Negro's past has come out of the vagaries of rhetoric and propaganda and become systematic…[Black people have demonstrated] a record of credible group achievement when scientifically viewed…of vital general interest because of their bearing upon the beginnings and early development of culture” ( Schomburg 1925 , p. 232). He wrote as the founder of the Negro Society for Historical Research, citing parallel efforts being undertaken by the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History and the Journal of Negro History . So, this emphasis on institution building has been here all along. African American archaeology no longer resembles its initial form as a topic dominated by a focus on slavery and ethnicity, while ignoring race and power ( Singleton & Bograd 1995 , p. 29). The debates pitting, for example, Africanisms against acculturation are largely passé. Going forward, researchers may look forward to “less of the sand of controversy and more of the dust of digging” ( Schomburg 1925 , p. 237).

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I must highlight the vision and leadership of Marley R. Brown, III, whose efforts to build African American archaeology at Colonial Williamsburg made it clear that there was a place for me and the issues I cared about in archaeology. My sense of what African American archaeology could be has been indelibly shaped by the people assembled there, including, but not limited to, Whitney Battle-Baptiste, Ywone Edwards-Ingram, Patricia Samford, and Maria Franklin, the last having been a crucial sounding board as I developed this review. Thank you to the authors of several sister articles in this same volume: Kelly N. Fong 方少芳, Mark W. Hauser, Jocelyn Lee 李紫瑄, Lindsay Martel Montgomery, Laura W. Ng 伍穎華, Veronica L. Peterson 孫美華, and Barbara L. Voss. In exchanging manuscripts with these authors, I learned a great deal about the capacity for archaeology to transform our understanding of both human potential and possibilities for just futures.

Section: literature cited


Section: RELATED RESOURCES

SAA (Soc. Am. Archaeol.). 2020. A note from the SAA Publications Committee on a selection of SAA publications on race, inequality, and decolonization. SAA Contributions on Race . https://www.saa.org/publications/saa-contributions-on-race
SAPIENS. 2020. From the margins to the mainstream: Black and indigenous futures in archaeology. SAPIENS , Sept. 25. https://www.sapiens.org/archaeology/black-and-indigenous-futures-in-archaeology/
