Title: The Necropolitics of Language Oppression


Section: 

This article is part of a special theme on Global Health. For a list of other articles in these themes, see https://www.annualreviews.org/toc/anthro/51/1

Section: ABSTRACT

This article explores how language oppression—coerced language loss—contributes to physical death. The context for this investigation is the ongoing crisis of global linguistic diversity, which sees approximately half the world's languages facing language oppression. It is also a crisis of bodies and lives. This article proposes the necropolitics of language oppression as a decolonial anthropological approach for theorizing and confronting this global problem. Drawing on the anthropology of violence, genocide, and the state, within the context of anthropology's colonial turn since the 1970s, this article describes how states within colonial modernity create and exploit population-differentiated death through practices of social death, slow violence, and slow death. This perspective enables a synthesis of literature from linguistics, applied linguistics, sociolinguistics, translation studies, and public health to reveal the links between language oppression and death. The conclusion discusses how the approach developed in this article can help sustain languages and lives.

Section: 


[N]o one would suggest that to prevent an individual from speaking his native language could possibly constitute homicide .
—Mr. Stephens, representative of Canada to the United Nations during debates surrounding the drafting of the Convention on the Crime of Genocide, August 26, 1948 ( Abtahi & Webb 2008 , p. 1225)


Section: LANGUAGE, OPPRESSION, DEATH

Language oppression kills, and states exploit this death to govern.
That is my overall argument in a nutshell, but it will take a bit of work to unpack it. Before we even begin that process, some justification is needed for any readers who find the juxtaposition of language, oppression, and death incongruous.
We can therefore begin by noting that people are killed on account of language. International Mother Language Day, introduced by the United Nations (UN), is held annually on February 21 to commemorate the 1952 killing of several students at the University of Dhaka (then in East Pakistan) who were protesting attempts to impose Urdu as the medium of education. 1 In South Africa, in 1974, when thousands of students in Soweto protested against a decision to make Afrikaans the medium of teaching in schools, police opened fire, killing more than 500 “linguistic martyrs'' ( Mugane 2005 , p. 165). During the Cambodian genocide, minority Cham communities were broken up, and their language and religion banned. “Some Chams were killed for speaking Cham” ( Kiernan 1988 , p. 29), and then entire communities were massacred, leading to the death of 90,000 people, over one-third of the country's Cham population ( Hinton 2004 ). During the South Sudan civil war, both Dinka and Nuer militias used language to identify their enemies, “shooting” and “executing” anyone heard speaking the “wrong” language ( Turse 2016 , pp. 13, 39). And in Burundi's 1972 Ikiza, during which 100,000–300,000 Hutus were massacred, linguistic cues were used to identify victims: Even though the Tutsi perpetrators and Hutu victims all spoke Kirundi, certain telltale pronunciations of words such as “you” and “goat” were used to identify Hutu, who were then killed ( Malkki 2012 ).
Here we see examples of what Calvet (1988) calls “shibboleths of death,” according to which “one can die on account of a phoneme, on account of a difference of pronunciation” (p. 24). Urciuoli (1995) similarly describes how “phonemes, lexemes, and syntactic or morphological rules” (p. 538) can “put speakers at risk” (p. 539). The widespread use of language to identify people for killing has also given rise to the “antishibboleth”—“the presentation of the self as a nonspeaker of a language that the person in fact speaks, usually in order to avoid identification as the Other, with its associated penalties, which may include death” ( McNamara 2020 , p. 334).
If people are killed on account of language, they also take their own lives for it. In India, in late 1952, Potti Sriramulu died after a 58-day fast for the Telugu language ( Mitchell 2009 ). In 1964, a man named Chinnasami died in a self-immolation protest, calling out “Death to Hindi! May Tamil flourish!,” and the following year, on the anniversary of his death, eight more Tamil language activists became linguistic martyrs, either by self-immolation or drinking a pesticide ( Ramaswamy 1997 ). In 2019, 79-year-old sociologist and advocate for the Udmurt language, Albert Razin, died after setting his body alight to protest Russian state policies that undermined minority language education ( Aitkhozhina 2019 ). In 2021, at least eight Mongols in the People's Republic of China committed suicide following restrictions on the use of their language in schools ( Bulag 2020 ). And a decade earlier, during a series of self-immolation protests across the Tibetan Plateau, several protesters justified their actions with laments about the fate of the Tibetan language ( Woeser 2016 , Roche 2021 ).
In addition to these direct links between language and death, a growing body of research also connects them in more subtle and complex ways. This research builds on Indigenous language workers’ observations that language is associated with health, well-being, and healing ( Baldwin 2003 , Wong 2011 ) and examines how language maintenance and reclamation make positive contributions to individual and communal health and well-being ( Taff et al. 2018 , Walsh 2018 ). For example, a 2016 literature review found that Indigenous language use was associated with lower rates of smoking and alcohol consumption ( Whalen et al. 2016 ). One recent study reported an increased sense of belonging, strengthened social ties, and improved mental and emotional well-being among language reclamation practitioners ( Rafael 2021 ). Another study found that Indigenous language use creates stronger community bonds and increases positive emotions ( Olko et al. 2021 ). Such findings help explain the correlation between Indigenous language retention and lower suicide rates ( Hallett et al. 2007 , Gibson et al. 2021 ). These psychological and emotional benefits also extend to physical well-being, as seen in a study by Oster et al. (2014) , which found correlations between Indigenous language maintenance and a lower prevalence of diabetes.
People are therefore killed on account of, take their own lives for, and delay death due to language. Language and death are connected. The aim of this article is to examine, unpack, and theorize that entanglement.
However, if we have good reason to explore the relationship between language and death, we also have good reason to be cautious in doing so because lurking to the side of this conversation is the “specter” of “language death” ( Perley 2011 ). Academic discourses on language death date back to the late 1970s ( Dressler & Wodak-Leodtler 1977 ), but they are preceded by literary and activist discourses dating back to the seventeenth century ( McEwan-Fujita 2020 ). These language death discourses rose to prominence following the emergence of endangerment linguistics in the early 1990s ( Roche 2020 ). However, the idea of language death has been resoundingly critiqued for its fatalism and complicity with ideologies and practices of elimination, prompting a shift in terminology from dead or extinct languages to sleeping, dormant, or hibernating languages, which may someday be reawakened ( Leonard 2011 , Amery 2016 , Davis 2017 , Henne-Ochoa et al. 2020 ). Rather than seeking to reinvigorate the “zombie discourse” ( Perley 2012 ) of language death, the approach I advance here aims to take seriously the “actual necropolitical dynamics” that are associated with “the decline or demise in Indigenous sovereignty or autonomy [and] the loss of political, economic, or geographic stability and power” ( Davis 2017 , pp. 44–45) that accompany what is referred to, in hegemonic discourses, as “language endangerment,” but which I call “language oppression.”
My use of the term language oppression is taken from Taff et al. (2018 , p. 862), who define it as the “enforcement of language loss by physical, mental, social and spiritual coercion.” The loss described here is directed not simply at individuals, families, and communities, but at the entire population that speaks or signs a language and is thus driven by an eliminatory logic ( Wolfe 2006 ), manifested through a relationship of domination, usually in the context of national or colonial occupation.
The stakes for understanding language oppression are high. Around the world today, in all but a handful of countries, 2 “languages are being forced into hibernation at an alarming rate” ( Meissner 2018 , p. 267). Although we should be cautious when using statistics to count languages and measure their endangerment, I follow Povinelli (2011) in seeing such statistics as a way to apprehend forms of social suffering that are rendered invisible by their uneventfulness. Our current best estimate is that just under half of the world's languages are experiencing language oppression, i.e., undergoing coerced shift leading to dormancy ( Campbell & Belew 2018 ). And although this problem is unevenly distributed, being most intense in settler colonial states ( Mufwene 2002 ), it is also widespread and historically unprecedented.
The approach to this issue that I propose here—the necropolitics of language oppression—builds on other research examining how oppression and inequality contribute to poor health and untimely death ( Therborn 2013 , Sullivan 2015 ). In focusing on physical, bodily death, the necropolitics of language oppression thus eschews anthropological approaches that focus primarily on the metaphorical and symbolic dimensions of death ( Verdery 1999 , Engelke 2019 ). In the following section, I begin by examining the anthropological foundations of the necropolitical approach to language oppression. I then discuss how the state enforces language oppression, and following this discussion I synthesize a wide range of literature to demonstrate how language oppression kills. In the conclusion, I offer a reinterpretation of the opening sections of this article, in light of the necropolitical approach I outline and conclude with reflections for future work in theory and practice, toward sustaining languages and life.

Section: THE NECROPOLITICS OF LANGUAGE OPPRESSION AS ANTHROPOLOGY

The necropolitics of language oppression draws on a wide range of literature from a variety of disciplines, including linguistics, applied linguistics, sociolinguistics, translation studies, genocide studies, public and global health, and cultural studies. Nonetheless, it is a fundamentally anthropological approach. In this section, I discuss what sort of anthropology the necropolitics of language oppression is.
To begin with, the necropolitics of language oppression is what Ortner (2016) calls “dark anthropology,” i.e., “anthropology that emphasizes the harsh and brutal dimensions of human experience, and the structural and historical conditions that produce them” (p. 49). Ortner traces how this dark anthropology emerged from developments in postcolonial and feminist anthropology in the 1970s, leading to a transformative “explosion of all things colonial” (p. 51) in anthropology, following pioneering work by Asad (1973) and others. Ortner goes on to show how this colonial turn was integral to the “triumph” (p. 49) of dark anthropology and its expansion into examining other facets of contemporary life, particularly neoliberalism and its harms.
In focusing on a global problem of “power, domination, inequality, and oppression” ( Ortner 2016 , p. 47), the necropolitics of language oppression requires a global approach. It takes up Wolf's (2010) injunction to look at the world “as a whole, a totality, a system” (p. 385) of “interconnected processes” (p. 3), while also following him in privileging a “materialist” over a “culturalist” interpretation ( Ortner 2016 ). It follows Trouillot (2003) in focusing on the longue durée process of globalization that emerged in the sixteenth century, which involved the incorporation of the entire planet into a fundamentally extractive and exploitative capitalist economy ( Hickel 2018 ). This process entailed a massive movement of people, a “repopulating of the world through human predation” ( Mbembé 2019 , p. 11) consisting of vast influxes of European settlers—40–50 million Europeans to the Americas between 1846 and 1924—and the relocating of 12 million Africans to the New World as slaves, as well as 3.7 million people from Africa, China, India, Japan, and Melanesia from the 1830s to 1920s as indentured laborers ( Patterson 2018 , Allen 2017 ). Along with the forced and unequal flows of resources and people, the creation of the colonial world system has also involved the circulation of ideas and practices of colonial governance along “imperial routes” ( Stoler 1996 ).
An important set of ideas and practices that were produced and circulated in the colonial world system pertain to language ( Fabian 1986 , Trautman 2006 , Nakata 2007 , Errington 2008 , Heller & McElhinny 2017 ). Agents of colonial power acted on language in multiple ways: creating and imposing lingua francas [often “non-European languages of European power” ( Errington 2008 , p. 16)] such as Swahili, Malay, and Quechua; counting, codifying, and classifying languages; establishing and enforcing linguistic hierarchies; and creating durable common-sense understandings of what language is and how it works that persist into the present. These ideologies aimed not only to fix certain languages and employ them for control, but also to justify colonization by helping to “scientifically” establish stadial theories of human development that placed Europeans at its apogee as the only truly modern people ( Bauman & Briggs 2003 ). Practices and ideologies of language thus play a fundamental role in the system of colonial modernity.
An integral aspect of the creation and perpetuation of this system is destructive violence, and so the necropolitics of language oppression also draws on the anthropology of violence ( Scheper-Hughes & Bourgois 2004 ) and genocide ( Hinton 2002 , 2004 ; O'Neill 2010 ). Three points from this literature bear emphasizing. First is the distinction between what we might call culturalist or interpretive studies of violence (e.g., Whitehead 2004 ) and more materialist studies, which seek to understand how violence is produced and circulated, who it is produced by, who is subjected to it, and how it impacts the body. Second is a focus on structural violence ( Galtung 1969 , Farmer 2004 ) and how it socially distributes various forms and intensities of direct violence, creating what Scheper-Hughes & Bourgois (2004) call a “violence spectrum,” ranging from mass killing to less blatant forms of everyday violence. And finally, this literature also provides a critique of the modern state as a central agent of violence and death, particularly regarding its “primary goal” of “assimilation, homogenization, and conformity” ( Nagengast 1994 , p. 109).
In focusing on the state, violence, and languages within global modernity, the necropolitics of language oppression aligns more with political and historical anthropology than linguistic anthropology. To the limited extent that anthropologists have studied language oppression ( Meek 2016 ), linguistic anthropology has dominated, particularly approaches that focus on language ideologies ( Woolard & Schieffelin 1994 ). In contrast to these approaches, a historical and political anthropology of language oppression treats language as somewhat of a black box, if not an object. Doing so does not entail an essentializing or reifying stance but instead implies a “moderate constructivist” approach ( Barnes 2016 ) that sees the ontological depth of language as emerging from intersubjectivity ( Mills 2015 ) and materiality ( Flores 2017 ). Meanwhile, this approach also diverges from linguistic anthropological approaches in deferring questions about how people and communities navigate processes of language socialization ( Meek 2019 ) and shift ( Hill & Hill 1986 ) in order to focus on the structural factors that envelope these processes.
Finally, the necropolitics of language oppression, as an anthropological approach, is militantly decolonial. It is militant in being oriented toward “practical realities and dilemmas” rather than “theoretical conundrums” ( Scheper-Hughes 1992 , p. 4) and asserts that anthropology should exist both “as a traditional, disciplinary field and a force field, a…site of struggle and resistance” ( Scheper-Hughes 1996 , p. 892, emphasis in original). And it is decolonial insofar as it sees language oppression as emerging from coloniality: the continuing harms of “racial, political, economic, social, epistemological, linguistic, and gendered hierarchical orders imposed by European colonialism that transcend ‘decolonization’” ( Richardson 2020 , p. 3). It thus aims to “reconstitute or eradicate” “systems of domination such as racial capitalism, White supremacy, and the normative modes of colonial subject formation” ( Rosa 2019 , p. 6), with the aim of achieving liberation ( Harrison 1997 , Allen & Jobson 2016 ).
In summary, then, the necropolitics of language oppression as an anthropological approach examines language oppression as occurring within a globalized condition of colonial modernity and being enforced through violence either directly or indirectly by the state. It seeks to both understand and end this practice and work toward the liberation of speakers and signers of oppressed languages. To understand the mechanisms through which language oppression operates, and how it is entangled with the production and exploitation of death, the next section examines the state and its necropolitical governance.

Section: NECROPOLITICAL GOVERNANCE

Having examined how specific anthropological concerns underpin the necropolitical approach to language oppression, this section examines the necropolitical operations of the state within colonial modernity and their relationship to language, exemplified through the current situation in Tibet, based on my own research ( Roche 2019 , 2021 ), and drawing on theories from the anthropology of violence and genocide and adjacent disciplines.
Such an analysis must start with territory ( Mbembé 2003 , Wolfe 2006 , Foucault 2007 ) by asking which histories of invasion, annexation, absorption, expansion, seizure, colonization, and occupation result in a given community being included within the territory of a particular state and the denial of self-determination that this inclusion involves. This question is relevant to European nation-states, settler colonial states, postcolonial states, and even those states, such as Thailand, Bhutan, and Ethiopia, that claim to be exceptions to these categories. Within colonial modernity, all states subject the diverse populations inside their borders to programs of normalization, including forms of linguistic subordination and assimilation. Although many states have (reluctantly) shifted from overt to covert forms of assimilation, such change is often a “policy of changing everything so that everything remains the same” ( Cusicanqui 2012 , p. 101), since no state willingly undermines its territorial integrity in order to assure the freedom, dignity, self-determination, and well-being of specific populations. Instead, all states today jealously guard their territorial integrity and violently police their borders.
The communities I have worked with on the northeast Tibetan Plateau were incorporated into China during the eighteenth century under the Qing Dynasty and were retained by the People's Republic of China (PRC) due to the UN's refusal to grant self-governance to peoples dominated by land-based empires during its decolonization process. Policy regimes regarding language have oscillated from explicit assimilation to greater accommodation but, as we see below, have followed a stable oppressive logic. Continued exposure to this logic is assured by the state's violent response to any Tibetan attempts to contest the state's territorial integrity.
All states practice racism to manage the populations within their borders ( Foucault 2003 ). State racism is not the creation of hierarchies among preexisting phenotypically distinct populations, but rather the active creation of racial distinctions as a mechanism for distributing death to certain segments of the population ( Mbembé 2003 ). This action is done not out of animosity, but rather to ensure the efficient functioning of the state by purifying and normalizing the population ( Foucault 2003 , 2007 ). Racialization rarely maps directly onto languages. Indeed, it often involves the deliberate erasure of languages. For example, in settler colonial contexts, Indigenous people are typically racialized as a single population, despite their linguistic diversity ( Veronelli 2015 ), and in India, residents of the northeast are racialized as “Mongoloids” regardless of the languages they speak ( McDuie-Ra 2016 ).
In the PRC, state racism, informed by colonial/modern ideologies of race and nation, creates a fundamental racial distinction between the Han majority as the state's “normal” population and the rest of the population, designated “minority nationalities.” This distinction manifests as a threefold linguistic division with the national, Han, language (Putonghua/Mandarin) at the top, recognized minority languages (such as Tibetan) in the middle, and the vast majority of the languages spoken and signed in the country at the bottom. Each layer of the hierarchy is slated for distinct treatment. Putonghua is targeted for compulsory, state-sponsored universalization throughout the territory and population. Recognized minority languages such as Tibetan are available for optional use within prescribed territories and contexts while being simultaneously “promoted at the expense of other indigenous languages and marked for extinction” ( Mannheim 2011 , p. 35). Meanwhile, other languages spoken by Tibetans, such as Manegacha, Gochang, or Japhug, are slated for elimination through the state's refusal to recognize their existence and extend appropriate support, while exposing them to the harmful effects of state-building. We therefore see two distinct logics of language oppression in relation to the racialized category of “national minorities.”
Language oppression entails the social death of racialized populations. Patterson (2018) described social death as a condition of living within society without being a member of it, imposing the status of “nonpersons” on the socially dead and denying them a place in “any legitimate social order” (p. 5). Card (2003) builds on this idea in her discussion of genocide and social death, arguing that social death takes place when “the social relations—organizations, practices, institutions—of the member group are irreparably damaged or diminished” (p. 69). Social death occurs in language oppression when racialized people are seen as nonpersons, and their linguistic practices are seen as “simple communication” rather than language ( Veronelli 2015 ). It also involves concrete measures to break up communities, destroy social relations that sustain language, and dismantle institutions that produce and reproduce language.
In Tibet, the PRC's national language is imposed as fundamentally rational and progressive—quintessentially modern—whereas all other languages spoken by Tibetans are seen as signs of a degraded, backward, and threatening personhood. Nonetheless, restricted respect and material support are tied to the Tibetan language through its association with state-sanctioned “minority nationality” identity. Unrecognized languages, meanwhile, are dissociated from both valorized and tolerated forms of personhood and are thus rendered disposable. The social death of Tibetans who use these languages is further exacerbated through the breakup of communities, relations, and institutions that occurs as a result of the state's abandonment.
Abandonment and exposure—the withdrawal of support and protection—rather than direct deliberate harm, are the main means of imposing social death ( Agamben 1998 , Biehl 2013 ). This abandonment typically occurs in state-driven processes that appear harmless or even benign, such as state-building, economic development, modernization, urbanization, or, more generically, progress. These processes disproportionately affect racialized populations, who in some cases are murdered and massacred to make way for progress but, more often in the twenty-first century, are subjected to dispossession, dislocation, deagrarianization, proletarianization, and so on: a completely radical reordering of the social fabric, which protected languages, associated with valorized identities and supported by state power, somehow always survive.
In Tibet, for speakers and signers of unrecognized languages, such exposure and abandonment occur in two ways. First is the total disruption of community and social life through infrastructural violence ( Rodgers & O'Neill 2012 ) and authoritarian capitalism ( Makley 2018 ), which render prior lifeways and communal forms unviable and compel community members to participate in state education and the labor economy. All of this disruption occurs in the context of the total exclusion of unrecognized languages from all major social institutions, such as education, health care, and employment, compelling people who use and identify with those languages to acquire and deploy either the national language (Putonghua) or Tibetan's designated “national minority” language (Tibetan) to navigate their forced socioeconomic mobility. Second, the state exposes speakers of unrecognized languages to an unregulated regime of everyday disrespect, including the use of slurs, disparagement humor, taunts and insults, and physical violence.
This abandonment and exposure result in slow violence against racialized populations, a violence that “occurs gradually and out of sight…of delayed destruction that is dispersed across time and space…a violence that is typically not viewed as violence at all” ( Nixon 2011 , p. 2). This slow violence results in what Povinelli (2011 , p. 4) refers to as the “dispersed suffering” of “abjection, despair, impoverishment, and boredom,” which is a “state of neither great crisis nor final redemption” and in which “nothing happens that rises to the level of event, let alone a crisis.” This character of slowness typifies language oppression, which most often takes place over the course of generations.
Collapse of intergenerational language transmission is currently occurring in communities across Tibet that use unrecognized languages, a process that has been unfolding for at least the past half century. Some communities are undertaking a collective shift, where all families agree to cease transmitting their language to children, but in most cases, households are making this highly coerced “choice.” The central argument of this article is that the slow violence of language oppression that these communities are experiencing leads to death or, more specifically, slow death.
“Slow death” is the “structurally motivated attrition of persons notably because of their membership in certain groups” ( Berlant 2007 , p. 761). Engels referred to this process as “social murder,” brought about by conditions which meant that workers could “neither retain health nor live long,” eroding their health “little by little” and sending them “to the grave before their time” (Engels as cited in Short 2016 , p. 33). In Foucault's (2003 , p. 244) words, this is a death that “gnaws” at life. Gilmore (2007) describes this foreshortening of racialized lives in terms of the “production and exploitation of group-differentiated vulnerability to premature death” (p. 38).
To understand how the slow death of racialized populations is created through language oppression, the next section draws on a wide range of literature to expose the nonobvious and sometimes counterintuitive connections between language, the state, and death.

Section: HOW THE STATE KILLS THROUGH LANGUAGE OPPRESSION

We can begin thinking about how language oppression kills by examining how other forms of oppression kill. Oppression distributes death relative to population-differentiated symbolic and material inequities ( Fraser 2000 ) and their entanglement in phenomena such as racial capitalism ( Robinson 2020 ). The literatures on racial and anti-Indigenous oppression demonstrate how these entanglements of disrespect and maldistribution produce necropolitical effects.
Regarding racial health disparities, medical anthropologist Carter (2018) notes that Black Americans have higher mortality rates, get sick at a younger age, and have more severe illnesses over their life span. According to Yearby (2015) , these outcomes amount to a total of 4.2 million unnecessary deaths among Black Americans in the United States since 1964. Watson (2017) links these deadly disparities with police killings of unarmed Black men in the United States by examining the role that bias plays in producing both, and Geronimus et al. (2006) describe the cumulative health impacts of persistent bias and discrimination against Black Americans as “weathering” that slowly wears down the body. These studies repeatedly demonstrate how racism, as an assemblage of disrespect and maldistribution, is the “root cause of health inequities” faced by Black Americans ( Bailey et al. 2017 , p. 1453). The deadly outcomes of these racist health inequities were vividly demonstrated in a 2021 study that showed how reparations for slavery would have significantly reduced the disproportionate incidence of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) among Black Americans ( Richardson et al. 2021 ).
The literature on Indigenous health disparities again demonstrates how disrespect and maldistribution produce divergent health outcomes, leading to necropolitical inequities. Studies in numerous contexts attest to these inequities. Anderson et al. (2016) found evidence for consistently (but not uniformly) poorer health outcomes for Indigenous people in 23 countries across a range of indicators. Reid & Robson (2007 , p. 4) link these inequities, ultimately, to colonialism as a “deliberate and continuous process” that produces differential access to health determinants (such as education, employment, and income) and greater exposure to risks, as well as unequal access to and quality of health care. Watego (formerly Bond) and her collaborators have shown how Indigenous health inequities are produced by ongoing colonialism that aims to enforce the “originary” violence of land theft, manifest as racial violence ( Bond et al. 2021 ).
These examples demonstrate how the disrespect and maldistribution of oppression kill by exposing racialized populations to heightened risk of premature death. As people facing historical dispossession and ongoing regimes of everyday violence, we would expect the morbidity and mortality of people subjected to language oppression to be affected in similar ways. However, language oppression also produces death in ways that are specific to language not just as a marker of social difference, but also as a means for communication. The necropolitical consequences attached to language as a means of communication are particularly evident where states erase languages, such as in the PRC, where the state demotes the majority of the country's languages to the status of dialects ( Roche 2019 ), or India, where languages with fewer than 10,000 speakers are not recognized ( Kidwai 2017 ). This erasure typically results in languages being excluded from all formal institutions, such as schools.
The shortest line connecting language, schooling, and death is the killing of students in schools that also aimed to deprive them of their language. In Canada, “[t]housands of children died” while attending boarding schools where they were also punished for using their languages, “frequently at the physical site of language: the mouth and the tongue” ( Griffith 2017 , p. 764). In the United States, Indigenous languages were banned in boarding schools and students were “physically abused for speaking their languages'' ( Iyengar 2014 , p. 53). Students in these schools died as a result of “malnutrition, exposure to disease, lack of medical care, and a range of other causes,” including “severe physical abuse that was directly language-related” ( Iyengar 2014 , p. 55).
More often than not, however, the route from schooling to death is more indirect. It starts with schools that either exclude certain languages in their entirety, thus forcing students to learn (inefficiently) through the medium of a language they do not know, or with schools that enforce subtractive bilingualism aiming to gradually exclude students’ languages from schooling. These practices are almost always accompanied by some form of racialization and stigmatization of minoritized students, meaning that they not only face the linguistic challenges associated with the medium of instruction, but also are perceived and treated as deficient ( Flores & Rosa 2015 , Rosa 2016 ). Language exclusion and disrespect lead to decreased participation in schooling and reduced educational outcomes, and given that multiple studies show a correlation between years of schooling and life expectancy ( Luy et al. 2019 ), these educational differentials also have necropolitical consequences.
Meanwhile, literature on the relationship between language oppression and health care discusses how the exclusion of certain languages from health services results in reduced health outcomes. This research variously focuses on how “language barriers” 3 ( Terui 2017 ), “linguistic discrimination” ( Yoo et al. 2009 ), and the failure to provide trained interpreters ( Flores 2005 ) all reduce health care outcomes. Linguistically appropriate health care information and services improve participation in and effectiveness of health care ( Burke 2020 , Haimovich & Mora 2020 ). Briggs & Mantini-Briggs (2004 , 2016 ), anthropological pioneers in this field, examine how language oppression leads to greater exposure to death during epidemics, not only because of the exclusion of languages from public health measures, but also because disrespect accompanies these languages even when they are used. The COVID-19 pandemic has thus seen the emergence of calls for a “linguistic turn” in public health ( Dreisbach & Mendoza-Dreisbach 2020 ) and the development of “multilingual logistics” ( Zhang & Wu 2020 ) in public health to decrease the necropolitical impacts of linguistic exclusion and disrespect in health care.
In addition to its role in health care, the structural violence of language oppression also manifests within legal systems, leading to unjust, life-affecting outcomes for those that sign or speak oppressed languages. Research on this topic is carried out within the transdisciplinary framework of jurilinguistics ( Monzó-Nebot & Moreno-Rivero 2020 ), as well as sociolinguistics ( Eades 2012 ) and applied linguistics ( Angermeyer 2013 ). This research has shown how courtroom interpretation ( Du 2015 , Eades 2012 ), the translation of court documents ( Mellinger 2017 ), and police interpreting ( Howes 2019 ) are all sites where failures of communicative justice negatively impact procedural justice. This research has not explicitly addressed how failures of procedural justice expose speakers and signers of oppressed languages to increased risk of premature death, but work by Gilmore (2007) suggests that we should take the potential for this connection seriously.
In addition to these chronic issues related to language oppression and the production of group-differentiated death, language oppression and death are also linked in acute crises. O'Brien et al. (2018 , p. 627) argue in a recent review article that “clear, timely, and accurate information is…critical to disaster response effectiveness,” including the prevention of unnecessary deaths. Research in this field has focused on how translation problems lead to mistrust in crucial information 4 ( Cadwell 2020 ), increase the vulnerability of minoritized populations ( Federici 2020 ), and lead to false and misleading information being distributed, thus increasing the risk for vulnerable populations ( Sutherlin 2013 ). Research by Uekusa (2019) has also shown that linguistic discrimination further compounds these effects, meaning that even linguistic minorities that are not socially or economically marginalized may suffer disproportionate exposure to risk during crises ( Uekusa & Matthewman 2017 ). Overall, this literature suggests that the structural violence of language oppression manifests with deadly consequences in acute crises, acting as a form of “contextual vulnerability” along with more familiar determinants such as class and race ( Méndez et al. 2020 ).
Finally, the observations of Briggs & Mantini-Briggs (2016) in relation to health care and communication are relevant to all these contexts. They point out how health care communication studies typically focus on unidirectional transfers of information from expert communicator to subaltern recipient. Such an approach both maintains and obscures necropolitical hierarchies and inequities, and the authors therefore argue that achieving “communicative justice” also involves measures for full and equal participation in communication. The necropolitics of language oppression must therefore consider not only how subaltern communities are communicated to, but also how they are not listened to, treated with dignity, or supported to participate fully in the political processes and social institutions that directly shape their lives.
We thus see that language oppression increases exposure to premature death in multiple ways: through the physical weathering of racialized bodies that results from chronic disrespect and ongoing maldistribution; via subjection to violent schooling and exclusion from the benefits of appropriate education; by exclusion from life-saving and -sustaining health care systems; through miscarriages of procedural justice; by increased exposure to harm and death during acute disasters; and by exclusion from the political processes that shape all of these avenues.

Section: LANGUAGE OPPRESSION, NECROPOLITICAL GOVERNANCE, AND SUSTAINING LANGUAGES AND LIFE

So, language oppression kills. In doing so, it creates “death worlds”—“forms of social existence in which vast populations are subjected to conditions of life conferring upon them the status of living dead ” ( Mbembé 2003 , p. 40, emphasis in original; Mugane 2005 ). Crucially, these death worlds enable the necropolitical state to govern not simply by destroying the racialized Other, but also by serving to guide their conduct: not only the governing of death, but also governing through death, by using death to shape people's desires and behaviors. Death and the surrounding environment of slow violence and dispersed suffering are powerful coercive elements that help produce the profoundly unfree choice that many parents make, in order to nurture and protect their children, to transmit dominant languages, trading their child's social death and “the pain of separation” ( Povinelli 2006 , p. 93) for a chance at the good life: a life without pervasive disrespect and deprivation, free from corrosive bodily weathering and premature death. The production of death in the context of language oppression is thus not an accidental side effect of governance, but rather one of its aims. It is part of the functioning of necropolitical governance that helps drive the ongoing normalization of the population. Viewed in this light, necropolitical language oppression can be considered within a broader set of “linguistic governmentality” techniques ( Urla 2019 , p. 261), which seek to “govern, guide, and shape (rather than force) linguistic conduct and subjectivity.”
We can now return to where we started, with the examples of people being killed on account of and dying for language and the links between health, well-being, and language maintenance and reclamation.
To begin with, a necropolitical interpretation of people being killed on account of language is relatively straightforward. These events occur in moments when the state's slow violence, and the slow death it causes, is intensified and accelerated, propelling techniques of governance along the violence spectrum. This process is the necropolitical logic of language oppression in real time, stripped of its slowness, erupting into eventfulness.
In terms of people who have died for language, a necropolitical interpretation would suggest that these are examples of what Bargu (2014 , p. 14) calls human weapons: “actors who forge their lives into weapons of political struggle by a resort to self-destructive techniques.” Such protests emerge, argues Bargu, when the state intensifies its necropolitical capacities, and self-destruction becomes the only way for insurgent actors to exercise agency and, through it, resistance, by denying the state its ultimate sovereign right to cause death. We can thus understand the deployment of human weapons within the context of necropolitical language oppression as an effort to assert self-determination against the state and its capacity to distribute death.
Finally, regarding the relationship between health and well-being and language maintenance and reclamation, the literature review presented above suggests that an important and yet unexplored aspect of this correlation is the physical weathering that people experience within the chronic disrespect and maldistribution of language oppression and how this weathering interacts with the heightened risk of premature death that adheres to the exclusion of certain languages from critical public institutions. At a minimum, language maintenance and reclamation efforts counteract this death-dealing by sustaining and reconstituting the relationships, institutions, and communities that the state destroys and, in doing so, provide respite from the chronic stress of linguistic death worlds.
Understanding that health and well-being can be promoted through language maintenance and reclamation enables us to conclude by following through on the necropolitics of language oppression's decolonial commitments. In doing so, we can ask, if language oppression is inherently necropolitical, how can conditions that promote and sustain life—long, good, full, equitable lives—be pursued through decolonial practices of language reclamation? Research on the anthropology of language reclamation and maintenance ( Walsh 2005 , Meek 2011 , Perley 2011 , Urla 2012 , Wyman 2012 , Nevins 2013 , Davis 2018 , Shulist 2018 ) provides an important starting point for thinking about this question. The approach advanced above suggests that we can contribute further to this literature, and to the life-sustaining practices of language reclamation and maintenance, through continued interrogation of the mechanisms of language oppression and how they can be resisted. Of particular relevance here is growing awareness of backlash against language reclamation, as part of broader efforts to maintain systems and structures of language oppression ( McEwan-Fujita 2020 , Roche & Troy 2020 ). What role might anthropology play in acting as a “force field” ( Scheper-Hughes 1995 , 1996 ) to protect against the “gale force” of these “curtailing social winds” ( Povinelli 2011 , p. 10)? What role might militant, decolonial anthropology play in theorizing and obtaining language emancipation ( Huss & Lindgren 2011 ) and social justice in relation to language ( Avineri et al. 2019 , Roche 2020 )? And if we accept that the state is the primary agent of language oppression and the beneficiary of its necropolitical consequences, then how might anthropology contribute to pursuing life-sustaining language reclamation beyond and against the state ( Clastres 1989 , Graeber 2004 , Scott 2009 , Kauanui 2021 )?

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I acknowledge funding from La Trobe University's Transforming Human Societies Research Focus Area, which supported me to think through the issues discussed in this article as part of my project on “The Politics of Global Language Endangerment.” This project included a workshop where I initially floated these ideas, and I am grateful to the participants who provided helpful feedback and encouragement: Jakelin Troy, Jenny Davis, Serafin Coronel-Molina, Ruth Singer, Ahmed Kabel, Åsa Virdi Kroik, Nala Lee, Alice Gaby, Debra McDougall, Michelle O'Toole, and Cassie Smith-Christmas. I am grateful to my colleagues and friends at La Trobe University and beyond, with whom I also discussed these ideas as they were taking shape, including Lauren Gawne, Alex Davis, Ruth Gamble, James Leibold, and Tonya Stebbins. Thanks also go to Anna Belew, Sarah Goldfinch, and Karthick Narayanan for inspiring conversations on the many intersections of language and politics. Finally, I also acknowledge the support of my immediate and extended family, without whom I could not have done any of this.

Section: literature cited

