Title: Human Evolution in Asia: Taking Stock and Looking Forward


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

We review the state of paleoanthropology research in Asia. We survey the fossil record, articulate the current understanding, and delineate the points of contention. Although Asia received less attention than Europe and Africa did in the second half of the twentieth century, an increase in reliably dated fossil materials and the advances in genetics have fueled new research. The long and complex evolutionary history of humans in Asia throughout the Pleistocene can be explained by a balance of mechanisms, between gene flow among different populations and continuity of regional ancestry. This pattern is reflected in fossil morphology and paleogenomics. Critical understanding of the sociocultural forces that shaped the history of hominin fossil research in Asia is important in charting the way forward.

Section: 1. INTRODUCTION

In the history of modern paleoanthropology, Asia occupied a marginal space in the second half of the twentieth century, secondary to the attention given to Europe and Africa. Europe was the place for modern human origins debate, with a focus on the evolutionary history of the Neanderthals and their relationship with modern humans. Africa was the place for hominin origins, the only continent where early hominins were discovered. In comparison, Asia did not receive much attention in either of these topics. The attention it did receive was shaped by Eurocentrism and colonialism ( Athreya & Ackermann 2020 ).
The twenty-first century has witnessed a renewed interest in human evolution in Asia. Research energized by the increase in reliably dated fossil materials and the advances in paleogenetics/paleogenomics shows a long and complex evolutionary history of hominins in Asia. Hominin sites start as early as two million years ago and continue to increase in number and geographical coverage. Although the majority of the fossil data have been found in China and Indonesia, and they still are to a degree, other countries have added to the list of fossil hominin sites ( Figure 1 ; Table 1 ). New materials confirm the general picture repeatedly observed over the years; they also bring out points of contention and move the field forward.

Figure 1 Click to view

Hominin sites in Asia
Abbreviations: AA, argon-argon; aDNA, ancient DNA analysis; AMS, accelerator mass spectrometry; BIO, biostratigraphy; ESR, electron spin resonance; FT, fission track; OSL, optically stimulated luminescence; PM, paleomagnetism; RC, radiocarbon dating; RI, radioisotopic dating; TL, thermoluminescence; U, uranium series.

The fossil record from Asia has long been explained by continuity from earlier hominins to modern humans. The predominant view of continuity among the paleoanthropologists in Asia and the United States persisted through the 1990s; tension began to develop when the idea of a recent African origin of modern humans as a new species, Homo sapiens , and the ensuing complete replacement of indigenous archaic humans increasingly gained support particularly among the geneticists in Europe and the United States. Although genetics and morphology were often described as depicting different pictures of human evolution, with genetics supporting discontinuity and morphology supporting continuity, the development in genetics/genomics that took place in the twenty-first century brought forward the important role played by the concepts of introgression and admixture between ancient populations in shaping recent human evolution.
Here, we review the fossil record, articulate the status of current understanding, and delineate the points of contention. We hope this review is helpful in moving discussions forward. We begin with the evidence for a long period of hominin habitation in Asia.
Figure 1 Click to view
Hominin sites in Asia
Abbreviations: AA, argon-argon; aDNA, ancient DNA analysis; AMS, accelerator mass spectrometry; BIO, biostratigraphy; ESR, electron spin resonance; FT, fission track; OSL, optically stimulated luminescence; PM, paleomagnetism; RC, radiocarbon dating; RI, radioisotopic dating; TL, thermoluminescence; U, uranium series.

Section: 2. HOMININS LIVED IN ASIA FOR ALMOST TWO MILLION YEARS

The first evidence of hominins in Asia, either fossil or archaeology, may date to as early as two million years ago. The earliest evidence for a hominin presence in Asia comes from archaeological sites in northern China without hominin fossils: the Nihewan Basin sites such as Majuangou (Site 21) 1 ( Ao et al. 2013 ) dated 1.32–1.66 Ma based on magnetostratigraphic correlation ( Zhu et al. 2004 ) and Shangchen (Site 38) dated 2.1 Ma based on loess ( Zhu et al. 2018 ).
Stone tools found from these early archaeological sites are Mode 1, chopper-chopping tool industry, using quartz as the material. Mode 1 chopper-chopping tools are associated with processing bones for marrow from a scavenging adaptation, in contrast to Mode 2 handaxes, which are associated with butchering and processing meat from big-game hunting. Mode 1 technology continued in Asia for a long time, even after Modes 2 and 3 tools were made. Debates about the different stone tool sequences and what they mean in terms of adaptive strategies are beyond the scope of this review. Interested readers can refer to a review by Bar-Yosef & Wang (2012) .
Although no hominin fossil has been discovered in the archaeological sites discussed above, Gongwangling, Shaanxi (Site 15), a fossil hominin site, is in the vicinity of Shangchen, dated to as old as 1.62 Ma based on the paleomagnetic dating of loess-paleosol sequences ( Zhu et al. 2015 ). The new name given at first, Sinanthropus lantianensis , does not signify a new species (see below). The Gongwangling cranium shows traits consistent with the later Homo erectus specimens in Asia—namely, a long and low frontal, thick supraorbital torus, and thick cranial bones. The cranial capacity estimated at 780 cc is similar to that of another early hominin sample of similar date and latitude outside Africa, Dmanisi, Georgia (Site 6), with cranial capacity estimates in the range of 546–730 cc ( Lordkipanidze et al. 2013 ).
Early hominin fossil materials are found farther south in China. The two incisors from Yuanmou, Yunnan (Site 54), are dated to the Early Pleistocene, at 1.7 Ma based on magnetostratigraphy ( Zhu et al. 2008 ). The Yuanmou incisors have shovel shaping, a trait found in high frequency among fossil hominins in Asia and among populations in this region today. It is also notable that this incisor morphology is found in hominins from Africa of earlier and comparable dates, such as KNM-ER 1590B and KNM-WT 15000 ( Zhu et al. 2008 ). This may be an example of a trait that originated in Africa that then became a regionally predominant trait in Asia.
Early Pleistocene hominin fossils are also found in Southeast Asia, in Sangiran, Java (Site 36), Indonesia. The Mojokerto cranium of Java (Site 24) is dated to 1.8 Ma based on argon-argon dating ( Swisher et al. 1994 ) and 1.43 Ma based on palynology and zircon fission-track dating ( Morley et al. 2020 ). The earliest Sangiran hominin fossils are dated to 1.5–1.3 Ma based on fission-track and uranium-series dating ( Matsu'ura et al. 2020 ). The precise date is disputed due to the unclear provenience of the Mojokerto cranium ( Huffman et al. 2006 ), as is the case for almost all fossil hominin discoveries from Indonesia. However, it is generally agreed that the earliest Indonesian hominins have an Early Pleistocene date.
Although it is now widely accepted that hominins dispersed beyond Africa in the Early Pleistocene ( Table 2 ), the idea of an early dispersal became generally agreed on only after the 1990s, starting with the acceptance of the radiometric dates for Dmanisi ( Antón & Swisher 2004 ). Until the 1990s, the consensus was that hominins were limited to Africa during the Early Pleistocene and that hominin habitation of Eurasia took place during the Middle Pleistocene between 500 and 800 ka ( Klein 1989 , Pope 1988 ).
Important hominin fossil sites with comparable sites in Africa and Europe
Abbreviation: NA, not applicable.

It should be noted, however, that the acceptance of the Middle Pleistocene dispersal of hominins was not universal. Scholars writing about the hominin materials in China have consistently supported an alternative scenario of an early dispersal and continuous habitation, with continuity maintained through modern humans. The idea of early dispersal of hominins into Asia had to withstand scrutiny in terms of the reliability of early dates that were reported. The hesitation to accept early dates may be at least partly attributable to the scrutiny given to research by scholars originating from regions other than the United States or Europe, motivated by Eurocentrism ( Athreya & Ackermann 2020 ), as well as the suspicion of a nationalist agenda linked to claims of antiquity ( Sautman 2001 , Yen 2014 ). In addition to the early dates of Yuanmou and Gongwangling, other sites in the region provide further evidence for hominin habitation dating more than one million years ago with Xiaochangliang, Hebei (Site 49), at 1.36 Ma, and Donggutuo (Site 7) at around 1 Ma ( Wu 2004 ). Archaeological evidence from West Asia such as Zarka Valley (Site 56), Jordan, dated with stone tools at 2.48 Ma using paleomagnetic, argon, and uranium dating methods ( Scardia et al. 2019 ), and the Shangchen stone tools dated to 2.1 Ma (discussed earlier) strengthen the model of early dispersal out of Africa (see below).
As Pliocene hominins are found only in Africa, and as the earliest fossil members of the genus Homo are found in Africa, hominin dispersal from Africa into Eurasia is the reasonable and widely accepted hypothesis. An alternative to the dispersal model is the Asian origins model, arguing for an even earlier hominin dispersal out of Africa and into Eurasia, possibly an australopithecine, from which Homo erectus originated, which in turn spread throughout Eurasia and ultimately back to Africa ( Dennell & Roebroeks 2005 ). While the Early Pleistocene presence of hominins in Asia supports the model of early dispersal of hominins into Eurasia, it does not hold enough weight to support the Asian origins model. Australopithecines being adapted to savanna and woodlands ( Lee-Thorp et al. 2012 ) and using stone tools ( Semaw 2000 ) are minimally compatible with the Asian origins model. Future research comparing the Early Pleistocene hominins from Dmanisi, Sangiran, Gongwangling, and Yuanmou with the African Early Pleistocene hominins may provide insight into the relationships between the fossil groups and their bearing on possible origin models: If the dispersing hominins originated in Africa, and if dispersal was rapid (considering that the earliest hominin appeared in Asia not long after Homo erectus appeared in Africa), the earliest hominins should be similar to one another, and all similar to the early Homo in Africa. However, if they are different, this would be more compatible with a different and much earlier lineage out of Africa, in the Early Pleistocene and even terminal Pliocene, with more time to diversify. As there is no validated presence of australopithecines outside of Africa, there is not much support for the Asian origins model.
Important hominin fossil sites with comparable sites in Africa and Europe
Abbreviation: NA, not applicable.

Section: 3. CONTINUITY OF REGIONAL TRAITS: ANCESTRY OR GENE FLOW

Homo erectus is the hominin species that is first known to have inhabited Asia and also the first hominin fossil found in Asia, with the discovery from Trinil (Site 44) in 1891. Hominin fossils and archaeological materials found from the first set of systematic excavations in Zhoukoudian (Site 58) during the 1920s and 1930s form the basis of what we understand to be Homo erectus morphology: thick cranial bones, thick torus around the cranium (supraorbital, angular, and occipital torus), sagittal keel, low forehead, and postorbital constriction. The hominin fossils from Zhoukoudian were first announced as Sinanthropus pekinensis ( Black 1927 ). Because they were similar to those from Indonesia that were called Pithecanthropus erectus , the Sinanthropus pekinensis fossils were merged into Pithecanthropus erectus ( Weidenreich 1943 ), which in turn was later changed to Homo erectus ( Mayr 1950 ). The dating of the hominin activity in the Zhoukoudian (Site 58) cave has yielded various results: from 800 ka to 400 ka based on uranium-series and aluminum dating ( Shen et al. 2009 ), and from 578 ka to 230 ka based on combined uranium-series, electron spin resonance (ESR), fission-track, and thermoluminescence dating techniques ( Wu 2004 ).
Fossils in Asia have been given various names, especially the discoveries made during the early years of paleoanthropology: Pithecanthropus modjokertensis , Pithecanthropus erectus , Pithecanthropus robustus , Pithecanthropus dubius , Meganthropus palaeojavanicus , Javanthropus soloensis , Sinanthropus pekinensis , and Sinanthropus lantianensis. Although these names take the binomial format of a genus and a species name, they were not given as a biological classification at the level of species, but rather as referents of different fossil samples ( Antón et al. 2007 ). Early scholars such as Weidenreich had already recognized the morphological similarities shared by hominin fossils in Asia, although Mayr is credited for subsuming all the fossil materials from Asia under a single species, Homo erectus ( Mayr 1950 ).
Earlier than Zhoukoudian are the two crania from Yunxian (now Yunyang), Hubei (Site 55). They have been dated later in the Early Pleistocene, approximately 1.15 Ma with magnetostratigraphy ( Zhu et al. 2003 ), or even later at 800 ka based on paleomagnetism and paleosol ( Guo et al. 2013 ). The two crania are nearly complete with facial bones, which is rare in Asian fossil hominin materials ( Li & Etler 1992 ). Morphological studies have been limited due to deformation during the fossilization process; a virtual reconstruction ( Vialet et al. 2010 ) shows features characteristic of Homo erectus , similar to those seen in the earlier Gongwangling and the later hominins from Zhoukoudian.
A recent fossil discovery is from Hualongdong, Anhui (Site 11), China ( Wu et al. 2019 ). The materials are reliably dated to between 275 and 331 ka using uranium-series dating, compatible with the faunal remains. Morphological features of Hualongdong are shared with other Asian specimens of similar dates, including a low vault, frontal keel, and smaller molars.
From Southeast Asia, following the discovery of the fossil materials in Trinil (Site 44) in 1891, more fossil materials were found from the sites along the Solo River, such as Sangiran (Site 36) and Ngandong (Site 28) ( Rizal et al. 2019 , Zaim et al. 2011 ). However, the provenience of the Javanese specimens has proven to be problematic, making it extremely difficult to settle on a date. The case of Mojokerto discussed earlier is one of many examples. New discoveries have continued to be reported from Java, Indonesia. Sambungmacan 4 has an endocranial volume of 1,006 cc, within the range of other Javanese Homo erectus ( Baba et al. 2003 ), while Skull IX (Tjg-1993.05) has an endocranial volume of 870 cc ( Kaifu et al. 2011 ). Skull IX is estimated to date between 800 ka and 1.5 Ma, but it is not reliable due to the unclear provenience.
Asian hominins show a combination of traits that continue through the Pleistocene ( Wu 2004 ), including sagittal keel, interparietal bone, platymeric femur, shovel-shaped incisors, metopic suture, small nasal cavity, high frequency of third molar agenesis, decreasing premolar and molar size, low nose, and round infraorbital cavity ( Weidenreich 1939 , 1943 ). The traits are mostly cranial, as few postcranial elements have been found. These traits are sometimes mistaken as unique in Homo erectus and consequently used as diagnostic features. Although not all of these traits are unique to Asia, they occur together more frequently in Asia. Some may have originated in Africa and become prevalent in Asia; shovel shaping in incisors as discussed earlier may be one example. Future research may help us to understand the regional or continental variation in the frequency of traits.

Section: 4. PATTERNS OF VARIATION THROUGH SPACE AND TIME

Continuity of traits does not mean an absence of change. Researchers agree there are complexities in the pattern of morphological variation through time in Homo erectus . Some researchers ( Baab 2015 , Weidenreich 1951 ) have noted regional differences between the northeastern group, represented by the fossils from Zhoukoudian, China, and the southeastern group, represented by the fossils from Java, Indonesia; others ( Liu et al. 2005 , Rightmire 1990 ) have argued that there is no significant difference between the two samples.
Hexian, Longtandong (Site 10), and Nanjing (Site 26) ( Zhao et al. 2001 ), Homo erectus fossils from southern China, are found to be different from the Zhoukoudian sample from northern China and quite similar to the Indonesian and African Homo erectus ( Kaifu et al. 2005 , Kidder & Durband 2004 , Liu et al. 2005 ). For example, Hexian lacks the narrow occiput found in the Zhoukoudian sample ( Kaifu et al. 2005 ). This has been interpreted as a result of isolation of the Southeast Asian Homo erectus , with diverging evolutionary trajectories between the two geographical regions of Homo erectus ( Kaifu et al. 2005 ). An alternative hypothesis is that it is the Zhoukoudian sample that is divergent ( Antón 2002 , Kidder & Durband 2004 ), while Hexian and Nanjing are retaining ancestral traits shared with the Indonesian sample. As southern China was connected to Southeast Asia during times when the sea level was low ( Figure 1 ), fossil hominins from southern China would not necessarily align most closely with the fossil hominins from northern China. It is then not surprising that fossil hominins in southern China share more similarities with the Southeast Asian sample than with those in northern China.
Continental differences between the African Homo erectus and the Asian Homo erectus can answer the question of whether Homo erectus can be considered a single polytypic species with a list of diagnostic traits. The morphological differences seen in the African and Asian Homo erectus samples include reduced postorbital constriction with a higher cranial vault and a narrower supraorbital torus ( Baab 2008 ). However, not all Asian fossils are uniform in morphology, with some matching more closely to African specimens. When the pooled Homo erectus sample from Africa and Asia was compared to a sample of pooled modern humans from Africa and Asia, results could not refute the hypothesis of a single species of Homo erectus ( Villmoare 2005 ). If African Homo erectus/ergaster dispersed to Asia, the earliest Homo erectus samples from both regions should be similar (having recently shared a common ancestor) and then diverge with time if there was little gene flow. Whether Homo erectus is a polytypic species with a worldwide distribution ( Baab 2008 ), whether there are multiple species in the fossil sample currently recognized as Homo erectus ( Andrews 1984 , Kaifu et al. 2005 , Stringer 1984 , Wood 1994 ), or whether Homo erectus should be subsumed under Homo sapiens ( Wolpoff et al. 1994 , Wu 2004 ), the debates reflect differences in the theoretical outlook and the challenges of dealing with the complexities of a worldwide lineage with geographical and temporal variations.
In addition to the regional/continental differences, there are changes over time. Between the earlier, traditional Asian Homo erectus represented by the Zhoukoudian sample and the later Homo erectus , including the later Indonesian materials from Ngandong and the late Middle Pleistocene materials from southern China, differences are in the posterior cranial vault and the degree of prognathism ( Antón 2003 , Wolpoff 1999 ). However, the uneven distribution of fossils across time and space confounds the overall patterns of variation: The earliest fossils are mostly from Southeast Asia, followed by the northeastern samples such as Zhoukoudian, with the latest fossils again from Southeast Asia. Hence, it is difficult to understand changes through time versus regional differences. Future research will help shed light on this issue with additional fossil materials that fill the gaps in time and space.
Asian fossil data are predominantly cranial, with very few postcranial elements. An exceptional case of a fairly complete skeleton was found from Jinniushan, Yinkou, Liaoning (Site 13), excavated in 1984 ( Lü 1989 ). Although it was first reported as a male ( Lü 1989 ), a subsequent study argued that it is a female ( Rosenberg et al. 2006 ). Jinniushan has the largest body size of any female hominin, with an estimated stature of 168 cm based on the ulna ( Rosenberg et al. 2006 ). The large body size and relatively short limbs are compatible with cold adaptation. The Jinniushan cranium shows cranial traits that are a mixture of archaic and modern human traits ( Pope 1988 ). The dates are bracketed between 310 ka and 200 ka based on uranium-series dating ( Brown 2001 , Lü 2003 ).
Fossil hominins in Asia are often described as having a mixture of archaic ( Homo erectus ) and modern ( Homo sapiens ) features. One such example, Dali (Site 3), is particularly notable as one of the few complete skulls from the Middle Pleistocene. Dali was found in 1978 in Shaanxi Ruohe River, with a reliable date of 250 ka based on loess, in association with scrapers ( Brown 2001 , Wu & Poirier 1995 ). Dali was classified as archaic Homo sapiens and shows a mosaic of Chinese Homo erectus traits, European and African Homo heidelbergensis traits, and Chinese modern human traits ( Athreya & Wu 2017 , Wu & Athreya 2013 ).
Researchers characterize some traits in Asian fossil materials as Neanderthal morphology. Maba, Guangdong (Site 20) ( Xiao et al. 2014 ), resembles Neanderthals in the supraorbital torus and cranial shape. The two crania discovered in Xuchang, Henan (Site 50) ( Li et al. 2017 ), show a mixture of Neanderthal, Homo erectus , and Homo sapiens features, along with a cranial capacity of 1,800 cc by virtual endocast reconstruction. The Xuchang hominins are dated to 125–105 ka using optically stimulated luminescence (OSL).
Neanderthal morphology is also reported in fossil hominins from Xujiayao, Shaanxi (Site 51), found in the 1970s ( Brown 2001 ). The date is not settled, with estimates ranging between 16 ka based on radiocarbon dating, 370–260 ka from ESR ( Ao et al. 2017 ), and 500 ka with paleomagnetism ( Norton & Gao 2008 ). The Xujiayao fossils show a mixture of Homo erectus and archaic Homo sapiens traits ( Wu & Poirier 1995 ), and the Xujiayao mandible has a retromolar space, which is a characteristic of Neanderthals.
Neanderthal morphology in a hominin fossil from Asia can be explained by several hypotheses. One is that what is known as a Neanderthal morphology may have a broader distribution and is not unique to Neanderthals. Alternatively, this could reflect the level of gene flow among hominin populations in Eurasia. The identification of Neanderthal traits, once interpreted as a basis for a global Neanderthal stage in human evolution, may be evidence of gene flow from western Eurasia during the Middle Pleistocene. Gene flow from the Neanderthals (also known as introgression if Neanderthals belong to a different species than modern humans) has been documented through ancient DNA studies since 2010 with the publication of the first Neanderthal genome ( Green et al. 2010 ).
While morphological traits characteristic of another region can be found in Asia, for example, a Neanderthal morphology as discussed above, some fossils show continuity of archaic features through time within Asia. The 13 crania from Ngandong, Indonesia (Site 28), found in the 1970s, show remarkable similarities to the earlier Homo erectus materials from Sangiran. Their date is not settled, with reported dates ranging from 53–27 ka ( Swisher et al. 1996 ) to 117–108 ka ( Rizal et al. 2019 ), all based on ESR and uranium-series dating. The dating is done on the materials from the fossil-bearing level rather than on the hominin fossils themselves, while the exact stratigraphy is debated. Despite the difference in reported dates, it is generally agreed that Ngandong is the latest Homo erectus .
A mixture of Homo erectus and Homo sapiens traits continues until the end of the Pleistocene. A recent discovery of a partial cranium and a mandible with dentition from Dushan Cave, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region (Site 8), is dated to 15 ka at the Pleistocene–Holocene boundary, using accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) radiocarbon dating ( Liao et al. 2019 ). The dentition shows dental traits associated with Homo erectus as well as traits considered typical in Homo sapiens .
A mosaic of regional traits, worldwide traits, and traits from other regions are repeatedly found in the late Middle Pleistocene Asian fossils. The variation in the late Middle Pleistocene Asian fossil hominins has been a topic of confusion for many because they do not fit neatly in either Homo erectus or Homo sapiens . This sample includes fossil hominins from China such as Dali, Hexian, Jinniushan, Maba, and Xujiayao, as well as the skull from Narmada (Site 27), India. Traditionally they have been called archaic Homo sapiens . Recently, there have been explorations as to their membership in a separate species, Homo heidelbergensis ( Bae 2010 ), but no consensus has been reached ( Athreya 2010 ). There is no evidence that the pattern of variation in the late Middle Pleistocene hominin fossils in Asia warrants a different species designation.

Section: 5. MULTIPLE ANCESTORS, MULTIPLE ORIGINS

The late Middle Pleistocene period has received increased attention as most relevant to the modern human origins debate, as the recent African origin model of modern humans posits that Homo sapiens originated around 200 ka in Africa as a new species and spread worldwide ( Stringer 2016 ). While the Early and early Middle Pleistocene hominin fossil data provide morphology without genetics (as yet), the modern human origins debate based on the hominin fossils from the late Middle Pleistocene and the Late Pleistocene is informed by both fossils and paleogenetics, and increasingly, paleogenomics.
Fossils assessed as modern humans in Asia appear from the Late Pleistocene. Dated to 35 ka based on AMS radiocarbon ( Li et al. 2018 ), Shandingdong (Zhoukoudian Upper Cave) (Site 37) fossils were excavated in the 1930s ( Wu & Poirier 1995 ). Like the Zhoukoudian Homo erectus fossils, the original fossils from the Zhoukoudian Upper Cave have been lost. High-quality casts, meticulous descriptions, drawings, and measurements that Weidenreich made remain and have been studied. That these are modern humans is not disputed; the question is the relationship between the Upper Cave and earlier hominins, and that between the Upper Cave and modern Chinese. The range of variation in the Zhoukoudian Upper Cave crania has been recognized for a long time ( Cunningham & Wescott 2002 , Harvati 2009 , Weidenreich 1939 ), but the small sample size and taphonomic distortion suggest that the debate will not be settled easily ( Kaifu & Fujita 2012 ).
Further south, the hominin teeth found in Longtanshan Cave, Yunnan (Site 18), dated to between 82 ka and 60 ka based on uranium-series dating, raise the possibility of an early dispersal of modern humans into inland Asia ( Curnoe et al. 2016 ). Other caves in southern China including Huanglong (Site 12) ( Liu et al. 2010b , Shen et al. 2013 ), Zhiren (Site 57) ( Ge et al. 2020 , Liu et al. 2010a , Martinón-Torres et al. 2017 ), Luna (Site 19) ( Bae et al. 2014 ), and Fuyan (Site 9) ( Liu et al. 2015 ) have also been argued as evidence of an early dispersal of modern humans into inland Asia. However, the early dates of some of these sites have been questioned. Hominin teeth from Fuyan were dated to be younger than 10 ka ( Sun et al. 2021 ) instead of 120–80 ka ( Liu et al. 2015 ). Further research may illuminate the notoriously complicated matter of dating fossil finds with cave stratigraphy.
Modern human fossils were found at several sites in Japan including Yamashita-Cho (Site 52) ( Suzuki 1983 , Trinkaus & Ruff 1996 ), Minatogawa (Site 23) ( Suzuki & Hanihara 1982 ), and Shirao-Saonetabaru Cave (Site 39) ( Nakagawa et al. 2010 ). The fossil sites from the Japanese archipelago all date to the terminal Pleistocene and show more similarities with the Southeast Asians or Australo-Melanesians than with the Northeast Asians from Zhoukoudian Upper Cave ( Kaifu & Fujita 2012 ). Although fossil hominins are reported from the Korean Peninsula including Mandal (Site 22) ( Norton 2000 ), Ryonggok (Site 33) ( Bae & Guyomarc'h 2015 ), and Turubong (Site 45) ( Park & Lee 1990 ), a full assessment has yet to take place due to the uncertainty of dates and the limited access to the fossil materials ( Kaifu & Fujita 2012 ).
The diversity in morphology and the mixture of archaic and modern features continue in Southeast Asia. New discoveries were added to the previously found specimens from Wajak 1 and 2 (Site 47) and Ngawi 1 (Site 29) ( Cartmill & Smith 2009 ) from Java: a partial skeleton found in Moh Khiew Cave (Site 25), Thailand, dated to ≈26 ka 14 C BP ( Matsumura & Pookajorn 2005 ); Tabon (Site 40), Philippines ( Dizon et al. 2002 ); and Penghu (Site 32), Taiwan ( Chang et al. 2015 ). Fossils from Niah Cave (Site 30), discovered in 1958, were dated to 45–39 ka cal BP using uranium-series and radiocarbon dating techniques ( Barker et al. 2007 ).
Tam Pa Ling (Site 41), a limestone karst cave site in northern Laos, yielded hominin fossils argued to be modern humans ( Demeter et al. 2012 ). A partial cranium and several mandibles have been reported. The partial cranium has modern human morphology, while the mandibles show a mixture of archaic and modern features in a robust mandible with a chin ( Demeter et al. 2015 ). The date of 70–46 ka (OSL) is supported by U/Th-series dates ( Demeter et al. 2012 , 2015 ).
In Callao Cave (Site 1), on Luzon island, Philippines, a third metatarsal was discovered in 2007 ( Mijares et al. 2010 ) followed by additional elements of maxillary dentition, manual and pedal phalanges, and a femoral shaft. Dated to 67 ka by uranium-series dating, the mixture of archaic and modern features in the fossil material was deemed to warrant a new hominin species, Homo luzonensis ( Détroit et al. 2019 ). As in the case of Homo floresiensis , the site is east of the Wallace Line; the island was not connected to Southeast Asia even during the times of the lowest sea levels. Future research may illuminate whether the hominins reached these islands by accident or with the technology of maritime navigation.
The debate surrounding the Liang Bua hominins, Flores (Site 16), Indonesia ( Morwood et al. 2004 , Sutikna et al. 2016 ), took a new turn with data from Mata Menge, Flores, supporting the idea that the Liang Bua hominin was not an exceptional outlier but a member of a lineage with a long history dating to the early Middle Pleistocene ( van den Bergh et al. 2016 ). While the first decade since the discovery of Liang Bua 1 in 2003 was focused on whether the cranium is a pathological outlier or a valid basis for a new species Homo floresiensis ( Falk et al. 2005 , Henneberg et al. 2014 , Jacob et al. 2006 ), the new discoveries from Mata Menge are adding weight to the position that it is indeed a new species, Homo floresiensis , coexisting with Homo sapiens . The debate will not resolve until more crania are found in addition to the single cranium with its small cranial capacity that is at the crux of the debate.
Flores and Luzon share several similarities in dentition, and they are close to each other in both time and space. Hominin fossils from both sites show features that are reminiscent of australopithecines. It is not resolved whether they are different species from Homo sapiens and whether they are different species from each other.
Modern humans did not have a singular point of origin in time or space; instead, modern humans have multiple ancestors and multiple origins, while gene flow maintains shared similarities across continents. Gene exchange, be it as introgression or gene flow, is maintained between archaic populations and modern populations; gene exchange is also maintained between different regional populations while local extinctions and replacements shaped regional evolutionary histories ( Eller et al. 2004 ).

Section: 6. ANCIENT DNA RESEARCH ANSWERS SOME QUESTIONS

Throughout the 1990s in the United States and Europe, the modern human origins debate was characterized by two competing models, each with an emphasis on a different body of evidence. The multiregional evolution model ( Wolpoff et al. 1984 ) was supported by the fossil data showing regional morphological traits throughout the Pleistocene. The recent African origin model ( Stringer & Andrews 1988 ) was supported by the genetic data compatible with modern humans originating as a new species within the last 200 thousand years. In particular, studies based on the ancient DNA extracted from Neanderthal fossils, first mitochondrial and then nuclear DNA, repeatedly showed that Neanderthals did not contribute to the genetic makeup of modern humans ( Green et al. 2006 , Krings et al. 1999 ).
The publication of the first Neanderthal genome ( Green et al. 2010 ) showing gene flow between Neanderthals and modern humans became a turning point. Since then, research has been accumulating that shows admixture between archaic ancestral humans in Eurasia (including the Neanderthals) and modern humans. The seemingly irreconcilable difference between the arguments based on fossils and genetics has been resolved in an agreement that modern humans have multiple ancestral populations. The concepts of introgression and admixture have become mainstream in the debate on the origin of modern humans. This reflects a change in the perception of species from a stable unit defined by a clear reproductive barrier to a fluid concept where barriers are porous.
In the past 10 years, genetic research has converged with the arguments based on fossil materials in agreeing that there was a genetic exchange between modern humans and archaic humans in Europe and Asia. (There was always a consensus about the continuity in Africa as a place of origin for modern humans.) The conclusions drawn through genetics overlapped with the position based on fossil morphology that there was indeed admixture between the preexisting Asian populations and modern humans and that modern humans in Asia have multiple ancestors. The point of contention is in the magnitude: How much interbreeding occurred? Answers to this question most likely will not be the same for all populations; increasing resolution in both the fossil and the genetic data will provide insight into the complex histories of local extinctions and local continuities.
Paleogenetics played an important role in the mainstreaming of the idea of multiple ancestry and hybridization, especially the ancient DNA from the Neanderthal fossils and the Denisovan DNA. The discovery in the Denisova Cave (Site 4) started a new era in paleoanthropology, where a new group of hominins was announced based on molecular data without much morphology (see the review by Hawks 2013 ). In addition to the Neanderthals and the Denisovans, yet another archaic lineage was posited to have left genetic signals of admixture ( Krause et al. 2010 , Reich et al. 2010 ). Currently, several archaic groups are thought to have admixed ( Brown et al. 2016 , Prüfer et al. 2014 , Reich et al. 2010 ), resulting in the usual conclusion that the picture is more complex than we thought.
The discovery of the Denisovans has led to a new direction of research in Asian paleoanthropology, resulting in a re-examination of previously studied Asian fossils to ask if there are any Denisovans among them. A mandible discovered in 1980 in Baishiya Karst Cave from Xiahe, Gannan Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, Gansu (Site 48), was dated to be 160 ka based on uranium-series dating ( Chen et al. 2019 ). Ancient proteome extracted from the Xiahe mandible pointed to a close affinity with Denisovans. Although it was heralded as the first Denisovan fossil outside of the Denisova Cave, the fossil was described as “closely related to the Denisovans from Denisova Cave” ( Chen et al. 2019 , p. 409) rather than being identified as a Denisovan. Further clarification is necessary to differentiate between identification and affiliation with Denisovan genes. In addition, the relatively new methodology of ancient proteomics will have to stand the test of time. Morphological features of the Xiahe mandible are those regularly found in Middle Pleistocene mandibles, including Penghu 1 (Site 32). The particularly large molars and the three-rooted lower molar of Xiahe form the basis for the assignment to or introgression from Denisovans ( Bailey et al. 2019 ). The three-rooted lower molar is also observed in Penghu and Xujiayao (discussed above for its Neanderthal morphology) ( Bailey et al. 2019 ), raising the possibility of Denisovan affiliation.
Signals of Neanderthal and Denisovan admixture are detected in Southeast Asia and Melanesia ( Pääbo 2015 ), and admixed genes are functional genes important for survival, such as the immune system (human leukocyte antigen) ( Abi-Rached et al. 2011 ) or red blood cells helping in the adaptation to the Tibetan high altitude ( Pääbo 2015 ). The long history of hominin adaptation to high altitude is also documented by the archaeological record of 45 ka on the Tibetan Plateau in Mongolia ( Zwyns et al. 2019 ) and the hominin evidence at 3,500-m-high altitude in Ethiopia dating from 47 ka ( Ossendorf et al. 2019 ).
Given the rising importance of paleogenomics research, the bias toward the European data needs to be addressed soon. Paleogenomic research of the Asian fossil materials is much fewer in number compared to the case in Europe; so far two fossils have been analyzed. One is the Tianyuan (Site 43) hominin, which shows a complex connection to the modern humans of today. Tianyuan 1 is a partial skeleton including a mandible discovered in 2003 near Zhoukoudian ( Tong et al. 2004 ). AMS dating on the faunal remains that accompanied the hominin fossil femur yielded a date of 39–44 ka ( Shang et al. 2007 ). The Tianyuan cranium shows modern facial features but also similarities with Jinniushan and Neanderthals, possibly a result of cold adaptation ( Shang & Trinkaus 2010 ). Ancient DNA analysis ( Fu et al. 2013 , Yang et al. 2017 ) found Tianyuan to be more closely related to modern Asians than to past and present Europeans. A mixture of archaic and modern human signature was noted in the genetic analysis, similar to modern-day Asians ( Fu et al. 2013 , Yang et al. 2017 ).
The other Asian fossil with paleogenomics research is the Salkhit skullcap (Site 34) discovered in 2006 in eastern Mongolia ( Tseveendorj et al. 2006 ). Based on the somewhat archaic appearance and the extinct fauna found nearby, it was speculated to be an archaic hominin, possibly Homo erectus , and was given the generic name Mongolanthropus ( Tseveendorj et al. 2006 ). Morphological analysis aligned the specimen with Neanderthals ( Coppens et al. 2008 ) or in between archaic and modern humans ( Lee 2016 , Tseveendorj et al. 2016 ). Analysis of ancient mitochondrial DNA aligned the specimen with modern humans, supported by the radiocarbon date of 34 ka ( Devièse et al. 2019 ). However, ancient DNA analysis of the nuclear DNA ( Massilani et al. 2020 ) argues for a Denisovan ancestry. What is notable is the mixture of archaic and modern features, which is repeatedly noted for many hominin fossils from Asia. Neanderthal genetic features seen in other Eurasian hominins were found in the genome extracted from the femur from Ust-Ishim, Russia (Site 46), with a radiocarbon date of 45 ka ( Fu et al. 2014 ).
Modern humans in Asia, therefore, have come to existence from a dynamic admixture with local populations, rather than originating as a new single species from Africa. A model that posits Homo sapiens as a new species replacing every population (outside Africa) without any genetic exchange is refuted; admixed populations contributed to the evolution of modern humans. The mixture of archaic and modern features can be explained by ancestry (or introgression, if they are two different species).

Section: 7. CONCLUSIONS AND NEW DIRECTIONS

In paleoanthropology, Asia has occupied an interesting position. The predominant impression has been that of inadequacy from a combination of the smaller number of fossil finds compared to that in Europe and Africa, often expressed as dearth; the even smaller number of fossils with reliable radiometric dates; and the research published in languages other than English. The inadequacy of data has often been cited to explain the relative lack of attention to the continent.
However, the field of paleoanthropology, like other scientific fields, is also shaped by factors besides data, namely the historical, cultural, and political contexts of the scientists and the finds. The inadequacy of data alone does not explain the position of Asia in human evolution research history. The weight given to the arguments in different parts of the world and what is presented as the mainstream view is influenced by the sociocultural and political environments. A critical perspective to understand human evolution research in Asia identifies Asia as marginalized in the debates about hominin origins and modern human origins through Eurocentrism and colonialism; it also notes the influence of orientalism in viewing Asia as a static place of Homo erectus , even a backwater or a refugium, in contrast to the dynamic movement of modern humans coming from Africa ( Athreya & Ackermann 2020 ).
In the modern human origins debate, it is considered a consensus that modern humans originated in Africa after a bitter debate in the 1990s in the United States. However, the scholars who study fossils from China, predominantly Chinese scholars with a significant number of proponents from the United States, Europe, and Australia ( Etler 1996 ; Pope 1988 ; Wolpoff et al. 1984 , 2001 ; Wu 2004 ), argued for continuity throughout the human evolutionary history in Asia. Some changed positions after more data became available ( Stringer 1991 , 2016 ).
Continuity from Homo erectus to Homo sapiens has a long history of support, especially in China. The unanimous (at least, unanimously voiced) support for the continuity from Homo erectus to Homo sapiens among Chinese scholars can be understood in the context of the role it played in the political and cultural history of China ( Schmalzer 2008 , Yen 2014 ). Continuity in the African, Asian, and Australian fossil records in balance with gene flow provides an alternative explanation of the Asian fossil record to the branching tree model of evolutionary lineages. A river that diverges and comes back together ( Rosenberg & Wu 2013 ) is a resonating alternative to a branching tree.
Asia is providing an experimental ground for new and critical approaches in human evolution research. Self-reflective approaches in paleoanthropology have raised questions about the practice of privileging certain data over others, leading to a critical analysis of postcolonialism ( Porr & Matthews 2017 ). Research from local scholars is often subject to suspicion of nationalism and nationalism-motivated bias ( Glantz 2010 , Glantz et al. 2009 , Petraglia et al. 2009 ). Local researchers have traditionally been underprivileged in terms of resources and access to power, compared to scholars from the United States and Europe. Colonial language can often be found in the literature involving Homo erectus or Homo sapiens , such as “colonize,” “occupy,” and “migrate,” which can be politically charged concepts. New approaches to addressing these biases ( Porr & Matthews 2020 ) are timely prompts to move the field forward.
The twenty-first century beckons a new era for Asian paleoanthropology. New data are accumulating at a fast rate, and old data are becoming easily accessible with digital archiving. What used to be a dearth of fossil hominins is now being replaced with an ever-increasing fossil sample that will be better dated, and with a magnitude and pattern of variation that exceed previous understanding. Renewed understandings of old data welcome new perspectives that ask us to reflect and project. With these trends in place, Asia may find itself at the center of investigations crucial to understanding human evolution throughout the Pleistocene. The past decade has revealed that the Asian hominin fossil record includes a spectrum of populations from the caves of Siberia to the forests of Java, showcasing an interesting focal point in the story of human evolution.

Section: disclosure statement

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

We are especially grateful to Karen Rosenberg and Karen Strier for the thoughtful comments that significantly improved our review. S.-H.L. thanks the Hanmaum Peace and Research Foundation, the Seoul National University Asia Center, and the University of California, Riverside, for financial support.

Section: literature cited

