Title: Recent Research on the Archaeology of War and Violence


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

The mid-1990s through the first decade of the new millennium marked an increase in publications pertaining to war and violence in the ancient past. This review considers how scholars of the past decade have responded to that work. The emerging consensus is that war and violence were endemic to all societies studied by archaeologists, and yet the frequency, intensity, causes, and consequences of violence were highly variable for reasons that defy simplistic explanation. The general trend has been toward archaeologies of war and violence that focus on understanding the nuances of particular places and historical moments. Nevertheless, archaeologists continue to grapple with grand narratives of war, such as the proposition that violence has decreased from ancient to modern times and the role of war and violence in state formation and collapse. Recent research also draws attention to a more expansive definition of violence.

Section: INTRODUCTION

The late 1990s through the first decade of the current millennium marked a turning point in the archaeology of war and violence as evidenced by both an uptick in the number of publications on the subject and a growing recognition of the ubiquity and importance of violence in the past. Sparking that florescence was Keeley's (1996) War Before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage , which was followed by a series of deep histories of war published by archaeologists, anthropologists, and historians ( Gat 2006 , Guilaine & Zammit 2001 , Leblanc & Register 2003 , Otterbein 2009 , Otto et al. 2006 ). At the heart of many of these publications is the question of whether war and other forms of violence have become more (or less) common over time, especially with the advent of modernity, the nation-state, and all their related trappings. Concomitant with these studies of war and violence over the longue durée were a series of edited volumes that address the practice of war in complex societies in both global ( Arkush & Allen 2006 , Otto et al. 2006 ) and regional contexts ( Brown & Stanton 2003 ; Chacon & Dye 2007 ; Chacon & Mendoza 2007a , b ; Nielsen & Walker 2009 ; Raaflaub 2007 ; Raaflaub & Rosenstein 1999 ). Published in parallel with these works was a series of volumes that highlight conflict resolution and peacemaking in past societies ( Fry 2006 , 2007 , 2013 ; Kemp & Fry 2004 ).
This article reviews the anthropological archaeology of war and violence in the wake of these publications, particularly since 2010. Much of this scholarship has been devoted to reconstructing the nuances of war and violence in particular social and historical contexts, research that is difficult to synthesize in a brief article such as this. The general picture that has emerged is that war and violence were manifest in all past societies, and yet the prevalence, causes, and consequences of violence differ from one archaeological context to the next for reasons that elude easy explanation. For this review, I consider how recent literature addresses two questions that are central to the archaeology of war and violence: Has violence increased or decreased over time, and what was the role of warfare and violence in the formation states? I also highlight recent efforts to broaden our understanding of what constitutes violence and offer a brief discussion of recent work on public killing, the display of traumatized bodies, massacres, and the role of violence in resistance, rebellion, and collapse. From my reading of the past decade of research, I have found that simple narratives that propose (de)escalation in violence as essential to the evolution of complex societies into modern nation-states are overly simplistic and miss many of the nuances of the diverse forms of violence within complex societies.
Definitions for violence, trauma, war, and related terms are necessary for this discussion and yet elusive. Violence in its broadest sense can be understood as harm (physical, psychological, emotional) suffered by people as a result of the actions (intentional or not) of others. I prefer a tighter definition of violence that pertains specifically to physical harm, which is how I largely use the term in this article, though others will take issue with that narrow framing. Nevertheless, focusing on violence as physical harm reflects the reality that injury to bone or negative consequences to bodily health are easier to identify in the archaeological record than are psychological and emotional harm. As for war, the general sense among archaeologists is that it is a collective effort involving conflict among autonomous groups and involves not only physical trauma but also the emotional and psychological trauma that are ephemeral in the archaeological record but nevertheless remain important for a complete understanding of the consequences of war.
This review leans heavily on literature from the pre-colonial Americas, with which I am most familiar, though I have made every effort to reference work from global contexts. I also draw the reader's attention to two emergent areas of research relevant to the archaeology of war that will not receive further coverage in this review: battlefield archaeology and conflict archaeology. The former is the study of recent conflicts of the past two centuries and is concerned with using archaeology to reconstruct the actual events of battles (e.g., Freeman & Pollard 2001 , Scott et al. 2007 , Scott & McFeaters 2011 ). While scholars differ somewhat on its definition, conflict archaeology is generally understood to also focus on the material study of violent engagements of the past few centuries but differs from battlefield archaeology in that it is more concerned with anthropological understandings of the human experience of war (e.g., Saunders 2012 , Smith & Geier 2019 ).

Section: CONFLICT AND VIOLENCE OVER THE LONGUE DURÉE

The central premise of Keeley's (1996) influential book is that violent conflict in prestate and early state societies was characterized by total war: Large segments of the population fought, and the consequences were significant, with the potential for substantial loss of resources and human life. A number of recent synthetic essays have reiterated Keeley's central point, with ongoing archaeological discoveries providing supporting evidence ( Keeley 2014 ; Leblanc 2014 , 2020 ). One such example is a report of ten individuals from Nataruk, Kenya, who, dating to ∼9,500–10,500years BP, provide what may be some of the earliest evidence for intergroup violence among humans ( Lahr et al. 2016 ), though these findings are contested ( Stojanowski et al. 2016 ). Recently published reviews of early evidence for skeletal trauma highlight that violence was endemic in the Paleolithic ( Morris 2020 , Orschiedt 2020 ), Mesolithic Europe ( Eastbrook 2014 ), Neolithic Europe ( Smith et al. 2020 ), and Paleoindian North America ( Chatters 2014 ). Kim & Kissel (2018 , Kissel & Kim 2019 ) explore the evolutionary roots of human warfare and argue that, while war was clearly present during the Pleistocene and human violence is not without biological roots, violence was (and is) fundamentally culturally mediated. Their position is that the capacity for both warfare and “peacefare” emerged as outcomes of the evolution of modern human sociality.
Many recent publications have staked the claim that war and violence have significantly declined in modern times. The most widely read publication is psychologist Stephen Pinker's (2011) The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined . Pinker takes an expansive look at trends in violence, harm, and inequality by citing a wide range of historic data such as homicide rates from Europe and the United States, literacy rates in England, the frequency of war involving the “great powers” (e.g., Soviet Union, France, United Kingdom, United States, Ottoman Empire, China, and others; this list varies depending on the point in history), hate crimes against blacks in the United States, and sexual assault in the United States. From such data, Pinker (2011 , pp. xxv–xxvi) argues that violence has declined and the human condition has improved, which he attributes to the modern state, globalized commerce, growing respect for the interests and values of women, and increasing reliance on knowledge and rationalization in human affairs. The book has sparked intense debate that is beyond the scope of this article. The holism in Pinker's approach is laudable in that he considers historical trends in not only physical violence but also other forms of harm. The shortcoming is that much of Pinker's data for the reduction in violence is derived from Western Europe and the United States. As such, one could argue that what he has really shown is why colonialism and the modern nation-state have proven beneficial for citizens in these places.
Archaeologist and historian Ian Morris (2014) takes a slightly different angle in his book War! What Is It Good For? Conflict and the Progress of Civilization from Primates to Robots and posits that war itself has paradoxically led to reduced violence by facilitating the emergence of increasingly larger, more complex states that have internalized peace within their borders. For Morris (2014 , pp. 8–9), violent conflict is an inevitable part of state building, one that may even involve genocide, as in the case of the United States. For the descendants of those who survive the process, however, they are less likely to die violently and may even prosper. Morris (2014 , p. 9) is an optimist regarding the current state of war in that “humanity has gotten so good at fighting—our weapons so destructive, our organizations so efficient—that war is beginning to make further war of this kind impossible.” Morris's argument is built less on rates of violence of the sort used by Keeley and Pinker (though such data are cited) and more on the archaeology and history of empire: how empires formed, conquered, and were administered.
Other scholars have critiqued the notion that war and violence were more prevalent in the archaeological past and are more recently on the decline. Ferguson (2013) carefully reviews the skeletal data cited by Pinker (2011 , figure 2–2) and highlights various holes in the data, such as duplicate case studies, instances where numbers are inflated by implicating the recovery of stone tools near skeletons as evidence of violent death, and other errors and cases of overinterpretation. Indeed, one of the glaring issues with the data presented by Pinker is that they represent a cherry-picked list of archaeological sites, many of which are known for their unusually high rate of traumatic injury (e.g., the massacre at Crow Creek, South Dakota), and he juxtaposes these data against modern and recent historic data pertaining to the frequency of war deaths in the United States, Europe, and combined global samples. Ferguson conducts his own synthesis of the archaeological and bioarchaeological evidence for violence in the Paleolithic through Neolithic Europe and the Near East and finds that timing, intensity, and geographic evidence for war are highly uneven; he thus concludes that war was certainly present in the past but hardly inevitable and ubiquitous (though the latter depends in part on one's understanding of “ubiquity”).
The past decade has seen a boom in bioarchaeological studies tracking the frequency, patterns, and contexts of violent injury in the past, including a number of relevant books and edited volumes ( Baten & Steckel 2018 , Martin et al. 2012 , Martin & Anderson 2014 , Martin & Tegtmeyer 2017 , Scherer & Verano 2014 , Tegtmeyer & Martin 2017 , Tremblay & Reedy 2020 , Tung 2012 ) and a recent synthesis ( Redfern 2017b ). The most expansive and comprehensive is an edited volume by Knüsel & Smith (2013b) . In their introduction, Knüsel & Smith highlight the numerous interpretational challenges involved in extracting evidence for warfare from human skeletal remains: Trauma may arise from a range of contexts (intergroup violence, domestic violence, accident, ritual practice, etc.), data are reported differently across studies, geographic and temporal gaps exist in the data, etc. (see also Schulting & Fibiger 2012 ). To avoid including cases of accidental injury, assessment of violence from skeletal remains should include only cranial blunt force trauma, certain postcranial blunt force trauma (e.g., parry fractures), and projectile and sharp force trauma, recognizing that even some of these injuries may be accidental or related to postmortem mortuary rites. A more conservative approach is to focus only on cranial trauma, particularly wounds above the hat brim line, which have been shown to be more likely caused by violent attack than by accident ( Kremer et al. 2008 ). Overall, evidence for traumatic injury was disproportionately present in men relative to women and children, suggesting that men were more likely to be engaged in combat ( Knüsel & Smith 2013a , p. 668). Nevertheless, women and children also suffered injury, and it would be incorrect to say that war throughout human history was strictly men's affairs, as evident, for example, in skeletons from both the Andes ( Tung 2013 , 2014 ) and Neolithic Europe ( Schulting & Fibiger 2012 ). The skeletal data have also been essential for dispelling a number of myths regarding war in the past, including the notion that total war is only a modern phenomenon or that only elite men fought and were killed in battle, presumptions that frequently creep into grand histories of war and violence ( Scheidel 2017 , p. 199).
The studies from Knüsel & Smith's (2013b) volume are complemented by recent regional syntheses from Mesopotamia ( Sołtysiak 2017 ), the American Southwest ( Martin 2016 ), the Andes ( Arkush & Tung 2013 ), and Europe in the past two millennia ( Baten & Steckel 2018 ). Combined, these studies support Ferguson's finding that while warfare was endemic in the human past, its frequency was highly variable and can be understood only by careful consideration of local contingencies. One parallel found in the Mesopotamian and the Andean syntheses is that increased political centralization and stability were correlated with a decrease in traumatic injury, lending support to Morris's model. However, European frequency of traumatic injury was the same before and after the collapse of the Roman Empire, contradicting Morris's thesis. The prevalence of injury remained relatively stable in Europe until a spike in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, suggesting that political centralization alone may not explain the frequency of violence over time. Only the Mesopotamian data show a steady temporal decline in violence. The Andean and American Southwest historical arcs are characterized by oscillations in violence. Arkush & Tung (2013 , p. 342) suggest that periods of increased warfare in the Andes may reflect episodes of “violent competition over resources or political allegiances during ‘crisis times’: periods of environmental stress and/or major sociopolitical transformation, especially after the breakdown of earlier forms of political integration.” For the American Southwest, Martin (2016 , pp. 4–5) is more cautious in proposing explanations for ebbs and flows of violence, instead noting that “violence was likely tied to deeply held cosmological beliefs in addition to political, economic, and cultural practices that both endured over time but also likely changed in some aspects.”

Section: WARFARE AND THE ORIGINS OF STATES AND OTHER COMPLEX POLITICAL FORMATIONS

Anthropological archaeologists continue to debate definitions of the state, and I find the various typologies of complex polities unhelpful. Instead, I follow the lead of Classicist Josiah Ober (2015 , pp. 7–8) and distinguish between “dispersed authority” and “centralized authority” societies. The former were societies with numerous relatively equal, autonomous, small political entities that nevertheless shared coherent social practices and cultural traditions (e.g., chiefdoms, city-states, peer polities, petty kingdoms). Centralized authority societies are those governed by political formations in which the seat of authority is represented by a sizable bureaucracy, is potentially distant, and has an expansive reach (e.g., ancient empires and modern nation-states). The distinction between dispersed authority societies and empires is important as it relates to the role of war in the formation of premodern states: Empires by definition conducted wars of conquest and sustained themselves with threats of violence; less clear is whether dispersed authority societies were universally forged by violence.
Carneiro's (1970 , 1978) conscription theory placed warfare as essential to the formation of states. The essence of the theory is that the first states emerged where competing populations were environmentally circumscribed (e.g., coastal Peru, the Nile Valley), leading war leaders (chiefs) to expand their authority through conquest and consolidation of power. Carneiro (2012b) published an updated version of the theory in a special issue of the journal Social Evolution and History , which includes modifications to the theory, some of which he had published previously, including the possibility that circumscription was also created by the concentration of resources or settlements. That update appeared alongside a series of comments by other scholars as well as his own rebuttal to those comments, where he conceded that “warfare—including conquest warfare—can be caused by factors other than population pressure. Or, perhaps, better stated, conquest warfare can begin even before population pressure has made its appearance” ( Carneiro 2012a , p. 135). Carneiro passed away in 2020, shortly after publishing his final reflections on circumscription theory, which include personal anecdotes regarding the genesis of the theory ( Carneiro 2018 ).
Archaeologists continue to posit variants of Carneiro's model where state formation is linked to wars of conquest. For example, Redmond and Spencer see territorial expansion as an essential quality of “primary states” ( Spencer 2010 ) and suggest, using the case of Monte Alban, that ascendancy to statehood was a direct result of the needs “to develop a powerful military and an internally specialized administration” that facilitated conquest of its peers ( Redmond & Spencer 2012 , p. 34). Redmond & Spencer's model, like that of Carneiro, is grounded explicitly in social evolution and grants primary agency in state formation to chiefly war leaders, who established more complex political institutions in order to rule over larger, more expansive populations and territories (see also Sherman et al. 2010 ). In the past ten years, however, there has been a shift among scholars who, while still sympathetic to social evolutionary models, are more deeply interested in the actions and intents of all actors in past societies as they relate to the formation of states ( Blanton & Fargher 2008 , 2016 ; Carballo 2013b ; Carballo et al. 2014 ; Stanish 2017 ). This body of work is grounded in cooperation or collective action theory, and war and violence are infrequently addressed. One exception is a model developed by Stanish & Levine (2011) based on archaeological data from the Titicaca Basin of Peru. From an “evolution of cooperation perspective,” they shift the focus from aggrandizing war leaders to group cooperation:
In a context of sufficiently high regional population densities, conflict emerges as a viable strategy for highly cooperative groups to acquire more resources and protect themselves against potential adversaries…Groups that successfully organize themselves to raid others will acquire external resources and, in the long run, will be at a selective advantage against groups that are less well organized. ( Stanish & Levine 2011 , p. 13902)

Overall, the trend among cooperation or collective action theorists echoes that of archaeologists in general, which is to recognize the futility of the search for unitary models for the origins of states. Rather, warfare was one of a range of practices and processes (responses to famine and other stressors, prosocial activities such as feasting, etc.) that gave rise to social complexity (see, for example, contributions in Chacon & Mendoza 2017 , Price & Feinman 2010 ). A key weakness of unitary expansionistic models of early state formation is, as pointed out by Feinman (2017 , p. 462), that in some cases states emerged when one community effectively dominated a region from the outset (contra Redmond & Spencer, Feinman cites Monte Alban as one such example), whereas in other cases several large and roughly coequal centers arose at the same time (e.g., coastal Shandong, China). Indeed, for expansionistic models of state formation to work, all dispersed authority societies (e.g., Classical Greece, Classic Maya) would need to be considered nonstate societies.
In considering the relevance of warfare in the emergence of states, Roscoe (2013 , p. 59) places emphasis on defense and suggests that “polities as political communities are and were almost everywhere defensive organizations, aimed at securing the collective benefits of mutual protection against enemy attack. In contrast, polities as political apparatuses are hierarchies of power relations created, reproduced, and extended to advance elite agendas.” For Roscoe, it is necessary to distinguish between offensive and defensive warfare because the shared interests are not the same in both; defense is generally of concern to a broader constituency, whereas offensive war is more likely to directly serve the interests of the political elite. My colleagues and I highlight the roll of common defense in the formation of Classic period (AD 350–810) Maya polities of the Western Lowlands, which emerged after Late Preclassic period (BC 350–AD 350) communities were abandoned en masse and people migrated to emergent polity capitals ( Golden & Scherer 2013 , Scherer & Golden 2014a ). At places such as Piedras Negras and Yaxchilan, the Maya lived as defensive communities under the banner of kings who celebrated themselves as accomplished warriors. The precolonial Maya warred among themselves to acquire spoils and captives and to establish fragile systems of tribute that were persistently upended by subsequent conflict. While brief hegemonies were established in the Central Lowlands, overseen by the dynasties seated at Calakmul and Tikal, for more than 1,500 years (from the Late Preclassic period through European conquest) the Maya never sought to conquer or subjugate (or at least succeeded in conquering) their rivals ( Martin 2020 ), indicating that imperialism was not an inevitable pathway for decentralized authority societies.
Nevertheless, at multiple points in human history, other societies desired and acquired the necessary logistical and technological capacity to subjugate formally autonomous political communities, and war (or at least the threat of violence) was (and is) a primary tool of imperialism. For archaeologists, the challenge then is to understand which factors facilitated successful imperialism and what the impacts of conquest, subjugation, and political consolidation were on the lives of the people involved. The Andes provide an especially valuable case study, owing to multiple episodes of political expansion and collapse coupled with what Arkush & Tung (2013 , p. 308) identify as a “robust tradition of full-coverage [archaeological] survey, well-preserved fortifications, and the analysis of ample skeletal remains.” Arkush (2011 , 2018) contrasts the success of Inka imperialism against the endemic conflict that wracked the Titicaca Basin during the Late Intermediate Period (AD 1000–1400). At that time, the Titicaca Basin was characterized by communities with little internal inequality whose members worked together to raise monumental defenses. And yet ongoing strife between communities limited the capacity of any one community to subjugate its neighbors. In contrast with the situation in the Titicaca Basin, Arkush (2011) suggests that the Inka achieved imperial success not through sheer military prowess but instead from multiple centuries of state building that not only developed the Inka's advanced logistical infrastructure but also involved the establishment of coalitions through mostly peaceful means.
The human osteological evidence for war during periods of state formation and imperial expansion is mixed and belies any simple explanation, in part because sizable skeletal samples from periods of state formation are generally lacking. On one hand, human remains provide evidence for the spectacle of ritual violence at the time of emergent complexity as documented, for example, in the Maya area ( Inomata 2014 , pp. 45–46) and among the Moche of the north coast of Peru ( Hamilton 2016 ). However, reconstructing increases (or decreases) in warfare through traumatic injury in skeletal remains is more difficult, as noted above. One exception is the city of Harappa in modern-day Pakistan, which shows a clear increase in cranial trauma coeval with urbanization and Indus state formation ( Robbins Schug et al. 2012 ). At the Peruvean site of Cerro Oreja, the incidence of trauma gradually increases with the transition from the Gallinazo phase (less complex) to the Moche phase (more complex), and Moche phase sites in general show evidence for endemic violence ( Arkush & Tung 2013 , p. 329). The Andean data indicate that the expansionary margins of states were sometimes, but not always, associated with elevated evidence for traumatic injury in human remains ( Arkush & Tung 2013 , p. 342).

Section: VIOLENCE AND THE PRACTICE OF COMPLEX POLITIES

While settlement patterns, fortifications, and traumatized human remains provide direct evidence for the conduct of war in the past, the actual effect of ancient war can be more challenging to reconstruct. Nevertheless, scholars in recent years have made efforts to both tease out the consequences of war and reconstruct the subtler effects of violence in past complex societies. For example, in a recent volume edited by VanDerwarker & Wilson (2016a) , researchers assessed war's impact on food security. In some instances, a shortage of food, perhaps caused by climate change or other factors, directly led to an escalation of violence ( Kuckelman 2016 , Lape 2016 , Tung et al. 2016 ). In other cases, the escalation in warfare was directly implicated in food shortages because the capacity to forage for wild foods and expand agricultural fields was diminished as safety declined ( Langlie & Arkush 2016 , VanDerwarker & Wilson 2016b ). In their own paper, VanDerwarker & Wilson (2016b) approach the question of food security through the lens of structural violence, a framework that, as first proposed by Galtung (1969) , looks beyond physical trauma and considers other processes that inhibit people from achieving their biological, social, or economic potential.
Within anthropology, Farmer (1996 , p. 261) is cited widely on structural violence, which he identifies as “great and unjust injury” that may result from a range of sources, from “premature and painful illness, torture and rape” to “institutionalized racism and sexism.” Klaus (2012) proposes a model for assessing structural violence in the bioarchaeological record based on his own work on the health consequences of colonialism on the north coast of Peru, and numerous studies have begun to frame inequalities in health, diet, and bodily modifications using the framework of structural violence (e.g., Stone 2020 , Tremblay & Reedy 2020 , Tung 2021 ). One could argue that describing declining health as structural violence is an exercise in semantics, one that overextends the concept of violence to incorporate all forms of bodily harm. Whatever we wish to call the collective harm that may result from colonialism and other adverse state practices, there is utility in recognizing that the physical costs of war, conquest, and colonialism extend well beyond bodily trauma and that lives can be significantly shortened or impaired even during times of peace ( Martin & Harrod 2015 , p. 119).
The recently completed Backbone of Europe project has synthesized a massive body of osteological data, facilitating a look at the health consequences of sociopolitical changes over the course of the past two millennia of European history ( Steckel et al. 2018 ). One notable finding is the improvement in oral health and stature (inferred from femoral length) after the collapse of the Roman Empire ( Baten et al. 2018 , p. 387) with no changes to the level of traumatic injury over the same period of time. Following the early Medieval period, oral health and stature steadily declined into the industrial era, while traumatic injury peaked during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. While it is insufficient to suggest that living under imperialism was inherently unhealthy for Europeans without exploring the myriad reasons why, these findings underscore that bodily harm may take a diversity of forms under different political regimes.
Structural violence generally manifests itself along fault lines of inequality, including ethnicity, class, and gender. The question of gender and violence (structural and otherwise) has been a particular focus of attention as scholars question the “naturalness” of masculine violence and instead highlight how associations between gender and violence are situational, informed as much by “imagination, perceptions, and ideology…as bone, muscle, and chromosomes” ( Gutmann et al. 2021 , p. S11). Tung (2021) illustrates how ancient Andean masculinities were embodied through violence as evident both in their skeletons and also in artistic depictions of men. In the same study, Tung reports gender differences in carbon isotopic values, which she attributes to different patterns of consumption of chicha (fermented maize gruel), likely signaling female exclusion from some aspects of commensal feasting and hinting at broader means by which women were alienated from Andean social webs. Martin (2021) makes similar observations regarding the role of violence in constructing masculine identities in the precolonial American Southwest, illustrating how such violence was often ritualized and served a socially integrative role, binding men to one another through the common cause of violence. Raffield (2019) considers how Viking Age Scandinavia was militarized by the violent play of young boys, as evidenced by toy weapons, board games, and physical games found at archaeological sites. In perhaps the most detailed study of the construction of ancient masculinities, Houston (2018) draws on text and imagery from the Classic Maya to illustrate how violence (in both war and self-sacrifice) was integrated with other practices, including feasting, gifting, and training in young men's houses to transform unruly youths into civilized young men.
Captive taking and slavery represent additional forms of violence that are challenging, but not impossible, to reconstruct archaeologically ( Figure 1 ). The most extensive archaeological work on slavery has focused on trans-Atlantic enslavement ( Weik 2020 ), and only in recent years have archaeologists begun to situate slavery within a broader, comparative framework ( Cameron 2011 , 2016 ; Marshall 2015b ). Spatial analysis figures prominently in the archaeological study of slavery, where the focus has been especially on plantation slavery ( Singleton 2010 , 2015 ). An alternative archaeological approach to slavery is to consider patterns of skeletal trauma. For example, healed injuries to the face and forearms sustained by some women have been used to make the case that those women were captives who were abused by their captors ( Harrod 2018 , Harrod & Martin 2015 , Martin et al. 2010 , Redfern 2017a ). Unequal sex ratios or unexpected age profiles in massacre sites are another potential line of evidence, whereby the missing demographic may represent individuals taken as captives. As demonstrated by Tiesler and colleagues’ (2010) study of early colonial slave interments in Campeche, Mexico, and Valcárcel Rojas and collaborators’ (2020) work on indigenous slaves in the Caribbean, a combined battery of bioarchaeological evidence, including migratory isotopes, body modifications, and health consequences, can be utilized to provide a robust perspective on the experience of enslavement.

Figure 1 Click to view


Human sacrifice and the display of traumatized human remains by past societies continue to receive much scholarly attention (e.g., Chávez Balderas 2014 , Medrano Enríquez 2021 , Prieto et al. 2019 , Verano 2014 ). Recent work has incorporated methodological advances to reconstruct both the manner by which individuals were slain and their bodies dismembered ( Ragsdale et al. 2016 , Tiesler & Olivier 2020 ), as well as the origins of the individuals who were killed ( Moreiras Reynaga et al. 2021 , Pacheco-Forés et al. 2021 ). In the case of precolonial deposits from the Basin of Mexico, sacrificial victims were drawn from diverse sources, including local slaves as well as foreigners captured in war. Interpretations of public acts of mass killing remain diverse. For example, a deposit of ritually killed children and camelids in coastal Peru has been interpreted as offerings to mitigate climate-induced catastrophe ( Prieto et al. 2019 ). Recent research in Mesoamerica has focused especially on reconstructing the underlying belief systems that undergirded the practice, connecting sacrifice to reenactments of myth ( Chinchilla Mazariegos et al. 2015 ) and more broadly the reciprocal and alimentary nature of such killings, with humans bound in covenants to both other humans and supernatural beings ( Scherer 2020 , Scherer & Houston 2018 ). Other research focuses on the political economic dimensions of such practices. For example, Conte & Kim (2016) evaluate the economic costs and benefits of retainer sacrifice in royal mortuary contexts in the ancient Silla kingdom of Korea; they observe both the extreme costs paid by the elites hosting the events as well as the potential economic gains to the sacrificed and their families.
Defensive features continue to be a focus of research by archaeologists, their form providing clues to the local practice of warfare ( Kirk et al. 2020 ) while the timing of their construction remains useful for reconstructing the general trajectories of war ( Arkush & Tung 2013 ). Scholars also continue to draw attention to the ideological importance of such features. For example, a number of recent studies have emphasized how monumental fortifications materialize the collective efforts of their builders and memorialize the community, organized around collective defense ( Arkush & Ikehara 2019 , Everhart 2021 , Grau-Mira 2019 ).
Figure 1 Click to view

Section: WARFARE, VIOLENCE, AND RUPTURE

Deciphering the impact of war and violence on social change in the archaeological past is never straightforward, and their role in the demise of complex political formations is especially complicated. Shifts in settlement patterns provide the clearest evidence for human responses in the wake of violence and may include cycling between strategies of concentrated, urban habitation and dispersed, defensive settlement. In the Maya area, the history of settlement patterns differs by region. For example, in parts of the Central Petén region of Guatemala (near El Zotz and Tikal), settlement shifted from Late Preclassic habitation at large, aggregate centers to dispersed, hilltop settlements with defensive terraces and walls ( Garrison et al. 2019 ). In contrast, in the Usumacinta River region, Late Preclassic settlement includes numerous scattered, defensible hilltop settlements that then consolidated in the Early Classic period at polity centers such as Piedras Negras and Yaxchilan ( Golden & Scherer 2013 , Schroder 2020 ). The distinction likely reflects the different geopolitical histories of the respective regions during the Late Preclassic and Early Classic periods: Complex polities emerged in the Usumacinta River region only in the Early Classic period, whereas they began to take shape centuries earlier in the Petén. There, the defensive posturing in the Early Classic period likely reflects a reorganization of the political landscape, as Tikal rose to dominate nearby centers at a time that also saw the poorly understood intrusion of the Central Mexican power of Teotihuacan. The collapse of Classic period polities in both regions was marked by a shift toward scattered, defensive settlement; hilltops in the Usumacinta region ( Schroder 2020 ), and isolated islands and peninsulas of the Petén lakes region ( Rice 1986 ). Arkush & Tung (2013) note a similar pattern for the Andes, where scattered defensive hilltop settlements correspond with a period of political decentralization that was characterized by endemic violence.
Conceptually, the archaeological destruction of place—especially the seat of political authority—should indicate violence as a catalyst for sociopolitical change. Evidence for burning and destruction of earlier polity capitals in the Americas includes Maya centers such as Aguateca ( Inomata 2008 ), the Central Mexican center of Teotihuacan ( Cowgill 2015 ), and the Andean polity capital of Tiwanaku ( Janusek 2004 ). The case of Aguateca is especially important in that the destruction is associated with rapid abandonment of the site, indicating that intentional destruction by its former inhabitants as a means to decommission the settlement is unlikely. Similarly, there is abundant evidence for fiery destruction of communities in the American Southwest and, as Snead (2016) suggests, careful consideration of the archaeological evidence is necessary to distinguish between communities razed by attackers and those that were intentionally retired by their former occupants as they emigrated elsewhere.
Massacres, archaeologically visible as assemblages of numerous traumatized bodies, are especially visceral evidence of violence and transformation. The distinction with public killings described earlier is partially spatial (the victims of massacres are often located in proximity to their own homes, as opposed to the domains of the perpetrator) and also conceptual in terms of why people were killed and what their traumatized bodies represent. Historically, victims of massacres have been both people from antagonistic communities ( Fernández-Crespo et al. 2020 ) and also the citizenry within a complex polity ( Ferrándiz & Robben 2015 ). Massacres are as much about eliminating unwanted or problematic people as they are about sending a powerful message to both the allies and the enemies of the perpetrators ( Anderson & Martin 2018 ). Careful archaeological, taphonomic, and bioarchaeological work is necessary to distinguish victims of massacres from warriors who fell in battle, as illustrated in a recent case study from fifth-century Sweden where the people of Sandby borg ringfort were systemically killed by an unknown enemy, their bodies left to lie unburied in the fort ( Alfsdotter 2019 , Alfsdotter et al. 2018 , Alfsdotter & Kjellström 2019 ). Martin (2021) observes that massacre sites in the American Southwest can be understood in part as the reification of the masculinity of the perpetrators through acts of collective violence. She also suggests that Southwest massacres were conducted at times when the social order was contested, the spectacle of extreme violence necessary to imprint the rightness of the victors and the wrongness of the defeated in the memories of all. A similar interpretation is offered for a mass grave of at least 20 people at the Postclassic period Maya site of Mayapán ( Paris et al. 2017 ). The Mayapán remains show extensive injuries and were deposited in the civic ceremonial center of the site where the mound covering their bodies was visible for centuries after the bloody event. The study's authors suggest that this memorial to violence was created by “a victorious faction or lineage at Mayapán, and that the victims represent a losing faction of a political struggle for power that took place during a period of internal conflict” ( Paris et al. 2017 , p. 83).
War and violence are inevitable points of discussion in ongoing work on the archaeology of resistance, revolt, rebellion, and collapse. Research on resistance/revolt/rebellion has focused especially on the dynamics between dominant powers and subaltern peoples and tends to be situated in historical (especially colonial) contexts. In contrast, research on collapse more often involves ancient, precolonial contexts, and scholars tend to focus on the internal shortcomings of a given society, especially when faced with an external threat (invader, climate change, volcanoes, etc.). Recent research on resistance/revolt/rebellion emphasizes the agency of the subordinated in resisting colonial domination, while also examining the processes by which ideas, technologies, beliefs, etc. flow between the colonized and colonizers ( González-Ruibal 2014 , Liebmann 2013 , Liebmann & Murphy 2011b ). To that effect, scholars have commented on the structural violence inherent in such contexts ( Klaus 2012 ) but also point toward direct evidence for violent resistance, revolt, and uprising ( Murphy et al. 2011 ).
In considering collapse in archaeological contexts, we must distinguish between “collapse” as the failure of political institutions and that of rapidly declining populations from mortality or emigration. Both political and demographic collapse may in turn trigger a myriad of social changes and transformations that are all contingent on the local situation ( Scherer & Golden 2014b , Yaeger 2020 ). Within that framework, the role of war and violence in political collapse and demographic failure is rarely straightforward. Although environmental catastrophe or climate change may have triggered escalation in violence in the past (e.g., Kennett et al. 2012 , Schwindt et al. 2016 , Zheng et al. 2014 ), most writers of collapse prefer instead to look at the nuances of local conditions to reconstruct how and why past political institutions failed, which factors may have led people to abandon once occupied settlements, and how war and violence may have factored into either process (e.g., McAnany & Yoffee 2009 ; Middleton 2012 , 2017 ).

Section: CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

In its present state, the archaeology of warfare has largely moved past simplistic questions of whether more or less violence existed in the past and is instead grappling with the social and historical contingencies that gave rise to both war and peace. Overall, the inclination in the anthropological archaeology of warfare of the past decade has been to engage with the more nuanced details of how war and violence impacted particular societies of the past. This approach is represented, for example, in recent books on war and violence in the precolonial Americas ( Morton & Peuramaki-Brown 2019 , Scherer & Verano 2014 ), China ( Campbell 2018 ), and Neolithic Europe ( Heath 2017 ). The four-volume series The Cambridge World History of Violence ( Dwyer & Damousi 2020 ) provides an encyclopedic look at the history of human violence from a global perspective (albeit, one focused heavily on Europe and Asia). The series was written largely by historians, although both Volume I: Prehistoric and Ancient Worlds ( Fagan et al. 2020 ) and Volume II: 500 – 1500 CE ( Gordon et al. 2020 ) include contributions by archaeologists.
Archaeological work has shown that conquest and subjugation is one method for establishing peace. Yet even in times of peace, forms of harm may persist whether from inequalities in access to food and health care, from slavery, or from other forms of systemic harm. Moreover, claims of (de)escalations of violence cannot be built on circumstantial evidence but instead must rely on the systematic approaches that bioarchaeologists have adopted in the past decade. The general picture of the role of war and violence in state formation and decline is by no means straightforward but highlights that they were critical factors in both, depending on the particular historical context.
Ongoing developments in archaeological methods and practice are likely to have a major impact on the study of war and violence. Perhaps the most significant methodological innovation of the past ten years has been the addition of lidar survey to the previously existing battery of remote-sensing technologies (e.g., Bernardini et al. 2013 , Canuto et al. 2018 , Garrison et al. 2019 , Masini et al. 2018 , Parton 2018 ). These approaches have the capacity to rapidly and cost-effectively survey entire landscapes for evidence of defensive features and settlement practices that may reveal a concern with defense. Just as archaeologists are finding their reach increasingly remote and expansive, they must remain attuned to the impacts of their work on local communities, particularly those descended from the people we study. The need to be mindful of the impact of archaeology is especially important for work on the subjects of war and violence ( Chacon & Mendoza 2012 , Martin & Harrod 2015 ). On one hand, it is impossible to understand a society without some consideration of how it practiced and understood violence. On the other hand, we must be careful not to portray past societies as pathologized by war at the expense of celebrating other legacies of their cultural traditions, including the capacity to make peace.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I thank the editors of the Annual Review of Anthropology for the invitation to write this article. Rowan Flad kindly navigated me to relevant literature on violence in East Asia. Stephen Houston and an anonymous reviewer provided useful comments on an earlier draft of this article. All errors and omissions are mine.

Section: literature cited

