Title: Feminism in the House of Anthropology


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Although early feminist insights about reflexivity and fieldwork relations have become core tenets of anthropological theories, feminism itself has been marginalized in anthropology. This review examines feminist contributions to American cultural anthropology since the 1990s across four areas of scholarship: the anthropology of science and medicine, political anthropology, economic anthropology, and ethnography as writing and genre. Treating feminist anthropology as a traveling theory capable of addressing critical social problems beyond gender, this article aims not merely to recredit feminism in anthropology, but also to show its potential to transform anthropology into an antiracist, decolonial, and abolitionist project.

Section: THE “F” WORD IN ANTHROPOLOGY

The definition of “feminist anthropology” is far from self-explanatory. Although many scholars have worked under that label, much of the literature has gone by other names. At times, there has been a problematic conflation of works by women or about women with feminist scholarship, whereas works on race or sexuality have not always been read as feminist, too. Feminism itself is a contested word—one that has historically divided as much as it has served as a rallying cry for shared analyses of gender, sexuality, and interlocking forms of oppression. Feminist anthropology became a proper subfield in the 1970s ( Rosaldo et al. 1974 ) and the Association for Feminist Anthropology was officially established in 1988, but feminist methods and approaches ante litteram date back to our discipline's founding. By calling attention to embodiment and power relations in the fieldwork encounter, feminist anthropology, as we now call it, has challenged dominant anthropological assumptions and set new research ethics for well over a century.
One of feminist anthropology's most notable contributions is reflexivity—the now accepted practice of incorporating the ethnographer's subject position in the analysis of fieldwork data—which in turn emerged from the feminist critique of scientific objectivity ( Harding 1986 ), from feminist standpoint theory ( Collins 1989 , Hartsock 1983 , hooks 1984 ), and from the recognition that all knowledge is situated ( Haraway 1988 ). It was feminist anthropology that first problematized the insider/outsider dichotomy of ethnographic research, premised on the assumption of a white male ethnographer conducting fieldwork among Black and brown people ( Harrison 1991 ). Drawing heavily from the works of Black feminists and feminists of color ( Collins 1986 , Lorde 1984 , Moraga & Anzaldúa 1981 ), feminist anthropologists developed theoretical models to conceptualize the hybrid positionality of “halfie” ( Abu-Lughod 1991 ), “split” ( Kondo 1990 ), or “native” ( Narayan 1993 ) ethnographers, who are simultaneously insiders and outsiders to their communities of study. Textually and formally, feminist anthropologists revolutionized the genre of ethnographic writing by giving voice to their subjects of study and by refusing the disembodied god's eye view of canonized ethnographies. While those early feminist contributions have become mainstream tenets of ethnographic methods and writing, feminist anthropology has paradoxically been relegated to the margins of the discipline it helped to shape.
In this article, I review some of the key theoretical and methodological contributions that feminist scholarship has made to American cultural anthropology to counter the persistent marginalization of feminism within our discipline. The title of this review pays homage to two previous Annual Review of Anthropology articles: Weston's (1993) “Lesbian/Gay Studies in the House of Anthropology” and Boellstorff's (2007) “Queer Studies in the House of Anthropology.” Although these articles reviewed the struggle to legitimize the study of sexuality within our discipline (see also Morris 1995 ), the concerns raised by the authors continue to be relevant to a discussion of feminism in anthropology today. Whereas queer studies has finally earned its academic status as real theory, that is, as a “traveling theory” ( Said 2000 ) relevant to a wide range of topics beyond sexuality, feminist anthropology is still too often seen as pertinent only to gender or to cis -women's lives. I have never had a student ask me how their project could be queer if there were no gay people in it (or Marxist, if there were no factory workers in it), but I still routinely get asked how a project could be feminist if there are no women in it. The divide and conquer approach to sex/gender epistemologies has separated not only queer and feminist anthropologies from each other but also the younger field of transgender studies from its queer and feminist antecedents ( Valentine 2007 ). Despite anthropology's early contributions to two-spirit and “third” genders studies, the field of transgender studies is now thriving mostly outside our discipline ( Camminga 2018 , Namaste 2009 , Snorton 2017 , Stryker & Whittle 2006 ). To be sure, some feminists have widened this divide by pushing a racist, transphobic, homophobic, and essentialist notion of gender ( Stone 1992 ). But given how many of us feminist, queer, and transgender studies scholars read, cite, and collaborate with each other, the institutional separation of “sex” and “gender” into different domains of theory should be cause for grave concern, especially as it further marginalizes feminism in the house of anthropology.
For the purposes of this review, I treat feminist anthropology as a broad heuristic and a traveling theory. The parameters for what I include reflect the limits of my expertise as much as my commitment to advancing a robust feminist anthropological approach to the most critical social problems of our times beyond gender and cis -womanhood. The literature review is limited to English-language scholarship from the United States published in sociocultural anthropology since roughly the mid- to late 1990s. 1 That was the moment when the question of whether feminism and anthropology could coexist reached a breaking point. About a decade earlier, the publication of Clifford & Marcus's (1986) Writing Culture had ushered in a new era for cultural anthropology that exiled feminism to the margins. The writing turn had called attention to the poetics and politics of ethnography as a genre, but it had done so by drawing its genealogies of literature, authority, and discourse from poststructuralist and postmodern male thinkers. The volume editors had not engaged with feminist writers, poets, or philosophers who had long theorized the partiality of knowledge production, nor had they cited anthropologists such as Hurston (1935) , who had already blurred the boundaries of fiction and ethnography decades earlier. Instead, in a now infamous introduction to the anthology, Clifford justified his choice to exclude feminist anthropologists from Writing Culture by asserting that “[f]eminism had not contributed much to the theoretical analysis of ethnographies as texts” ( Clifford 1986 , p. 20). Adding insult to injury, Clifford consigned all citations of feminist works from the 1970s and 1980s to a single lengthy footnote. There, in a formidable feat of logic, he claimed that all those previously published works “supported” his later arguments, rather than the other way around ( Clifford 1986 , p. 19, note 9). Just like that, with an eloquent f-word dropped in one of the most influential works in our discipline, feminism became the footnote of anthropology.
In the 1990s, feminists wrote back. The question first asked by Stacey (1988) and Abu-Lughod (1990) of whether there could even be a feminist ethnography gained new urgency in the aftermath of feminism's spectacular dispossession from anthropological theory. The best-known feminist comeback of the 1990s was Women Writing Culture ( Behar & Gordon 1995 ). As they fought to establish a counter-canon of anthropology, however, many of those feminist responses further marginalized other voices within feminism, and especially those of Black anthropologists working at the intersection of race and gender ( Bolles 2013 ). While the late 1980s and early 1990s staged an ideological clash between feminism and anthropology, they also revealed the internal fragmentation of a subfield that could not unite on a common “subject” of feminism [ Butler 1999 (1990) ]. In her review of the state of feminist anthropology at the end of the twentieth century, Aggarwal (2000) noted the ongoing “problem” of “placing gender at the center of experience, over differences based on race, class, or sexual orientation” (p. 14). Black feminist anthropology was born out of those internal struggles ( McClaurin 2001a ). As a self-conscious project of knowledge production, Black feminist anthropology has strived to form a counter-canon of feminist anthropology that centers the antiracist, intersectional works of anthropologists who have been marginalized even by the discipline's most critical voices.
Taking off from those late-twentieth-century debates, in what follows I trace some of the most exciting directions where feminist anthropology has led the field. My approach is thematic rather than chronological, focusing on four main areas of scholarship: the anthropology of science and medicine, political anthropology, economic anthropology, and ethnography as writing and genre. And because any review of feminist scholarship would be incomplete without an account of the politics of knowledge production, in the conclusion I reflect on the institutional moves that the present moment affords us and on contemporary feminism's potential to transform anthropology.

Section: THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF SCIENCE AND MEDICINE

Much of feminist anthropology since the 1990s has focused its attention on a critique of science and biomedicine. In this area, reproduction has been a prime topic of study. Two groundbreaking volumes published in the 1990s, Ginsburg & Rapp's (1995) Conceiving the New World Order: The Global Politics of Reproduction and Franklin & Ragoné’s (1998) Reproducing Reproduction: Kinship, Power, and Technological Innovation , paved the way for a spurt in studies of reproductive politics and new reproductive technologies. Some of that research has focused on state and nationalist biopolitics across the globe, such as Kahn's (2000) ethnography of assisted conception in Israel and Andaya's (2014) ethnography of post-Soviet socialist policies of reproduction in Cuba. But many others turned their gaze to the United States, making reproduction a key site through which feminist anthropologists have examined, as native ethnographers, the gender, race, and class politics of their own country. In her ethnography of fetal testing, Rapp (1999) critiqued the rhetoric of “choice” and ableism attached to the moral decisions that pregnant American women are asked to make in cases of fetal disability. Similarly, Craven (2010) challenged the neoliberal notion of choice driving activists in the American midwifery and homebirth movements, who often ignore the racial and class implications of their consumeristic approach to reproductive rights. Confronting head on the racial dimensions of pregnancy in the United States, Bridges's (2011) Reproducing Race: An Ethnography of Pregnancy as a Site of Racialization offered an unflinching indictment of American health care disparities and medical racism. Through lucid ethnographic descriptions of the prenatal care and childbirth experiences of poor women of color, Bridges demonstrated that race is socially constructed through patients’ encounters with doctors and nurses and then later naturalized as an explanation for inequality. Davis's (2019) ethnography of premature births among middle-class professional Black women went even further in tracing the afterlife of slavery through contemporary medical racism, showing that not even class privilege or education can protect Black mothers from the systematic devaluation of their lives and bodies. While critical race approaches to feminist science studies have developed largely outside anthropology ( Benjamin 2013 ; Nelson 2011 , 2016 ; Pollock 2012 ; Roberts 1997 ), Black feminist anthropology as a subfield has been at the forefront of the anthropology of race, medicine, and reproduction ( Mullings & Wali 2001 ).
In addition to writing on childbirth and pregnancy, feminist anthropologists of science and medicine have exposed the cultural roots of scientific beliefs about sex/gender binaries by studying hormonal therapies, bodily modifications, and the materiality of the body ( Lock & Farquhar 2007 ). For instance, Kulick's (1998) ethnography of Travestí sex workers in Brazil—a major anthropological contribution to transgender studies—provincialized the sex/gender system of the Global North by affirming his interlocutors’ refusal of etic categories of selfhood and sexuality and their reliance on some, but not other, forms of bodily modifications to inhabit gender fluidity in their own terms. Also in Brazil, Sanabria's (2016) study of hormonal therapy traced the transformation of menstrual suppression from a racial tool of population control to an empowering choice for cisgender women, demonstrating ethnographically the plasticity of both bodies and medical discourse. Turning to the United States, Plemons's (2017) The Look of a Woman: Facial Feminization Surgery and the Aims of Trans-Medicine centered the narratives of transgender women patients and their doctors as they shifted the imagined locus of sex and gender identification from genitalia to physiognomy.
Studying the sexed body as a discursive site of analysis, feminist medical anthropologists have examined illness, death, and suffering in the context of poverty and racism ( Das 2015 , Kleinman et al. 1997 , Lock 2002 ). For instance, Martinez's (2018) ethnography of cervical cancer patients in Venezuela shed light on medicine's complicity in perpetuating sexist stereotypes about poor women's lack of morals under the guise of health risk factors. And Pinto's (2014) Daughters of Parvati: Women and Madness in Contemporary India crafted a powerful critique of the gendered practices of psychopharmacology in the Global South by noting the impact of social vulnerabilities on women's mental health. These feminist works have shaped not only our understanding of gender and sex as social constructs, but also the parameters of medical anthropology overall ( Lock 2001 , Rapp 2001 ).
Finally, a significant body of feminist work in the anthropology of science has turned to environmental and interspecies studies to abandon false dichotomies of nature and society. Haraway's (2003) The Companion Species Manifesto extended the critique of anthropocentrism she first developed in her Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature ( Haraway 1991 ), which had inspired a generation of feminist scholars of science to think beyond the boundaries of the human. A prime example of multispecies feminist anthropology is Parreñas's (2018) ethnography of orangutan rehabilitation centers in Borneo, which dissected the afterlife of colonialism, its racialized politics of conservation, and the shared futurity that awaits humans and nonhumans alike. The precarity of the Anthropocene has featured prominently in recent feminist works ( Povinelli 2017 ), with Haraway's (2016) critique of capitalism's devastating effects on the planet once again leading the way. Environmental disasters have forced twenty-first-century feminist anthropologists to confront the limits of political advocacy, as pollution and toxicity are unevenly distributed on populations across the globe ( Fortun 2001 , Petryna 2002 ). In this vein, Tsing's (2015) ethnography of mushrooms offered a meditation on the value of life in the ruins of capitalism that followed the nonhuman plant to theorize survival. And Weston's (2017) multisited ethnography of water, climate, food, and energy envisioned a new political ecology founded on the visceral entanglements of humans and other living entities. In a sustained attempt to decolonize scientific knowledge of the environment, some feminist anthropologists have turned to indigenous knowledge as etic, rather than emic, epistemology ( de la Cadena 2015 ). Others have moved the field to outer space ( Battaglia 2005 , Olson 2018 ) in pursuit of a more capacious orientation to subjectivity and futurity, one not unlike Stewart's (1996) “space on the side of the road,” where capitalism's poor, discarded others here on Earth could nonetheless scrape together a life worth telling about.

Section: POLITICAL ANTHROPOLOGY, TRANSNATIONALISM, AND THE STATE

In addition to the anthropology of science and medicine, political anthropology has been another key area of feminist work since the 1990s. Building on earlier feminist postcolonial studies ( Mankekar 1999 ), a large body of feminist anthropological scholarship has examined the gender and sexual politics of nation-building in anticolonial, settler-colonial, diasporic, and globalized contexts. For instance, Bernal's (2014) ethnography of online networks of Eritrean nationalists and Shakhsari's (2020) ethnography of a transnational network of Iranian bloggers both examined the forms of digital citizenship available to diasporic subjects. Taking issue with the “post” of postcolonialism, feminist indigenous studies scholars have crafted analyses of ongoing settler-colonial temporalities that reclaim territory and prioritize the active voice of indigenous interlocutors ( Simpson & Smith 2014 ). Among them, Cattelino's (2008) ethnography of the Florida Seminoles, an indigenous nation made prosperous by the first American Indian casino, explored the relationship between capitalism and sovereignty in forging contemporary indigenous identities. And Simpson's (2014) ethnography of the Mohawks of Kahnawà:ke treated their political refusal of Canadian citizenship as the ground for an epistemological refusal, in anthropology, of colonialism as a completed project.
Alongside nationalism and sovereignty, militarism and imperialism have been prime topics of study in feminist political anthropology ( Lutz 2009 , Weiss 2014 ). Some ethnographies have focused on the role of women nationalists within military or para-military organizations ( Aretxaga 1997 , Steedly 2013 ). Others have exposed state violence and conflict as gendered processes, which reproduce not only state forms but also dominant regimes of gender and sexuality ( Greenhouse et al. 2002 ). The anthropomorphic figure of the state ( Aretxaga 2003 ) has come to life through embodied ethnographic accounts of the wounding intimacies of political violence, as in Nelson's (1999) ethnography of post–civil war Guatemala or Theidon's (2013) ethnography of postconflict Peru. Feminist political and legal anthropologists working in postconflict societies have developed cogent critiques of the sexism and Eurocentrism of human rights discourses ( Merry 2006 ), and they have chronicled the pushback from some Global South nations against the neocolonial pressures of international justice courts ( Clarke 2019 ). Tracing the roots of contemporary conflict back to histories of slavery and colonialism, Thomas's (2019) ethnography of police brutality in Jamaica asked what repair might look like in what she termed “postplantation” societies.
Feminist anthropologists working in the Global North have been especially vocal in critiquing the political ideologies of liberal humanism that serve to maintain the superiority of the “Occident” on a global stage ( Mahmud 2018 ). Ticktin's (2011) ethnography of immigration policies in France, for instance, showed that humanitarian rhetoric actually entrenched a hierarchy of suffering among refugees. Also in France, Fernando's (2014) ethnography of Muslim French citizens’ religiosity revealed the contradictions of secularism and republican imaginaries. My own study of women Freemasons in Italy examined the concept of “brotherhood” as an unattainable promise of fraternity born out of European liberal humanist notions of the subject ( Mahmud 2014 ). As a Black Italian conducting research among white elites, I positioned myself not as a “native ethnographer”—a US-centric category of low emic significance in a country that measures citizenship by blood, not soil—but as a “profane” ethnographer attempting to desecrate the power sites of Occidentalism ( Mahmud 2013 ).
Feminist scholarship since the 1990s has continued to problematize the ethnographer's relationship to her subjects of study. Answering Nader's (1972) call to “study up” in sites of power, a handful of feminist anthropologists in the 1990s had begun to do research on the “repugnant” others of ethnography ( Harding 1991 ), such as prolife and religiously conservative groups in North America ( Ginsburg 1998 ), and noted the ethical and representational problems that emerge when studying the right ( Ginsburg 1993 ). Over the last two decades, feminist scholars have made further strides in the study of nationalist, conservative, and far-right groups. Harding's (2000) influential ethnography, The Book of Jerry Falwell: Fundamentalist Language and Politics , brought the anthropology of religion to bear on questions of extremism and far-right politics. Bacchetta & Power's (2002b) interdisciplinary anthology, Right-Wing Women: From Conservatives to Extremists Around the World , marked the first effort to develop a systematic feminist approach to conservative movements. Writing against the notion of “false consciousness,” and with no pretense of neutrality, the volume editors argued that to resist the right, feminist scholars must expand our definitions beyond Euro-American contexts and must recognize right-wing women as agents, rather than victims, of oppressive ideologies of gender and sexuality ( Bacchetta & Power 2002a ). Mahmood's (2005) groundbreaking ethnography of religious movements in Egypt marked a turning point for feminist anthropology of conservatism. Exposing the Eurocentrism of feminist notions of agency rooted in the liberal subject, Mahmood (2005) called for the recognition of agency even among those whose actions go against liberal imaginaries of freedom.
By challenging earlier assumptions of sisterhood between feminist ethnographers and our interlocutors, the anthropology of conservatism has contributed to broader debates about subjectivity, power, and activist scholarship. As Lamphere (2016) noted, a new generation of feminist anthropologists has studied social movements, including right-wing movements, in ways that blurred the once heavily policed line between anthropology and advocacy. Indeed, Craven & Davis's (2013) edited volume on Feminist Activist Ethnography: Counterpoints to Neoliberalism in North America theorized explicitly the parameters of an engaged anthropology capable of resisting neoliberalism from the ground. Even activist anthropology, however, has often replicated a masculinist approach to fieldwork, as noted by Berry and coauthors in their influential article, “Toward a Fugitive Anthropology: Gender, Race, and Violence in the Field,” calling for embodied analyses of how race, gender, and sexuality shape the ethnographer's activism and personal risk-taking ( Berry et al. 2017 ).
Feminist political anthropologists have been among the most vocal public intellectuals in our discipline. When the War on Terror invoked a facile feminism to justify US military interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq, for instance, feminist anthropologists of the Middle East spearheaded a critique of the savior logic of (neo)imperialism. “Do Muslim women need saving?” asked Abu-Lughod first at an antiwar teach-in, then in an article, and finally in a book ( Abu-Lughod 2013 ). The answer—a resounding no—echoed the antiwar campaigns of feminist scholars across disciplines ( Bacchetta et al. 2002 ). As xenophobia and Islamophobia grew rampant in Europe and the United States, feminist scholars contributed timely research on the discourse of terror and the racialization of “Arab Americans” and “Muslim Americans” ( Maira 2009 , Naber 2012 ). Given the increased politicization of fieldwork in the Middle East, feminist political anthropologists turned anthropology and academic freedom into objects of study themselves ( Deeb & Winegar 2016 ). The call to “decolonize” our discipline, which Harrison (1991) first issued, has therefore been answered in literal and metaphorical ways since the 1990s by feminist political anthropologists working in contested fieldsites and seeking to redress anthropology's complicity with the global order of things.

Section: ECONOMIC ANTHROPOLOGY, MARKETS, AND NEOLIBERALISM

As gender and sexuality continue to serve as metrics of a country's “modernity” on the global stage ( Deeb 2006 , Rofel 1999 ), feminist scholars have tied long-standing critiques of colonialism to recent critiques of late capitalism ( Mohanty 2003 ). Wary of neoliberal notions of progress and temporality ( Weston 2002 ), they have written against development discourses in the Global South from a decolonial perspective ( Babb 2018 ). And while recognizing that neoliberalism transcends nation-state boundaries, they have been uniquely attentive to its racialized and gendered effects. Feminist ethnographies have theorized large-scale political and economic transformations—from the revival of shamanism in postsocialist Mongolia ( Buyandelger 2013 ) to small marketplace traders in Vietnam ( Leshkowich 2014 ), family-owned businesses in Italy ( Yanagisako 2002 ), Wall Street high finance ( Fisher 2012 ), or the fast fashion production circuits between China and Europe ( Krause 2018 )—by tracing their impact on families, kinship, and local communities. Peterson's (2014) ethnography of Nigeria's pharmaceutical markets, for instance, followed drugs, speculators, and International Monetary Fund regulators along the derivative journey of global capital to examine the economic devastation left in its path. Even when neoliberal development programs attempt to help the poor, or take a “moral” stance ( Muehlebach 2012 ), feminist ethnographers have shown that their push for entrepreneurial initiatives, such as microcredit loans, invariably supplants existing informal economies with the “free” market, resulting in further dispossession ( Elyachar 2005 ).
Across such varied sites and problematics, then, feminist anthropologists have treated the “economic” not as a separate domain of study, but as a system of productive powers that engenders human and nonhuman social relations through the heterogenous workings of capital ( Bear et al. 2015 ). It is often in sites of civil society, including nongovernmental organizations ( Bernal & Grewal 2014 , Hodžić 2017 ), that feminist anthropologists have noted the pernicious articulation of ideologies of race, gender, and sexuality with the “scattered hegemonies” ( Grewal & Kaplan 1994 ) of global neoliberalism. Schools, for instance, are sites of civil society where neoliberal logics of success and achievement can coopt “progressive” demands for diversity while selling out the futures of vulnerable students, as Shange (2019) demonstrated in her abolitionist ethnography of antiblackness in American education. Other such sites include media institutions, as in the televised spectacles of national beauty pageants, which, as feminist ethnographers have noted, reflect racist colonial histories through a classic male gaze but for a globalized audience ( Cohen et al. 1996 , McGranaham 1996 , Ochoa 2014 ).
Feminist anthropologists working on market economies and labor have remained attentive to the commodification of gender and sex. The study of sex work in particular, a staple of feminist analysis, has seen a marked shift, since the 1990s, from debates centered on questions of agency and consent to approaches rooted in critiques of labor. The “work” in sex work has been the object of growing feminist interest ( Kempadoo & Doezema 1998 ). For instance, Kelly's (2008) ethnography of a state-run brothel in Mexico examined the regulation of prostitution through biopolitical regimes of health and safety that, despite legalization, left sex workers vulnerable and stigmatized. Studying another legalized prostitution zone in Mexico, Luna's (2020) recent ethnography of Mexican migrant sex workers, and of the American missionaries trying to save their souls, explored the War on Drugs at the US–Mexico border through the lenses of prostitution. Sex work is a global business, and ethnographers have studied its erotic and intimate dimensions transnationally ( Constable 2003 ). For instance, Williams's (2013) ethnography of sex tourism in Bahia explored the Brazilian state's complicity in marketing to foreign tourists what Smith (2016) termed an “Afro-paradise” built on the backs of Brazil's Black citizens. And Stout's (2014) ethnography of romance and sex work in postsocialist Cuba revealed the effects of large economic transformations on the intimate relationships of gay and lesbian Cubans.
Pushing the boundaries of what counts as sex work, feminist anthropologists have studied the transaction of bodies and intimacies in a range of domestic, religious, and private contexts, including academia. Constable's (1997) long-standing research on Filipina domestic workers in Hong Kong, for instance, rethought the distinction between sex and domestic work in the gendered economies of transnational labor. Ramberg's (2014) ethnography of the devadasis —girls and boys who engage in an illegal but religiously sanctioned form of ritual sex work—illuminated the role of sexuality in the contradictory politics of religion, modernity, and the state in South India. Finally, feminist anthropologists have called attention to the gender and sexual economies of fieldwork itself, that intimate labor of research that puts the ethnographer's body on the line, sometimes at the risk of violence and harassment ( Kulick & Willson 1995 ). Building on earlier feminist insights about reflexivity, situatedness, and native ethnography, feminist anthropology since the 1990s has further examined the value attributed to our labor, especially when the field is “home” ( Rodriguez 2001 ), and it has suggested ways to “rework” anthropology departments and academic institutions to dismantle their exclusionary practices ( Harrison 2008 ).

Section: ETHNOGRAPHY AS WRITING AND GENRE

It is the power of storytelling that sets feminist anthropology apart from any other subfield. In the 1990s, Behar embarked on a “quest for a new genre” to make the ethnographer vulnerable in the writing ( Behar 1996 , p. 9). Since the publication of Women Writing Culture , feminist anthropologists have continued to experiment with various genres—fiction, poetry, drama, essays, autoethnography, etc.—to bring to life the power and vulnerability of the fieldwork encounter. Autoethnography has been an especially generative literary form to bridge the personal and political dimensions of ethnographic representation for anthropologists minoritized by their class or racial position ( Walley 2013 ). McClaurin (2001b) theorized autoethnography as indebted to but distinct from reflexive ethnographies and autobiography, both of which can still assert the authority of an outsider over native voices. Among Black feminist anthropologists in particular, autoethnography has been an effective methodological strategy to track from within institutional and social referents that frame personal and collective memories of racial experience ( Ebron 2001 ).
Drawing inspiration from performance arts, feminist anthropologists have moved beyond textuality to revolutionize the politics and aesthetics of ethnographic representation. For instance, in her ethnography of Black girls in a Detroit homeless shelter, Cox (2015) focused on her interlocutors’ “shapeshifting” movements across institutional spaces to theorize choreography as a form of “embodied meaning making, physical story telling” that can narrate cultural texts not otherwise legible (p. 28). Kondo, whose early work at the forefront of reflexivity debates had theorized the “crafting” of ethnographic “split selves” ( Kondo 1990 ), later turned to drama. As a playwright and ethnographer, she explored inequities of race and gender through live theater performances, at once staging theory and highlighting the performativity of ethnography ( Kondo 2018 ).
Perhaps more than any other genre, fiction has continued to entice anthropologists looking to expand ethnography's world-making abilities. Whereas before the 1990s ethnographers tended to insist on the “truth” of ethnographic nonfiction ( Visweswaran 1997 , p. 614), feminist anthropology since the 1990s has more confidently blurred the line between fiction and ethnography, suggesting that both genres build “a believable world” separate from the one in which readers live ( Visweswaran 1994 , p. 1). Fiction has provided a safe medium of expression for ethnographic research in politically fraught contexts, but it has also made visible the creative liberties that social science research takes, too. For instance, Varzi's (2016) novel about an Iranian theater group narrativized the resilience of a younger generation of Iranian artists working under censorship, but it also represented metaphorically the ethnographer's authority over the story, as each chapter is framed by a fictional director's notes, not unlike a watchful ethnographer directing scenes that she herself wrote and staged. Feminist anthropologists have broken new ground in ethnographic fiction and visual anthropology ( Spyer & Steedly 2013 ), with Hamdy & Nye (2017) turning a medical ethnography of organ transplants, gender, and class differences in Egypt into a fictionalized graphic novel accessible to general audiences.
Even within nonfiction, feminist ethnographers have pushed the limits of the genre by writing lyrical texts that evoke the sensorial experiences of their interlocutors. For instance, Krause's (2009) Unraveled: A Weaver's Tale of Life Gone Modern combined memoir, ethnography, and oral history to analyze Italy's low birth rate “problem” through the poignant tales of one woman's life story. Garcia's (2010) ethnography of heroin addiction in New Mexico humanized the US opioid epidemic, while literalizing Behar's insight that “anthropology that doesn't break your heart just isn't worth doing anymore” ( Behar 1996 , p. 177). And Stevenson's (2014) ethnography of the suicide and tuberculosis epidemics among the Inuit centered her interlocutors’ images and visions of what life really means against the Canadian state's biopolitical investment in preventing only bodily death.
Prose is not the only form in which feminist anthropologists have written creative nonfiction. In her study of UFO believers and alien encounters in the US Southwest, for instance, Lepselter (2016) transcribed ethnographic interviews as poems, engendering in readers the same feeling of “apophenia”—an intuitive sense that random things are connected—which was the basis of her interlocutors’ cosmology. And Zia (2019) embraced poetry as a medium more capacious than prose to capture the lament of widows and mothers in her ethnography of Kashmir. Perhaps the greatest testament to feminist anthropology's ongoing commitment to textual innovation, however, has been Narayan's (2012) Alive in the Writing. Written in an imaginary conversation with nineteenth-century Russian author Anton Chekhov, Narayan's gift to anthropology was at once a meditation on ethnography's literary craft and a practical manual full of tips to write it anew.

Section: STILL LIFE IN THE HOUSE OF ANTHROPOLOGY

There is no doubt that anthropology needs rewriting. As I finish this piece on the state of feminist anthropology while quarantined in Southern California, at the tail end of the COVID-19 pandemic, after the fall of Donald Trump's administration, I cannot help but wonder what kind of world we will be returning to. University campuses in North America, where most of us have not set foot for more than 12 months, are now rushing to redress the cumulative effects of institutional racism by throwing money and diversity initiatives at an age-old historical problem. After a wave of antiracist and antipolice protests swept the world following the viral video of George Floyd's murder in 2020, the Black Lives Matter movement—the same movement whose members were called “terrorists” a short time ago ( Khan-Cullors & Bandele 2018 )—was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize. And in the midst of it all, on Zoom and webinars and online journal issues, anthropology is once again burning.
To be sure, the fires started long ago. As Weston (1998a) wrote, life in the social sciences has been “a long slow burn” for Black, brown, queer, indigenous, and feminist scholars. What makes someone a “virtual anthropologist” today might have changed, as previously shunned types of ethnography have gained standing, but what has not changed is the knowledge economy that marks some anthropologists as “less than legit” ( Weston 1998b , p. 198). Feminist anthropologists have been doubly marginalized by anthropology and by the interdisciplinary field of feminist scholarship. The latter, which anthropologists cofounded in the 1970s, is now dominated by the humanities and especially by American cultural studies. The “awkward relationship” between feminism and anthropology ( Strathern 1987 ) has therefore also become a “curious relationship” between feminist anthropology and feminist studies ( Bolles 2016 ). The “burn,” then, is a familiar feeling for a subfield that since the 1990s has lost plenty of institutional ground.
And yet, at the risk of falling into the trap of presentism, I would argue that some things about this historical moment feel different. Perhaps it was the two global economic recessions—the latest one tied to a pandemic—that over the last decade forced academic institutions to confront the precarity of labor that PhD students face, as even the protections of tenure are eroding. Perhaps it was the #MeToo movement, which swept like wildfire through multiple industries, until it reached some of anthropology's powerhouses ( AAA 2018 ). Perhaps it was the rise of neofascism calling on us to resist in the streets and in the halls of the academy. Or perhaps it was our very own HAU debacle in anthropology that finally spelled enough. When a journal organized around a cult of celebrity, named after a stolen and mispronounced Māori indigenous term, and edited by a white man without a PhD long accused of misogyny finally publicly imploded, for some of us it was time. Whatever the reason, by 2020 we gave ourselves collective permission to engage in what Ahmed (2017) has dubbed a feminist “snap” in the sense that both breaks apart and creates anew. And it was not only feminists who snapped. When American Anthropologist , the flagship journal of our field, seriously entertains the case for letting anthropology burn in its year-in-review essay ( Jobson 2020 ), we are clearly past the breaking point.
The case for letting anthropology burn is indeed compelling, driven by an abolitionist impetus and by a radical intent to salvage the human from its liberal shackles. But I, for one, am not ready to let anthropology burn alone. Those of us with lived experiences of interdisciplinarity, who have worked in gender or ethnic studies departments, and who tried to make an intellectual home outside anthropology, know all too well that there is no innocence to be found. Anthropology is indefensible, but so are the rest of them (and their flagship journals are not talking about that). The snap, then, can be an opportunity to remake worlds, and feminist anthropologists have caught it. The year 2020 brought us a pandemic; however, it also saw the first issue of the new journal of Feminist Anthropology , which replaces the now defunct Voices ( Wies 2020 ) and promises to reimagine what feminist anthropology can be, if it intentionally centers the works of Black, brown, indigenous, queer, and gender nonbinary folx. Some feminist responses to Jobson's year-in-review essay have questioned humanism's radical potential, and they have problematized the assumption of the United States as the geopolitical center from which abolition and burning are theorized, thus reminding us with humility that even our most radical critiques must be decolonized from US imperialism ( Al-Bulushi et al. 2020 ). Abolition and decolonization ought to be intertwined goals for an antiracist feminist anthropology committed to fighting antiblackness globally ( Clarke & Thomas 2006 ) and to redress the harm our discipline has caused to indigenous people.
As feminist anthropology reclaims an institutional place, it will need to shed the trappings of liberalism once and for all. As I have argued elsewhere, anthropology ought to become fully “illiberal” ( Mahmud 2020 ) to fight for social justice. We certainly need more feminist ethnographic research on neofascist and right-wing movements, but we also need more studies of liberalism and its complicity with white supremacy. Given the state of our planet, we need more feminist anthropological research on the environment that can trace the uneven effects of toxicity and disaster on vulnerable populations, while also recognizing the “posthuman” as a decidedly racial discourse that fails those whose humanity has never been fully realized. Finally, as I alluded to at the start of this review, the current split between feminist and queer anthropology and the driving of transgender studies out of our discipline are living legacies of both feminism's and anthropology's exclusionary histories. While it is certainly “too soon for postfeminism” ( Ortner 2014 ), it is also too late for a feminism that for one reason or another left too many of us out. Instead of fracturing ourselves further, feminist anthropology should become a refuge for a capacious field of gender and sexuality studies and for traveling theories of bodies and power. To be clear, the goal is not merely to recredit and recenter feminism in the house of anthropology. It is to turn anthropology into an antiracist, anticapitalist, antifascist, decolonial, and abolitionist feminist project that we would want to be part of.
Otherwise, we may as well light the fire.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

Special thanks go to the anonymous readers at the Annual Review of Anthropology , to the students in my Feminist Anthropology and Feminist Ethnography graduate seminars, to the feminist maestre who taught me by example, and to the colleagues who provided generous feedback at different stages of this project: Lila Abu-Lughod, Tom Boellstorff, Manduhai Buyandelger, Carla Jones, Graham Jones, Sherry Ortner, and Kamala Visweswaran. This review is dedicated to Mary Margaret Steedly, in memoriam .

Section: literature cited

