Title: Postcolonial Semiotics


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

This article provides an overview of recent scholarship on postcolonial semiotics: processes through which linguistic and other signs are linked to the colonial and its ongoing relevance in the construction of value. After tracing the question of colonialism across scholarly lineages in linguistic anthropology, this article focuses on elite formations as a key realm within postcolonial semiotics and on “fake,” “mix,” and “excess” as central qualities that constitute chronotopically anchored dimensions of ambivalent, aspirational postcolonial eliteness. Linguistic anthropological work on postcolonial elite formations illuminates how economic interests are advanced through the creation of ambiguous value around emblems presupposed as colonial and attached to differentiated elite types in fractally recursive forms. Scholarship on postcolonial semiotics reveals how colonial hierarchies persist through the continuous production of divisible interior alterities that create nested categories of the formerly colonized, inventing elite types that are both denigrated and admired for their supposed approximation to imperial modes of being and speaking.

Section: INTRODUCTION

In his groundbreaking article “Colonial Linguistics” in the Annual Review of Anthropology , Errington (2001 , p. 20) explores “how representations of linguistic structure and colonial interests shaped and enabled each other.” Documenting languages upon imperial contact, colonial linguists did not describe linguistic structure as much as they reduced complexity and objectified difference through the creation of unified written representations. These authoritative grammars helped naturalize linguistic and racial distinctions and hierarchies not only in colonial encounters, but also in scholarly fields such as comparative philology. Colonial linguistics has been a long-standing area of focus in linguistic anthropology, particularly in work on language ideologies ( Woolard & Schieffelin 1994 ), as well as adjacent disciplines, such as history ( Rafael 1988 ). Since the publication of Errington's formative review, colonial linguistics has continued to receive attention from linguistic anthropological research that incorporates new questions tied to race ( Kroskrity 2020 , Rosa & Flores 2017 , Vigouroux 2017 ), missionization ( Handman 2014 , Schieffelin 2014 ), decolonization ( Deumert et al. 2020 ), print technologies ( Das 2017 ), and the invention of languages ( Irvine 2008 , Makoni & Pennycook 2005 ).
In Linguistics in a Colonial World , the comprehensive book-length follow-up to his “Colonial Linguistics” article, Errington (2008 , p. 151) begins to formulate a “postcolonial linguistics” as “ongoing in nation-states that have inherited colonial borders and infrastructures.” To demonstrate how the mechanisms of colonial linguistics do not end with decolonization, he offers the example of when colonial languages are assigned official status in the postcolony and when access to these languages reproduces hierarchies among postcolonial populations, maintaining the interests of “new national elites.” In the years following Linguistics in a Colonial World , much linguistic anthropological scholarship has maintained attention to such concerns of the postcolonial, examining a range of issues that commence or escalate upon decolonization, including tensions of value surrounding indigenous, colonial, and syncretic languages and practices (e.g., Babel 2018 , Canagarajah 2013 , C. Davis 2020 , J. Davis 2018 , DeGraff 2009 , Feliciano-Santos 2021 , Kubota 2016 , Kulick 2019 , LaDousa 2014 , Levisen & Sippola 2019 , Makihara 2009 , Ramanathan 2019 , Rickford 2019 , Rodriguez 2020 , Spears 2020 , Swinehart 2019 , Tupas 2014 , Urla 2012 , Valdez 2010 ). Studies have explored forms of postcolonial domination with regard to settler colonialism ( McIntosh 2016 , Meek 2012 ), commodification and tourism ( Ball 2018 , Heller 2010 , Jaffe & Oliva 2013 ), and neocolonialism and development ( Berman 2019 , Donzelli 2019 , Kockelman 2016 ). Others have traced postcolonial diasporic processes in relation to migration ( Dick 2018 , Paz 2018 , Smalls 2018 , Yeh 2018 ), refugees and asylum seekers ( Blommaert 2009 , Jacquemet 2009 ), and overseas workers ( Lorente 2017 ). Still others have centered on postcolonial institutional formations, such as bureaucratic processes ( Hull 2012 ) and legal systems ( Richland 2008 ), as well as collective movements involving democratic belonging ( Bate 2009 , French 2018 , Jackson 2012 ), literacy ( Cody 2013 , Debenport 2015 , Faudree 2013 ), and community collaboration ( Kroskrity & Meek 2017 ).
Despite this lineage of key scholarship, linguistic anthropology lacks a sustained program for theorizing colonialism and postcolonialism outside of work on missionization, indigeneity, and creolization. At the end of the nineteenth century, Franz Boas helped build American anthropology partly through knowledge production about Native Americans in a settler-colonial state whose empire was expanding aggressively overseas. Scholars such as Edward Sapir, Dell Hymes, Jane Hill, and Michael Silverstein, who are credited with shaping American linguistic anthropology as a coherent discipline across the twentieth century, maintained this focus on indigenous populations of the Americas. The question of colonialism was not ignored across these projects, but neither was it the main analytical focus. It was not until the twenty-first century that a few major linguistic anthropological books centered squarely on language and colonialism appeared, beginning with Linguistics in a Colonial World: A Story of Language, Meaning, and Power ( Errington 2008 ), followed by Hanks's (2010) Converting Words: Maya in the Age of the Cross , and Heller & McElhinny's (2017) Language, Capitalism, Colonialism: Toward a Critical History . Meanwhile across the early 2000s, linguistic anthropological work on globalization, migration, and citizenship exploded, challenging colonialism as the central frame for the phenomena under study, even as the broader field of anthropology engaged in reflexive critiques on its role in advancing colonial logics and racial science, culminating in calls to decolonize the discipline ( Allen & Jobson 2016 , Harrison 1997 ).
There are at least a few reasons why linguistic anthropological attention to colonialism and postcolonialism has not expanded or intensified across the decades. First, anthropology struggles with nonpresentist modes of inquiry. Colonialism is often viewed as a matter of the historical past, whereas questions of globalization, migration, and citizenship work well within an anthropological paradigm of the ethnographic present. Second, scholars do not agree on the very conceptualization of colonialism. Is it a past influence in the historical establishment of world orders? Is it a contemporary construct that emerges and circulates with material significance for present-day actors? Is it of less consequence than other large-scale formations, such as the nation-state, capitalism, and postsocialism? If colonialism's magnitude and temporality span the historical and contemporary, how do we account for the ongoing relevance of colonialism as an organizing principle in current societies? Linguistic anthropology has models for how to conceptualize the historical in ethnographic accounts, such as Inoue's (2006) Vicarious Language: Gender and Linguistic Modernity in Japan . For Inoue, if we want to understand Japanese women's language in a present-day corporation, we cannot start with the present-day or with the corporation. Instead of offering a brief historical background, the bulk of her book lays out the century-long processes and phases of women's language formation as the necessary theoretical and analytical work that must be foregrounded before her readers can even encounter the present-day corporation. Where is postcolonialism's Vicarious Language ? Can a theorization of colonialism move from background to foreground in ethnographic accounts of the contemporary postcolonial world? Wirtz's (2014) Performing Afro-Cuba: Image, Voice, Spectacle in the Making of Race and History moves in this direction, particularly in her concluding chapter on the historical formation of “bozal,” a racialized speech style associated with African slaves in the colonial past and with folklore performances in the postcolonial present.
On the twentieth anniversary of the publication of “Colonial Linguistics,” this review asks what follows the colonial and the linguistic by interrogating what I refer to here as postcolonial semiotics: how linguistic and broader sign processes are linked to the colonial and its ongoing relevance in the construction of value. If colonial linguistics is driven by the professional linguist, postcolonial semiotics is driven by the everyday semiotician (cf. Rymes 2020 on the “citizen sociolinguist”), embodied by social actors who create, regiment, and circulate signs that presuppose colonialism's contemporary presence. Postcolonial semiotics encompasses a broad range of phenomena: from modern-day yoga practice whose signs like “balance” presuppose British colonial discourses on health and Orientalist framings of spirituality ( Rosen 2019 ), to current debates about sports mascots as signs taken to honor Native Americans or uphold settler-colonial logics ( Avineri & Perley 2018 ). In colonial linguistics, collaborating linguists rely on centripetal forces to produce homogenizing categories of language and people. Colonial linguistics serves imperial interests by constructing unitary formations of the colony and metropole alike. In postcolonial semiotics, in contrast, everyday populations rely on centrifugal forces to produce a heterogeneous array of linguistic and person types. Postcolonial semiotics does not construct unitary formations as much as produce multiplicity, ambivalence, and uncertainty around the question of colonialism's endurance.
In this review, I consolidate recent linguistic anthropological work that focuses on a narrow but key realm within postcolonial semiotics: elite formations in the postcolony. Tracing how elite categories are configured from formerly colonized populations illuminates how the economic interests of Errington's “new national elites” are advanced. Across this literature, evaluations of the supposedly artificial, contaminated, and surplus manner in which postcolonial elites appear, communicate, and consume emerge as particularly crucial. I thus focus on the concepts of “fake,” “mix,” and “excess,” not as inherent features of elite people or practices, but as attributed qualities assigned by a “listening subject” ( Inoue 2006 ). These qualities form emblems of elite distinction that are fastened to a colonial present through spatiotemporal contrasts: a modern/nonmodern temporality and a mobile/immobile spatiality, which are often mapped onto an urban/rural within the nation and an external/internal to the nation. Fake, mix, and excess are thus united as chronotopically anchored dimensions of ambivalent, aspirational postcolonial eliteness in processes of value production, maintenance, and transformation.

Section: WHAT IS POSTCOLONIAL?

Many scholars have critiqued the term postcolonial, not least for its spatiotemporal presuppositions. The “post” asserts a temporality—an “after” of colonialism—implying that colonial systems are in the past rather than an ongoing structure of contemporary societies ( McClintock 1992 , Wolfe 2006 ). The “-colonial” suggests a spatiality—the geographical entity of the colony—even though the metropole and noncolonized territories are also dynamic terrains that are simultaneously shaped by global imperial orders ( Cooper & Stoler 1997 ). Several questions emerge. What is “post” about settler-colonial states, such as Canada and the United States ( Byrd 2011 , Simpson 2014 )? When is a postcolony a “neocolonial appendage” ( San Juan 2000 )? How does a nation with no formal colonial history, such as Thailand or Greece, become a “crypto-colony” that is organized by colonial logics nonetheless ( Herzfeld 2002 )? Scholarship on these questions explores how colonialism exceeds its time and space, agreeing with Guha (2001 , pp. 41–42) that “the colonial experience has outlived decolonization and continues to be related significantly to the concerns of our time.” Given these critiques, “coloniality,” a term most associated with Latin American subaltern studies, offers a compelling theory of power that emphasizes the endurance of a range of colonial systems in the postcolony, including modes of control over the economy, subjectivity, and knowledge ( Mignolo 2001 , Quijano 2007 , Wynter 2003 ).
Despite the limitations of the term postcolonial, it nonetheless signals postcolonial studies, an important body of critical scholarship that has produced a range of key concepts and insights, including the reflexive critiques above. Concerns of language emerge across this field. Spivak (1988) , for example, famously framed the question of the subaltern as a linguistic one—can the subaltern “speak” [or “listen” ( Slotta 2017 )]—to examine issues of representation and political participation. Anzaldúa (1987 , p. 77) used the concept of “linguistic terrorism” to describe how the imposition of English, as the “oppressor's language,” attempts to dominate and disparage Chicano ways of speaking as “deficient” and “mutilated.” Fanon (1967 , p. 18) explored how linguistic competence in the colonial language can transform the humanity of the colonial subject: “The Negro of the Antilles will be proportionately Whiter—that is, he will come closer to being a real human being—in direct ratio to his mastery of the French Language.” Although postcolonial studies has been criticized for producing cultural essentialisms and identity politics that lack analyses of political economy ( Chibber 2013 ), the field has a long tradition of Marxist approaches to the postcolony ( San Juan 2000 ), advancing materialist critiques, such as “colonial capitalism” ( Alatas 1977 ).
The postcolonial is a construct that presupposes the ongoing relevance of the colonial. Spatiotemporal, linguistic, and material concerns of the postcolonial are thus fundamentally ethnographic, semiotic, and ontological questions ( Chumley 2017 , Rosa & Díaz 2020 , Shankar & Cavanaugh 2012 ). Linguistic anthropology enhances postcolonial studies because it can examine how the postcolonial is produced on the ground with everyday actors by tracing sign mechanisms through which value is attached to forms of being and speaking that are tied to colonialism's endurance.

Section: WHAT ARE ITS SEMIOTICS?

If the “colonial present” ( Gregory 2004 ) is not a seamless continuity of imperial rule, but rather a set of “recuperations, reactivations, and recombinations of familiar forms” ( Stoler 2016 , p. 32), research must trace how structures and hierarchies taken as colonial are actively reformulated through sign processes. Not only do everyday actors attend to signs in a postcolonial semiotics, so do the linguistic anthropologists who study them. I thus outline here sign processes of concern to both linguistic anthropologists and the everyday semioticians they investigate: namely, how “qualities” attach to “registers” and other “emblems” of personhood that are “interdiscursively” linked to the colonial and reconfigured in “fractally recursive” forms. Each of these technical terms will be defined with examples in this section. Although these semiotic concepts are applicable to areas of focus beyond the scope of this review, I do suggest that they have a distinct efficacy in illuminating concerns of the postcolonial.
In a Peircean framework ( Peirce 1932 ), abstract qualities (such as “fake,” “mix,” and “excess”) are potential components of yet unrealized signs. These qualities are experienced as qualia when they are felt in material form, as “qualities instantiated or embodied in entities or events” ( Chumley & Harkness 2013 , p. 5). Since qualia are experiences of sensuous qualities, they can be perceived not as the attributed phenomena that they are but as intrinsic features that appear “natural” or “real.” Such qualities can be incorporated into an emblem, “a thing to which a social persona is attached” ( Agha 2007 , p. 235). Emblems construe signs as linked to social figures ( Goffman 1981 ). For example, “light skin” can be emblematic of Philippine elites ( Reyes 2020b ). This is a semiotic process: when a quality (“light”) is experienced in an entity (“skin”), it can be taken as an emblem (“light skin”) of a figure (“Philippine elites”) within a social domain whose members recognize it as such. Registers often function as prominent emblems of figures and can be experienceable through qualia as well, such as “gentle Taglish” (Tagalog-English), another emblem of Philippine elites ( Reyes 2017b ). A register is not a stable language variety but an extracted moment within wider-scale processes of enregisterment “whereby distinct forms of speech come to be socially recognized (or enregistered) as indexical of speaker attributes by a population of language users” ( Agha 2005 , p. 38). Enregisterment is dependent on extensive speech chains linking actions of social persons, who produce identifiable footings ( Goffman 1981 ) relative to the qualities, emblems, registers, and figures that they encounter and recirculate, thus forming and transforming their value. Through “interdiscursive webs” ( Wirtz 2014 ), these phenomena are entextualized and recontextualized across social events as well as chronotopically anchored to other (including colonial) times and spaces ( Bakhtin 1981 , Bauman & Briggs 1990 , Wortham & Reyes 2021 ).
Central to these processes are “axes of differentiation” ( Gal & Irvine 2019 ), oppositions built through bundling signs and placing them in contrasts for qualitative comparison and value allocation. For example, “light skin” and “gentle Taglish” can be emblematic of Philippine elites only as they emerge in contrast to “dark skin” and “rough Taglish,” which are assigned to the Philippine masses ( Reyes 2017b ). Binaries such as elite/masses—as well as others germane to this review, such as colonizer/colonized, real/fake, pure/mixed, and moderate/excessive—are often produced through “fractal recursivity” ( Irvine & Gal 2000 , p. 38), which “involves the projection of an opposition, salient at some level of relationship, onto some other level.” Here, a principal axis of differentiation, such as colonizer/colonized, can recur at other levels, such as subcategories of the colonized like elite/masses, thus positioning the corresponding ends of each pole in an iconic relation: elites as colonizers and masses as colonized. Such downward recursions of established colonial hierarchies—what I have called “colonial recursivity” ( Reyes 2017a )—can be reproduced to a seemingly infinite degree, generating interior alterities, which create contrasting categories of being and speaking that reactivate the relevance of colonial categories in contemporary forms.

Section: POSTCOLONIAL ELITES

By the 1970s, anthropology was increasingly widening its gaze to “study up” ( Nader 1972 ), such that even “First World elite identity” ( Silverstein 2004 , p. 649) could be an object of analysis. The term elite has been enjoying robust circulation across the globe in recent years. It is often accompanied by modifiers, such as “liberal elite,” “ruling elite,” and “global elite,” situating elite figures as politically powerful and progressive, as coastal and cosmopolitan, and as associated with aspects of refined culture: from fine wines ( Silverstein 2004 ) to luxury travel ( Thurlow & Jaworski 2006 ) to upscale residential complexes ( Searle 2013 ) to prestige registers of dominant ( Agha 2007 , Zhang 2017 ) and indigenous ( Durston & Mannheim 2018 ) languages. Eliteness can be highly gendered, such as when girlhood frames elite figurations of “Kong girls” in Hong Kong ( Kang & Chen 2014 ), “schoolgirls” in Japan ( Inoue 2006 ), and “white girls” in the United States ( Slobe 2018 ).
As a popular lay term, elite requires a careful theorization as an analytical concept. In the introduction to The Anthropology of Elites , Salverda & Abbink (2013 , p. 1) conceptualize elites as “a relatively small group within the societal hierarchy that claims and/or is accorded power, prestige, or command over others on the basis of a number of publicly recognized criteria, and aims to preserve and entrench its status thus acquired.” In Weberian terms ( Weber 1947 ), eliteness is not a stable “class” position determined by economic capital, but a socially constituted “status” position that requires distinction for its existence ( Bourdieu 1984 ). Elaborating on a Weberian class conception, Besnier (2009 , p. 216) emphasizes that rather than focus on “the relationship between groups occupying different positions vis-à-vis capital and labor, Weber understood class as the product of people acting in a similar fashion in given social situations, for example, having similar aspirations, making similar decisions, and harboring similar affects.” Being recognized as elite does not require financial power to the exclusion of other forms of capital and social practice, including language ( Bourdieu 1991 ).
This review considers postcolonial elites, a construct informed by conceptions of colonial elites under imperial rule. Colonial governments often created exclusive educational opportunities for local elites to be educated in European modes of knowledge and language ( Quijano 2007 ). These opportunities helped solidify divisions within the colonized, producing what has been referred to as “internal colonialism” ( Mignolo 2001 ) or “internal empire” ( Kramer 2006 ), where local elites maintained power by accepting the terms of modernization offered by colonial regimes. Conversely, elites could use the tools of empire to lead social movements of reform or revolt against it, as was the case with the Philippine ilustrado (“enlightened ones”) in the late nineteenth century. Colonial elites are thus regarded with deep ambivalence and suspicion: as self-interested collaborators benefiting from colonial governance, and as revolutionary heroes rising up against colonial power. Postcolonial elites are often viewed as the ongoing beneficiaries of this colonial order, as ambiguous extension and residue of imperial regimes. As such, they are commonly regarded as inauthentic, hybrid, and unrestrained, forming postcolonial modes of being and speaking that can be admired as much as reviled, avoided as much as anxiously aspired to ( Besnier 2011 , Park 2009 ), particularly from a striving middle-class positionality ( Banda 2020 , Besnier 2009 , Hall 2019 , Reyes 2017a ).
Thus I approach the concept of postcolonial elites less as some material fact of class and more as a differentiated status position that forms and circulates as an object of discourse, as a category that social persons can evaluate and be interpellated into. In the next three sections, I review studies that explore how a postcolonial semiotics produces elites as “fake,” “mix,” and “excess,” as desirable yet disloyal cosmopolitan figures set in contrast with figurations of the immobile, rural, and poor in the postcolony.

Section: FAKE

The concept of “fake” is often set in contrast to notions of “authenticity” ( Bucholtz 2003 ) and in proximity to notions of “mimicry” ( Taussig 1993 ), “imitation” ( Lempert 2014 ), and “copy” ( Inoue 2006 ). When something is read as mimetic practice, discerning between original and copy relies on a differential that is “felt to exist” ( Lempert 2014 , p. 381). “Feeling” a fake, I suggest, often involves rendering something as that which aspires through double voicing ( Bakhtin 1981 ). That is, the fake is construed as attempting to approximate a voice that does not match its own ( Lo & Choi 2017 ). Whereas the real is often seen as being itself, the fake is often seen as failing to resemble (i.e., stand in iconic relation to) what it aspires to be. An ontology of fake thus presupposes the existence of types whose tokens aspire to pass for tokens of differentiated types through double-voiced emblematic displays ( Reyes 2017b ). In this section, I review studies that explore how the quality of fake is experienced when attributed to emblems attached to three postcolonial elite types: “nose brigade” in Zimbabwe, “burger” in Pakistan, and “D4” in Ireland. Viewing postcolonial elites as fake positions them as too tainted by the metropole to represent or act in the interests of what is regarded as the real postcolonial population.
Mlambo (2009) discusses a postcolonial elite type defined by its inauthenticity: “nose brigade,” a derogatory term for black Zimbabweans accused of emulating a Western nasal quality when speaking English. Members of the nose brigade are evaluated as “unzimbabwean” and “westernized” ( Neate 1994 , p. 69), “affected” and “misguided … because they are perceived to be uninterested in their African culture” ( Mlambo 2009 , p. 22). As a type of speech, nose brigade is recognized as a prestige register of English “spoken by pupils and students who live in English acquisition-rich residential areas” and do not “want to have social interaction with people from English acquisition-poor environments, who speak what is referred to as rural English” ( Mlambo 2009 , p. 22). These so-called rural English speakers are dubbed SRBs (strong rural background) by the nose brigade, just as SRBs are credited with coining the term nose brigade. Thus the rural/urban axis is mutually configured on the basis of personhood (SRB/nose brigade) and language (rural English/nose brigade variety), as is the external/internal axis through the construct of “overseas,” which forms a central aspiration of those labeled nose brigade ( Neate 1994 ). Moreover, Pattman (1999) finds that men from rural and working-class backgrounds derisively label female intellectuals “nose, nose,” “modern,” and “trying to emulate whites” as a reflection of their own projected anxieties about cultural loss in the aftermath of the Rhodesian settler state. Nose brigade elites are thus framed as “the whites they have replaced” ( Bennell & Ncube 1994 , p. 601), defined by their orientation to the Global North and thus positioned as thwarting decolonizing efforts of “real” Zimbabweans.
In her study of Pakistani-origin youth formations, Durrani (2016) examines a postcolonial elite type also evaluated as fake: “burger,” named after the introduction of American fast food culture to Karachi and the kinds of people who favor expensive foreign hamburgers over cheap local cuisine. Burger circulates as a cosmopolitan, upper-class figure that represents a double exteriority: “urban” in the urban/rural axis and “American” in the American/Pakistani axis. A major emblem of burgers is linguistic: being fluent in English and incompetent in Punjabi. Durrani analyzes how burgers are ridiculed and mocked for being “detached” from Pakistan: “so modernized and influenced by Western cultural practices that they are out of touch with the experience of everyday Pakistanis” ( Durrani 2016 , p. 108). Burgers betray not only their country, but also their gender: Male burgers are viewed as “girly-boy” types and female burgers are viewed as “not very girl-like.” Yet burgers also accrue value and serve as targets of aspiration, given that they are tied to economic mobility. Durrani argues that burger points to “postcolonial anxiety where youth who seek to become more urbanized, English-speaking cosmopolitans” must contend with how to be modern, “grappling with their own mobility trajectories that take them physically and ideologically between rural and urban imaginaries” ( Durrani 2016 , p. 113).
Finally, Moore (2011) discusses another fake figuration of the postcolonial elite: “D4,” a fashionable Irish English accent associated with affluent youth, named for the postal code of an upper-class residential area of Dublin. D4 speakers are characterized as sophisticated, urbane, international, and “pretending to be something they aren't” ( Moore 2011 , p. 42) by, for example, imitating accents linked to British, American, and Australian Englishes. Moore examines the dual avoidance of D4 as an accent that avoids “pronunciations seen as emblematic either of working-class Dublin identity or of rural Irish provincialism. And now, D4 itself has become an accent to avoid” ( Moore 2011 , p. 41), in fact, an accent that no one claims as their own. Questions of fake are central to D4; the register is viewed as artificial, as not spoken by real rural or working-class Irish people and as associated with an Anglophone exteriority linked to colonialism where
[t]he English language, then, becomes a site for the expression of a particular kind of split subjectivity in Ireland, a society where the primary linguistic emblem of national belonging is still Irish (Gaelic), and English is generally regarded, when it is regarded at all, as a tool of convenience as well as colonialism. ( Moore 2011 , p. 49)
Moreover, as D4 emerged in the context of an economic boom and an influx of migrants, D4 speakers are not viewed as “the immigrants who ‘refuse to integrate,’ but their mirror image: they are the ‘native Irish’ who actively dissociate themselves from their congeners, conationals, and kin—people whose very existence is the symptom of an Irish society dis-integrating from within” ( Moore 2011 , p. 59).

Section: MIX

In addition to fake, postcolonial elites are often evaluated as “mixed.” The notion of “mix” I draw on here is informed by theorizations of “hybridity” of both person and linguistic types ( Chun 2017 , Heller & McElhinny 2017 , Reyes 2020a , Young 1995 ). Hybridity has been a concept of sustained interest, from eighteenth-century natural sciences on plant and animal crossbreeding, to nineteenth-century racial theories on “mongrelizaton” and linguistic theories on “creoles,” to twentieth-century humanities scholarship on the colonial anxiety surrounding cultural forms. For Bhabha (1994) , hybridity frames the ambivalences of imperial rule as enacted by colonized subjects, who relocate the signs of colonial authority through mimicry. Language is a central sign of this relocation in that colonial contact is also linguistic contact, leading to syncretic practices that appear to be outside the prescribed official languages authorized by the state. In this section, I review studies that explore how the quality of mix is experienced when attributed to emblems attached to three postcolonial elite types: “conyo” in the Philippines, “fresa” in Mexico, and “Engsh” in Kenya. Viewing postcolonial elites as racially and linguistically mixed positions them as containing both the colonizer and the colonized, as enviably “doubled” ( Rafael 1995 ) or indecently “contaminated” ( Hoffmann-Dilloway 2016 ). As “mixed” qualities form desirable status emblems, they can maintain the value of body and speech types linked to colonial empires.
Reyes (2017a) examines a postcolonial elite figure and register framed as mixed: “conyo” in the Philippines. Conyo—often recognized as deriving from the Spanish word coño —“is regarded as a contemporary iteration of the Taglish-speaking Philippine mestizo [mixed race] elite, one that enjoys the usual advantages of wealth, but one that is also youthful, consumerist, and vapid” ( Reyes 2017a , p. 213). Commentary about conyo is driven by private school–educated youth, who are accused of being and speaking conyo themselves. But these youth rarely claim conyo as their own, similar to D4 as an avoidance register. Conyo emblems still emerge as desirable targets of aspiration, spawning many imitators, such as “paconyos” (wannabe conyos), and set in contrast with the supposedly tacky sensibilities of the lower classes: urban “jolog” and rural “promdi” (“from the provinces”) ( Reyes 2017b ). Conyo are viewed as thoroughly mixed in body and speech, as well as in loyalty. They are regarded as light-skinned, owing to a history of racial mixing, and Taglish-speaking, owing to a history of linguistic mixing, emerging as figures to admire but also to condemn for being indelibly tainted by empire. Their supposedly mixed speech, in particular, is an object of ridicule, encapsulated by the widely circulating example of reported speech: “Let's make tusok tusok the fishballs” (“Let's get fishballs” [ lit: “Let's make skewer skewer the fishballs”]).
Mixed qualities also frame the Mexican elite type of “fresa”: “a Mexican Spanish slang term for a young person from the urban, middle-class, predominantly European-descent elite” ( Mendoza-Denton 2008 , p. 11), who is associated with aspirational lifestyles that “pseudofresas” (like paconyos) come to envy, such as “attending private schooling institutions, driving expensive cars, wearing expensive clothing, owning vacation homes, extensive international travel, being fluent in English and other languages, etc.” ( Chaparro 2016 , p. 52). In her study of Latina youth gangs in California, Mendoza-Denton (2008 , p. 21) examines how “cosmopolitan” fresas emerge in a contrast with rural, working-class “piporras,” a distinction that “reproduced urban/rural and white/indigenous/black divisions prevalent in postcolonial Latin America.” Fresa also emerges in a similar contrast with “naco,” such that “fresas phenotypically are depicted as light-skin and European descendant, while nacos are darker skinned, closer to indigenous phenotypes” ( Chaparro 2016 , p. 61). In her study of fresa and naco metadiscourses in Mexico, Chaparro (2016) finds that fresas are seen as not only racially mixed but also linguistically mixed, using English phrases and American English pronunciations that signal a preference for the foreign. As with conyos, fresas are often ridiculed through reported speech that is taken as a mixture of registers. For example, Chaparro (2016) analyzes song lyrics that typify the supposedly mixed speech of fresas as preferring English “ice cream” to Spanish “helado”: “Entonces un ice cream de perdida no?” (“Then an ice cream at least, ok?”)
Finally, “Engsh” in Kenya illustrates another case of how mixed qualities get attached to elite types. Considered a “hybrid code” ( Kaviti 2015 ) of English and Kiswahili, Engsh is purportedly spoken by the sophisticated and fashionable children of the Kenyan elite who reside in the wealthy, racially mixed Westlands area of Nairobi. Among the middle and upper classes, there is a shift from Kiswahili and mother tongues to English, particularly American English as a prestige, aspirational variety, given the influence of American popular culture and media. Engsh emerges in contrast to “Sheng,” the more popular Kiswahili-dominant register spoken by the lower-class youth masses ( Makoni et al. 2017 ). That Engsh and Sheng constitute an axis of differentiation characterized by mutual hostility “is a manifestation of class struggle among the youth that also represents, at the national level, the social stratification and consequently perpetual class distinctions in Kenyan society” ( Abdulaziz & Osinde 1997 , p. 54). Like conyo, Engsh is tied to the university setting and yet is also perceived as “vulgar” and an “adulteration of the purity of Kiswahili” ( Mukhwana 2015 , p. 97). Engsh is regarded not only as mixed, but also as containing unnecessary linguistic features that are “excessive,” the subject of the next section. For example, Engsh is noted for its double pronouns and double plurals: providing two pronominal forms when one would suffice, e.g., “On that day, me I was kamata-ing” (“On that day, I was drinking”); and adding plural suffix –z to nouns that are already plural, e.g., Kiswahili plural “wadosi” (“rich people”) and Engsh plural “wadosiz” ( Barasa & Mous 2017 , p. 60).

Section: EXCESS

In addition to fake and mix, postcolonial elites are often linked to modern “excess” from the perspective of an anxious, moral, middle-class position. “Modern” characterizes an image of the colonizing European world in relation to how colonized “nonmodern” worlds are viewed from the supposed centers of modernity ( Chakrabarty 1992 ). To understand one's relationship to modernity is to be aware of this purported provenance and gaze and to anxiously aspire to the modern through personal and social transformation. Anxieties about modernity can constitute a middle-class nationalist morality that monitors excess and appropriate consumption ( Besnier 2009 ), what Nelson (2000 , p. 107) calls “consumer nationalism”: “a moral practice of cultural preservation from the corruption of luxury and modernization.” Here, ideas about excess are intimately linked to the nation and its internal social divisions, that is, to anxieties about who is and who is not appropriately modern. Thus signs of excess can index not only elite arrogance but also fundamental moral shortcomings that require restraint to be “suitably modern” ( Liechty 2003 ). In this section, I review studies that explore how the quality of excess is experienced when attributed to emblems attached to three postcolonial elite types: “Peter” in India, “Model C” in South Africa, and “limeños” in Peru. Viewing postcolonial elites as excessive positions them as participating too enthusiastically in colonial models of behavior that are seen as overly modern and a national betrayal.
In his study of Tamil youth style in South India, Nakassis (2016) discusses an elite personification of excess: the “Peter” figure. The Christian name Peter is used for a snobbish, arrogant show-off, who “unabashedly attempts to inhabit the space of cosmopolitan globalism through his or her use of English” ( Nakassis 2016 , p. 109). College students are anxious about English: not only about speaking it poorly, but also about speaking it too well. Given the mapping of “linguistic difference (English versus Tamil) onto regional and class difference (cosmopolitan Chennai versus backwater Madurai)” ( Nakassis 2016 , p. 109), an excessive quantity or ability in English can highlight social divisions that threaten the egalitarian ideals of the university. Nakassis (2016 , p. 111) notes that this English excess is not about an absolute quantity but “about the differential relationship that such affected speech diagrams between a speaker and his or her interlocutors.” Thus a Peter's excessive use of English can be perceived as denigrating the lower classes who are linked to less English fluency. But it is not just English excess. Several elements of the Peter's style go “too far” ( Nakassis 2016 , p. 110), including an excessive desire for the foreign, flashy brands, and hair that is too long or too short. To avoid being called a Peter, one has to carve out a middle position between extreme poles: between the local nonmodern and the global cosmopolitan, between too little and too much.
Another figuration of excess is found in “Model C” in South Africa. Model C was a classification for white semiprivate, state-supported schools in the early 1990s. Although the postapartheid government abolished this classification, the term is still used for these now ex–Model C schools, which have increasingly admitted black students, primarily from the elite and upwardly mobile middle class ( Mesthrie 2017 ). Black South Africans who orient to linguistic and other social practices associated with these previously all-white, English-medium schools are called “Model C” ( Collins 2017 ). The black ex–Model C student is marked by excesses in terms of both race and language: too much whiteness ( Wale 2010 ) and too much English ( Rudwick 2008 ). Moreover, their speech is framed in terms of elite consumption, with one participant calling it “Louis Vuitton English” ( McKinney 2013 , p. 23). Mesthrie (2017 , pp. 318–19) also notes how media commentary attributes “soft” and “rough” qualities to an elite/masses linguistic distinction: “soft cadences of a private school education” in contrast with the “rough tones of a working class.” Because English is linked with social and economic mobility, as well as with unity and liberation owing to its role in the antiapartheid movement, South Africans, including black youth labeled Model C, feel pressure to know not only English, but a prestigious variety of it. The linguistic and material excesses attributed to Model C symbolize “an upwardly mobile elite who invest in the present status hierarchy of South African society” ( Mesthrie 2017 , p. 342) and therefore “provide a clear example of how deep historical inequalities persist well past the formal end of colonialism” ( Christie & McKinney 2018 , p. 2).
Finally, Arispe-Bazán (2021) discusses how excess relates to the construction of upwardly mobile “limeños,” native residents of Lima, Peru. As opposed to excessive qualities being attributed to limeños, limeños attribute excessive qualities to Spanish migrants in Peru. Spaniards are regarded as speaking at an excessive volume and with an excessive amount of expletives, qualities set in contrast with the supposedly moderate and respectable manner of middle-class limeños. Excess is attributed not only to language, but to personhood, as Peruvian returnees regarded as performing excessive Spanish features are also regarded as performing excessive Spanishness. As limeños repurpose colonial forms of respectability, Arispe-Bazán (2021 , p. 45) notes that “language ideologies around middle classness both sustain and obfuscate colonialism's longue durée .” Although limeños frame Spanish migration to Peru in colonial terms of “reconquest,” “it became clear that, to middle class Limeños , discourses around rejecting the Spanish migrants served to bolster their bids for upward mobility, rather than contend seriously with the contemporary legacies of colonization” ( Arispe-Bazán 2021 , p. 44).

Section: CONCLUSION

If “languages could be powerful naturalizing instruments for colonial power” ( Errington 2001 , p. 34), what of semiotics for the postcolonial? Postcolonial semiotics describes how everyday people create and circulate signs that presuppose colonialism's ongoing relevance in the production of value. This review has focused on a narrow realm within postcolonial semiotics: evaluations of the supposedly fake, mixed, and excessive qualities that form chronotopically anchored emblems of postcolonial elite types. Linguistic anthropological scholarship has illuminated how extensions of colonial-era systems of inequality do not require colonizers or collaborating colonial elites, but the semiotic constitution of differentiated categories of postcolonial elite figures and registers in fractally recursive forms. Colonial hierarchies persist through the continuous production of divisible interior alterities that create nested categories of the formerly colonized, producing elite types that are both denigrated and admired for their supposed approximation to imperial modes of being and speaking. At least two major limitations of this review include its paucity of studies on linguistic processes that do not involve English (limeños are an exception) and on colonial processes that do not involve European or American empires (Japanese and other colonialisms are absent). As a final thought, after reviewing how downward recursions reproduce colonial structures, I am left wondering, what if we had more active upward recursions? Instead of investing in endless divisions, could the oppressed across former colonies and metropoles alike unite against global capital?

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I owe enormous gratitude to Elaine Chun, Adrienne Lo, Stephanie Love, and Sinfree Makoni for thinking through this piece with me and inspiring many of the ideas therein. Special thanks go to Elaine, Adrienne, and an anonymous reviewer for their careful reading and critical feedback on earlier drafts. All remaining weaknesses are mine alone.

Section: literature cited

