Title: Intersectional Ecologies: Reimagining Anthropology and Environment


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Drawing on the work of Black feminist scholars, this review suggests “intersectional ecologies” as a method for critically engaging anthropology's relationship with the environment across subfields, intellectual traditions, and authorial politics. Intersectional ecologies helps us trace how a broad coalition of scholars represents and accounts for the environment within shifting planetary arrangements of bodies, sites, practices, and technologies. Our basic argument in this article is that because the environment is a malleable and contingent social fact, it matters who is analyzing its formation and how they are analyzing it. To this end, the scholarship we review comes from a diverse array of authors. The three themes we have identified—materiality, knowledge, and subjectivity—are central to bringing this diverse scholarship into dialogue while putting into focus anthropology's uneven commitments to the environment as a concept.

Section: 


A Small and Needful Fact
Is that Eric Garner worked
for some time for the Parks and Rec.
Horticultural Department, which means,
perhaps, that with his very large hands,
perhaps, in all likelihood,
he put gently into the earth
some plants which, most likely,
some of them, in all likelihood,
continue to grow, continue
to do what such plants do, like house
and feed small and necessary creatures,
like being pleasant to touch and smell,
like converting sunlight
into food, like making it easier
for us to breathe.
—Ross Gay (2015)


Section: INTRODUCTION: EXPANDING ENVIRONMENTS

Environmental anthropology is a field that has historically organized itself around examining the interrelated sociocultural, physical, economic, chemical, political, geological, and biological processes of life on Earth ( Heider 1972 ). As a concept, the environment has been defined as a geographic area dialectically shaped by and determinant of human activities ( Blaikie & Brookfield 1987 ). Today, ongoing crises—from climate change, mass extinction, nuclear fallout, to pandemics—have pushed anthropologists to reconsider the pedagogical and theoretical significance of the environment to the discipline. In recent years, anthropologists have developed alternative concepts and rubrics, including multispecies ethnography ( Kirksey & Helmreich 2010 , Tsing 2015 ), geontology ( Povinelli 2016 ), ecologics ( Howe 2019 ), and the “sustainability of everything” ( Ingold 2016 ). At the same time, the field is addressing the fact that its canon has tended to prioritize the contributions of Euro-American, white, and male scholars, which in turn has delimited its audience and disciplinary reach. Today, many argue that the contributions of the field extend to and are extended by a far more diverse canon of scholars (for example, see Guarasci et al. 2018 ). In this review, we examine the recent (re)turn to the environment in anthropology. In doing so, this article identifies themes—materiality, knowledge, and subjectivity—that emerge when scholars confront the environment as a creative resource for advancing a more ethically oriented discipline.
The poem “A Small and Needful Fact” offers a poignant entry point to help us see the ever-widening range of political events, forms of violence and creativity, fieldsites, and topics that generate new analytic practices around the environment. Specifically, the poem delineates the contours of what we are calling “intersectional ecology.” We refer to intersectional ecology as a method for critically engaging anthropology's relationship with the environment across subfields and intellectual genealogies. Intersectional ecology is not a programmatic manifesto. Rather, it helps us trace how a broad coalition of scholars represents and accounts for the environment within shifting planetary arrangements of bodies, sites, texts, practices, and technologies.
The term intersectional ecologies came into focus for us as we engaged the insights of Black feminist scholars, including Kimberlé Crenshaw, Patricia Hill Collins, and June Jordon. They have used the concept of intersectionality to get after why and how supremacy as a specific form of power materializes in American social life. Recognizing that structures of domination are not isolated phenomena, they foreground the importance of theorizing the interconnected ways that race, gender, sexuality, and class socially reproduce exclusion and privilege [ Collins 2019 ; Crenshaw 1989 , 1991 ; Jordan 2002 (1985) ]. A concept initially attentive to Black women's lived experiences, intersectionality has provided a framework for Black feminism to critically intervene in other disciplines, especially legal studies and sociology. Indeed, intersectionality is a helpful metaphor for, as Jennifer Nash (2019) argues, fostering disciplines that are less invested in “making property of knowledge” (p. 3). In a parallel way, this article seeks to demonstrate that recent ethnographic studies of the environment have an interest in unpacking assumptions about authorship and the contribution of anthropological theory to other disciplines. Ethnographic texts circulate with different values depending on the positionality of the author, the place(s) in the world researched by the author, and the author's choice of theory and representational style ( Boyer et al. 2015 ). An emphasis on intersectional ecology as an ethic and method helps reorient anthropology's collective investment in diversity, equity, and inclusion, without resorting to false universals or essentializing differences.
The intellectual themes that environmental anthropology has pursued for the past century reflect the varied scope and objectives of the field. For example, the presumed borders of environmental anthropology have often been informed by the insights of its sister disciplines, geography and political ecology ( Orlove 1980 , Watts 2016 ). In a recent review, Orr et al. (2015) detail the coupled social and natural sciences research agenda that informs the field. Topics such as climate change and the Anthropocene have ushered in deeper conversations among scholars about the role that environmental anthropology can play in fostering transdisciplinary collaborations ( Crate 2011 , Mathews 2020 , O'Reilly et al. 2020 ). From these observations, we note the lively theoretical debates about nature/culture dualisms that continue to provide a foundation for environmental anthropology ( Little 1999 , Rappaport 1968 , Steward 1955 ). Several anthropological studies reinforce this point, noting that human–environment interactions are a product of historical and less so evolutionary events ( Balée 1998 , Vayda & Walters 1999 ). Thus, we propose intersectional ecology as one perspective on the history of environmental anthropological thought while offering a critical reading of the field's investment in competing theoretical and analytical frameworks.
Our basic argument in this article is that the environment is a malleable and historically contingent concept. The literature we review comes from an array of scholars who are concerned with issues that include conservation, extractivism, biotechnology, environmental justice, climate change, health, and pollution. The three themes we have identified—materiality, knowledge, and subjectivity—are central to bringing these scholars into critical dialogue with one another and with the field. These themes make visible the ways in which environmental anthropology's commitment to deconstructing nature/culture dualisms is not enough to render visible relations of (in)equality and life in the historical present. To this end, intersectional scholarship treats materiality as the physical qualities of the environment that get reimagined through economic and governmental interventions. Knowledge about the environment is analyzed less as an object than as a social practice informed by violent colonial histories, cultures of scientific authority, and varied social engagements with technologies. Subjectivity is central to examining individual and collective feelings, desires, and awareness of the environment.
These themes are shared arenas in which, following Mullings (2005) , scholars examine the racialized histories of epistemic engagements. To this end, our primary goal in this article is to bring into focus how environments are always in a process of becoming. Our second goal is to show how an intersectional reading of environmental anthropology maps the problem space through which appeals to collectivity and diverse ways of knowing are gaining traction in anthropology today.

Section: MATERIALITY

Questions of matter and materiality are foundational to environmental anthropology. The matter of ecology includes waters, sands, reeds, plants, insects, animals, and humans and the ways in which they live interrelationally in shared worlds. Intersectional scholars ask how matter is produced, how matter is agentive, and how it gains value. As Lowe (2006) has argued, natures—in the plural—are “made” “at the intersection of humans with their particular social histories, and plants and animals with their unique evolutionary and ecological histories” (p. 2; see also Mikhail 2011 ). Neither science nor society is equipped to inform us about these histories, she writes. Rather, to know these histories, scholars must delve into the intersections of interspecies relations ( Ogden 2011 ).
Intersectional scholars presume the social production of nature and thus analyze organic and inorganic matter and species of flora and fauna as agentive, intra-active, co-constitutive, and relational ( Barad 2007 ). They have examined how minerals and people create value together ( Ferry 2013 ), how the messy slipperiness of salmon is constitutive of the indeterminacy embedded in the workings of markets ( Hébert 2014 ), how the bodies of miners are attuned to the substances they mine ( Smith Rolston 2014 ), how the corporation enacts its own ecological existence ( Welker 2014 ), and also how sacred aspects of nature materially constitute socionatural worlds such as mountains or waters ( Ballestero 2019 , Li 2013 , Whyte 2017 ).
Teaiwa (2015) advances such analysis by reframing histories of the Central Pacific and the island of Banaba, in particular, in relation to the materiality of phosphate, the substance of the island's formation. Teaiwa begins by centralizing Kiribati ways of thinking about island ecologies where “land is the very basis for relationality and for knowing and being” such that the materiality of land constitutes an epistemology and an ontological orientation ( Teaiwa 2015 , pp. 7–8). Teaiwa treats ecologies as logics expressed by material existence. Her analysis of ecologies as materially realized discursive formations reorients anthropological analysis of the environment from the study of being and behavior to the study of discourse as advocated by Asad (2009) . It is an analysis that “think[s] from materials not about them” ( Ingold 2012 , p. 437).
By examining scientific practice, scholars demonstrate how social categories, such as the species category, become material facts. The development of the natural sciences has been closely linked with the emergence of environmentalism, argues Feeley-Harnik (2001) . She analyzes how imperial scientific practice, like the effort to define Madagascar's “flagship” species, the Ravenala tree, obviated efforts to understand land-use practices according to local social-ecological terms. The species categories of “native” and “alien” are similarly inseparable from social context and instead are burnished by the discourses of race and racism that define empiricism much as they do our social world ( Helmreich 2005 ). Conservation, the act of preserving nature, must therefore be understood as a conservative act, one designed to affix ideologies of heritage in the ground ( Peutz 2018 ).
Beyond analyzing matter as a social fact, intersectional scholarship requires the reexamination of the social relations of materiality. The recent turn of scholars toward ecologies is purposeful here: It is a recuperation of an old anthropological concept to emphasize that ecologies are infrastructures that systematically integrate and organize the social relations of matter ( Carse 2012 , Hetherington 2019 , Kim 2016 , Scaramelli 2019 ). Uruguayan historian Eduardo Galeano [1973 (1971) ] famously argued that the mineral and agricultural resources of Latin America were the lifeblood of global capitalism and their “invisible sources of power” (p. 134). Contemporary work on organic farming and fair trade demonstrates that while the forms of agriculture may bend toward justice, they do so performatively in ways that continue to accelerate the power of industrial capitalists at the expense of labor ( Besky 2014 , Guthman 2014 ). Environmental anthropology has embraced the idea that there is no nature outside of capitalism; rather, nature is a product of capitalism ( Smith 1984 ) and intersectional work has been well poised to critically examine the ways in which capitalism expands into new frontiers by developing novel approaches to energy extraction ( Appel 2012 , Günel 2019 , Powell 2017 ) or by harnessing the rhetoric of conservation ( Davis 2007 , Kaur 1998 , Lorimer 2015 ) and development ( Bear 2015 , Walley 2004 , Turner 2004 ).
In addition to geographic transformation, the consolidation of global capitalism has produced new forms of racialization. Modernity itself, Winant (2015) reveals, was a worldwide racial project. Pulido (2016) , for example, argues that difference is racialized at the base level of capitalist production; capitalism is racial capitalism. Pulido addresses how the body is inscribed and reinscribed by race and racism through practices of industry and manufacturing that identify devalued bodies as sinks, places where pollution can be deposited (see also West 2016 ). Pulido asserts that if we take seriously Moore's (2015) assertion that capitalism organizes nature, and acknowledge that humans are nature, we must also recognize that capitalism reproduces itself on a cellular level within all beings (p. 529). Capitalism therefore acts on bodies, human and nonhuman, to produce emerging forms of biocitizenship at a molecular level ( Roberts 2012 ) such that biocitizenship is often experienced as a form of endangerment. Mavhunga (2018) argues that epistemological shifts, like thinking with mhesvi , the Zimbabwe name for the tsetse fly, are prerequisites to opening the space for an African-led critique of the global circulation of harmful biological material, thereby exposing the violence of biocitizenship. In other places and contexts, claims to biocitizenship can also be aspirational and a way of holding space for a future of well-being that does not yet exist, as they are for Peruvians in the Montaro Valley ( Graeter 2017 ). While citizenship is increasingly mediated biologically, the popularity of genetic tests that offer the promise of transcending race has also grown exponentially, which demonstrates the enduring quest for pathways to escape or subvert the violence of racial categorization that themselves reproduce such violence ( Roberts 2012 ). This scholarship collectively reveals that the discourse of race is not additive or external to, but materially definitive of, ecologies.
Interactive relations of human and nonhuman agencies animate the material world. As Teaiwa (2015) notes, Banaba island residents at times were both victims and agents of their own displacement. Similarly, Asher (2009) argues that capitalist development has not been unmade by third-world social movements; rather, development projects and social movements are intertwined in contradictory, complex, and contingent ways. Additionally, racial capitalism has created material limits to its growth that have not been readily acknowledged, as in the case of Canadian railroad lines built across Native lands that make the tracks legally vulnerable to seizure on reservations’ grounds ( Pasternak 2014 ). Analyzing the embodiment of technosocial phenomena in this way foregrounds personhood and centralizes how it has been shaped by history and geography. Experiences of nuclear energy, Hecht (2012) argues, are not the same everywhere, but particularized. Understanding the specific manifestation of social-material relations further requires scholars to move beyond the current focus on productivity to examine life processes, such as decomposition, that do not depend on growth ( Lyons 2016 , Stamatopoulou-Robbins 2019 , Zhang 2020 ).
The recent proliferation of intersectional scholarship on matter is invigorating for studies of ecologies, but these contemporary modes of thinking with and about matter and materiality have unacknowledged historical roots in the discipline. For example, Zora Neale Hurston's unpublished 1958 essay on Florida's migrant labor force, ultimately published in 1991, analyzes migrating laborers as a “plankton-rich stream” and a “subterranean force” moving across the Florida Everglades ( Hurston 1991 ). More than 60 years ago, Hurston argued for the ways in which the social forms of matter, e.g., water and soil, are constituted in relation to each other ( Cattelino 2019 ; see also Ortiz 1995 ). While Hurston's work has long been underappreciated in environmental anthropology, current scholarship is revisiting these themes with new eyes.
Recent Black ecologies scholarship has pushed conventional understandings of environmental materiality. Gregory (1998) anticipates the work of Black ecologies in a material sense by arguing that race has been largely overlooked by mainstream anthropologists because racial politics is too often treated as a distinct, autonomous facet of urban life rather than as a field of power relations. In her recent manifesto, Chelsea Mikael Frazier (2020) argues that environmentalism and its related intellectual movement, ecocriticism, has similarly failed to recognize the voices and intellectual contributions of Black feminist ecologists owing to biases of privilege that determine what counts as environmental (see also Ferrari 2020 , Roane & Hosbey 2019 ). Artist LaToya Ruby Frazier's photo project, “Flint Is Family,” documents how the stress that families experienced as a result of the water crisis was due not to any individual failing, as the racial grammars of American life are quick to suggest, but to state-sponsored ecological violence. al-Mohammad's (2007) scholarship on Basra shifts Black ecologies’ critical focus on environmental violence to a global context by analyzing war as a continually unfolding ecology of violence that debases and devalues humanity as people are forced to live in highly toxic and degraded environments.
As an interpretive and creative world sense committed to understanding the intersections of gender, race, and class, Black feminist ecologies are more necessary than ever. This work can “help us to criticize (when necessary), reimagine and create other elements of culture including our legislation, our economic sensibilities, or engagement with material resources like water, flora, fauna, and land” ( Frazier 2020 , paragraph 14). Thus, foregrounding Black feminist materialities is vital to contemporary work on the environment because it offers the possibility of delving into a world beyond the narrow lens of trauma ( Ferrari 2020 ).
An intersectional ecological reading of the diverse groups of authors and perspectives presented here reveals the significance of materiality, focusing on how matter is made in ways that emplace and integrate race, capitalism, and empire in bodies and life-forms.

Section: KNOWLEDGE

Entangled with the expanding consideration of materiality and materialization, scholarship on the environment has become deeply engaged in recent decades with exploring and critiquing the practices of “Western” science and technoscience as the arbiter of knowledge about the living world. This interest has led to a growing appreciation of science and technology studies within environmental anthropology. But rather than focusing on the science of ecology, conservation biology, medicine, or biotechnology as discrete topics, intersectional scholarship is branching out to redefine understandings of the “natural” technosciences in a time of extinction and multiscalar change. This redefinition is reflected in the growth of what some might call Black, queer, anti-colonial, feminist science and technology studies, the rhizomatic roots of intersectional ecological thinking about science. The scholars presented here interrogate the sciences in different ways, but when read together they document the production of knowledge affecting a shimmering constellation of bodies, natures, beings, rights, histories, and forms of belonging that span (but are not irreducible to) the genetic and the planetary ( Rose 2017 ). In concert, the work described here reflects an intersectional praxis generated from an ethnographic focus on the lives of scientific research subjects and scientific practitioners around the world and at home.
Beginning with work on the geosciences, which have made some of the boldest claims to the crisis condition of Planet Earth, we see that anthropologists have oriented their attention to the implications and outcomes of that research, documenting how science and engineering projects coproduce geophysical knowledge about change in contingent locales. For example, scholars such as Zee (2017) have described recent attempts to manage desertification in China with sand-control engineering campaigns. For land managers, controlling sand with geoengineering has become a form of chronopolitics in which the environment becomes a space of multiple possibilities rather than a singular apocalypse. The science of sand control, in this case, normalizes ecological disaster as part of the inevitable cycle of dynastic and geological time that is constitutive of Chinese endurance rather than the end of the world. Anand (2017) has also documented ecological management crises in India, in this case around urban water infrastructures, in which water is now more practically known as a kind of sociotechnical flow of resources and forms of citizenship rather than as an immutable element or transcendent icon of global scarcity.
Examples of geoengineering and infrastructure studies like these begin to represent one way in which science and scientific practices are becoming more intersectionally understood as social and political processes deeply linked to history, biography, geography, and genealogy ( Bhimull 2017 ). To better understand how contemporary authoritative knowledge is so entangled in its own contexts, Subramaniam (2014 , following Haraway 2003 ) has called for radical scholarly interdisciplinarity capable of spanning the natural sciences, social sciences, and humanities. Such work conducted by scholars such as TallBear (2013) , who are keenly aware of their own racialized, socioeconomic, and gendered positionality within the context of their disciplines and the fields they study (in TallBear's case, this is the intersection of Indigenous sovereignty and the genetic sciences), will continue to reveal the unexamined histories of violence embedded in scientific methods and questions. For intersectional scholars like Subramaniam and TallBear, the specter of eugenics stalks the life sciences, perpetuating supremacist notions of belonging and biological being while simultaneously hiding the cultural biases and interpretations that are constitutive of those disciplines.
Embedded forms of violence and creative forms of living beyond violence are central to a great deal of recent intersectional work on the science of changing ecologies. Echoing scholars like Ahuja (2015) , who calls for the application of queer theories of intimate existence to planetary and ecological phenomena, Parreñas (2018) shows how heteropatriarchal capitalist colonial forms of violence are perpetuated in orangutan conservation facilities in Borneo. According to Parreñas, biodiversity loss, mass extinction, and captive breeding programs are themselves manifestations of ongoing colonialism, and any redress can come only through radically reframing conservation science to acknowledge its agency in perpetuating violent dispossessions of land, security, and sovereignty from Indigenous and nonhuman beings. Her work forces the realization that most biologists know more about enforcing inequitable suffering and violent existence on endangered species than they do about dying with dignity (on death and care in conservation biology, see also Bocci 2017 ).
The limited possibility of living and dying with dignity as an essential and underacknowledged component of contemporary supremacist science bleeds between anthropological scholarship on ecological conservation, bioscience, medicine, and corporate accumulation. For example, Benjamin (2013 , 2019) studies how racial inequalities in the United States are embedded in technologies such as stem cell therapies and computer coding. Her work follows the tensions built into scientific practices that channel the benefits of STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) fields from research on marginalized and minoritized populations to the corporate and institutional profits of technology companies (see also Nelson 2016 ). Such complicit and common scientific practices, Benjamin reveals, reemphasize racial hierarchies, replicate social divisions, and heighten racial biases in the name of inclusion. In this way, Benjamin shows how race remains a scientific technology of extinction.
The intersectional examination of justice or the lack thereof in marginalized populations extends to the study of marginalized places and the ways in which transnational flows of pollution affect emplaced bodies and bodily well-being. Agard-Jones (2013) shows how sexuality and gender, colonial supremacy, and the commodity chains of imported products, including hazardous agricultural chemicals, materialize in bodies in Martinique. She describes how bodies in the Caribbean become evidentiary devices that can be scientifically and socially read to understand how power jumps scale from the global to the hyper local, as people live, eat, breathe, and variously consume and are consumed by circulating products, economies, and geopolitical trends. Uneven flows of corporate interest can also be read in bodies in the privileged bastions of North America. Mackendrick (2014) shows how capitalist markets promoting science-based wellness mediate gendered embodiments of maternity and motherhood, linking social class to the contemporary formation of the normative mom. In such markets, precaution against toxicity and pollution becomes a consumable luxury, and motherhood becomes a medical product. Murphy (2017) takes up this discussion of chemical body burdens in the Americas, arguing that industrial chemicals are now part of the living embodiment of settler colonialism and that technoscience itself has to be engaged in the study of chemical (in)justice. Such an expansion of the frame of justice is necessary because corporate technoscientific representations of chemicals in molecular models too often isolate and depoliticize chemicals in ways that benefit capitalist chemical industries.
Intersectional scholars such as Plumwood (2002) argue that such (race, gender, colonialism, and class-based) “dominant illusions” promote a kind of technofix heroism that is completely antithetical to the requirements of the current ecological crisis, which is why business as usual persists to benefit the privileged few while the world burns. Such culture-scale blind spots embedded in science-based decision making hide the imminent danger of extinction and mass death. Liboiron (2009) notes that this illusion is true even when it comes to everyday practices such as municipal waste recycling, a practice that is culturally known to be good in North America but which, in practice, involves a small fraction of the waste produced by industry, merely shifting waste from its origins to other places or parts of the world, out of sight. These scholars argue that advertising for household recycling has made it the most commonly practiced form of environmental activism even as it subverts any real understanding of this complexity; rather, it promotes the homogenizing assumption that recycling is an obvious good for individuals, the environment, and the planet while hiding the systemic realities of industrialization altogether.
Such systemic inequity is hidden in scientific terms, especially recently famous terms such as “the Anthropocene.” Davis & Todd (2017) make the case that the Anthropocene has always been a political term defined by Eurocentric settler colonial logics and blindnesses that place the initiation of the epoch in recent industrial history. They propose an alternative “golden spike” that is grounded in the colonization of the Americas and the systematic, continental-scale dispossession of Indigenous lands and relationships, and they contend that scholarly engagements with the Anthropocene idea must have the decolonial potential to show how the origins of ecocidal anthropogenesis are inherently colonial and not universal or apolitically “human.” This notion dovetails with de la Cadena's (2015) subversive notion of the “anthropo-not-seen,” as an era in which irreducible collectives of humans and nonhumans exist beyond simplistic scientific categorization and homogenous worlding, even as they are subject to (and exceed) continued colonial processes of destruction.
In sum, when it comes to scientific knowledge about the environment, an intersectional ecological reading reveals a wide array of scholarship that incontrovertibly demonstrates how understandings of nature are always shaped by history and culture. “Knowing nature” is therefore always a process of translation, intersectionally mediated by labor, social positionality, subjectivity, and various forms of exclusion and inclusion that are contingent in a given place and time ( Satsuka 2015 ).

Section: SUBJECTIVITY

Knowing nature and knowing the self have always been interrelated processes. For anthropologists, subjectivity remains a critical theme for reflecting on what it means to regard oneself as human ( Biehl et al. 2007 , Das 2006 , Luhrmann 2006 ). Subjectivity has been defined, following Ortner (2005) , as the “states of mind of real actors embedded in the social world, and as cultural formations that (at least partially) express, shape, and constitute those states of mind” (p. 46). The word “embedded” gets after the ways in which Ortner, throughout much of her work, has interpreted subjectivity as linked to questions of power. In examining subjectivity today, intersectional scholars take this insight as a helpful starting point for analyzing environmental risks and transformations that have brought about stark forms of insecurity in daily life ( Auyero & Swistun 2009 ). Theoretically, this notion of subjectivity means that the dualist break between nature and culture on which the category of man is envisioned in Western philosophy is objectionable on not only ethical grounds but also epistemological grounds ( Braidotti & Bignall 2019 , Ebron & Tsing 2017 ). Studies within the subfield of environmental anthropology, thus, tend to focus less on the question of the inner self than on intersubjectivity by analyzing how people live collectively. In particular, intersectional scholars have asked whether people's sense of accountability is linked to the mobilization of identity-based environmental movements.
Li (2000) details the social construction of group identity in development projects. Focused on a comparative study of farmers in the interior region of Indonesia, Li argues that development projects are shaped by a plurality of discourses about indigeneity. She shows that farmers’ competing interests and cultural idioms frame how they present their case to the state for the protection of rights and lands. Building on Stuart Hall's notion of articulation, Li pays careful attention to resource politics or struggles over redistribution that animate cultural-ethnic notions of place and landscape. Resource politics, Li (2000) warns, “tend to invoke simplified symbols fashioned through processes of opposition and dialogues, which narrow the gaze to certain well-established signifiers and traits” (p. 157). She, in turn, urges anthropologists toward an intersectional analysis by examining how subordinated groups use their local knowledge to resist domination by outside actors. Contemporaneous studies take an alternative intersectional approach by examining the formation of “environmental subjectivities” from the perspective of conduct and less so the appropriation of cultural forms ( Agrawal 2005 ). In her analysis of biodiversity conservation in highland Ecuador, Davidov (2013) contends that local residents cultivate an identity of “folk environmentalisms” to oppose both state- and corporate-sponsored oil exploration on their land. With an identity based in local knowledge of resources and experiences of oppression, folk environmentalisms shed light on people's efforts to navigate economic boom and bust cycles (for related arguments, see Escobar 2020 , Sawyer 2004 ). Yet, by treating group identity as a privileged heuristic to reality, such studies at times produce an anthropocentric view of environmental vulnerability, as if it were traceable only through human actions and intentions.
Thus, intersectionally oriented anthropologists have become invested in developing analytic frameworks that account for how different people narrate their encounters with environments over time ( Baker 2021 , Morimoto 2020 , Swanson et al. 2018 , Whitington 2013 ). Cruikshank (2006) offers a study of how encounters between humans and glaciers affect the practice of conservation sciences in the Canadian-Alaskan Saint Elias Mountain range. Working from the premise that local knowledge is unstable, Cruikshank argues that “nature is in human affairs”; it shapes kinship, locality, and belonging. While this concept may seem obvious, how one speaks for nature(s) has to be learned, especially within contexts of accelerated or unprecedented environmental degradation. The Tlingit people's oral traditions “provide the conceptual ability to recreate through language, situations for someone who has not experienced [glaciers] directly” ( Cruikshank 2006 , p. 247). By retelling glacier life stories, the Tlingit people's sense of well-being materializes through their collaborations with scientists exploring protected areas.
Other intersectional scholars have turned to concepts including “knots of connection” ( Govindrajan 2018 ), “shelters” ( Hastrup 2011 ), “self-devouring growth” ( Livingston 2019 ), and “ruderal ecologies” ( Stoetzer 2018 ) to foreground the shifting relations of well-being that inform the management of environments. In particular, studies of disaster demonstrate that such events are shaped by the failure of infrastructure, which in many cases has come to personify people's skepticism of environmental regulations ( Fortun 2001 , Hirata 2016 ). By and large, this attention to the more-than-human dynamics of intersubjectivity has transformed anthropology's stance toward not only social imaginations of well-being but also power-knowledge. As Petryna (2017) has argued, uncertain climate projections and abrupt ecosystem shifts have brought new challenges to how people desire to live and think collectively (for related arguments, see Callison 2014 , Olson 2018 ). In response, she calls for anthropologists to engage in horizoning work or “a particular kind of intellectual labor that reconfigures possibilities for knowledge and action” ( Petryna 2017 , pp. 246–47).
In many respects, anthropology has already begun to take on this horizoning agenda through analyses of the ethics surrounding who or what counts as socially desirable. This question has been of particular importance for an emerging intersectional scholarship that bridges analyses of environmental racism with settler colonialism (for discussion, see Hoover 2017 ). As Voyles (2015) has noted of uranium mining in the Navajo Nation (Diné Bikéyah), “remaking Native land” into settler land is a deeply symbolic act that collapses the distinction between Navajo peoples as subjects and land as object (p. 7). In doing so, industrialism is naturalized as Indigenous to the landscape, and Indigenous bodies and knowledge are rendered expendable, marginal, and pollutable. Themes of contamination have also informed scholarship on environmental racism as it relates to people who dwell in both rural and urban settings ( Checker 2005 ). Yet, making this spatial comparison meaningful requires attention to site-specific and historically constituted processes of racialization ( Ficek 2018 ), which means that victimhood may not be the only lived or psychic experience of racialized subjects confronting overlapping state, corporate, and community-derived forms of neglect ( Vena 2019 ). For this reason, cultural geographer and public intellectual Carolyn Finney (2014) has urged social scientists to develop methodologies that focus on the complex relations of representation, affect, and race that emerge across environmental movements. Even still, as many have documented, environmental movements often play out in tension with people's everyday efforts to define projects of anti-racism ( Lennon 2017 ). The efforts of our informants to “foster what they think is good” may unfold in ways that challenge anthropological understandings of how the self and its image become embedded in social worlds ( Robbins 2013 , p. 457; Stevenson 2014 ). Their attempts to integrate local knowledge into institutional strategies, global arrangements, and models of environmental change are at the center of intersectional ecological analyses of subjectivity today.

Section: CONCLUSION: TOWARD INTERSECTIONAL ECOLOGIES

We began this article by acknowledging the instability of the concept of “the environment” within anthropology in the twenty-first century. To address its own continued relevance, environmental anthropology needs to also grapple with what Crenshaw (1991) calls “process[es] of categorization” as a normative and not simply a default dimension of its practice. Crenshaw uses the term to draw attention to the relations of power that undergird how people, ideas, and things get classified and ordered. Building on Crenshaw, we see the three themes of materiality, knowledge, and subjectivity as detailing environmental anthropology's recent efforts to intersectionally examine the environment and name the sociopolitical processes that encompass it. Ultimately, our goal is not to account for the empirical validity of the concept. Rather, we consider the varied intellectual genealogies and frameworks that inform scholarly analyses. In doing so, our reading seeks to expand the field's goals to continue to develop what we have provisionally called intersectional ecologies. The notion of intersectional ecologies, as a heuristic method, pushes environmental anthropology to consider its scholarly designs, from research planning to writing, publication, collaboration, and disciplinary content, as complicit practices. Intersectional work thus begins with the way in which we formulate questions, it is made possible through reading expansively and heterogeneously, and it develops with the situated and reflexive observation of emergent environments across diverse social contexts and scales.
Our approach is not new—Black feminist scholars are quite familiar with this mode of praxis—but an intersectional approach has not been explicitly acknowledged as a critical scholarly intervention for mainstream environmental anthropology until now. This review is an initial invitation for the field. We have resigned this review to a consideration of English language texts and to scholars working and publishing within American institutions. The project remains more suggestive than exhaustive, and we have in no way included every author whose work could apply to this conversation. We are also cognizant that more themes are possible and that more themes can and should emerge from intersectional reading. Advances in recent work are not so much the result of anthropology finally acknowledging “the environment” in a singular, hegemonic sense of the term. Rather, an increasing number of scholars now grapple with rendering visible the entangled forms of creativity and structural inequity that inform epistemologies of the environment. In short, reorienting environmental anthropology around intersectionality means making intentional connections across difference. Paraphrasing Jordan (1985) , we must love, we must feel, and we must stand up together as an intentionally diverse collective of scholars.
Hence, throughout this article we have been less concerned with staking claims to theory and concepts than with removing the too-often unacknowledged borders and boundaries that delimit work on the environment. As Frazier (2020) and other Black feminist ecologists argue, any engagement with the environment must first begin by historicizing environments as geopolitical movements that apprehend the world as a certain kind of global problem ( Ferrari 2020 , Roane & Hosbey 2019 ). Intersectional ecologies is invested in promoting current and future scholars, redefining the canon, formulating research design, selecting research sites, and pursuing conceptual and theoretical analysis in environmental anthropology. It is, broadly speaking, an intervention into how we see, approach, and think environments.
Finally, intersectional ecologies is an ethical reorientation for mainstream environmental anthropology. We want to see more scholarship that can focus on the immediacy of structural violence and creative agency in the now of everyday life without resulting in dehumanizing, reductive essentialisms or facile critiques. This approach involves taking some last points into account. For one thing, the act of comparison is power-laden and demands attention to the way scholars make claims about the specificity of a given site over others to theorize the environment ( Choy 2011 , Raffles 2002 ). Relatedly, we have to be explicit about how we form our ethnographic projects about the environment. As a number of scholars have recently noted, ethnography involves diverse forms of encounter, activity, and expression (for discussion, see Pandian 2019 ). Doing ethnography of the environment should involve not only collaboration with scholars of other fields in both the arts and the sciences, but also the incorporation of their design practices into ethnography (see Murphy et al. 2012 ). We hope that this article will help to expand environmental anthropology as an ethical practice by offering an intentional space for many more scholars to engage the field on their own terms without depoliticizing inclusion, equity, justice, or the environment.

Section: disclosure statement

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

We thank Vanessa Agard-Jones, Chandra Bhimull, Jessica Cattelino, Eleana Kim, Laura Ogden, Natalie Vena, Paige West, and many others for their insights on intersectional ecologies and environmental ancestors shared during recent American Anthropological Association annual meetings. We also thank Adrian Cato for bringing “A Small Needful Fact” to our attention. Finally, we dedicate this piece to Leith Mullings, whose work has provided so much inspiration to so many.

Section: literature cited

