Title: Truths and Consequences


Section: 


Section: 

In her Perspective article for this volume of the Annual Review of Anthropology ( ARA ), Linda Fedigan reflects on some of the experiences that shaped her professional life as a biological anthropologist and primatologist. As she explains, her path in primatology was decided early on when she was an undergraduate anthropology major and discovered that she preferred conducting observational research more than interviews. This self-revelation launched her initial investigations into the social behavior of female nonhuman primates and led to a succession of increasingly refined studies of how wild female primates navigate the complex social dynamics that arise from living in groups with one another and with males.
From this brief autobiography, Fedigan deftly distills the lessons she learned as a researcher in academia into a set of what she describes as “nine truths to live by.” The comparative perspectives that nonhuman primates provide about humans (truth 7) are among the cornerstones of anthropology's comparative, multifield approach (truth 6), and they provide the intellectual continuum along which Fedigan and other anthropologically trained primatologists work.
The five truths leading up to these anthropologically focused insights pertain to the scientific process and how to navigate it. These begin with the messiness of science, as Fedigan illustrates through the lens of her first thwarted initiatives before she was able to establish a highly productive, long-term primate fieldsite in Costa Rica. She also expands on the importance of persistence (in the face of setbacks), communication skills (for publishing), flexibility in identifying interesting questions (which are often not the questions with which we start), and the purposefulness and commitment that are necessary to succeed in research in primatology and other fields. But it is in her final two truths about the importance of being willing to change our minds (truth 8) and of defining a legacy and then working toward it (truth 9) that Fedigan's article takes on a prescient timeliness, for these particular truths apply equally well to the challenges of academia and research as they do to the challenges of our times.
Fedigan wrote and submitted her article before the COVID-19 pandemic had been declared and before so many lives were lost or irrevocably altered. Her contribution also preceded the global protests about persistent racial and social injustices and the rallying cries for positive change. Yet her wise words about the uncertainties that ebb and flow throughout one's life, and about the necessity to adapt and change, resonate and speak to our capacity to meet these unanticipated contemporary challenges in actively thoughtful and effective ways.
One can find several intersections between contemporary global events of the first half of 2020 and the topics covered by many of the reviews in this volume and by both of the volume's themes, the Anthropocene and race, which were identified by the ARA Editorial Board more than two years ago. For example, the reviews by Mathews and by O'Reilly and her colleagues model ways in which distinctively anthropological sensibilities and strategies can be brought to bear on the consequences and trajectories of climate change and on our conceptualizations of the Anthropocene itself. Nading's article on “living in a toxic world” explores closely related challenges, and McGuire's piece on contemporary forced migrations also wrestles with issues of dramatic environmental change. The theme of race figures centrally in a number of this volume's reviews. Two archaeological reviews, McGuire on forced migration and Lillios on mobility and alterity, address questions of race and difference. Several sociocultural anthropology articles tackle race directly, including Navaro's exploration of research on the aftermath of mass violence and Tate's comprehensive charting of the anthropology of policy.
Crises and challenges also remind us of the truths about our biological and biocultural heritage as social beings whose survival is dependent on one another. As we adapt to the new truths and consequences of recommendations for social isolation and distancing, it is not insignificant that the only exemptions are cohabitants, who often (but not always) include either family members or caretakers or both. Some examples of these interdependencies, from different perspectives and in different contexts, can be found in reviews such as those by Nelson on the biocultural models of alloparenting in Caribbean families, by Gettler et al. on the roles of fathers and paternal care, and by Bribiescas on age and life history.
One consequence of the reality of the COVID-19 pandemic was that for the first time in the history of the ARA , the annual meeting of the Editorial Board to plan the 2022 volume was held online rather than in person. We are very grateful to our colleagues on the Editorial Board for their flexibility despite the challenges of working from home and in different time zones and to Jennifer Jongsma and the technical staff at Annual Reviews for their rapid adaptation and execution of this change in venue. As always, we thank the ARA production editor, Jennifer Mann, without whom neither the present volume nor the ones we have planned for upcoming years would be possible.
Karen B. Strier
Don Brenneis
