Title: The Aftermath of Mass Violence: A Negative Methodology


Section: 

fn1a This article is part of a special theme on Anthropocene and a special theme on Race. For a list of other articles in these themes, see https://www.annualreviews.org/toc/anthro/49/1

Section: ABSTRACT

Recent anthropological works on the aftermath of mass violence can be studied as having generated a negative methodology. New work has addressed the gaps, voids, and hollows of knowledge production in and about sites of mass atrocity and is developing novel research practices within these schisms. While considering the (im)possibility of research as the condition of possibility (as well as the question) for anthropological (and historical) work on the long durée of mass violence, this review highlights some adverse ethnographic methods that have emerged (and have been conceptualized) in the interstices. A critical positionality vis-à-vis anthropology's positive outlook for evidentiary presences in the field has moved scholars of mass atrocity and its aftermath toward methods that would tarry in and through the negative.

Section: INTRODUCTION

This review article takes into serious consideration the black holes that emerge when one tries, as an anthropological scholar, to trace mass violence through its aftermath. I focus specifically on the (im)possibilities of research in the aftermath of mass violence, when the witnesses have been exterminated and are not there to bear testimony, when the material remains of the sites of atrocity have been manipulated or washed over by perpetrator regimes and their citizens, and when denialist states place barriers before the study of their culpability (e.g., Trouillot 1995 , Cohen 2001 , Jelin 2003 , Nichanian 2009 ). How, then, ought the anthropologist approach the aftermath of mass violence as a research practice? In posing its question in this way, this article problematizes “methods” in anthropology in the study of the aftermath of politically induced mass violence.
If our professional imaginaries about “research methodologies” assume the availability, presence, and accessibility of “evidence” and propose routes toward its conceptualization and interpretation (e.g., Engelke 2009 ), how does the study of the aftermath of mass violence throw questions at this presupposition of recoverability? In this review article on the aftermath of mass violence, I draw a negative methodology, in critique of anthropological approaches that would approach “the field” in fieldwork as a reservoir for ethnographic materials that become positively researchable by the anthropologist through their visibility, tangibility, and existence (e.g., Henare et al. 2007 , Holbraad & Pedersen 2017 ). Against the assumption of the presence of evidence, I begin from an observation of its absence: its erasure, denial, misappropriation, inaccessibility, unavailability, or irretrievability in sites in the long-term aftermath of mass atrocity. This negative positionality vis-à-vis research's possibilities casts a shadow not only on the study of mass violence in its aftermath, but also on the positivism still inherent in distinct anthropological schools of thought, or on what could be called, following Gordillo (2014) , anthropology's phantasmagoria of positivity—that scientific phantasm still inherent in certain schools of anthropological thought that would imagine the world as confidently researchable in all its moments.
By placing death and the politics around it at the center of their query, the works reviewed in this article develop what could be called countermethodologies, practices against the odds of the researchable vis-à-vis lives that have been exterminated and lifeworlds that have been extinguished. What would happen to anthropological research methods if political and social death [e.g., Bargu 2016, Patterson 2018 (1982), Mbembe 2019 ] were centered in our conceptualizations and studies of the world? Emerging work on climate change and world endings (as well as pandemics) will soon be pushing our research epistemologies far afield by placing the possibility of human and planetary extinction at the heart of our imagination ( Stengers 2015 , Ghosh 2016 , Danowski & Viveiros de Castro 2017 , Lynteris 2020 ). But in this review, I attend mainly to works on the aftermath of politically induced mass violence (e.g., Hinton 2002 , Adler et al. 2009 ). What, I ask, do studies of sites of extermination and atrocity and spaces of dispossession and annihilation bring to anthropology's research imaginary, methods, and practice? To pose this question differently, what methodological position might the anthropologist take were s/he to place the (im)possibility of research in the aftermath of mass violence at the heart of her/his query? Anthropologists have recently taken cue by focusing not on presences (e.g., modes of being-in-the-world, ontologies, or futures), but on absences, erasures, traces, fragments, ruins, remnants, silences, gaps, and voids. I attend here to examples for such work which stays in the fissures, rifts, enigmas, and hollows of knowledge production after mass atrocity. Brought together into a conversation, these works on the Armenian genocide, transatlantic slavery, indigeneity vis-à-vis settler colonialism, refugees on Greek islands, Mexican migrants in the United States, the Bosnian war, the Partition of India, the Palestinian Nakba, and the Holocaust have a tremendous potential to carry the ethnographic research imaginary further afield than evidentiary knowledge making.
Addressing the aftermath of the Armenian genocide in Turkey, and under the rubric “an impossible history,” the philosopher Marc Nichanian (2002) tackles head on the challenges of research and writing in a context of annihilation. How, he asks, might it be possible to reconstruct what happened during the process of extermination (or to give a full account of the social life of Ottoman Armenians prior to the genocide of 1915), when the victims of the violence (those who were targeted) are not there to give their testimony? “No archive is available,” he writes, “except that of memory, that of the victim” (p. 13). The victims are not there, and the survivors of the genocide who continue to live under the dominion of the perpetrator state cannot provide evidence either, as there is an “interdiction of mourning” (p. 13). Grief, too, was criminalized under the denialist status quo of postgenocidal Turkey (see also Ayata 2008 ; Biner 2010 ; Erbal & Suciyan 2011 ; Bayraktar 2015 ; Ekmekçioğlu 2016 ; Parla & Özgül 2016 ; Suciyan 2016 ; Von Bieberstein 2016 , 2017a ). Drawing the question about recoverability toward one about “the archive” (and therefore about the medium of access to the time of the atrocities), Nichanian (2002) notes that “we are talking, after all, about nonexistent archives, about a nothingness of the archive” (pp. 13–14). The archives of the Committee of Union and Progress, who ordered and orchestrated the extermination of the Armenians of the Ottoman Empire in 1915, were destroyed in 1919, and though historians have made tremendous efforts to reconstruct the time of the genocide (e.g., Miller & Touryan Miller 1999 , Kévorkian 2011 , Tachjian 2017 ), the absence of this archive gravely limits these endeavors. Nichanian (2002) therefore questions the project of history as a discipline, as well as its core methodology, when that which is central to its professional practice—the archive—has been demolished as a component of genocidal violence. This makes the task of the historian impossible (p. 14; see also Ahıska 2006 ).
Following Nichanian (2009) , I argue that there is an (im)possibility in anthropological research, too, in such contexts where targeted groups of people have been exterminated and/or dispossessed from their homeland and where the world associated with them (political, economic, social, cultural, material, natural, spiritual) has been cast for annihilation along with them by being erased from contemporary spaces and obliterated from the political imagination. Studies of the aftermath of mass violence have tended to start from the premise of the possibility of reconstruction, attempting to put back together (like pieces of a puzzle that can be rendered complete) that which was lost. Here, I suggest that the beginning point must instead be the (im)possibility of research in the aftermath of annihilative violence, a condition that must, by necessity, awkwardly situate our conceptual apparatuses, methodological practices, knowledge production, and genres of writing as anthropologists. Let us begin by highlighting the situations that have rendered research impossible, and the past irretrievable, through political barriers to it, through its criminalization, through the silencing of victims who have survived the violence, or through the burning or destruction of records, as well as (and fundamentally) through the absence of the witnesses (those who did not survive the violence).
Once taken as the starting point, the (im)possibility of research enables a different imaginary for unpacking mass violence through its aftermath. In his “Theses on the Philosophy of History,” Walter Benjamin (1978) had drawn such an approach to writing about the past when finding oneself among the debris of violence. Rather than attempting to reassemble the shards into a coherent set of materials from which to craft a whole (or total) account of the violence, or to fully reconstruct the world that preceded it, Benjamin turned the leftovers themselves into his conceptual apparatus, keeping each component of the violence as a fragment of a puzzle that (against historicists’ claims) can never be completely put back together. He also highlighted the way in which an instance of the past makes itself available to us only when recognized by a contemporary concern, and then only fleetingly so, as a flash, therefore making the task of the historian necessarily situational and serendipitous. Once it can be accepted as a premise that the past that precedes the act of mass violence can come to us in only a disjointed and piecemeal, compromised way, then knowledge about that past must also be produced and represented in the status (and genre) of a fragment. Benjamin's writing (e.g., 1999) mirrored his philosophy of the debris in that he favored excerpts, quotes, aphorisms, and essays over holistic accounts, full monographs, or complete narratives. Certain anthropological studies of the aftermath of violence have already followed in Benjamin's footsteps ( Navaro-Yashin 2009 , 2012 ; Taussig 2010 ; Ladwig et al. 2012 ; Stoler 2013 ; Gordillo 2014 ; Biner 2020 ; see also Lynteris 2018 , 2020 ).
Instead of drawing out a coherent methodology for the study of the aftermath of mass violence, then, I propose a methodological pessimism . This approach to research (including field and archival work) takes the fundamental (im)possibility of its task as a premise. The lead for this negative positionality vis-à-vis research's possibilities comes from Afropessimist scholarship, or work by Black academics that has highlighted the limits of documenting the slave experience ( Hartman & Wilderson 2003 ). In her seminal article “Venus in Two Acts,” Hartman (2008) writes of slavery as “an unrecoverable past” and of attempts to write its history as “a narrative of what might have been or could have been” (p. 12). Against the grain of empiricist urges to document slavery through archival research, Hartman highlights what she calls the “incommensurability” between that commitment and the reaching of evidence about the experience of enslavement through the archive. Pointing at the massive void in documents about the slave experience—the missing slave narratives and the epistemic violence of slave owners’ records and forms of representation— Hartman (2008) notes that “the irreparable violence of the Atlantic slave trade resides precisely in all the stories that we cannot know and that will never be recovered” (p. 12). She begins, therefore, not from a research practice that would aim “to give voice to the slave, but rather to imagine what cannot be verified” (p. 12, emphasis added). Setting aside the attempt to render coherent that which cannot be grasped (or attained) through the empiricism of predominant research practices (and their epistemologies), Hartman (2008) instead sits in the tension of the “formidable obstacle or constitutive impossibility [that] defines the parameters of [her] work” on slavery (p. 12). This methodology rests in the gaps of knowledge about the experiences of the enslaved, rather than trying to fill in the emptiness or attempting to write a coherent narrative. Hartman develops new terms for this research practice that is positioned against the grain of totalizing methods that would attempt to conquer the archive through their writing: With what she calls “ narrative restraint ,” she proposes to stay in the chasms of knowledge about slavery, in a refusal to render fully commensurable this originary violence of Black experience ( Hartman 2008 , p. 12, emphasis added; see also Hartman & Wilderson 2003 ).
I take cue from this pessimistic position vis-à-vis research on the Black experience as constituted in and through slavery and its aftermath and propose to negatively remain likewise in the schisms of knowledge production in the anthropological project of writing ethnography on the aftermath of mass violence. If ethnography has been centered as the core anthropological contribution, the heart of the anthropological project, it is limited especially when presented as an act of retrieval via fieldwork of knowledge about the aftermath of mass violence. Any attempt at drawing a workable set of ethnographic methods for the study of mass violence would be problematic if directed toward a total empirical account. In its worst moments, ethnography may become a practice of writing over or filling in the gaps (by the anthropologist) of experiences of the missing that cannot be recovered. The methodological pessimism (a negative positionality with regard to research's possibilities) that I here propose instead tarries in that which cannot be fully known or completely rendered in ethnography.
In an article ( Simpson 2007 ) setting the stage for her book Mohawk Interruptus ( Simpson 2014 ), Simpson highlights the issue of “sovereignty” at the heart of the ethnographic project about indigenous communities vis-à-vis settler colonial states. Here sovereignty has to do with power over land, territory, and resources, but it is also about who has the right to access and write about indigenous communities in the aftermath of annihilative practices. Sovereignty, then, also poses a question about knowledge production in the ethnographic project within the ongoing context of mass violence. “Rather, it is my proposition,” Simpson (2007 , p. 72) writes,
that to think about “sovereignty”—a construct which is always a bestowal and as such is deeply imperfect but critical for these moments in Indigenous/Settler-State relations—is to think very seriously about needs and, basically, involves a calculus ethnography of what you need to know and what I refuse to write in.

“Refusals” sit at the heart of Simpson's work:
the ways in which Kahnawakero:non , the “people of Kahnawake,” had refused the authority of the state at almost every turn. The ways in which their formation of the initial membership code (now replaced by a lineage code and board of elders to implement the code and determine cases) was refused; the ways in which their interactions with border guards at the international boundary line were predicated upon a refusal; how refusal worked in everyday encounters to enunciate repeatedly to ourselves and to outsiders that “this is who we are, this who you are, these are my rights.” ( Simpson 2007 , p. 73, emphasis added)

But Simpson takes Kahnawake refusals on board and transforms them into a methodological consideration of “ethnographic refusal” (her term), “a refusal, or a denial within the space of ethnography” ( Simpson 2007 , p. 76).
I connect Simpson's reflections on ethnographic refusal with the methodological pessimism I here develop with regard to scholarship on and writing in the aftermath of mass violence. What is being refused is an anthropological project that would shed aside the history of settler colonial violence vis-à-vis indigenous communities in favor of (or in the interest of) producing ethnographic knowledge (and concepts) through them. Simpson's (2007) focus on refusal is a reminder about “when to stop” (p. 78) before turning the originary violence of settler colonialism into an ethnographic project that would gloss over it. I would further this discussion by suggesting that what is being refused is also a form of ethnographic representation that would attempt to render the mass violence of settler colonialism as a totalizing account, a history that can be “citable in all its moments” (to use a Benjaminian phrase; Benjamin 1978 ).
Where, then, might the anthropologist's research dwell in the aftermath of mass violence? Or, when the witnesses are missing (as are the victims of the mass violence), whither the anthropologist? Where might her/his questions reside? From a negative methodological approach, I would suggest that the anthropologist would need to locate her-/himself not in the anticipation of the presence of evidence about mass atrocity, but in the political domain of spaces where these events have been glossed over or misappropriated and where access to evidence continues to be limited, complicated, or denied.

Section: TARRYING THE NEGATIVE

In their volume An Anthropology of Absence: Materializations of Transcendence and Loss , Bille et al. (2010a) wonder why anthropology has been so oriented toward what makes itself visible, tangible, and available to the researcher in the form of evidence or ethnographic material. How, they ask, is it the case that anthropology has been so geared toward the study of what is present in the field, to the detriment of that which is absent (the invisible, the immaterial, the unstated)? Instead they chart routes and ways for the methodological (and conceptual) study of “absences”: “We wish to situate absences in everyday practice, by investigating how absences are important social, political and cultural phenomena that impinge upon people's lives” ( Bille et al. 2010b , p. 7). This volume does not address only (or directly) the aftermath of mass violence, thereby rendering the category of absence more abstract than would be my preference in relation to the historical conditions of possibility in which it emerges as a political reality. However, some of the contributions study loss as an engagement with absence, thereby developing a methodological question that resonates with the concerns of this article. Bille et al. (2010b) ask “how to study something which is gone, metaphysical in nature, deliberately or accidentally destroyed, or not yet materialised” (p. 11). From this question, we can extrapolate further on the theme of studying the aftermath of mass atrocity to wonder how, then, does one study that which has been buried from political discourse, purposefully erased from the spatiomaterial environment, or expropriated and transformed through forms of misappropriation and denial? Or, how can we study violence in its aftermath through the absences that it manifests? In resonance with the negative methodology that I draw out in this article, Fowles (2010) develops what he calls “a negative archaeology” in reference to what one might “infer from an absence of an object or category of objects from the archaeological records” ( Bille et al. 2010b , p. 11, on Fowles). The analysis indicates that “the absence of evidence is not evidence of absence” ( Bille et al. 2010b , p. 11). From this observation, we may highlight the importance of remaining with absent material and conceptual spaces especially in situations where things do not directly make themselves present to the researcher because they have been actively absented. Colonially transformed sites are full of such emptied spaces, which have been rid of their original inhabitants and redeployed for new purposes. Dwelling in absences, then, can be proposed as one negative methodology in the study of the aftermath of mass atrocity. Several anthropological works have followed this route under frameworks such as “landscapes of clearance” ( Smith & Gazin-Schwartz 2008 ), “landscapes of erasure, disappearance and exception” ( Schindel & Colombo 2014 ), “harrowed landscapes” ( Steinmetz 2008 ), “absent mourning” ( Perl 2016 ), and “remembering absence” ( Argenti 2019 ).
In her brilliant article “Anthropology and Traces,” Napolitano (2015) “argues for a renewed centrality of the trace in an anthropological study of materialities and historicities” (p. 47). Reviewing different approaches to “traces” in anthropology and social theory, Napolitano proposes “tracing” as “at once an analytical tool and an ethnographic site for inquiry.” Traces, for Napolitano (2015) , “signal the limits of representation; they are the materials of knots of histories at the margins, as well as auratic presences” (p. 47). In her ethnography of Peruvian and Ecuadorian migrants’ passages through the neighborhood of Casa del Popolo in Rome, she unpacks labor's violent histories through the traces left on migrants’ scarred bodies and the material debris of the sites of their precarious moving through (p. 57). Traces allow the anthropologist a disjointed and piecemeal reflection on that which normally falls outside the domain of representation. In asking “how can we operationalize a study of traces in anthropology?” (p. 48), Napolitano charts a negative methodology, as well, a way to study that which otherwise falls between the cracks of official histories. An attention to flashes of conversation, gaps in discourse, excesses of expression, and material remainders unravels the violent and racialized social history of Latin American labor migrants in Italy as pieces of a story that would otherwise be illegible to and unrecognizable by bourgeois forms of narrative. I take cue from Napolitano in proposing tracing as a method for doing research in the aftermath of mass violence (see also Yoneyama 1999 , Gray & Gómez-Barris 2010 ). In sites and contexts where violence has gone unrepresented or misrepresented, or where it has been washed over through a palimpsest of official launderings of information and matter, tracing—against the odds—becomes one of the only possible modes of research for the anthropologist.
Tracing has been especially taken up by anthropologists (and archaeologists) studying refugees escaping mass atrocities in their home countries and encountering further forms of violence (physical, political, legal, social) on their routes. De León's The Land of Open Graves: Living and Dying on the Migrant Trail ( 2015 ) is one such ethnography, which works with the material and physical traces of the undocumented Mexican migrants who cross the Sonoran Desert of Arizona in the hope of living in the United States. Vis-à-vis the impossibility of thoroughly capturing the stories of these migrants, thousands of whom disappear or die while crossing into and through the United States, De Leon follows the trail of objects and bodies left behind in the desert in order to create an account. He employs archaeological, photographic, and forensic methods to trace Mexican migrants’ footsteps. A volume edited by Hamilakis (2018) , The New Nomadic Age: Archaeologies of Forced and Undocumented Migration , similarly employs tracing as a method for documenting the fate of refugees who cross the Aegean, from Turkey toward the Greek islands, in search of harbor. The contributors to this volume address migration as materially (as well as sensorially and affectively) embedded, tracing migrant routes archaeologically. “The materiality of undocumented migration can also be encountered,” writes Hamilakis (2018) , “in the remnants that are left behind in the border-crossing attempts: material artefacts such as boats and dinghies, life vests, and discarded rucksacks, which are today scattered all over in regions such as the Mediterranean” (p. 9). But who is the addressee of such an archaeology of undocumented migration? Or, for whom does one do this research through material traces of migrants’ routes and failures to arrive at their ports of destination (p. 12)? While this tracing might intend to be in solidarity with the migrants [and construed at odds with the claims to documentation of modernist archaeology (p. 13)], Hamilakis also admits that it might work against the migrants’ wishes (as well as potentially replicating state practices). He therefore suggests “ an archaeology of care which valorises and activates small and seemingly insignificant material things,… an archaeology of witnessing , which objectifies neither the migrants nor the migrant material traces but foregrounds both as subjects and agents in the world” ( Hamilakis 2018 , p. 13, emphasis in original). Tracing unfolds as a research practice vis-à-vis the migrant experience, as well as potentially for the study of the aftermath of mass violence.
Studying through debris is another negative method that has been developed for the aftermath of mass violence. Here, anthropologists have been highlighting the leftovers or remains of violence, in both their tangible, material forms (such as in the shape of ruins) as well as in enduring, structural and political forms (as in postcolonial states). The volume Imperial Debris: On Ruins and Ruination edited by Stoler (2013) stands out in this research practice. Stoler and the other contributors to this volume unpack “ruination” as a concept for the analysis of the political project of empire ( Stoler 2013 , p. ix). Ruination, here, is another name for the aftermath of colonialism: the ongoing and durable effects of colonial violence after decolonization. It captures the enduring quality of the damage wrought by colonialism and develops a way to study this damage anthropologically. In Stoler's work, ruination refers to the material debris of colonialism, which can be traced in the destruction of the built and natural environment, the ruinous tangibilities left behind after colonialism; however, it is also a concept through which to study postcoloniality as a social and political form that harbors the residues of colonial violence. “We attempt to track,” writes Stoler (2013) , “ the uneven temporal sedimentations in which imperial formations leave their marks. Most important, we seek to ask how empire's ruins contour and carve through the psychic and material space in which people live and what compounded layers of imperial debris do to them” (p. 2, emphasis in original). Ruins, then, are both things (actual material objects that can be traced as the waste of empire) and metaphors (representing the ongoing legacy of colonialism) (p. 11). Several other studies have employed ruination as method (and concept) for the study of the aftermath of politically induced mass violence or war ( Navaro-Yashin 2009 , 2012 ; Dawdy 2010 ; Gordillo 2011 ; Ladwig et al. 2012 ; Kim 2016 ; Schwenkel 2017 ; Von Bieberstein 2017b ; Smith 2018 ; Biner 2020 ). It is interesting to highlight the concepts employed in these works—leftovers, remains, rubble, debris, remnants, rot, waste, decay—all referring to the imprint of mass violence in the shape of material or metaphorical ruins (also Navaro et al. 2021 ).
In his ethnography of the Argentine Gran Chaco, Rubble: The Afterlife of Destruction , Gordillo (2014) carefully distinguishes “ruins” (which in his reading harbor elite aesthetic projections of sites that would need to be preserved or turned into museums) from what he calls “rubble” (local people's subaltern way of identifying the textured affective form in which they find matter in their everyday lives) (pp. 5–6). While ruins, in this conceptualization, are sites of destruction or decay that have been tamed to be recognized by master narratives (such as those of nation-states and their heritage sites), rubble, for Gordillo, does further conceptual work. Against the positive attributions of ruins (incorporated in the tourism industry or in the official teaching of history), through rubble Gordillo (2014) develops what he calls “an object-oriented negativity” (p. 14). Unlike object-oriented ontological frameworks, which would focus on the positive and productive presence of things, their agencies and effects, transforming them into ethnographic concepts (e.g., Henare et al. 2007 ), through inspiration from Adorno and Benjamin, Gordillo (2014) approaches objects as negativities, emphasizing their embroilment in political projects of violence and destruction (p. 14). His tracing of rubble through the Argentine Gran Chaco can be sited as a negative method, among others referenced in this review: work that draws attention to the destruction underneath “capitalism's ideological phantasmagoria” (p. 6). By way of following the rubble , Gordillo unfolds (and critiques) anthropology's own conceptual and methodological positivities, too.
Tarrying through the negative as a research practice, as well, anthropologists have more recently been studying war and its aftermath by analyzing the afterlives of human remains. Further than the classical frameworks for the study of death in the life-regenerating cycles of distinct groups of people (e.g., Bloch & Parry 1982 , Danforth 1982 ), anthropologists have more recently centered the political in their studies of death. Death is now studied not as the end of human life, which can be analyzed by anthropologists through its culturally relative, variegated reception, but as constitutive of (and constituted by) the political. In distinctive recent studies, which have centered death as the primary purpose and effect of political violence, forensic methods have come to the fore (see, e.g., Weizman 2017 ). Anthropologists have been studying the setting aside or incorporation of mass graves by state practices in their body politic ( Fontein 2011 , Renshaw 2016 ). They have observed, described, and analyzed, as well, the work of forensic experts in sites of war (e.g., Wagner 2008 , Petrović-Šteger 2009 , Crossland 2018 ). Missing persons or “the disappeared,” and the enduring presence of their loss in the lives of their relatives, has also constituted the theme of important work in the ethnography of political violence ( Crossland 2000 , Sant Cassia 2005 , Gandsman 2009 , Denyer Willis 2015 ). “Haunting” has been a key ethnographic and conceptual trope in ethnographies of the war dead or the ghosts of war (e.g., Kwon 2006 , 2008 ; Carsten 2007 ; see also Gordon 2008 ).
Scholarly work on Palestine has been fundamental in developing original research practices for the study of spaces that have been dispossessed, through mass violence, of their original inhabitants, expropriated, misappropriated, and transformed. Palestinian scholars, whose access to Israeli archives that retain documents on the Nakba catastrophe of 1948 has been impossible, limited, or complicated, have had to adopt working within erasures as their research practice ( Qato 2019 ). To compile the voluminous All That Remains: The Palestinian Villages Occupied and Depopulated by Israel in 1948 , Khalidi (1992) and his team developed a methodology (incorporating field research) to document the destroyed villages of Palestine “and the events that swept them away” (p. xvii). They used the list of village names compiled by the Institute for Palestine Studies in Washington, DC, on the basis of the Palestine Index Gazetteer , checked these against the Village Statistics 1945 pertaining to the period before the Nakba, and against the Census of Palestine , the last one conducted by the British before the end of their mandate. These villages were then compared with a 1958 map produced by the Survey of Israel, as well as Israeli census records for the decades that followed ( Khalidi 1992 , pp. xvi–xviii). During their field research, Khalidi (1992) notes that “the bulldozer and the ravages of time have sometimes conspired to leave few traces” (p. xix). Erasure, therefore, was the precondition (or basis and starting point) for this field research conducted in Palestine between 1987 and 1990. And Khalidi and his team render erasure a component of the conceptualization of their research methodology. They study the erasure of Palestine by working within erasure as a research practice. Erasure is both the object of their analysis (what their project is about) and the medium of and for their research practice and methodology. Field research in an environment in Israel that was hostile to the researchers was complemented with eyewitness accounts and testimonies by Palestinians who remembered their villages by photographs, memoirs, newspapers, and other sources ( Khalidi 1992 ). The result is a manual of the Palestinian villages destroyed in 1948 compiled out of shards. Under each village name in Arabic, the volume gives a brief description of village life before 1948, of how it was occupied by Israeli forces and depopulated, and of the Israeli settlements in the village today. All That Remains powerfully renders explicit the (im)possibilities of research in spaces that have been destroyed through mass violence and fundamentally transformed through subsequent state practices. We have in hand an account of the research (the volume itself), as well as an account of the (im)possibility of research.
Anthropologists and other scholars working on Palestine (and on Palestinians in the diaspora) have tread this negative methodological path in the footsteps of Khalidi (e.g., Slyomovics 1998 , Kelly 2006 , Davis 2011 , Allan 2014 , Allen 2017 , Salih 2017 ; see also Lentin 2011 , Azoulay 2013 , Morgenstern 2019 ). In the introduction to their volume Nakba: Palestine, 1948, and the Claims of Memory , Sa'di & Abu-Lughod (2007) reflect on erasure as the base (or the condition) for Palestinian existence in exile: “If the most distinctive feature of Palestinian social memory is its production under constant threat of erasure and in the shadow of a narrative and political force that silences it, one of its most characteristic qualities…is its orientation to place” (p. 13). The contributions to this anthropological volume on the Nakba, then, work in and through erasure to render Palestinian attachments to their homeland ethnographically commensurable. Erasure is likewise the space where Abu El-Haj's (2001) research is situated, as well as being the object of her analysis of archaeological practice as a component of Israel's territorial claims over Palestine.
The ethnography of the aftermath of mass violence mobilizes questions about that which cannot be known. And in some work, the unknown has appeared in the form of supernatural beings or entities in spaces in the vicinity of atrocities. In his brilliant ethnography Waiting for Elijah: Time and Encounter in a Bosnian Landscape , HadžiMuhamedović (2018) writes of Bosnia's postwar protracted uncertainty through survivors’ attempts to connect with (or return to) the cosmological time associated with the saintly figure of Elijah (pp. 8–9). He analyzes a temporal dissonance between wartime and the sacred time of Bosnia's spiritually referenced annual cycles referencing Georgic saints. Situated in the field of Gacko, this ethnography fundamentally incorporates the unknown into its reading and analysis of timespace in the aftermath of war. Here, HadžiMuhamedović (2018) highlights the gap between what he calls a “Gacko sacroscape,” referring to life-regenerating cosmological cycles, and a “Gacko ethnoscape,” specific to the cycle of death that emerged through the war (p. 58). The supernatural holds the place for the unknown here in an ethnography that addresses the spiritual voids that mass violence creates among survivors. Taneja's (2018) Jinnealogy: Time, Islam, and Ecological Thought in the Medieval Ruins of Delhi is another excellent example of work that incorporates the supernatural in a study of the erasures and disappearances that constitute (and are constitutive of) mass violence. The space of post-Partition Delhi, and specifically the site of Firoz Shah Kotla, one of many ruinous Muslim shrines destroyed during Partition violence, forms the centerpiece of this ethnography, which focuses on people's communications with jinns that link them with a Muslim past that has been buried, violated, and attacked through the ongoing Hindu-right violence in India ( Taneja 2018 , p. 10). “The jinns,” Taneja (2018) writes, “are figures, we could say, of apotropaic mnemonics , magical figures of memory who serve as an antidote to the magical amnesia, the sleight of hand, of the postcolonial state, which makes things disappear not by keeping them out of its archives but by making them disappear within” (p. 11, emphasis in original). In this analysis of the aftermath of Partition violence in India, the jinns address the massive hollow that was created through the violation of Muslim-associated spaces in Delhi. Further such work that tackles the aftermath of mass violence via the unknown as the supernatural is out or forthcoming ( Mittermaier 2019, Biner 2020, Navaro 2021 ).

Section: CONCLUSION

Building on the massive contributions of post-Holocaust work on memory, trauma, and subjectivity ( Das et al. 2000 , La Capra 2001 , Leys 2010 , Hirsch 2012 , Caruth 2016 , Mandel & Lehr 2020 ), as well as furthering them in a distinctive way, recent anthropological works on the aftermath of mass violence can be studied as having generated a negative methodology. New work has addressed the gaps, voids, and hollows of knowledge production in and about sites of mass atrocity, as well as developing novel research practices within these schisms. While addressing the (im)possibility of research as the condition of possibility (as well as the question) for anthropological (and historical) work on the long durée of mass violence, this review has also highlighted some adverse ethnographic methods that have emerged (and have been conceptualized) in the interstices. A critical positionality vis-à-vis anthropology's positive outlook for evidentiary presences in the field has moved scholars of mass atrocity and its aftermath toward methods that would tarry in and through the negative.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

This review builds on my work in two thematically interrelated research projects. For our collaboration in the long term, I thank Zerrin Özlem Biner, Alice von Bieberstein, and Seda Altuğ of the Living with Remnants: Politics, Materiality and Subjectivity in the Aftermath of Mass Atrocities in Turkey (REMNANTS) project funded by the European Research Council (ERC). For our collaboration in the Archives of the Disappeared: Discipline and Method Amidst Ruin research network based at the Centre for Research in the Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences (CRASSH) at the University of Cambridge, I thank Mezna Qato, Hana Morgenstern, and Mahvish Ahmad.

Section: literature cited

