Title: Living in a Toxic World


Section: 

fn1a This article is part of a special theme on Anthropocene. For a list of other articles in this theme, see https://www.annualreviews.org/toc/anthro/49/1

Section: ABSTRACT

While the proliferation of industrial toxic substances over the past century has had drastic environmental and bodily effects, conventional methods of measuring and mitigating those effects continue to produce uncertainty. The project of living in a toxic world entails ethical, technical, and aesthetic efforts to understand toxicity as a contingent encounter among beings, systems, and things, rather than as a fundamental characteristic of particular substances. Anthropologists do not just observe such encounters; they live and work within them. This review examines recent anthropological research on toxicity, proposing that responses to toxic disaster and occupational exposure, as well as acts of familial, state, or corporate care, are all modes of “toxic worlding.” The review concludes with a summary of recent research in collaborative and engaged anthropology, suggesting that such approaches are essential not so much for purifying or detoxifying the world as for making it otherwise.

Section: INTRODUCTION

There is no escaping the toxic world. To write this review, I have used no fewer than four personal computing devices. Each contains toxic heavy metals, gases, and powders. My office is faintly perfumed with dissolving toner from thousands of pages of printouts. I wrote this review while working in a research institute named for the man who once led the American computer giant IBM. IBM helped shape the global information economy, and its machines became so essential that office buildings were redesigned to accommodate them and the growing army of underpaid clerical workers, most of them women, who operated them ( Murphy 2006 ). Today, the village of Endicott, New York, IBM's former headquarters, is a Superfund site, one of some 40,000 places in the United States where the impact of industrial harm is monitored and mitigated by the Environmental Protection Agency ( Little 2014 ). As those women workers found out, many of those office buildings turned out to contain dangerous levels of toxic adhesives, gases, and fibers ( Murphy 2006 ). Computers and offices are apt places to begin an exploration of the toxic world, both because of the materials that compose them and because of how essential they are to the circulation of toxic assets, toxic masculinity, and other metaphorical poisons through late industrial life.
With the possible exception of mean average annual temperature rise, the saturation of the biosphere with toxic substances is the most notable reminder of the lasting human impact on Earth. Industrial disasters like Bhopal ( Fortun 2001 ) and Chernobyl ( Petryna 2002 ) illustrated this impact in dramatic fashion. A more pervasive and ongoing, if less dramatic, “slow violence” ( Nixon 2011 ) is also occurring, thanks to the underregulation of nuclear waste in Richland, Washington, and Ozersk, Russia ( Brown 2013 ); petrochemical pollution in Louisiana's “cancer alley” ( Allen 2003 ) and Ontario's “chemical valley” ( Jackson 2011 , Murphy 2013 ); and the exposure of farmworkers and others to agrochemicals ( Bohme 2015 , Hamdy 2013 ). Rachel Carson's ( 1962 ) alarming descriptions of the biological effects of pesticides like dichloro-diphenyl-tricholorethane (DDT), published in Silent Spring , helped galvanize environmentalists around the goal of protecting every being on the planet from toxic destruction. For some, that aspiration remains, but the toxic world is defined by a vexing patchiness. The respective experiences both of African mining communities with radioactive uranium ( Hecht 2012 ) and of Chernobyl victims with nuclear meltdown ( Petryna 2002 ) are part of a planetary story, but in many ways they are incommensurable. Whether due to histories of racialization and settler colonialism ( Checker 2005 , Hoover 2017 , Powell 2018 ), the legal and political insulation of corporate polluters from effective prosecution ( Kirsch 2014 , Sawyer 2004 ), or the logics of militarism ( Lyons 2016 , Johnston 2007 , Masco 2006 ), some have been intoxicated to a greater degree than others. The chemical saturation of the world is engendering a multitude of chemosocialities, whereby intoxication forms the basis for nonbiological modes of kinship, new forms of artistic expression, and interspecies solidarity ( Shapiro & Kirksey 2017 ).
Chemosociality is largely a product of twentieth-century technoscience, but when it comes to explaining how toxicants actually alter biological life, conventional scientific methods based on the quantitative calculation of risk are strikingly limited ( Fortun 2012 , Langston 2010 , Murphy 2006 , Nash 2006 ). What toxicity actually is is elusive. The effects of inorganic chemicals, metals, or gases on organisms vary depending on dosage, the presence of other organic and inorganic substances, and genetic and nutritional factors. Toxicity emerges in the situated biologies and ecologies of particular bodies and places, but the particulars add up to a global pattern of harm, one linked to white supremacy, colonialism, and economic exploitation ( Lock 2017 ).
Sometimes, toxic e ffects seem more like a ffects. Toxicity is often smelled, tasted, and felt by people living “downstream” more readily than it is seen from the detached vantage point of industrial engineers ( Murphy 2008 , Wylie 2018 ). This means that toxicity is never just an empirical characteristic of one or another substance. Though it may be a form of pollution, as first theorized in symbolic anthropology [ Douglas 2000 ( 1966 )], toxicity is not very useful as an abstract philosophical idea. It is perhaps best approached as what feminist theorist Sara Ahmed (2017 , p. 13) calls a “sweaty” concept, one born out of a “description of the world from the point of view of not being at home in it.” Empirically, toxicity is both “a condition of modern life and the substance of ethical engagement” ( Langwick 2017 , p. 420). This review's title, “Living in a Toxic World,” then, alludes to the process of both being affected and learning to affect in return ( Liboiron et al. 2018 , Murphy 2017 ). Following disability scholar Mel Chen (2012) , I call this process “toxic worlding.” Chen proposes this term specifically to describe their own phenomenological methodology, which links their experience of mercury toxicity to broader questions about the difficulty of medically “objectifying” such conditions. My usage of the term builds on Chen's (2012 , p. 196) observation that, given the uncertainty that surrounds toxicity, “toxic methodology … in some ways inherits anthropology's question about what can be done to respond to crises of objectivity.”
The next three sections of this review discuss three overlapping modes of toxic worlding: disaster, labor, and care. The fourth section brings attention to recent research—much of it avowedly queer, feminist, decolonial, and/or antiracist—that endeavors not only to document or theorize toxic worlds as they are but also to help construct them otherwise. While this review touches on human biology and reproduction, my coverage of those topics is not as thorough as some readers might hope. For an up-to-date look at this conversation, see Lappé et al. (2019) .
As this preamble has hopefully made clear, I am limiting this review to relatively recent anthropological engagements with the inorganic products of industrial engineering and extractive industry. This means that nuclear material, heavy metals, and petrochemical effluents are on the table, while foodborne pathogens, alcohol, drugs, and tobacco are not. Inorganic industrial substances are essential to global capitalism, but toxic anthropology is not well suited to a linear commodity chain analysis of the kind that runs from extraction to production to disposal ( Murphy 2008 ). Even acute toxic disasters, to which I now turn, raise questions about what came “before” and how the “next” might be otherwise.

Section: DISASTER AND TOXIC WORLDING

Disasters are punctuated moments, but it would be a mistake to see explosions, spills, and leaks as origin points for a toxic world ( Fortun 2012 ). Toxic disaster demands an open-ended search for new lexical and technical devices, legal frameworks, and aesthetic forms ( Barrios 2017 ). In the opening of her monograph on how the 1984 leak of deadly methyl isocyanate gas from Union Carbide's Bhopal pesticide plant shaped environmental politics, Kim Fortun (2001) argues that the accident did not happen to already established groups of stakeholders, be they government officials, urban residents, environmental activists, or corporate leaders. Instead, these groups continued to rearrange themselves into a heterogeneous array of enunciatory communities. Enunciatory communities do not preexist toxic events; they emerge in the effort to confront the double binds produced by them. Fortun (2001 , p. 14) adapts Bateson's concept of the double bind to account for two competing demands: the need to render claims of harm in their particularity and the obligation to articulate the broader, temporally and spatially cross-cutting systems in which those claims are nested.
The so-called biological citizens that emerged in the aftermath of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster and the dissolution of the Soviet Union a few years later found themselves sorting through a double bind as well ( Petryna 2002 ). To portray oneself as a sufferer was to call attention to one's proximity in time and space to the meltdown, as well as to invoke one's position in a broader Soviet and post-Soviet history and political economy ( Kuchinskaya 2014 , Stawkowski 2016 ). The fact that even after the meltdown, scientists could identify “no specific illness for radiation” in humans ( Petryna 2002 , p. 233), and that techniques for measuring and defining exposure were being refined in the midst of the aftermath ( Petryna 2002 , p. 120), only amplified the sense that, to borrow another phrase from Bateson via Fortun (with a hat-tip to Shakespeare), “time is out of joint” ( Fortun 2001 ).
Writing about research on the effects of radiation in the aftermath of the US nuclear attacks on Japan during World War II and the 2011 triple meltdown at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant, Lisa Onaga (2018 , p. 267) invokes the Japanese concept of genba (現場), a term resulting from the combination of the Chinese characters for “now” and “place,” to denote “a site of action” ( Onaga & Wu 2018 ). Genba enables an exploration of how “an incident at a physical place crystallizes a less than concrete conceptual space of knowledge production” ( Onaga 2018 , p. 267). The exclusion zone created around Chernobyl has become the locus of experimental attempts to contain nuclear material as well as to learn about radiation's effects on more-than-human ecosystems ( Brown 2019 , Petryna 2013 ). Japanese and US nuclear landscapes are similar kinds of ecological laboratories ( Allison 2013 , Masco 2008 , Sternsdorff-Cisterna 2015 ), as is the Gulf of Mexico, where the toxic chemical Corexit ® was used to disperse crude oil after the BP Deepwater Horizon spill ( Bond 2013 , Yusoff 2017 ). The attempt to contain toxic vapors from industrial accidents or waste incineration ( Ahmann 2018 , Choy 2011 , Little 2014 ); the legal battle to limit the impact of postconsumer waste on the enjoyment of private property ( Reno 2016 ), or of military waste on the exercise of territorial sovereignty ( Reno 2020 ); Tanzanian healers’ use of herbal medicines to combat toxicity ( Langwick 2017 ); and the ongoing work of repairing human–nonhuman relations in the context of settler colonialism can all be usefully analyzed as experimental endeavors ( Hoover 2017 , Montoya 2017 , Todd 2017 ). A range of aesthetic genres related to nuclear disaster, from the institutional work of preparedness ( Masco 2006 ) to the visual contemplation of insects mutated by radiation ( Raffles 2010 ) to sociodramatic political action ( Krupar 2013 ), could also be included in an inventory of experiments in postdisaster toxic worlding. Like medical research on human survivors at Bhopal ( Sunder Rajan 2016 ), Hiroshima, or Chernobyl ( Goldstein & Stawkowski 2015 ), ecological and aesthetic experiments raise questions about what counts as nature, what counts as health, and indeed what counts as toxic in the first place. Time is always out of joint in these experiments. They are attempts both to recall what just happened and to anticipate what might happen next.
Here it is worth noting the range of ways that the body–environment interface has been framed across scientific contexts. American occupational hygiene, for example, had by the 1960s and 1970s given way to a more dynamic environmental toxicology that understood ecologies outside the individual organism as subjects of health ( Nash 2006 ), eventually integrating genetic and epigenetic perspectives ( Fortun & Fortun 2005 , Lock 2017 ). American genetics stood in stark contrast to the Lysenkoist tradition that shaped the official Soviet (and later Ukrainian) response to the Chernobyl catastrophe ( Goldstein & Stawkowski 2015 ; Petryna 2002 , pp. 119–21). Elaborated in the early Soviet period, a Lysenkoist conception of the body–environment relationship denied genetic natural selection as a driver of evolutionary change in favor of a crypto-Lamarckian conception of acquired characteristics. More recently, the genba concept has shaped multidisciplinary responses to toxic disasters in Asia, where experimental responses to disasters have moved beyond natural science to include artistic and dramatic expression ( Onaga & Wu 2018 ).

Section: LABOR AS TOXIC WORLDING

Each year, occupational injuries cause more than two million deaths worldwide, twice as many as malaria ( Sellers & Melling 2012 , p. 402). Historian Brett Walker (2010 , p. 17) uses the term Homo sapiens industrialis to denote how the “simplification” of environments to facilitate the flows of capital and materials has also eased the flow of toxicants through bodies. The laboring body is both a mechanism of toxic worlding and a toxic world unto itself.
Just think about the alarmingly high rates of mercury poisoning among artisanal miners ( Jacka 2018 , p. 67; Worl 2019 ). Many of the precious metals extracted in formal and informal mining operations make their way into consumer electronics, from computers to televisions to solar panels. Despite restrictions on the export of such e-waste, many such items make their way to dumps in the Global South, either through recycling schemes or through humanitarian donations. E-waste is now the terrain of a growing and largely unregulated economy of resource recovery. In Ghana, for example, workers burn and break open electronics to access the valuable metals inside, exposing themselves to methyl mercury as well as a number of volatile and carcinogenic chemicals ( Akese & Little 2018 ). Yet the toxicity of waste and mining labor is not simply a matter of occupational risk management ( Little 2019 , Reno 2016 ). The direct poisoning of African bodies in these economies cannot be disaggregated from the more generalized (and only partly metaphorical) toxicity of what Danny Hoffman (2017) calls, following Achille Mbembé (2002) , an “African present” burdened by histories of slavery, apartheid, and racial capitalism ( Chari 2013 ).
Consider also the issue of radiation-related illness among African uranium miners ( Hecht 2012 ). Although there would be no nuclear energy or weapons without African miners, national and transnational regulatory bodies tasked with tracing the circulation of what Gabrielle Hecht (2012) terms “nuclear things” have systematically excluded primary uranium extraction. Even after the formal demise of apartheid in South Africa and Namibia, mine workers’ unions face considerable obstacles in establishing a link between exposure to radon and the risk of cancer, in part because national historic cancer registries are inadequate or nonexistent ( Hecht 2012 , p. 317; Livingston 2012 ). In the nuclear world, the question is not whether workers’ bodies will be exposed to dangerous levels of toxicity, but rather how much exposure is acceptable, and for whom—the level of “necessary wounding” ( Cram 2016 , p. 522) that is required for business to proceed as usual.
Toxicology is a relatively new field, and ethnographic research in Peru ( Graeter 2017 ), China ( Lamoreaux 2016 ), and Senegal ( Tousignant 2018 ) illustrates how history and place matter to the ethical and technical orientations of laboratory labor. Wherever the studies take place, finding the exact causes of respiratory or heart disease, metabolic disorders, neuromuscular problems, or cancers, either with retrospective epidemiological studies that measure exposure in humans or with laboratory studies that correlate dose to harm in animal models, is notoriously tricky ( Hecht 2012 , p. 41; Langston 2010 ; Nash 2006 ). The perceptibility of exposure is the outcome of unequal historical and economic processes ( Murphy 2006 , p. 7). This unevenness has been painfully felt, for example, during the US-led war on drugs in Colombia ( Lyons 2016 , 2018 ) or during the second Indochina war ( Gammeltoft 2014 ). Long after the start of the US-led invasions in the Middle East, farmers continue to endure slow forms of chemical toxicity ( Rubaii 2018 ). A poorly understood Gulf War syndrome among returning soldiers has been linked to toxic exposure ( Kilshaw 2010 ), and the burn pits used to dispose of inorganic wastes have been blamed, albeit inconclusively, for a variety of ailments ( MacLeish & Wool 2018 ).
The only surefire way to grasp the occupational impact of toxicants is to measure exposure during the labor process itself. This makes industrial management a kind of natural experiment in environmental health. As Michelle Murphy (2006) illustrates in her history of workplace exposure in twentieth-century American office buildings, questions about ventilation and the physical layout of desks, machines, and plants helped make certain forms of toxicity perceptible, even as these same processes systematically privileged the safety and comfort of white, male bodies. In both offices and agricultural settings, women and racialized workers have undertaken their own counterexperiments to turn their experiences of embodied harm into actionable social and political facts ( Murphy 2006 , Nash 2006 ). Around the time of the publication of Silent Spring ( Carson 1962 ), the United Farm Workers in the United States put “worker health and safety,” particularly pesticide exposure, at the top of its list of priorities, ahead even of collective bargaining rights ( Nash 2006 , p. 162). Soon after that, US women workers’ movements added indoor air quality to equal pay in their list of concerns ( Murphy 2006 ).
A novel sense of toxic temporality was central to these struggles. In office and farm workers’ reckonings of harm, single doses of single poisons in single locations mattered less than small, repeated doses of multiple poisons in multiple places. This raised the possibility that what was “sick” in both air-conditioned office buildings and vast rural monocultures was an ecology rather than a body ( Murphy 2006 , Nash 2006 ). Nevertheless, the gendered and racialized violence of American labor persists. Farmworkers continue to toil in pesticide-laden “extreme environments” ( Saxton 2015 ), more akin in some ways to blast zones than to peaceful, pastoral countryside ( Horton 2016 , Quesada et al. 2011 ).
Many pesticides that are now banned or tightly restricted in the United States and Europe remain on the menu for agribusinesses operating in the Global South ( Agard-Jones 2013 , Bohme 2015 , Nading 2017 ), but pesticides are not simply elements of industrial landscapes. While products like glyphosate (better known in its commercial formulation as Roundup) have helped industrial monocultures thrive as never before, their integration into the global agricultural economy has had devastating results for small farmers. In Colombia ( Lyons 2016 ), Paraguay ( Hetherington 2013 ), India ( Münster 2012 , Sethi 2017 , Stone 2007 ), and Sri Lanka ( Widger 2015 ), these effects include acute bodily injury as well as land loss, deskilling, mounting levels of debt, and epidemic levels of suicide. Farmers are not alone. The promissory, speculative, and secretive nature of extractive industry, for example, has had a similar impact ( Pearson 2017 , Willow & Wylie 2014 ). As Sara Wylie (2018) describes, the business of extracting natural gas by hydraulic fracturing (or fracking) makes extensive use of low-skilled, migrant, and short-term labor, creating its own cycles of debt, land loss, and psychological harm.

Section: TOXIC CARE

The poisoned, impoverished, clinically depressed worker is just one manifestation of Walker's (2010) Homo sapiens industrialis . The relatively affluent consumer is another ( MacKendrick 2018 ). Pesticides make reliably consistent (if not always flavorful and nutritious) food available to those who can afford it in quantities that could scarcely have been imagined half a century ago ( Guthman 2019 ). Chemicals in food, cosmetics, building materials, and even furniture have been linked to obesity, cancers, changes in the microbiome, and metabolic disease ( Guthman 2011 , Hamdy 2013 , Langston 2010 , Singer & Baer 2009 , Shapiro 2015 ).
The everyday toxicants found in homes permeate into or are insulated from bodies through acts of care ( Altman et al. 2011 ). Among working-class Mexican women, a preference for serving traditional foods on lead-glazed dishes has been linked by exposure scientists to high blood lead levels ( Roberts & Sanz 2018 ). The lead levels in some common Mexican glazes have increased as rural poverty and inequality deepen and ceramicists turn to lower-grade fuels for their kilns ( Pérez et al. 2010 ). In a less “traditional” vein, plastic toys, containers, and packages contain a variety of additives of varying degrees of toxicity ( Liboiron 2016 ). These are released through processes not only of irresponsible disposal but also of caring or economically frugal activity, such as when plastic is used to serve, store, and package food or when it is burned for cooking fuel ( Pathak & Nichter 2019 ). Attention to care blurs the divide between biological toxicity and metaphorical toxicity, as Chen (2012) argues in their analysis of US racial anxieties around popular Chinese-made children's toys alleged to have been decorated with lead-based paint.
Ethnographic attention to the entanglement of care and toxicity reveals a troubling downscaling of responsibility for managing industrial harms ( Shapiro 2015 ). For example, Alison Kenner (2018 , p. 20), in a study of asthma in the United States, shows how persons with breathing problems are explicitly and implicitly encouraged to care for themselves through the purchase and use of inhalers and the adoption of strict domestic cleaning regimens. This emphasis on personal responsibility artificially separates the day-to-day management of the disease from macrolevel investigation of its causes. Even when studies suggest a connection between pesticides and diabetes ( Moran-Thomas 2019 ) or between household chemicals and cancers ( Jain 2013 ), self-discipline continues to pervade medical advice. In an ethnographic meditation on cancer, Lochlann Jain (2013 , p. 186) highlights the racial and classed overtones here. While the embodied impacts of lead or mercury might be unevenly borne by Black, Brown, impoverished, or otherwise marginalized populations, cancer's seemingly democratic spread produces a linguistic and discursive dissonance (or scalar mismatch, or double bind) between individual and environment, responsible citizen and pastoral state. Elizabeth Roberts (2017) explains how working-class residents of one Mexico City colonia managed to negotiate this dissonance. They saw the association of their home neighborhood with violence, unappealing odors, and industrial toxicity as partially beneficial, insofar as it insulated them from both harassment and repression by police and the responsibilizing, moralizing gaze of public health authorities.
Even communicable disease has been domesticated in this way. In the 1960s, the pesticide DDT was applied to control disease-carrying mosquitoes on streets and in homes. The DDT-based global malaria eradication campaign probably reduced human acquired immunity and hastened mosquito resistance to pesticides. Yet despite its global ambition, the campaign failed to make its way into most of Africa ( Packard 2007 ). By the 1980s, DDT usage was far less common in public health. Mosquito control began being carried out by low-paid, part-time, or even volunteer community health workers. These workers often use pesticides or repellents against domestic mosquitoes with no personal protective equipment ( Kelly et al. 2017 , Nading 2017 ). They must present themselves as engaged, caring agents of the state if they hope to convince homeowners to allow those chemicals into their homes ( Kelly & Lezaun 2014 , Nading 2017 ).
From Hungary ( Harper 2005 ) to Puerto Rico ( Dietrich 2013 ) to Uruguay ( Renfrew 2018 ), toxicity has become a terrain for defining the parameters of corporate care and, by extension, for conceptualizing community in relation to capital. Feelings of communal abandonment amid cycles of postindustrial rust and revitalization, for example, are often evoked by the absent sights and smells of toxic emissions ( Ahmann 2019 , Fennell 2015 , Povinelli 2017 ). While corporations that emit toxic substances can act with cynicism and even hostility toward their critics ( Kirsch 2014 , pp. 159–87; Oreskes & Conway 2010 ), anthropology has moved beyond facile critiques of corporate social responsibility as greenwashing to illustrate a more complex set of exchanges and negotiations. Marina Welker's (2014) study of the Newmont mining corporation in Indonesia describes elaborate demonstrations in which the company invited local people to drink, touch, and otherwise interact with mine tailings, ostensibly to prove that they were harmless. While working to symbolically establish the safety of its effluents, the company funded non-mine-related environmental interventions that demonized local practices, such as the consumption of sea turtle eggs ( Welker 2014 , p. 217). In Peru, Fabiana Li (2015 , p. 21) observed that the effects of mining (much of it by Newmont) on the quality of water and soil turned out to be as uncertain as the value mining added to the economy or deducted from nature ( Li 2015 , p. 22; Ferry & Ferry 2017 ). There, Newmont attempted to replace polluted water in an irrigation canal used by farmers with water that was clean by regulatory standards, but this exchange of two kinds of water (and the assumption that they were equivalent in the first place) did not account for the ways in which extractive activity fundamentally altered people's relationship to canals and rivers, relationships that were enveloped kinship idioms ( Li 2015 , p. 171).
The construction of socioenvironmental equivalence ( Li 2015 ) is one modality of corporate care, but it is nested among others, perhaps most prominently the risk management and mitigation approach that has guided IBM's attempts to contain the carcinogenic toxic plume left beneath the village of Endicott, New York ( Little 2014 ). After Endicott became a Superfund site, a corporate community built around a Fordist ethic of industrial progress marked by a faster, more efficient production of computers was remade as a “mitigation landscape,” a space devoted to a different sort of progress: a faster, more efficient management of harm ( Little 2014 , 2017 ). This is not to say that residents of Endicott or Le Roy, New York ( Goldstein & Hall 2015 ), or of Louisiana's chemical corridor ( Allen 2003 , Ottinger 2013 ), or China's “cancer villages” ( Wahlberg 2018 ), or other contaminated sites are sure about what toxicants are actually doing to them. But what Javier Auyero & Débora Swistun (2009) call “toxic uncertainty” is only partly a response to the inconclusive science around the mechanism of intoxication. Uncertainty is also only partly a product of the “labor of confusion” performed by corporations and states ( Auyero & Swistun 2009 , p. 144). Equally important, they argue, is how community members’ perceptions of toxic risk (or safety) are “anchored” in place-based social relationships ( Auyero & Swistun 2009 , p. 144).
In the port of Callao, where much of Peru's lead is stored before being loaded onto cargo ships, exposed residents have long been given—and, indeed, have long sought—monetary compensation by multinational companies in exchange for not pursuing protest or legal actions ( Graeter 2020 ). Such exchanges, as Stefanie Graeter suggests, can make residents seem complicit in toxic extractivism, but the fact that these exchanges persist also reveals lingering “corporate vulnerabilities” that could signal the potential emergence of “other ethical grammars,” new ways of thinking about what constitutes a just relationship between human economies, human bodies, and toxic minerals ( Graeter 2020 ). Attention to that potential might make it possible to push back against a tendency in popular and ethnographic writing to equate toxicity with crisis. Joe Masco (2017) traces that equation through the parallel emergence of Cold War nuclear anxieties and late industrial chemical saturation. Despite the damage, Masco (2017 , p. S75) urges scholars working amid nuclearity and chemical toxicity to look for the forms of care and tempered optimism (if not outright hope) that animate collective actions.

Section: A TOXIC WORLD OTHERWISE

Perhaps the first step in imagining a different world is to speak plainly about what the world is now. Recent events in Flint, Michigan, where improper treatment of drinking water by public authorities led to mass lead poisoning, have been analyzed both as an acceleration of “racial necropolitics” through the neglect of infrastructure ( Anand et al. 2018 , p. 2) and as a platform for reasserting a global human right to water ( Gaber 2019 ). For indigenous people, who continue to bear a disproportionate burden of global toxicity, the destruction of bodies and environments is simply a perpetuation of (settler) colonial violence ( Murphy 2017 ). This gives them good reason to question not only the intentions of corporations and states but also the social, legal, and toxicological reasoning that undergirds much mainstream environmentalism and, indeed, much social theory ( Hoover 2017 , Montoya 2017 ). Theorizing that stops at highlighting the “lively,” agentive capacities of carbon, uranium, and petrochemicals (e.g., Bennett 2010 ) risks silencing indigenous perspectives, from which an understanding of the geological or mineral world as inert never did make much sense ( Povinelli 2016 ). Zoe Todd (2017) summarizes this point by reflecting on an oil spill in the North Saskatchewan River. She questions a settler colonial discourse that all too easily oscillates between treating fossil fuels as dangerous forms of pollution and seeing them as natural resources for capitalist accumulation. The “fossil” in fossil fuels indexes their more significant status as the remains of nonhuman kin. From this perspective, the mammals, reptiles, and fish who “made life” and “made worlds” for the inhabitants of Saskatchewan's extractive landscapes must be cared for, not demonized or commodified ( Todd 2017 , p. 104).
In environmental science, insect, plant, animal, and fish populations have been couched less often as kin than as biosentinels whose fates signal the looming human impact of toxicity ( Masco 2008 , Petryna 2013 ). The animal-as-sentinel trope is foundational to environmentalist “toxic discourse” ( Buell 1998 ), yet from queer, feminist, or decolonial perspectives, it is overly simplistic ( Alaimo 2010 , Chen 2012 , Di Chiro 2010 ). Scientific accounts of how endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) provoke “gender switching” in animals, for example, have been popularly associated with a threat to “normal” human bodies. This association has not been universal. [The reaction to the impact of EDCs on fish in China, for instance, is quite distinct ( Lamoreaux 2019 ).] Talk of EDC exposure and interspecies gender nonconformity risks deepening the marginalization of bodies already marked as abnormal due to sexuality, race, or disability ( Davis 2015 ). In Martinique, queer folks have become entangled in the island's ongoing struggles with exposure to the pesticide chlordéchone ( Agard-Jones 2013 ). Vanessa Agard-Jones's (2013 , p. 190) writing on chlordéchone and sexuality outlines a theoretical and an activist perspective that “[takes] anxieties about environmental estrogens seriously while refusing a retrenchment into heteronormative fantasies about ‘normal’ bodies.”
The environmental justice (EJ) movement, which links environmental degradation to white supremacy, sexism, and class inequality, has had a love–hate relationship with toxicological science, in part because of this normalizing tendency ( Bullard 2000 ; Fortun & Fortun 2005 , p. 50; Pellow 2007 ). Anthropologists have helped to develop a popular epidemiology, in which EJ activists collect exposure data ( Brown 2007 , Hoover 2017 , Ottinger 2013 ) and use them as leverage to force regulators and corporations to undertake the “undone science” ( Frickel et al. 2010 ) of accounting for harm. Popular epidemiology is not only citizen science; it is also avowedly political. In many cases, it has done less to definitively prove harm than to highlight the limited capacity of conventional scientific methods to address social injustice ( Boudia & Jas 2014 ). For example, while raw air quality samples collected by community activists can capture acute spikes in toxic particulate levels, these spikes often lose their explanatory power when amassed into long-term averages that fit beneath legal thresholds ( Frickel et al. 2010 , Matz et al. 2017 ). Elizabeth Hoover (2017 , p. 165) has collaborated with Mohawk EJ activists living in a Superfund site to develop a community-based epidemiology that, among other things, works to account for the fraught meanings of “citizenship” in Native American contexts. The political relationship between citizenship and science arose again during the extended protests against the Dakota Access Pipeline at Standing Rock, North Dakota, where indigenous groups gathered to make claims to both sovereignty and intergenerational harm at the hands of extractive petrochemical industries ( Dhillon & Estes 2016 ).
Despite the many limitations of toxicology, Kim Fortun & Michael Fortun (2005) encourage anthropologists and activists to adopt friendly rather than adversarial relations with toxicologists. In this spirit, Fortun, Fortun, and others developed The Asthma Files (see https://www.theasthmafiles.org ), an open-source online space that encourages collaboration through the “looping” of toxicological, ethnographic, activist, and other “thought styles.” The files are organized in a place-based fashion, but the platform encourages reading and discussion across sites, as a way of working through the knowledge gaps that beset nearly all efforts to address toxicity ( Fortun et al. 2014 ). In different ways, the decades-long Minamata Studies project in Japan ( Stolz 2018 ) and Roberts & Sanz's (2018) recent bioethnography of toxic exposure in Mexico City develop similar alliances. Projects like the Civic Laboratory for Environmental Action Research (see https://civiclaboratory.nl/ ), the Endocrine Disruption Exchange ( Wylie 2018 ), and the Public Laboratory for Open Science and Technology (see https://publiclab.org/ ) aim to extend the reach of popular epidemiology by using environmental monitoring devices not only to produce data but also to give differently positioned publics tools for rending the single bind between industry and regulation. This sort of friendship is potentially transformative in part because, as Wylie (2018) notes, corporate science has a “synoptic” quality. The collection of seismic data about the relative richness of petroleum reserves, or actuarial estimates about the risks of toxic accidents, enables decision making that is detached from the lived experiences of communities that might be affected by activities like hydraulic fracturing ( Wylie 2018 , p. 288). The use of data collection to highlight the experiences of those whose chemical sensitivity makes them unusually “attuned” ( Shapiro 2015 ) to harm can give flesh to polluting activities and push back against the smoothing out of standard impact statements ( Wylie 2018 , p. 283).
The collaborative projects mentioned above are nearly all North America based. Collaboration across thought styles requires stable electrical, educational, and transportation infrastructures. In places where these do not exist, more spectacular modes of enactment, including toxic tourism, film and storytelling, and public demonstrations, are frequently the only means of garnering attention from environmentalists, news media, and lawyers ( Bohme 2015 , Kirsch 2014 , Povinelli 2017 , Sawyer 2004 ). Amelia Fiske's (2018) research on the ongoing legal and political effort to confront the Chevron (formerly Texaco) Corporation's pollution of the Ecuadorian Amazon illustrates some of the advantages and challenges of these spectacular approaches, which often tend to focus on embodied exposure. Not all bodies relate to toxicity in the same way ( Chen 2012 ; Fiske 2018 , p. 391), and while bodily dramatization can effectively “contaminate” attempts by states and industries to ignore continued suffering, as it has in Bhopal ( Banerjee 2013 ; see also Das 1995 ), an emphasis on bodily harm risks ignoring the ways in which toxicity ramifies beyond the individual to socioecological relationships ( Fiske 2018 , p. 407; see also Checker 2007 ; Hoover 2017 ; Lyons 2016 , 2018 ).
Fiske and others invoke Nixon's (2011) concept of slow violence to name these extrabodily forms of harm. Acts of toxic spectacle are effective in part because they travel quickly through transnational advocacy networks, seemingly compressing the spatiotemporal distance between emission and harm. In several cases, such direct action has helped legal cases make their way to court. Once in the legal system, however, toxic violence has a tendency to slow back down. The ongoing Ecuadorian suit against Chevron ( Cepek 2018 , Sawyer 2012 ), the legal claims of the Yonggom people against Papua New Guinea's Ok Tedi Mine ( Kirsch 2014 ), and the suit against Dole by Central American banana workers injured by the pesticide dibromochloropropane ( Bohme 2015 ) have all been beset by temporal problems. The pace of discovery, court proceedings, and appeals is slow. Initial rulings can be reversed, different jurisdictions can offer conflicting or parallel rulings, and even rulings against polluters can come too late to save human and nonhuman lives.
Writing about the mining industry, Stuart Kirsch (2014 , pp. 188–90) suggests that it is not only the slow pace of jurisprudence but also the spatial politics of transnational organizing that hampers efforts to curb toxic harm. Kirsch advocates a “new politics of time,” in which activists and indigenous people work to stop potential damage before it starts through education, popular consultation, and other actions. Law still has a role to play here. Suzana Sawyer (2012 , p. 131) describes rulings by Ecuadorian judges that compelled Chevron to make amends despite indeterminacy about the toxicity of crude oil. Key to the politics of time is the capacity of activists, lawyers, and others to turn indeterminacy from a “political impediment” into a source of “political possibility” ( Yusoff 2017 , p. 76).
There are no fixed rules for how this temporal politics might work. In Curtis Bay, Baltimore, Chloe Ahmann (2018) joined EJ activists in “working time,” by both slowing things down (causing delays in the legal permitting of a garbage incinerator) and speeding them up (turning “morally punctuated” moments like the acquittal of the police officers whose abuse led to the death of Freddie Gray, a Black Baltimore resident, into catalysts for environmental action). Those still affected by the gas leaks at Bhopal have used hunger strikes—punctuated disruptions of bodily rhythms—to question an official history that sutures corporate indemnity to national development and consigns the disaster to the past ( Banerjee 2013 ). In Ambler, Pennsylvania, collaborative theatrical presentations prompted residents to consider their historical relationship to asbestos and the industries that produced it ( Shapiro et al. 2017 ).
In all these cases, anthropologists and their partners are pushing beyond the immediate issue of exposure to, as Nick Shapiro et al. (2017 , p. 586) put it, ask “the question before the question.” They are not (or not only) forensically unpacking the decisions and regulatory structures that gave rise to given toxic moments; they are also mining that prehistory for alternative ways of understanding the present. In many ways, of course, this is what toxic worlding has always been about. Anthropological toxic worlding is increasingly less concerned with a politics of correction or mitigation than it is with one of creative social and ecological rearrangement.

Section: CONCLUSION

A destructive present of militarization, extraction, and monoculture seems to call for desperate measures, but if those measures amount to a recapitulation of familiar narratives of crisis, of Black and Brown suffering, and of conventional calls for liberal political empowerment, then they may be of limited value ( Masco 2017 , Tuck 2009 ). Without entering into engagements that slow down both our reasoning and that of others ( Stengers 2005 ), the most engaged anthropologists among us risk erasing the ethical and political insights that might be gained from interlocutors, collaborators, and friends—be they scientists, activists, or even corporate functionaries—who recognize that toxic worlding has few if any fully innocent participants ( Murphy 2017 ). Even if acts of care such as feeding, watering, cleaning, or replanting damaged crops momentarily disrupt toxicity ( Lyons 2018 ), as Stacey Langwick (2017) argues, people undertake them less in a grand effort to politically transform or purify the world than in a more intimate attempt to make it habitable.
I close with a parable of sorts, from sociologists Manuel Tironi and Israel Rodriguez-Giralt's (2017) ethnography of the contaminated community of Puchuncaví, Chile. They recount the story of an anthropologist who visited a meeting of a local EJ group and encouraged its members to coordinate politically with other like-minded groups in Chile. The members listened politely, but they had called the meeting to discuss an ongoing legal case, not a grassroots movement. Sensing the boredom of the group with the anthropologist's scholarly-lefty exhortation to organize a network of advocacy, one of the male group leaders quickly took the microphone to remind everyone that the anthropologist could “put at our disposal lawyers … and that would be really helpful” ( Tironi & Rodriguez-Giralt 2017 , p. 104). For their part, most of the women in the group—many of them widowed—had come to comfort one another in their grief and to share strategies for healing, cleaning, and momentarily abating exposure. Tironi and Rodriguez-Giralt's point is that no single mode of acting is sufficient for toxic worlding. Though we should all be alarmed at the state of the world, the future for a toxic anthropology, I suggest, lies in slowing down and working through the mess. It isn't going anywhere.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I thank everyone who talked or read through portions of this article, provided insights, or gave advice, especially Sarah Besky, Peter C. Little, Alex Blanchette, and Josh Fisher. My thanks also go to the reviewers and editors of the Annual Review of Anthropology for the opportunity to write and revise this piece.

Section: literature cited

