Title: Aesthetics in Styles and Variation: A Fresh Flavor


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Speaker attitudes, ascriptions, qualia, and other forms of overt aesthetic commentary function as constraints on language and culture and are central to sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology. Despite the importance of aesthetics, sociolinguists studying variation and change have largely shied away from the topic. This review suggests that covert aesthetic evaluations play a role in variation and change. We draw on non-Western approaches to aesthetics ( rasa and “everyday aesthetics”) that emphasize the interplay between receiver and the aesthetic stimulus. We present two case studies. One, from fieldwork on Nkep (an Oceanic language spoken in Vanuatu), draws attention to the way aesthetic factors seem to slow language change. The other, from fieldwork on Spanish in California, shows how aesthetic evaluations of linguistic features facilitate the transfer of variation in a situation of language contact.

Section: AESTHETICS AND VARIATION IN LANGUAGE: A MISSING DIMENSION?

In 1980, violence came to the village of Hog Harbor (Vüthiev) in East Santo, Vanuatu. Supporters of the secession movement that wanted to break away from the incoming, independent Vanuatu government clashed with village locals. Guns were fired, many villagers fled, and peace was not fully restored until a formal ceremony of apology was held some months later. In 2014, a number of the surviving villagers recounted their stories in an interview as part of a language documentation project:
Camthël temyan, temlro, temroc ncaple mrüm mrüm…cam cavorce wesi, camhö (‘We scattered and we hid and we heard the guns firing, firing…we were many [there were lots of us] and we ran’) said Leci Warsal.

Camthël temyan ‘we ran’ and cam cavorce ‘we were many’: One has the long form of the pronoun ‘we’; one has the short. One has tem- as the agreement marker on the verb; one has ca ( m ) - . Such is the nature of language variation, and teasing apart such variation to determine whether it has structural or social significance is part of the work of sociolinguists and linguistic anthropologists.
Why does a speaker iterate a particular way of saying something? And why does the addressee or audience attend to and ratify the repetition, thereby coconstructing the variation as socially meaningful? There are numerous answers to these questions: Linguists might invoke ease of articulation ( Ladefoged & Johnson 2011 , Tatman 2021 ), processing/tracking constraints ( Grosz et al. 1995 ), social inferencing ( Burnett 2017 ), and shared experience with a language ( Sankoff 1980 ). Psychologists might invoke entitativity ( Campbell 1958 ), the minimal group paradigm, uncertainty reduction ( Grieve & Hogg 1999 ), and priming or shadowing ( Warren 2012 ). Anthropologists’ explanations might invoke habitus ( Bourdieu 1977 ), lamination (Brenneis, cited in Holland & Leander 2004 ), or language materiality ( Cavanaugh & Shankar 2017 ). These explanations, while diverse, take into account the body, mechanistic operations of the brain, and the properties of sounds and of the social group.
So far, so good, and these characterizations explains a great deal about the overlaps and intersections between these different disciplines. However, in this review article, we focus on a point of divergence: how readily the different disciplines embrace and theorize a role for aesthetic or expressive answers to the questions of how variation emerges from noise and how it is collaboratively forged into socially meaningful symbolic systems. We contend that linguistics, unlike linguistic anthropology, has been deeply reluctant to engage with aesthetic forces underpinning language. We present an account of why we think this is and its unfortunate consequences for interdisciplinarity. However, we also contend that close attention to the linguistic details of variation is missing from anthropological accounts of signs and signifiers, and accounts of how language users draw connections between language and moral or expressive systems. We present data that we think argue for affect and expressivity as a deep, explanatory mechanism—one that can provide the link between the instantiation of variation (why speakers iterate forms) and the diffusion of variation, both within languages (why a form is picked up and ratified as meaningful by others) and across languages (creating typological linkages and in situations of language contact).
One of our goals in positing the importance of understanding aesthetics in language variation is to imagine what difference it would make to the current state of sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology. Although anthropology is, on the face of it, better placed than sociolinguistics to incorporate aesthetic factors in accounts of language variation, recent research (e.g., Gal 2013 , Harkness 2015 ) limits itself to aesthetic commentary and social labeling that speakers have metalinguistic and metapragmatic ( Silverstein 2003 ) awareness of. We argue here that a sociolinguistic perspective means we do not need to be restricted to talking about aesthetic responses only when speakers themselves can tell us what they do and do not like in language. Instead, we adopt an “everyday aesthetics” ( Saito 2007 ) perspective, looking in one case study at the mundane variation that occurs below the level of speakers’ awareness ( Labov 1972 , Silverstein 1977 ), and in another at variation that defies speakers’ efforts at simple classification.
To do so, we have found it helpful to compare the role of aesthetics in different philosophical traditions in order to better understand the ways in which aesthetics can structure humanistic enquiry. We begin with some (highly simplified) comments on Enlightenment views of aesthetics. We then introduce approaches to aesthetics from India and Japan. Where possible, we highlight commonalities among the different traditions, as well as crucial points of difference. Our commitment to a social and interpersonal model of language finds more to be gained from dialogic, non-Western perspectives on aesthetics.
The now widespread use of the term qualia is, we believe, different from what we are discussing under aesthetics . Qualia (sometimes used in the specific sense of qualisigns) is useful for discussion of affect that is accessible to metalinguistic commentary and to metalinguistic labels. As we use aesthetics, it can also refer to the very subtle qualitative impulses and affective responses in speaker or hearer, which are not subject to metalinguistic commentary and yet permeate our everyday language and everyday interactions. 1 We suggest that these impulses and affective responses are the foundation of the labels and metalinguistic commentary that are discussed as qualia and therefore are of interest to anthropology, representing a productive nexus between sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology.
Another, related line of inquiry concerns the study of language ideologies ( Kroskrity 2004 , Woolard 1998 ), briefly described as “beliefs, feelings and conceptions about language use which often index political and economic interests” ( Kroskrity 2010 , p. 192). While political and economic interests cannot be separated from choices about aesthetics, poetics, and language use [see, e.g., work on Somali poetry and nation-building ( O'Dubhda 2009 ), on Yemeni poetic battles ( Caton 1990 ), on Mazatec revivalist song contests in Mexico ( Faudree 2013 ), on contemporary hip hop and politics in South Africa ( Haupt et al. 2018 ), and on the role of nationalist poetry in Kenyan/Ethiopian troubles ( Schlee & Shongolo 1996 )], most of this anthropological theorizing is again at the overt and metalinguistic level (pace Kroskrity 2020 ).

Section: AESTHETICS IN LANGUAGE

We first ask what sociolinguistics might be missing by not talking about aesthetics. Having addressed that, we look in closer detail at what kind of linguistic data might (as a consequence) be missing from our analyses. We try to show that the kind of data that are missing is exactly the kind of data that complements anthropological analyses of social semiosis.
It is well known in sociolinguistics that even in the best models of variation, not all of the variation is ever fully accounted for [ Labov's (1969) “inherent variability”]. Indeed, why shouldn't variation be inherent to language? Aspects of human interaction, such as surprise, salience, difference, articulatory ease, or “noise” in the environment and in the signal, may account for some of the unexplained, inherent variability, 2 and it may be impossible to exhaustively list them.
Nevertheless, it is notable that, since the early twentieth century, formal linguistics has been deeply reluctant to engage with, or even acknowledge, the fact that language is an expressive and aesthetic system. In the Western linguistic tradition, the study of aesthetics—cultural models that include ideas, feelings, and ideologies about what is beautiful or good/moral—is ceded to philosophy or other social sciences ( Palmer et al. 2013 , Black 2018 , Cavanaugh 2020 ).
The intellectual tradition dealing with aesthetics in the West, and possible explanations for its abandonment by linguistics, should start at least in the Enlightenment. 3 Hume and Kant are concerned with the idea that what is felt as a subjective perception (beauty, aesthetics) might be able to be discerned, objectively measured, and ranked by popular approval. “It is natural for us,” Hume [ 1910 ( 1757 ), p. 217] writes, “to seek a Standard of Taste; a rule, by which the various sentiments of men may be reconciled…confirming one sentiment, and condemning another.”
Following Hume, Kant [2000 ( 1790 )] considers beauty to be a type of inner feeling of pleasure, a perception arising within the beholder as an interpretation among the “manifold” sensations. This pleasure, for Kant, is disinterested, universal, and necessary; its universality derives from the fact that we are all born with the same faculties. Kant concludes that poetry (a verbal art) is the pinnacle of artistic endeavors, asserting that a plurality of voices would find approbation in the beauty of poetry, which can be doomed by neither space nor time. Disinterestedness arises from an indifference to functional concerns of the object in question. A house, for example, can be judged to be beautiful regardless of whether we intend to live in it and whether it would suit our purposes.
Despite such supposedly universal, shared faculties, even Hume's [2010 ( 1757 )] “Of the Standard of Taste” acknowledges cultural relativity. Insofar as aesthetics is the judgment of beauty, Hume concedes there is no absolute; the “Mahometans,” as he puts it, will have their own aesthetics and their own concept of the beautiful. Hegel (1920a , p. 60ff), like Hume and Kant, observes that standards of beauty are socially constructed, while nevertheless hierarchizing different expressions of creativity.
Hegel's development of aesthetics emphasized the important role human imagination plays in mediating between the (objective) world and the (ideal) realm of thought. Going beyond Kant's [ 2000 ( 1790 ), p. 48] approbation of poetry, he links speech more generally with aesthetics, calling speech a “sensuous presentation…addressed to the mind. ”
These perspectives have cast a long shadow on modern linguistics; “linguistic intuition” functions much as the judgment of taste. 4 Methods based on intuitions in Chomskyan linguistics grew out of the use of intuitions in philosophy, and in both fields the nature of intuitions has been questioned ( Wasow & Arnold 2005 , Devitt 2006 , Brøcker et al. 2020 ). For linguistics, where Chomsky (1965) argued that an ideal(ized) speaker-hearer was the proper object of study, a methodology was developed which counted the internal judgments of native speakers as data. This methodology could give rise to native speakers’ rank-ordering of sentences as more or less grammatically correct, not unlike Hume's suggestion regarding beauty in Of the Standard of Taste . Like beauty for Kant, a grammaticality judgment could be thought of as being universal (because given the same language all speakers share the idealized grammar), disinterested (a grammaticality judgment does not hinge upon whether a speaker would ever say the sentence in question), and necessary (falling out of the internal rules of the grammar). Precisely these features would allow trained scholars to induce the rules of grammar.
A consequence of this idealization of linguistic judgments is that emotion or the culturally relevant framings for utterances were set aside from the study of linguistics. This wholly cognitive and procedural model of language profoundly shaped the way linguistics departments have developed since the mid-twentieth century, and it cut off productive dialogue with parts of the humanities and social sciences that might have ensured the centrality of linguistics to the modern university. Linguists who synthesized the analysis of language structure with its social and expressive dimensions—such as Sapir (2002 , p. 229), who wrote, “It goes without saying that in actual speech referential and expressive symbolisms are pooled in a single expressive stream” (see also Drechsel 2010 ); Haas (1957 ; Haas 1969 cited in Adomako 2015 ); Jakobson et al. (2011) ; and Hymes (2016) —were ceded to anthropology and folklore, while the distance between quantitative sociolinguistics and formal linguistics is well documented (e.g., Labov 2019 ).

Section: ALTERNATE APPROACHES TO AESTHETICS

It is unlikely that Hume and Kant would have been surprised to learn that a long and very different tradition of aesthetics existed in India even as they were writing their own tracts. As we have noted, they were aware that the specific aesthetic reaction to an external object might be culturally relative. What might have surprised them was the way that aesthetic traditions of India and, later, Japan centered both the experiencer and the stimulus. In Japan, where European ways of thinking about aesthetics were introduced in the nineteenth century ( Nishi 1999 ), the “disinterestedness” associated with European aesthetics and art clashed with the didactic purposefulness of Confucian understandings of art. Both Nishi and Okakura (1999) responded to this tension by emphasizing the perceiver's emotional response to an aesthetic stimulus (“aesthetics is divided into two parts: One is inherent to the object; the other belongs to the subject”; Nishi 1999 , p. 30). Saito's (2007) “everyday aesthetics” centers the exchange of emotional reactions, placing this exchange at the heart of aesthetics, thereby including all types of everyday interaction between individuals and the material world. She argues that the creation of something aesthetically pleasing cannot be separated from a recipient's anticipated response. She also argues that the everyday, mundane nature of aesthetically charged exchanges operates below the level of conscious awareness. It is not subject to meta-commentary; nonetheless, it provides us with aesthetic satisfaction.
Okakura (1999) went further than Nishi, arguing for a fundamental contrast between pan-Eastern (dialogic and exchange–based) and European American (stimulus and response–based) approaches to aesthetics. Okakura's case for this being a pan-Eastern property of aesthetics is supported by the deep and rich Indian tradition of rasa . Rasa (literally ‘juice, flavor, taste’) can be traced back to Sanskrit writings ( Pollock 2016 ), but key interpretive commentaries were written by Kashmiri scholars between 700 and 1000 ce ( Ingalls 1990 ). The rasa of art or music requires that there be a “taster,” a “savorer”: some form of audience member whose response is integral and constitutive of the rasa of an utterance or text. nanda, one of the major exponents of rasa , proposed a meaning with four dimensions: direct denotation, indirect indication (implicature), the meaning of an utterance as a whole (perhaps its illocutionary meaning), and suggestion or revelation. Within linguistics, there are analogs of three of these: denotational meaning, implicatures, and illocutionary meaning/force. Suggestion or revelation is not part of modern linguistic approaches, though Hegel would surely have agreed with it, given his emphasis on imagination and synthesis of perspective in aesthetics. In this tradition, what is suggested or revealed is linked to eight basic rasa s, which in turn derive from the core human emotions, such as eros, comedy, tragedy, cruelty, heroism, and wonder ( Ingalls 1990 , Pollock 2016 ), and are “enjoyed actively” ( Chaudhury 1965 , p. 145)—contra the Humean subjective experience, which is objectively ratified as aesthetic. The dialogic nature of rasa and the necessity of reactions in the audience then inform and actively feed back into the production of the art (as Benamou 2010 documents in detail for rasa in gamelan song and music).
Approaches to aesthetics that allow for the humdrum (alongside the extraordinary) and that link aesthetics with the mediated or immediate engagement of interactants (producer and recipient) are approaches that lend themselves rather better to an exploration of aesthetics in everyday language than traditional (post-)Enlightenment views of aesthetics from linguistics and philosophy.

Section: MAKING A CASE FOR AESTHETICS

It is helpful, in arguing for the relevance of aesthetics in the analysis of language variation (and change), to address questions of why and how. Why have the aesthetic functions of language been ignored by modern (socio)linguists? How could the field of language variation—which is concerned primarily with understanding the nature of everyday speech—neglect aesthetic factors?
On the first question, it seems likely that this is due to linguistics having become (since the middle of the twentieth century) a field that privileges cognition over interaction. The most influential theories of language in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries all privilege cognition in one way or another ( Chomsky 1965 , Butt et al. 1999 , Steedman 2000 ). While some studies focus on exemplars, as radically opposed to Chomskyan universal grammar ( Gahl & Yu 2006 , Ambridge 2020 ; for a more inclusive, ecological approach, see Johnson 2007 ), they differ much less from Chomskyan linguistics than they might think, because they are all committed to a cognitive basis for the structure of language. A truly radical repudiation of generative grammar would be one that (re)frames what it is to “know” language in terms of human interaction, human emotions, and personality descriptors ( Malinowski 1965 , Lutz 1986 , White 1986 , Goodwin 2006 , Schieffelin 2008 ). It would engage with the many senses in which affect and qualia might play a role in how language functions as a system of social exchange.
As to how sociolinguistic studies of language variation could neglect aesthetic factors, we believe that there are two main reasons. One is typological; the second is methodological.
With respect to typology, the languages that have been subjected most closely to variationist scrutiny happen to belong to language families in which aesthetics plays a less obvious structural role. In the next section, we review data from Asia-Pacific languages that motivate our claim that this has led to an accidental blind spot in the traditional variationist literature. In the section titled Case Study 1: Variation in Nkep—Sonic Delight, we review data from a Pacific language that we believe illustrates aesthetics in subtle interaction with other linguistic and social influences on variation.
With respect to methodology, we revisit style, a topic of long-standing interest in sociolinguistics, where the tension between quantitative and qualitative methods has until recently ( Podesva 2006 , Eckert 2018 ) been presented as difficult, if not impossible, to reconcile. We suggest that aesthetic evaluations of variants are very similar to the way in which a variant encodes or evokes a particular style or register—aesthetic evaluations may emerge when there is either a rupture or a mismatch between preconceived notions of the “usual.” This process is illustrated in the section titled Case Study 2: Voice Quality and the Cholx Aesthetic—Circulation and Evaluation.
We aim to bring together several strands of research, especially with the aim of closing the loop in the Saussurean model of producers and perceivers by highlighting the role of the interpretant ( Atkin 2013 ). Most sociolinguistic studies have focused on patterns of speech production as a cue to particular social indexicalities. The production of variation is the domain of the section on Case Study 1.
Other researchers have attempted to unpack the perception side of this equation ( Drager 2010 , Preston & Niedzielski 2010 ). Still others have attempted to pull together both strands ( Levon & Buchstaller 2015 , Buson et al. 2018 ) and tried to understand linguistic variation within broader semiotic systems (like clothing, makeup, activities and seating patterns, play routines) in speech communities, social networks ( Dodsworth & Benton 2019 ), or communities of practice ( Mendoza-Denton 2008 , Strycharz-Banaś 2016 ). For this reason, we are ready to take the broader jump. What would a style look like if it were shared across multiple speech communities? What would a stance look like if it were shared broadly, across space and time? The nexus of perception and production is the domain of the section on Case Study 2.

Section: TYPOLOGY AND GAPS IN THEORY

Researchers interested in the symbolic and representational power of language in many Asian and Austronesian languages have found themselves poorly served by the Western tendency to divide the functions of language in use from the formal description of their target languages. A European approach to the basic units of language generally splits propositions into predicates and referents (roughly, verbs/states versus nouns). Under this view of language, discourse markers expressing a speaker's stance or attitude toward the proposition are assigned to the periphery of grammar (evidence can be found in the position, and size, of sections on pragmatics, politeness, and discourse in most descriptive grammars; Fischer 2006 includes various perspectives on this issue, and Haegeman 2014 includes them in a formal syntax).
Researchers on some East Asian languages have been much less comfortable with restricting their analyses in this way. Diffloth (1972) , for example, notes pervasive iconicity in Southeast Asian morphosyntax and proposes that, for Khmer, there are three basic morphological classes: nouns, predicates, and expressives ( Diffloth 2001 ). Watkins (2014 , p. 99) comments that “the relative importance of such devices in Southeast Asian languages is undeniable,” and Peterson (2014 , p. 219) states baldly that a “specifically aesthetic component of grammar” need not even be argued for. In other words, far from being structurally marginal, structural templates associated with aesthetic functions are a “core feature of the grammar” ( Watkins 2014 , p. 115). A volume edited by Williams (2014) includes several papers exploring the case for an aesthetic dimension in grammar across languages from a wide range of language families in the region (Austroasiatic, Tai-Kadai, Hmong-Mien, Austronesian, Tibeto-Burman). To these we might add research by Australianists who discuss the tight relationship among performance, language, and visual arts ( Green & Turpin 2013 , Bracknell 2020 ).
In Khmer, the historical record of the language suggests that these constituents have been a part of the language for centuries. Old Khmer, for example, included an infix, -am ( n ) - , that appears to have been “purely decorative,” and this infix continues to have reflexes in modern Khmer ( Haiman 2014 ). Prakorb (1993 , p. 255), a native-speaker linguist, observes that in Northern Khmer the syllable “/-rə-/ can be optionally inserted in any CC- presyllable,” as in example 1:

There is no semantic difference between the forms in example 1 (or any of the many others that could be generated). Haiman (2014) suggests that it simply sounds right or more pleasing to sometimes use the infixed variant. (Whether “pleasingness” accounts for all of the variation is not our concern. As we suggest above, all native-speaker intuitions are essentially aesthetic evaluations.)
Around the Pacific Rim, some forms of reduplication also serve aesthetic functions. Sapir noted the “self-evident symbolism” of reduplication ( Haiman 2014 , p. 79), but in languages such as Japanese, where reduplication does not seem to additively enhance the meaning of a base morpheme (the reduplicated form, often classified as an ideophone, is itself the base meaning), something more than meaning symbolism is involved. Example 2 deals with visual or auditory or physical (proprio)perception, domains that are central to human aesthetics. 5 As example 2f shows, reduplication also expresses linguistic facility:

Pawley (2010) reviews the diverse (and productive) strategies for what he calls rhyming jingles in Kalam (Papuan; Trans–New Guinea), drawing parallels with English (English: hoity-toity , argy-bargy , flim-flam ; Kalam: gadal badal ‘higgledy-piggledy’, ygn wgn ag- ‘keep repeating oneself’, guskol maskol g- ‘scatter things everywhere’). He notes that such rhyming jingles, while common across the world's languages, are not uniformly distributed even within a language family or region. 6
Stanford (2014) presents compelling data for an aesthetic component in Sui intensifiers. The Sui strategy for intensifying adjectives is not strictly reduplication, because both the initial consonant and the tone change (example 3). Most intensifiers start with a coronal sound (e.g., /t/, /n/), even if they are different coronals in multiply-intensified examples (example 3d):

Despite an extensive literature on reduplication, its expressive functions have been erased in linguistic analyses. We do not dispute the generative and descriptive power of Optimality Theory accounts of reduplication ( Inkelas & Downing 2015 ), but we suggest that they stop short of some of the more interesting aspects of reduplication from an interactional perspective. In the next two sections, we present case studies from our previous research, where the more holistic approaches of rasa and everyday aesthetics, reviewed above, seem to account particularly well for otherwise underexplained aspects of language variation.




Section: CASE STUDY 1: VARIATION IN NKEP—SONIC DELIGHT

Nkep is an Eastern Central Oceanic language spoken by approximately 1,000 people in and around the village of Hog Harbor (Vüthiev), East Santo, Vanuatu. Variation in Nkep has been the subject of several sociolinguistic analyses, in which sociolinguistic models of variation in the form of the agreement marking on the verb account for (a perfectly respectable) 72% of all variation observed ( Meyerhoff 2015 , 2017 ). That is, the bulk of the variation is accounted for by linguistic factors or social factors that can be isolated and demonstrated to affect the likelihood with which a particular form of the possessive or of the subject–verb agreement might be used by a speaker.
The facts about agreement marking in Nkep are as follows: Verbs in finite clauses occur with a prefix that indicates the person and number of the subject. There is ongoing change in the form of the plural prefixes, resulting in potential ambiguity in the meaning of the prefixes tem- and cam- . This variation is illustrated below, where both cam- (examples 4a and 4b) and tem- (examples 4c–e) express first-person plural (all examples are taken from spontaneous speech with interpretation from context): 7

Clearly a change is in progress: Only one speaker under the age of 50 spontaneously produced a cam- prefix on the verb with a first-person plural subject. Other factors influencing the choice of cam- or tem- lie within the grammar, but we suggest that some of these have interactional resonances.
Meyerhoff (2015) found that the cam- prefix was more likely when the subject pronoun was in the short form. If a speaker wants to use a free pronoun as well as the subject agreement marker on the verb, they have two options in first-person plural: a long form, camthël , and a short form, cam. In other words, an utterance like example 5a was more likely to occur than one with the long-form pronoun camthël (this is the only example we have of the short-form pronoun cam occurring with tem- on the verb; all other short-form pronouns occur with cam- ): 8


In addition, when the subject of the verb was active or an experiencer (example 6), the cam- prefix was more likely to occur than the tem- prefix (on the association between actor and experiencer subjects, see Musgrave 2006 ):


Intriguingly, there was a weak (but still significant) effect that depended on the form of the verb. If the stressed syllable of the verb stem included the same /ɣ/ sound (written with a <c>) found in the cam- (/ɣam-/) prefix (example 7), then this independently increased the likelihood of the prefix occurring as cam- :




This effect is similar to categorical long-distance linguistic processes of assimilation, such as vowel and consonant harmony, but quite distinct from these processes, because in Nkep the association between the verb prefix and the verb stem is probabilistic (like the Sui intensifiers). That is, alongside cam-cöth speakers may produce tem-cöth (both meaning ‘we saw’), and alongside cam-rooc the same speaker may produce tem-rooc (‘we heard, felt’). However, the quantitative analysis of variation reveals that there is a nonrandom association between the form of the verb and the use of the older agreement prefix, cam- .
There is no rule prohibiting tem-cöth ; it simply seems that, as the cam- prefix recedes in frequency among all speakers of Nkep, two of the contexts in which it lingers longest are ones that involve repetition (or reduplication) of forms. These are ( a ) verbs where there is a repetition of the /ɣ/ sound and ( b ) utterances where the speaker also uses the short form of the pronoun, which has exactly the same shape as the prefix. These two contexts co-occur in examples 7a, 7c, and 8: fn9

Generally, in studies of language variation, such patterns are undertheorized. They may be documented as a descriptive fact, or they may be analogized to regular phonological processes such as consonant harmony. A descriptive account can take refuge in the variationist's notion of inherent variability, the idea that some variation cannot be fully explained. The explanation by analogy suffices only so far, as it fails to address the question of why, in some languages, at some times, assimilation processes are categorical (harmony) while in others they are variable (euphony).
We suggest that the rasa (flavor) of an utterance like example 8 plays a role in its production. Two factors provide structure to the variation: first, the poetic nature of repetition (something that is exploited extensively in children's books and rhymes when children are trained to appreciate the oral/aural dimension of language) and, second, the physical delight and satisfaction associated with uttering a string of similar or identical segments (something that persists in adult verbal play). 10 True, it may be a structure that is revealed only after the fact, but that does not mean it isn't recognizably an aesthetic component of the language, something humdrum that nevertheless allows for the exchange of emotional reactions (cf. Saito 2007 ). In the concluding section, we return to the question of whether speakers need to be able to comment metalinguistically on the rasa and aesthetics of the forms that they, and others, use.
The variation in Nkep verb prefixes operates simultaneously on the levels of phonology and morphology/syntax. We have no direct evidence from speakers of Nkep that this variation functions expressively on an interpersonal level (e.g., enacting a particular stance or persona). Given that the data available are based entirely on speakers’ production, we do not want to overclaim how much of a role aesthetics plays in listeners’ perception of this variable. However, even a nonspeaker of Nkep can appreciate the playful quality of utterances like examples 7a and 8. Reminiscent of Pawley's (2010 , p. 292) rhyming jingles, the Nkep variable is “immediate, and less subtle, more obviously playful, than the effect of rhyme in verse,” that is, an aesthetics based on “making the familiar strange” ( Moland 2019 , p. 250). The semantics of language anchor both listener and speaker, allowing speakers to play more freely with form ( Hegel 1920b , p. 201).
In Case Study 2, we turn to combinations of linguistic variables and semiotic indices that not only operate across multiple levels of (linguistic) structure but also work in conjunction with stylistic choices to create a portable aesthetic. We trace how some of these choices rely on mediated circulation to straddle geographic and linguistic boundaries. The transferability of play across languages and the fluidity of the aesthetics and social meaning of a variable across languages speak directly to the elemental nature of aesthetics in language, especially language variation.











Section: CASE STUDY 2: VOICE QUALITY AND THE CHOLX AESTHETIC—CIRCULATION AND EVALUATION

In earlier research, Mendoza-Denton (2008 , 2011 ) described semiotic aspects of the figure of the Chola (a Latina youth professing some degree of gang membership). Broad semiotic indices included clothing, dress, makeup, and embodied poses ( Mendoza-Denton 2008 , Barreto 2018 ). Within the realm of purely linguistic variation, the specific speech community in Northern California investigated by Mendoza-Denton in the 1990s employed fortition of /θ/ and raising of /ɪ/, as well as frequent use of discourse-marking Th-Pro forms (e.g., something ; Mendoza-Denton 2008 ) and the contextually restricted use of creaky voice ( Mendoza-Denton 2011 ). These linguistic characteristics were not unique to this speech community, but were drawn from the larger resources of Northern California and Chicanx 11 English.
Having established that the covariation of these features was used by Cholas in the production of a particular persona, what can an inventory of linguistic attributes of a particular speech community at a specific point in time tell us about an evolving or enduring aesthetic? Here we depart from the discussion of aesthetics as an abstract property, as we have treated it until now, and we focus on the nominal aesthetic, defined as a system of interrelated signs that, taken together, give rise to a socially recognizable package. 12 Mendoza-Denton (2011) suggests that creaky voice depends on intertextual chains [ Hill 1985 , Hanks 1987 , Sapir 2014 ( 1927 )] to facilitate its travel from one context to another, ranging from the ethnographically collected first-person narrative of a Latina girl to mediated contexts such as a Chicano gangster rap singer who later became the voice of a Cholo character in a video game to an instructional YouTube video called “How to Be a Cholo.” Mendoza-Denton uses the metaphor of semiotic hitchhiking to understand how a suprasegmental feature such as creak may travel from one context to another with the meaning of being “hardcore,” a meaning that transcends class and gendered interpretations, is specifically rooted in emotion, and is unmoored both from its original context of use and even from the specific lexical forms that carried it. This makes the analysis very similar to that by Rickford & Rickford (1976) of the temporal and transnational mobility of cut-eye and suck-teeth as signals of displeasure spanning West Africa, the Caribbean, and the USA (and the United Kingdom).
The Cholx aesthetic is one that has straddled the US–Mexico border and has attracted public commentary from the beginning. Pachucos and Cholos have been Americans as long as that transnational, liminal space has existed, forged in contact-based subcultures rooted in the US incorporation of parts of northern Mexico in 1848, followed by labor migration from the resulting divide in the twentieth century. Pochos, 13 Pachucos, and Cholos have been extensively gazed upon, pathologized, and theorized by Mexican intellectuals [ Gamio 1930 , Vasconcelos 1957 (1936), Paz 1973 ( 1959 ), Leal 1977 , Sánchez Valencia 2005 , Monsiváis 2020 (1985)]. All have theorized the Pachuco (precursor to the Cholo) as a figure of semiotic extremes, a figure of defiance to oppression by means of “exaggeration.” Through the circulation of works by these prestigious writers from the center, the peripheral figure of the Pachuco/Cholo became a recognizable subculture on both sides of the border. At first prototypically male, the Pachuca and the Chola received increased attention after the 1943 Zoot Suit Riots in Los Angeles ( Ramírez 2009 ). Pachuquismo/being Cholx connoted an entire lifestyle, an aesthetic that included language (Spanglish as well as an argot), neighborhoods (the Southwestern barrios), transportation (lowriders), clothing (zoot suits in the 1940s and 1950s, later Cholx fashions), music (oldies), embodiment (dancing styles, picture poses, makeup), and an affective disposition (defiant pride) that might well be a reaction to the bald racism against Mexican-descent persons in the Southwestern USA.
Through stereotyping, the transnational interpretability of the Cholx lends itself to mediatized displays of the aesthetic. In both of the following examples, the aesthetic becomes the object of widely circulated commentary—in the song and video for “El Narco Cholo” and in the mass media attention to “Las Cholas del Valle de Chalco” (LCVC).
In the song “El Narco Cholo,” sung by La Banda Peña (2016) , a brass ensemble from Jalisco, Mexico, the narrator knows an impoverished Cholo who fell in with drug traffickers, and, as a result of becoming a rich Narco, the Cholo's language, demeanor, clothing, and even dancing style changed. The lead singer, in a kind of natural matched guise, voices everyone: narrator, Cholo, and Narco. As narrator, he sings in Standard Mexican Spanish, but when voicing the Cholo (starting at 0:40), he uses extensive creaky voice, rhyming slang, and code switching that is replete with English loanwords. When the Cholo returns as a Narco (1:41), he is transformed in appearance and sound: His Spanish morphs phonologically and grammatically to a Northern Mexican variety, with expanded use of second-person V-forms and deletion of the intervocalic /ð/ in past participles (e.g., ‘ Cómo ha estado ’? /komo a estaðo/ > [komoaestao]). The contrast between the Cholo and Narco aesthetics (and the narrator's surprise) is meant to provide humorous social commentary. The interpretability and familiarity of the Cholo (and Narco) aesthetics on both sides of the border, and of varieties of Spanish and English, are key to the humor for the audience. Without a history of South–North circular migration or the circulation of social texts in English (e.g., “How to Be a Cholo”) and Spanish (“El Narco Cholo”), such resignifications of the main character would be indecipherable.
The second example provides further evidence of the transnational and interlingual significance of creaky voice (among other symbols). Proyecto40 Informativo ( 2011 ) featured a video reportage on LCVC. Originally from a suburb of greater Mexico City, the Cholas who were interviewed sang, gave a tour of the neighborhood, and discussed the various symbols on their clothing, their gang signs, and so forth. The video was, and remains, hugely influential in many forms of social media. In the beginning of the interview, young Karla, using creaky voice, says: “ Mientras no nos digan nada, nosotros tranquilos, pero si nos buscan, nos encuentran ” (‘As long as no one says anything to us, we're peaceful, but if they come to provoke us, they will find us’) (0:13). She goes on to shed light on some of the gang symbolism: the number 13 (“for a street we are associated with”), how the position of the sunglasses on the wearer's head has different meanings, and that the bandanna on the forehead is worn to “represent our paisanos who are in the U.S., always with our head held high” (1:45).
A full analysis is beyond the scope of this review. The crucial point, as in “El Narco Cholo,” is that the Cholx aesthetic is transnational, multilingual (preserving creaky voice across languages), and interpretable. It has a rasa of defiant pride that transcends time, languages, and distance. LCVC had no actual return-migrant members, but the group had adopted the Chola aesthetic, playing with it and savoring its rasa . Despite Los Angeles–emblazoned clothing, identification with “13(th Street)” and “our paisanos ,” they had relatively little investment in the actual gangs of Los Angeles. Like creaky voice, “13” symbolically hitchhikes across languages and speech communities. Like any speech community, LCVC have their own innovations (like the glasses-wearing positions) that, because of their emotional and evaluative load (we suggest), acquire the potential for their own semiotic hitchhiking.

Section: IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND LINGUISTIC ANTHROPOLOGY

Semiotic hitchhiking can be considered a sociolinguistic manifestation of the human capacity to see and understand the world in terms of metaphor. The mapping of social meaning allows for not only the translation of creaky voice and the semiotics of hardcore across languages but also the translation of linguistic features that covertly or subconsciously index social categories into overt stereotypes that speakers can provide metalinguistic commentary about. The mapping/hitchhiking of social meaning across different speaker groups or speech contexts is directly analogous to the mapping of semantic meaning in metaphor.
Previous research in sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology has, of course, made this observation. Eckert (2018 , p. 192) sees a major point in her career as reframing the study of language as “not simply a referential system, but also quite fundamentally an expressive system.” The pervasiveness of semiotic hitchhiking is implied in Eckert's notion of “indexical fields,” which she suggests might exists not for single variables but for variables with “related indexical value” (p. 155).
Lee's (2021) analysis of Baba Malay provides tidy parallels to the analysis of creaky voice for Cholx. Lee establishes that Baba Malay pronunciations using a raised vowel /ɛ/, as opposed to an open vowel /ɑ/, are associated by speakers and hearers with the quality of halus (‘refinedness’). She shows that a sociolinguistically coherent analysis of vowel raising emerges when other cultural practices (also described as halus ) are considered alongside the phonological variable . Tiny beadwork and fine embroidery are archetypes of halus in Baba Malay material culture. As a result, the rasa and interpretation of smallness can carry over (hitchhike) from material culture to spoken culture: The use of vowels that are produced with a constricted (smaller) oral cavity is readily interpreted as halus against a broader background that associates tininess with refinedness.
Pawley & Syder (1983) present an early, modern attempt to highlight how much of everyday communication involves the replication of patterns. There is now a vibrant field researching N-grams and multiword, prefabricated constructions ( Biber et al. 2004 , Wray 2008 ). It is striking to us that although multiword units lend themselves readily to aesthetic evaluations (consider the visceral reaction to a politician punctuating their speech with “at the end of the day,” the effectiveness of “dog whistle” terminology, or the point of virtually every internet meme), linguists have determinedly ignored the aesthetic dimension of repeated patterning in language. Sociolinguists, who deal with spontaneous and naturally occurring speech, and who have the tools for probing the subtle, probabilistic patterns that may not be superficially obvious, have been deeply reluctant to talk about the expressive functions of language and the (sometimes obvious) aesthetic component of language variation. Meanwhile, linguistic anthropologists often ignore the details of the linguistic facts that support the social evaluations that are the focus of their enquiry.
Against this backdrop, we believe that if there were not an aesthetic dimension to language variation, this would be more remarkable than if there were. We know that patterns and aesthetics play a role at all levels of linguistic structure: rhyme and alliteration at the level of phonology, reduplication at the level of morphology, parison (repetition and balance across sentences) at the level of syntax (“Whither thou goest, I will go…”, “We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds…”), and the extraordinarily complex and abstract—but nonetheless real—patterns of syllable symmetry that differentiate poetic and narrative genres in Tahitian ( Meyer 2013 ) and the within-word syllable inversion of so many urban contact languages ( Mous & Barasa 2022 , Nassenstein 2022 ). The euphony patterns in Nkep can be viewed in this way. If, following Huizinga (1950) and Corballis (2017) , the evolutionary origins of language lie in storytelling and ludic impulses, then it seems likely that an aesthetic component has been deeply embedded in language for millennia. Linguistics rests on a foundation of being able to sift utterances into “good,” “bad,” “correct,” “wrong.” Adopting a view of aesthetics which looks more like the tradition of rasa or everyday aesthetics allows us to shed some of the sociocultural and teleological baggage associated with the most well-known European philosophical treatments of aesthetics.
We have tried to show in this review that approaches such as Hegel's marry quite well with a broader view in which aesthetics is a property that emerges from a relationship between the producer and the receiver, whether overtly articulatable, as with the Cholx aesthetic and many of the examples of qualia in linguistic anthropology, or not, as with the Nkep prefixes, which we believe can illuminate the roots of more overtly articulatable aesthetics. We have defined an aesthetic as a system of interrelated signs that, taken together, give rise to a socially recognizable package (which, again, emphasizes coparticipation of producer and receiver). In this regard, finding space for aesthetics is entirely consistent with a social view of language, one that emphasizes the interactional functions of language as fundamental and essential:
In the midst of the formidable realm of forces, and of the sacred empire of laws, the æsthetic impulse of form creates by degrees a third and a joyous realm, that of play and of the appearance, where she emancipates man from fetters, in all his relations, and from all that is named constraint, whether physical or moral. ( von Schiller 1910 , p. 310, cited in Morris 2017 )


Section: disclosure statement

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

We thank Herbert Morris, Bambi Schieffelin, Diwakar Acharya, and Dmitri Levitin for productive discussions on aesthetics in language and rasa in particular, and audiences at NWAV-AP5 in Brisbane, UCLA, Stanford, and the University of Pennsylvania, where M.M. presented early versions of some of these arguments. N.M.-D. thanks Maribel Álvarez, Laura Gutiérrez, Perry Gilmore, and audiences at University of Arizona and Università di Verona. Thanks also go to Majdouline Boum-Mendoza for discussions of youth aesthetics and to Annual Review of Anthropology editorial staff and reviewers for compassion and constructive assistance. Funding for fieldwork on Nkep is provided by the Endangered Languages Documentation Project (MDP-0210). All faults are ours alone.

Section: literature cited

