Title: Touch and Social Interaction


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Our understanding of touch as a basic and complex sense is informed by phenomenological perspectives on our corporeal “being-in-the-world” and the notion of intercorporeality ( Merleau-Ponty 1964 ) as well as by sociological perspectives on social life as organized and accomplished through corporeal participation and the interaction order ( Goffman 1983 ). Intercorporeality involves sense-making of oneself and copresent others as body subjects, active in (re)producing a corporeal interaction order that is understood as tactile as well as visual and sonorous. In our review of contemporary ethnographic work, we direct our attention to touch and social interaction and discuss ( a ) ritualized supportive interchanges; ( b ) moves of compassion that calm a distressed child; ( c ) forms of control that socialize the body and gain attention, in particular to create multisensorial, instructional environments; and ( d ) forms of touch during care and bodywork in medical and therapeutic contexts.

Section: INTRODUCTION

Touch is the most fundamental means of contact with the world, the simplest and most straightforward of all sensory systems. Touching is thoroughly palpable and presents a direct mode through which living creatures interact with the environment and each other ( Finnegan 2014 , p. 194). Despite the fact that skin is the largest sense organ, touch is the one sense most taken for granted and overlooked in research and in society. Through touch the individual locates themselves in time and space, grasping, stroking, and feeling ( Montagu 1986 ), becoming sensitive to pain, pressure, and temperature. Through various forms of interpersonal touch, the individual also becomes part of a social group and shapes social relations; these embodied practices and experiences, i.e., touching and being touched by others, shift over the life course and are variously important for human sociality. Touch has many physical forms and meanings and extends beyond positive affectionate touch, which is usually foregrounded in research and the media. Interpersonal touch can combine physical contact that is controlling and supportive as well as affectionate; and in different ways, it contributes to embodied intersubjectivity and social participation.
Our theoretical understanding of touch as a basic and complex sense is informed by phenomenological perspectives on our corporeal “being-in-the-world” and the notion of intercorporeality [ Merleau-Ponty 1964 ; 2012 (1945) ] as well as by sociological perspectives on social life as organized and accomplished through bodily participation and the interaction order ( Goffman 1983 ). Intercorporeality as intertwining refers to primordial features such as the materiality and physicality of bodily existence, which involves sense-making of oneself and copresent others as body subjects ( Merleau-Ponty 1964 , p. 175). It includes multiple senses in a carnal interchange between sentient-sensible (“body-to-body,” “seen-seer”) body subjects. Taking a Goffmanian perspective, “body-subjects” are not subordinate to the mind but are active in (re)producing a corporeal interaction order that is understood as visual, sonorous, olfactory, tactile, and saporous conventions and rules for our behavior (e.g., Goffman 1983 ), interwoven “with the perceptual field of the agent” within social situations ( Crossley 1995 , p. 136). Touch conduct is part of corporeal order; its uses and perceptual social meanings are not only biologically based, but also constituted and guided by embodied social practices and conventions that make specific forms of touch acceptable, desirable, or disciplined. Our approach relies on capturing video recordings of naturally occurring interaction to explicate the emic perspective, i.e., how the participants themselves make meaning together. In this respect, we invoke the perspective that Bateson & Mead (1942) called for in the investigation of cultural practices without the intervention of the filmmaker or videographer, when stating that “we tried to shoot what happened normally and spontaneously, rather than to decide upon the norms and then get Balinese to go through these behaviors in suitable lighting” (p. 49). Such an approach allows for transcription and analysis of various types of visual data, while also providing an empirical basis for connecting the lived experience with ethnography and making links between various theoretical perspectives on corporeality, represented by the scholarship of Goffman and Merleau-Ponty as well as Charles Goodwin's perspective on multimodal interaction analysis.
In this article, we begin by briefly reviewing work in sensory ethnography and primate research on touch before taking a look at classic cross-cultural anthropological studies of touch in infancy and childhood. We next discuss contemporary ethnographic work on touch in interaction occurring during ( a ) ritualized supportive interchanges; ( b ) moves of compassion that calm a distressed child; ( c ) forms of control that socialize the body and gain attention, in particular to create multisensorial, instructional environments; and finally ( d ) forms of touch during care and bodywork in medical and therapeutic contexts.

Section: THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF THE SENSES

Touch as a sensory modality has only recently started receiving specific attention in the social sciences. Sensory anthropology has, since the end of the twentieth century, developed analysis of the senses that focuses on the study of people's systems and meanings of sensory categorizations, intersensoriality, and, at times, multiple conflicting senses ( Synnott 1993 ; Stoller 1997 ; Ingold 2000 ; Geurts 2002 ; Howes 2003 , 2005 ; Classen 2005 , 2012 ; Paterson 2007 ). Cultural variations in the construction of sensory hierarchies, including touch, are examined by relying on historical and phenomenological interpretative perspectives (see Csordas 1994 ). These approaches have discussed the modern Western model of the senses—hearing, sight, taste, smell, and touch—as cultural categories; some studies have extended the categories of the senses to include rhythm and proprioception ( Leder 1990 , p. 39; Ingold 2000 ). More recent work extends methods and perspectives and examines touch and other senses (e.g., smell) as they are expressed through sense-perception-based conceptual metaphors ( San Roque & Schieffelin 2019 , Speed et al. 2019 ). Taking an ethnomethodological, i.e., members’ perspective, Mondada (2018 , 2021) examines the senses of smell and taste as they are invoked by social actors in their everyday encounters. In sensory ethnography that has developed from visual anthropology ( Pink 2009 ; see also Nakamura 2013 ), concern is with sensory experiences as they are revealed by reflexive processes of researchers’ own bodily perceptions and emplaced ways of knowing.

Section: ETHOLOGICAL STUDIES OF TOUCH

Our investigation of touch within embodied cultural practices, i.e., social interaction, is informed by our video-ethnographic studies on the use of touch in the family ( M. Goodwin 2017 , M. Goodwin & Cekaite 2018 ), in schools ( Cekaite 2016 ), and among friends ( M. Goodwin 2021 ). This approach acknowledges that human experiences, perceptions, uses, and meanings of interpersonal touch are grounded in neurobiology and evolutionary mechanisms as well as social practices, values, and hierarchies. Haptic configurations in humans build on our primate heritage. Among primates, a close configuration of bodies facilitates tactile communication for attachment, bonding, reconciliation, and play. Grooming creates the psychological environment that allows for the trading of support ( Dunbar 2010 , p. 261), as it “creates a platform off which trust can be built by triggering a cascade of neuro-endocrines that create an internal psychological environment facilitating trust” ( Dunbar 2010 , p. 263). Finnegan (2014 , p. 196) notes that through tactile engagements such as cuddling, muzzling, rubbing noses, and mutual grooming humans also maintain social bonds. Primatologist and ethologist de Waal (1989) , describing “peacemaking among primates,” has argued that touch plays an important role in the resolution of hostility and aggression. Forms of tactile reconciliation as a postconflict strategy take place through grooming, mounting, and clasping or hugging and have been documented in more than 20 nonhuman primate species ( Aureli & de Waal 2000 ).

Section: ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF TOUCH IN INFANCY AND CHILD-REARING

Some of the basic ways in which tactile practices feature early in humans becoming participants in a social community are poignantly visible in work on infancy. Psychiatrist Donald Winnicott developed the notion that the mother's technique of holding, bathing, feeding, and general ways of caring for the baby fosters the child's ability to experience the body as “the place where one securely lives” ( Winnicott 1973 , pp. 86–87, 194). Numerous psychologists support the notion that touch is crucial for human development. A caregiver's touch “regulates the infant's perceptions, thoughts, feelings, or behaviors” ( Hertenstein 2002 , p. 72). Before children can talk, they communicate via haptic and other nonvocal means; touch transmits valanced forms of emotion as well as specific information ( Hertenstein 2002 , p. 71).
Anthropological research addresses cross-cultural variation in how caregiving is configured for babies through diverse bodily formations and possibilities for contact with the world around them. Early ethnographic studies have examined how infants are cared for within multisensorial environments where touch provides a primary sense that is crucial to caretaking, contributing to the infant's well-being. Montagu (1986) noted some of the cross-cultural differences in the quality, frequency, and timing of tactile experience in infancy. Through close contact with their mothers throughout the day, babies learn the meanings of proximity, distance, and openness ( Montagu 1986 , p. 294) as they are supported, rocked, and enfolded in their mothers’ bodies. Among the Netsilik Eskimo culture in the Canadian Arctic, a baby's ventral torso is pressed skin-to-skin firmly on their mother's back inside a fur parka and then lashed onto the mother's body with a sling or sash. The skin-to-skin contact with the mother's body allows close communication of the baby's needs. A hungry baby sucking mom's skin is quickly brought to the breast (R. de Boer, unpublished manuscript, “The Netsilik Eskimo and the Origin of Human Behavior,” 1969). !Kung infants, like the Netsilik, also maintain close contact with their moms, tied in soft leather slings against their mothers’ bodies, from which they can easily access the mother's breast ( Marshall 1976 ). Being positioned in slings affords the infant eye-level contact with siblings, which leads to rich interactions. Much like the Netsilik and the !Kung, Balinese babies are in constant contact with their moms ( Bateson & Mead 1942 , p. 30). As a mom goes about her daily activity (i.e., pounding rice) the baby in a sling adjusts to her movements. In New Guinea, Arapesh infants sleep close to the mother's body, in a net bag against her back, in her arms, or on her lap while she cooks or plaits [ Mead 1963 (1935) ]. Children who cry are immediately allowed to breastfeed for comfort, and this stage lasts for up to four years. Mead states that “the whole matter of nourishment is made into an occasion of high affectivity and becomes a means by which the child develops and maintains a sensitivity to caresses in every part of its body” [ Mead 1963 (1935) , p. 43]. In contemporary Rossel Island, New Guinea, Casillas et al. (2020 , p. 5) report that infants are typically carried in a caregiver's arms during waking hours as moms work; they are exchanged between males and females and among younger and elderly community members throughout the day, though they return to their moms for nursing when hungry.
While most of the ethnographic studies of infant–parent interaction focus on mother–child interaction, Hewlett (1992) examined the role of fathers among the Aka Pygmies of Central Africa. Aka fathers do much infant caregiving and spend 47% of the day either holding a child or being close by. Fathers show affection through hugs and kisses more often than mothers do, and it is fathers rather than mothers who are sought after by children.
Whereas in Japan touch is absent from the public sphere, Tahhan (2010) provides rich analysis of skinship , or touch as intimacy in Japanese families. Mothers and children practice co-bathing, hugging, co-sleeping, massage, and holding hands, emphasizing emotional closeness or what Paterson (2007 , pp. 15–35) describes as a “‘felt’ phenomenology.” Co-sleeping may continue until the child is 10 and occurs in Japanese preschools as well ( Ben-Ari 1996 ). For children who have difficulty sleeping, teachers lie next to them and gently caress them. Co-sleeping is said to socialize children into particular Japanese cultural patterns: promoting intimate ties and a feeling of dependence ( Ben-Ari 1996 , p. 149).
About the same time as studies by Mead and others were reporting on the importance of unobstructed, rather continuous touch of babies in early development to promote well-being into adulthood, American psychologist J.B. Watson (1928 , pp. 81–82) urged mothers to keep their emotional distance from the child, not to coddle or fondle the baby or respond too readily to children's cries for food or attention. Watson enjoyed a large following in the United States, where his work had considerable influence on behavioristic child-rearing practices from 1930 to 1980. These ideologies were not taken up in Europe, however, where Benjamin Spock, who advocated a different approach to children's needs, gained popularity.
Current anthropological research uses videotaped data to capture both verbal and nonverbal aspects of interaction. It reveals that early touch and corporeal practices extend beyond the purposes of caregiving; they allow the positioning of infants as social actors within a variety of social situations and with various community members. By examining how Tzotzil Mayan speakers in the highlands of Chiapas use bodily practices to position infants as active participants in interaction with others, de León (1998) charts the microgenesis of the infant participant—from proto-speaker and proto-addressee to embedded speaker to vocal conversational partner. In the time from birth to 8 months, when they are strapped on a caregiver's back 70% of the time, infants share their caregiver's perspectival center ( Figure 1 ), from which they can directly or indirectly interact at the adult's level with other household members.

Figure 1 Click to view


Constant touch between infant and caregiver permits communication through body movements as well as vocalizations, posture, gaze, and facial expressions; these multisensorial cues are taken as expressing the infant's emotional or physical state and the caregivers respond to these cues with constant commentary. By the age of four months, a baby who sits on her caregiver's lap can participate in greeting events by following the postural orientation of the caregiver ( Figure 1 b,c ). The child indicates through gaze and head orientation that she is participating in the routine by sharing the visual field of the participants in synchrony with the interactional unfolding of the greeting ( de León 2012 , p. 92).
Figure 1 Click to view

Section: TOUCH IN SUPPORTIVE INTERCHANGES

Psychological research on touch suggests that specific forms of tactile conduct can be expressive of prosocial emotions such as love, gratitude, and sympathy. These emotions are communicated by stroking, patting, holding, or hugging the other person ( Hertenstein & Weiss 2011 , p. 283). In laboratory studies examining discrete single-mode tactile behaviors and perceptions, slow stroking has been found by neurobiologists to activate CT-fibers, which can trigger the release of oxytocin (the “love hormone”) and contribute to one's well-being ( McGlone et al. 2012 , Gallace & Spence 2015 ).
Social perspectives that take into consideration multisensorial features of social life show that multiple forms of touch associated with prosocial emotions occur in the shape of supportive interchanges ( Goffman 1971 , pp. 62–94) in greetings or farewells, for instance ( Hillewaert 2016 ; M. Goodwin 2017 , 2021 ; Gan et al. 2020 ). Through interpersonal supportive rituals one can “affirm and support the social relationship between doer and recipient” ( Goffman 1971 , p. 63). Affective tactile behaviors communicate intimacy and serve as “tie signs” ( Goffman 1971 , pp. 188–237) that build cooperativeness and social trust. For instance, in the American and European contexts studied by M. Goodwin (2017) and M. Goodwin & Cekaite (2018) during small reciprocal ceremonies, family members use culturally appropriate tactile communication, including the hug, the kiss, and other intertwining motions of the body, to provide a sign of involvement in and connectedness to another. The hug is sequentially achieved through actions that both invite entry into and enable dismantling of the contextual configuration (C. Goodwin 2000 ) of the hug, and these actions are coordinated through language ( Figure 2 ).

Figure 2 Click to view


In the family, hugs between parents and children occur at punctual points during the day: greeting each other in the morning, after school or after any sustained absence, while dropping children off at school, saying good night, etc. Family members intertwine their bodies and voice in actions that display entering into not only joyful reunion but also periods of extended separation ( M. Goodwin 2017 , M. Goodwin & Cekaite 2018 ). Within families, between intimate partners, corporeal engagement and coperception of tactile intimacy can be coordinated and exhibited through a particular voice quality (creaky voice) and lowered volume, communicating love and affection. Haptic sociality, displayed through intonation, facial expression, and bodily posture during greeting embraces, is critical to the affective life of friends ( M. Goodwin 2021 ) as well as family. Among friends from different cultural communities, hugs are sensitive to such things as sociocultural and gendered norms of tactility, frequency of interaction with the person initiating the hug, and projected times of decreased access (e.g., due to impending death) (M. Goodwin 2021 ).
Haptic rituals can be choreographed to either display deference or create distance. For instance, Hillewaert (2016) examines tactility in the performance of handshakes in Lamu, an island town in coastal Kenya, which was a formerly thriving center of trade and Islamic scholarship and is Kenya's oldest Swahili settlement. Hillewaert shows that the qualities of subtle push, pull, and touch in handshakes are important in the presentation of self, the assessment of others, and the negotiation of interpersonal relationships. By manipulating the sensory details of hand greeting, women negotiate their understandings of heshima (respectability).
In the wake of developing screen-based online technology, haptic rituals are transformed, and they develop from similar conditions for performing supportive interchanges in everyday life. In a study of Chinese video call greetings between migrant parents and their young left-behind children, Gan et al. (2020) show that call openings are crucially important for building and enacting social bonds in the family. Grandparents who take care of children use shepherding touch ( Cekaite 2010 ) to scaffold a participation framework such that the child is visible to the distant parent vis-à-vis the phone. Displaying “love at a distance” is conveyed through kisses, affectionate recognition of each other, and even tactile food exchange on the phone's surface ( Gan 2020 ).
Alternative ways of performing interaction rituals emerge in response to demands for social distancing during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Katila et al. (2020) show how these practices are creatively designed to respond to restrictions on touch and physical contact between politicians in formal encounters. For instance, elbow bumps replaced handshakes and became acceptable haptic supportive rituals worldwide. When one party initiated a conventional form of handshaking, the other party could repair the handshaking initiation by returning a less intimate manner of greeting, declining to touch, or apologizing for touching the other, as participants come to understand that a particular moral order of social distancing has been violated. Mondada et al. (2020) examine embodied and tactile greetings among acquainted people in public places in Switzerland during the COVID-19 pandemic and demonstrate that elbow or fist bumps, hugs in the air, bows, and curtsies were treated as symbolic substitutes for conventional greetings. Routine greetings changed to “hesitated, suspended, yet still completed ones, and to projected but resisted and refused ones” ( Mondada et al. 2020 , p. 441).
Figure 2 Click to view

Section: TOUCH AND COMPASSION

Touch is a sense that can sustain intimacy and close social relations and is implicated in emotionally loaded situations such as when we reach out with compassion toward others. Studies that document tactile soothing in various cultural contexts show both universal and culturally specific features in the sensory choreography of moments of compassion [ Mead 1963 (1935) , New Guinea; Cekaite & Holm Kvist 2017 , Sweden; Burdelski 2020a , Japan; de León 2021 , Tzoltzil Mayan; Takada 2021 , !Xun people; Davidson & Kelly 2021 , aboriginal community of Wadeye]. Compassion commonly involves social acts that include empathetic understanding and active attempts to alleviate the other's distress by soothing ( Keane 2017 ). From a phenomenological perspective, corporeal perception of such highly affective engagement can be interpreted as a lived manifestation of intercorporeality as “compresence,” when while intertwining with other bodies “we embody the other while the other simultaneously embodies us” ( Merleau-Ponty 1964 , p. 168). Compassionate, soothing touch blurs the boundaries between human beings who share emotional corporeal experiences and actions with others ( Cekaite & Holm Kvist 2017 ). In such highly emotionally valenced situations, a rich multisensorial intertwining is established through the lamination of touch, talk, movement, and rhythm. Multiple forms of physical contact—temporally sustained touch that encompasses a large area of participants’ bodies (torso, head-to-head) and strokes—are coordinated with soothing talk and rhythmic movements (e.g., rocking with infants).
As documented in studies of caregiver–child soothing practices in Swedish families and in early childhood education settings, close and intimate embracing as compassionate touch allows for corporeal intersubjectivity and mutual monitoring through coperception of each other's bodily responses ( Cekaite & Holm Kvist 2017 , Cekaite & Bergnéhr 2018 , Cekaite 2021 ). The embracing formation serves as a physical locus for the child's main engagement in a sustained and absorbing experience of crying and multisensorial soothing. Compassionate, soothing embraces are sustained and temporally extended between the soother and the person in distress. A reciprocated embrace and acceptance of soothing involve sustained bodily contact, not only between the upper part of the torso but also including the face, a highly sensitive area for touch as intimate skin-to-skin contact. De León (2021) shows how in Tzotzil Mayan culture, soothing of an infant who is hurt after a physically painful accident is the prerogative of the mother, who responds with breastfeeding. Such response to distress establishes an intimate and safe “nursing corporeal niche,” a rich sensorium of pleasure for the crying baby. Comforting a child in distress can require shifting the frame from serious, i.e., crying, to playful ( M. Goodwin & Cekaite 2018 , pp. 90–91; Takada 2021 ). As documented by Takada in the !Xun society, soothing is provided by engaging the child in gymnastic behavior and bouncing her up and down as caregivers create new rhythms and sounds for the child. By coordinating gymnastic behavior, gaze, smiling, and the production of sounds similar to the baby's whimper, in a kind of parody of it and other utterances for the child, fretful behavior is transformed into playful and pleasurable forms of engagement.
Soothing can also be choreographed with tactile actions that frame distress as requiring less intimate corporeal response. In a study of a preschool in Japan, Burdelski (2020a) has documented how teachers soothe children who are crying during peer conflicts. Teachers often established a face-to-face formation by squatting down to the child's eye level and then used their hands to stroke or rub a child's head or back. They simultaneously mediated and verbally socialized children into the moral conflict resolution.

Section: MANAGING THE OTHER'S BODY THROUGH TOUCH

Touch is also used in establishing specific body techniques, i.e., techniques du corps [ Mauss 1973 (1935) ]. Especially beyond infancy, physical contact is necessary not only in caregiving, but also in managing and exerting bodily control over children's conduct and actions for multiple social purposes. Socialization, caregiver control, assistance, and management of a child's actions are inextricably reliant on bodily practices, sensitizing the child's awareness of the interrelatedness of bodily actions and talk and of the embodied features of social conduct and moral accountability. In various cultural contexts, as documented in a growing number of studies ( Cekaite 2010 , M. Goodwin & Cekaite 2013 , Burdelski 2020b , Gan et al. 2020 ), touch is frequently implicated in dealing with children's noncompliance or unwillingness, bodily socializing children into “getting things done” ( Ervin-Tripp 1976 ).
In video ethnography of dual-earner families in the United States and Sweden, M. Goodwin & Cekaite (2013 , 2018) show that “shepherding” touches are used by parents in both cultural contexts to get children moving toward the location of the requested action, involving such mundane spaces as kitchens, bathrooms, or bedrooms, in parents’ attempts to get children to brush their teeth, eat dinner, or go to bed. Parents’ shepherding touches constituted the means for monitoring and controlling the direction, pace, and route of the child's locomotion. When used to choreograph embodied directives, these touches served as multifunctional cultural tools that scaffolded the child into reflexive awareness of the dialogic and embodied characteristics of social action and accountability. Shepherding controlling touch was used after caregivers’ unsuccessful verbal attempts to get children to comply with a requested action. In doing so, adults were giving children the opportunity to engage in autonomous bodily action prior to their shepherding through touch. Such configurations demonstrated caregivers’ initial trust in children as willing participants in everyday routines. Shepherding touches were subsequently coordinated and simultaneous with verbal directives that requested the child's movement (“Come. You'll change later. Go and wee-wee now Ida”; Figure 3 ). The social meaning of an embodied controlling touch that propelled the child recipient's body into movement thus did not come entirely unexpectedly for the recipient of the touch.

Figure 3 Click to view


Rather, adults manifested their orientation toward the child's bodily integrity and autonomy. Paradoxically, then, while touch can be implicated in controlling the recipient's bodily conduct, the use of touch in everyday life is controlled and shaped by moral normative orders of the community or local social group (e.g., Goffman 1983 , Cekaite & Mondada 2021 ; see also Piper 2014 ).
Several cross-cultural ethnographic studies on early childhood education have demonstrated notable differences in body regulation practices, suggesting that children's bodies are “sites of cultural reflection” and educational policies ( Burke & Duncan 2016 , p. 16; Tobin et al. 2009 ). For instance, in Anglo-Saxon contexts, teachers’ focus on no-touch policies and bodily integrity as well as “‘progressive individualization’ of the body and the self” resulted in the subjugation of physical contact with children in educational institutions ( Burke & Duncan 2016 , p. 12; Piper 2014 ). However, physical contact can also constitute a routine way of engaging in teacher–child relations. A cross-cultural study of children's peer conflicts in Japanese and Swedish preschools ( Burdelski & Cekaite 2021 ) shows that educators use controlling touch to organize triadic corporeal participation frameworks of mutual attention and moral accountability. By establishing and sustaining triadic participation frameworks, where the conflict instigator and a crying child are positioned facing one another, teachers socialized children to perform apologies and restore moral equilibrium while the children were publicly positioned to observe each other's emotional expressions and actions (see Lévinas 1987 on the moral ethics of face).
Touch is also used to establish and sustain attention, organize turn-taking, and foster inclusive participation frameworks. The ability and willingness to establish and sustain joint attention constitute some of the basic traits of human sociality and building blocks of intersubjectivity ( Brown 2012 , de León 2012 ), which is especially relevant for cooperative action (C. Goodwin 2018 ). Various kinds of touch are implicated in directing or sustaining the other's attention, such as when pointing or tapping toward the relevant focus of concern; such practices are constituted by relying on touch as a part of “multimodal gestalt” ( Mondada 2016 , p. 361) or rich multisensorial configurations (C. Goodwin 2018 ; see also Katila 2018 ). For instance, in Finnish classrooms, teachers engage in physical contact with their students when directing their bodily attentional orientation and use verbal directives and gestures to calibrate a socially meaningful action ( Heinonen et al. 2020 ). Meyer (2014 , 2017) examines how contact gestures and touch rather than gaze ( C. Goodwin 1981 ) are used in the organization of conversation—for attention management, turn-taking, and turn allocation—among the Wolof of northwestern Senegal; conversationalists are in constant bodily contact, where touch, gesture, and vocal signals are integrated. Touch is used to extend and sustain an inclusive participation framework and joint speakership during storytelling in Swedish couples living with dementia ( Nilsson et al. 2018 ). Similarly, in a study of Mandarin Chinese adult speakers during jokings, Li (2020) shows that touch served to manage the relational character of participation, for example, while seeking inclusion and appreciation during disagreements.
Various forms of controlling and assisting touch, together with other senses, are used to create multisensorial instructional environments for learning how to position one's bodily comportment in the service of various social imperatives, including such mundane tasks as learning self-care and hygiene practices (M. Goodwin & Cekaite 2018 ), appropriate gender conduct, or bodily comportment of a student ( Burdelski & Mitsuhashi 2010 , Kern 2018 ). In his study on a Japanese-as-a-heritage-language preschool classroom in the United States, Burdelski (2020b) describes a preschool graduation ceremony, a ritual exchange, where children have to use a specific sequence of bodily moves in presenting a “public self” ( Cook 1996 , p. 173). He shows that preparation and rehearsal prior to actual performance are carried out through teachers’ explicit and implicit references to “correct” bodily comportment and tactile instructions, socializing children to an ideology concerning the importance of paying attention to the details of the embodied form of social actions.
Within the family, learning how to perform a number of routine tasks related to self-care involves socialization into embodied activities (M. Goodwin & Cekaite 2018 , pp. 207–10). For example, brushing one's teeth entails learning how to position one's mouth, as well as acquiring a sense of the necessary duration and trajectory of each unfolding activity of toothbrushing. Such socialization involves a certain amount of controlling and assisting touch on the part of the caregiver and compliance and willingness by the child, who can be guided through touch and rhythmic attunement to acquire the skills necessary for autonomous self-care activity. Embodied controlling, assisting, and instructional moves can be seen as indexical of the dialectics of care and control, power and intimacy copresent in caregiver–child relations.
Figure 3 Click to view

Section: TOUCH IN DIAGNOSIS, CARE, AND BODYWORK

Touch in medical encounters is prolific and is used for multiple purposes: diagnosis, treatment, body care, and assistance. As procedural touch, it is a utilitarian and technical activity for which the patient's body is an object requiring intensive physical care. It reaches beyond instrumental task-oriented physical contact and includes expressive, caring touch that influences the patient–professional relationship and the quality of care; it implicates relations between body subjects.
In Western medicine's primary care practice, touch is important for diagnostic purposes ( Heath & Luff 2013 ), for instance, when determining the precise location of pain ( Heath 1989 ). During medical examinations, patients “transform themselves or part of themselves from an active experiential subject into an object of inspection, manipulation, and examination” ( Heath 2006 , p. 208). Percussion, auscultation (with a stethoscope), and palpation form a gestalt for understanding the body's system as a whole, as sound and touch converge in diagnosis of a bodily abnormality. Multiple senses are invoked in diagnostic situations in traditional midwife prenatal consultation in Japan where touch is combined with vision ( Nishizaka 2011 , 2017 ) and sound to serve as a reference, as a midwife tactilely shows the mother the position of parts of the baby's body while also producing memetic terms that indicate depth and position ( Nishizaka 2020 ).
In Tuareg society, women healers, or tinesmegelen , diagnose physical illness through touch; through stroking as well as various types of massages, healers sense the condition of the whole body of the patient ( Rasmussen 2006 ). Touch provides a kind of human “polygraph” test, “pulse-reading,” or “psychoanalysis” ( Rasmussen 2006 , p. 61). Medicine women who are specialists in massage assist with bone and joint problems and in remedying breech births. On the Micronesian island of Yap, touch allows for the diagnosis of pain as well as for therapy ( Throop 2012 ). To practice massage and bone setting, one must be able to feel how tendons, muscles, and bones interconnect when out of place, swollen, or distended. During massage, the patient's experience of pain guides the therapist. By touching the painful area and questioning the patient, the therapist attempts to assess the extent, trajectory, variety, and intensity of the pain. In Japanese physical therapy sessions ( Kuroshima 2020 ), touch permits tactile perception and sensation of the pain-related problem, which is useful in negotiating the patients’ and therapists’ accountability for the current state of the treated body part. Therapists’ professional medical authority is demonstrated through multimodal and sensorial attentiveness to the treated body part, whereas patients’ accountability is grounded in their immediate, firsthand experience of the physical problem.
Touch in medical encounters and nursing is said to have a “double meaning” ( van Dongen & Elema 2001 ). As “bodywork” ( Wolkowitz 2002 ), touch includes various ways of managing, instructing, and guiding the patient's physical actions in their everyday lives. At the same time, touch is intimate and emotional: “[T]ouching is developed into an art that recreates good contacts and human relationships in a medical setting” ( van Dongen & Elema 2001 , p. 149). Writing about medical encounters in the Netherlands, van Dongen & Elema (2001) explain that for both the nurse and the patient, experiences of touching are important. The body constitutes “an object that undergoes the practices of care” ( van Dongen & Elema 2001 , p. 153). An important feature of the art of touching is the “warm, emotional compassionate attitude and a more ‘technical’, concise attitude” ( van Dongen & Elema 2001 , pp. 155–56). Compassionate interaction and touch are quite common among the professionals who practice “relational medicine” ( Raia & Deng 2014 , Raia et al. 2020 ). Raia et al. (2020) describe forms of caring touch in the midst of medical exams with a patient in an advanced heart failure practice in the United States. When occurring in conjunction with diagnostic touch, especially in situations where patients may feel vulnerable, caring touch facilitates passages from the person level to the organ, tissue, and gene levels and then back to the whole-person level in an uninterrupted movement, maintaining the person–person relation between doctor and patient.
Some medical situations involve multiple dimensions of bodywork, as shown by Guo et al. (2020) , who examine how a child's body becomes an object for various kinds of touch as well as the recipient of admonition and comfort during dental exams in Qingdao, China. Touch as bodywork is also important in the contexts of professional care in residential care homes, where adult care recipients may have various kinds of cognitive and physical impairments that constrain their abilities to participate in and accomplish mundane tasks such as moving around, putting on clothes, or showering. Multisensoriality, manifested as the coordination of talk and touch, is crucial in performing these tasks. For instance, Krummheuer (2015) , examining health care in Denmark, shows that the Danish therapist's verbal instructions and positive assessments, in addition to embodied actions involving the touch of body parts to be moved, provide the scaffold for the patient to become an agent of an activity that they could not have performed themselves. In a study of a care resident with Parkinson's disease, Marstrand & Svennevig (2018) , examining Danish residential care homes, show that when haptic actions are used to instruct and guide the patient's movements, the caregiver orients to touch as sensitive, potentially affecting the patient's privacy and rights to self-determination. Similar to embodied directives in parent–child interactions (M. Goodwin & Cekaite 2018 ), shepherding touch was used when other verbal actions were exhausted. There is, however, a nuanced difference between caring touch in early childhood and caring touch in late adulthood. In early childhood, embodied care is imperative for survival; various forms of physical contact that clearly control, instruct, and manage the infant's or child's actions are not viewed as totally intrusive. A number of studies from Western contexts show how, in adult caregiving contexts, various routines are in place with regard to how the use of touch can be made accountable, without violating levels of intimacy ( Marstrand & Svennevig 2018 , Mononen 2019 , Merlino 2021 ). Touch by adults in caregiving situations is morally loaded, as power relations between the caregiver and care recipient are more balanced compared with caregiver–child relations.
Physical contact in health care is flexible and transformative; and, depending on a patient's responses and emotional experiences such as distress manifested during treatment, professional touch can evolve and take on affective, compassionate meanings. Merlino (2021) shows that during language therapy sessions body contact is initiated by the therapist for multiple purposes, depending on the progression of a therapy session. Touch is used to instruct and correct a patient's body positioning and to organize mutual focus of attention toward each other; and it can be transformed into comforting touches, as a patient's distress with his failure in therapy is manifested. Raudaskoski (2020) examines forms of touch in a residential home for patients with an acquired brain injury, highlighting what she terms amicable touch: ( a ) intimate, caring, long caresses or touches (typically given to more severely disabled residents as part of specialized care) and ( b ) routine, friendly, short prods and taps (frequently on the shoulder, as for example during verbal teasing) (see also Mononen 2019 ). The participation status or identity of someone as “able-bodied” or caregiver was indexed by the forms of touch one gave or received. Solomon (2010) in the United States examines interspecies therapeutic work involving autistic children and service dogs. She shows how communication with specially trained service dogs can allow an autistic child to develop the identity of an able-bodied caregiver and thus reconfigure interactions with their siblings.

Section: CONCLUSION

Across a range of cultural contexts, from the family to the school, to health care, we find forms of haptic engagement while providing for the care, control, socialization, and general well-being of the other. Detailed attention to the coordinated attunement of bodies in affectively heightened social interactions shows how the interactional shaping of social and affective relations combines multiple senses and extends beyond the use of language. Ethnographic observations and video recordings enable the use of microanalysis to investigate participants’ emic, in-situ meaning-making practices. This approach supports empirically grounded connections between the theoretical frameworks based on the corporeality of social life (e.g., Merleau-Ponty, Goffman) and cooperative social action (e.g., C. Goodwin). As we have discussed, through touch, together with other senses, the body can be scaffolded for entering new activity domains, including diagnosis and instruction. Haptic activities provide ways of ritually affirming and constituting social relations and expressing intimacy. Various forms of haptic sociality reveal the recurrent and recognizable ways in which humans, in social encounters, orient to each other as “the living body” ( Merleau-Ponty 1964 ) and uncover their intercorporeal relations with the world.

Section: disclosure statement

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

Michael Sean Smith, Felix Fritzell, and Hanna Fideli Fritzell provided their artistic talents in the rendering of images for this article, and we are very appreciative of their work. The data on Los Angeles and Swedish families were part of an interdisciplinary, collaborative research endeavor conducted by members of the UCLA Center on Everyday Lives on Families (CELF) under the direction of Elinor Ochs and the Swedish counterpart under the direction of Karin Aronsson (SCELF). CELF was generously supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation program on Workplace, Workforce, and Working Families headed by Kathleen Christensen.

Section: literature cited

