Title: PTPARL-D: an annotated corpus of forty-four years of Portuguese parliamentary debates


Abstract: Abstract

In a representative democracy, some decide in the name of the rest. These elected officials are commonly gathered in public assemblies, such as parliaments, where they discuss policies, legislate, and vote on fundamental initiatives. A core aspect of such democratic processes are the plenary debates, where important public discussions take place. Many parliaments around the world are increasingly keeping the transcripts of such debates and other parliamentary data in digital formats that are accessible to the public. This is meant to increase transparency and accountability, but these records are often only provided as raw text or even as images, with little, if any, annotation and in inconsistent formats, making them difficult to analyse. Here, we present ptarl-d , an annotated corpus of debates in the Portuguese Parliament, covering the years 1976 to 2019 and representing the entire period of Portuguese democracy.

Section: 1. Introduction

Analyses of large numbers of parliamentary debates are intended to pave the way for a better understanding of the collective information processes involved in the approval or rejection of laws, agenda setting, political cycles, etc . Such analyses are also necessary to assess, question and improve internal dynamics, facilitating comparative studies, and increasing transparency and accountability ( Setälä and Grönlund, 2006 ; and Ihalainen and Palonen, 2009 ). Until recently, political science questions on parliamentary dynamics have been approached either qualitatively or, when quantitatively, focussing on very specific variables that could be measured. More often than not, scientists would have to focus on quantity, and give up on content analysis, or focus on qualitative content analysis, and place human limits on how much data to include. For example, longitudinal or large-scale important studies performed on voting discipline and behaviour typically do not compare between discourses, focussing instead on the more tractable vote count ( Faas, 2003 ; Hix et al ., 2005 ; and Kam, 2009 ).
The increasing digitisation of parliamentary documents and development of computational methods opens exciting possibilities for the fast and unbiased study of political data. Using Natural Language Processing ( nlp ) and other Machine Learning tools on political texts is conceptually simple and has yielded some very interesting results ( Hopkins and King, 2010 ). Therefore, starting from a text, it is possible to computationally identify differences between discourses by analysing individual words (by simply counting or ranking), sequences of words and even sentence structure. Several tools have been developed to automatically analyse complex and large political texts, which increasingly include not only party manifestos but also parliamentary addresses, debates and commentary ( Laver et al ., 2003 ; Grimmer, 2013 ; Slapin and Proksch, 2014 ; Lauderdale and Herzog, 2016 ; and Lapponi et al ., 2018 ). These techniques have proven themselves, mainly focussing on two-party systems, such as the US Senate or Congress, but also on more complex systems.
The Portuguese Parliament ( pp ) corpus, introduced here, is a resource that can be used for Natural Language Processing and other text mining goals to study over four decades of a democratic multi-party system, including both quantitative indicators and the possibility of discourse analysis, as we describe below.
The Portuguese Parliament ( pp ) comprises a single chamber known as the Assembleia da República. This is the representative assembly of all Portuguese citizens, also overseeing the life cycles of the laws implemented in the Republic, while ensuring their compliance with the National Constitution. Portugal has records of parliamentary debates since 1821, when the country was still under monarchic ruling, through the First Republic (1911–1926), Estado Novo (1935–1974) and the current democratic period from 1975 to the present day. These include a number of distinct document series produced by the Portuguese government to keep records of parliamentary activities – each corresponding to the aforementioned historic periods – and protocols for data recording.
The study of the pp offers challenges both at the political science and computational levels, representing an excellent case study in approaching multi-party systems. From its peaceful revolution in 1974, to joining the European Union, Portugal has had a very rich forty years of political history, while maintaining a democratic regime. Thus, the pp can be a good model for computational political science research, while also allowing for comparative studies. This is for several reasons. Firstly, it is a relatively small parliament, with the 230 elected Members of Parliament ( mp s) representing the country as a whole, not a particular regional constituency, and with a limited number of players: Portugal has had less than 1,900 mp s since 1976, and more than 200 of those were, at some point, Members of Government ( mg ). Secondly, it is a multi-party system, with varying levels of polarisation, that does not favour voting freedom, but allows for other types of dissent ( Pequito Teixeira and Freire, 2010 ); Voting against the party line is very costly and infrequent, with divergence happening mostly at the level of discourse ( Leston-Bandeira, 2009 ). Thirdly, refining existing computational tools, able to detect more subtle differences, will open new possibilities to the study of other types of discourse and settings. Fourthly, the construction of a political discourse corpus in Portuguese is a novel contribution and it is fundamental to start developing tools in important spoken languages other than English. In fact, in what concerns the debates of the pp , at the start of this project there was a corpus released as a subset of the Corpus of Reference of Contemporary Portuguese ( Généreux et al ., 2012 ), and community efforts to facilitate access to publicly available data, such as the Demo.cratica website ( Carvalho and Lafuente, 2010 ), but not a comprehensive publication of all the diaries, in a (semi-)structured format. In 2019, pop a d was launched with similar goals, but using a different methodology for speaker identification and assignment ( De Giorgi and Dias, 2019 ).
This annotated corpus is based on the Series I of the ‘Third Republic’, which stores the debate transcripts that took place in the Portuguese National Assembly since 1976, when the first democratically elected Parliament took seat, covering the full story of the Portuguese democracy. Thus, this corpus builds on the growing collection of parliamentary corpora at the European level ( Marx and Schuth, 2010 ; Ogrodniczuk, 2012 ; Pražák and Šmídl, 2012 ; Abercrombie and Batista-Navarro, 2018 ; Nanni et al ., 2018 ; Hansen, 2018 ; and Wissik and Pirkir, 2018 ) and offers tools for discourse analysis and comparative studies at the national and international levels.

Section: 2. Original data

Debate transcripts were downloaded from the Portuguese Parliament ( pp ) website 4 in text format. For the first legislative session of the 8th legislature, the text documents from numbers 16 to 91 were not available from the source website. We thus retrieved them as pdf files from the main Parliament web site 5 and converted them to the same format as the original text files. The documents have been typed by humans over a period of over forty years and, in earlier legislatures, the Parliament had them digitised using optical character recognition ( ocr ). Each debate is stored as a text document. Within Series I, the overall ‘natural’ structure of debate documents is as follows: Preamble . This includes the journal number, debate date, president chairing the debate, and secretaries. Summary . Short statement of key topics discussed in the debate. Call of MPs . The Parliament President calls the mp s in the assembly, assessing their presence or absence. Communications . The President communicates relevant information for the debate. Debate transcription . The actual body of the debate. This is the only section we annotated. Record of late MP entries . Attendance to debate sessions is controlled, including a list of mp s who entered late. MPs that missed the debate . List of mp s that did not attend the debate, often with a justification. Corrections/Errata . This section contains explicit corrections to errors concerning events during the debate. Voting record . Registry of votes by present mp s to pass or fail a discussed proposal.
mp names and other biographical information were also retrieved from the pp website, when available, and stored in a relational database. There is an Open Data section with biographies of mp s, which were downloaded in the xml format; in addition, for the first five legislatures, we used csv files provided by the Parliament administrative services. This information was used for the assignment of utterances – uninterrupted sequences of words spoken by a subject – to a specific mp during a period in which a generic ‘current speaker’ ( Orador ) was used (more details below). In addition, for all other utterances, a match mp was identified in the database to identify the utterance’s speaker unambiguously.

Section: 3. Annotation pipeline

In order to implement our annotation scheme, we had to overcome a number of important hurdles, which can be broadly classified into three categories: ( 1 ) identifying the beginning and ending of the actual debate; ( 2 ) identifying the beginning and ending of an utterance; and ( 3 ) identifying the mp that speaks in each utterance.
Therefore, the collection of debate documents was subjected to several processing steps: ( 1 ) Strip html . html tags were removed to leave only the text. ( 2 ) Clean headers . Page headers, which include page numbers and other metadata, were detected and eliminated. ( 3 ) Clean asides . Asides that are not utterances, such as applause, protest and laughter, were detected and eliminated. ( 4 ) Detect session end . Debate transcriptions include a section after the President of the Assembly closes the session; this is generally marked by an expression indicating the time (e.g., ‘Eram 18 horas’, which is Portuguese for ‘It was 6 pm ’), and we marked that position to eliminate the text that comes after. ( 5 ) Tag utterances . Utterances by individuals are generally indicated with specific punctuation marks, a colon and a dash separated by one space: <Speaker> : - <Utterance> We used a regular expression to detect this pattern and slight variations, to enclose all utterances in xml tags, keeping both the content (<Utterance>) and the person speaking (<Speaker>). ( 6 ) Assign Parliament President utterances . President utterances are important because they can identify speakers, when the floor is granted to them. We used fuzzy matching of a few common speaker patterns (‘O Sr. Presidente’, ‘A Sr.a Presidente’ – Portuguese for ‘Mr President’ and ‘Ms President’, respectively) to assign these utterances. ( 7 ) Assign ‘ Orador ’. The first mp to speak after the President of the pp (could broadly be considered as the mp who had the floor), would be marked as ‘O Orador’ or ‘A Oradora’ (Portuguese for ‘Speaker’, in the masculine and feminine forms, respectively), after their first interruption. This made speaker assignment very difficult, up until the 10th legislature, when this procedure was stopped and all utterances started being identified by the name of the mp . Simple heuristics were used to assign the ‘O Orador’ or ‘A Oradora’, to the corresponding mp s. ( 8 ) Assign speaker . The speaker of each utterance was, whenever possible, identified as a specific person (i.e., as an entity that can be tracked throughout all of the debates, rather than just a name). Previous steps in the pipeline (tagging utterances and assigning ‘Orador’) yielded a string representing the speaker of each utterance; this string may belong to an mp (it starts with ‘O Sr.’ or ‘A Sra.’ – Portuguese for Mr and Ms, respectively – followed by the name and party), a member of Government (it contains the cabinet name) or to other actors, such as the President and secretaries of the Assembly, heads of state and guests. In the first two cases, the string was fuzzy-matched against a set of mp s or members of Government, respectively, who participated in the session.
The above steps were written as Python functions and co-ordinated using Luigi, 6 a Python module to build pipelines of batch jobs. The end result of the pipeline is an xml file, whose format is described next.

Section: 4. Annotation scheme

The general annotation structure of our corpus is exemplified below: <debate period="r3" legislature="1" session="1" number="1" date="1976-06-03"> <page number="1"> <utterance page-start="1" speaker-string="O Sr. Presidente" speaker-role="president" order="1">Dou a palavra ao senhor Alberto Alves</utterance> <utterance page-start="1" speaker-id="123" speaker-name="Alberto Alves" speaker-party="AB" speaker-string="O Sr. Alberto Alves (AB)" order="2">Blah</utterance> </page> </debate>
The outermost tag is the <debate>. It contains data and other sub-structures that pertain to a single, specific meeting of the parliament. Thus, the tag includes the following fixed metadata: Period . Corresponds to the historic data source, in this case always ‘r3’, the third Republic. Legislature . Indicates the government cycle in which the debate took place. Legislative_session . Typically refers to a year period within each four-year legislature. Number . Ordinal, per legislature session index of the debate. Date . Date when the parliamentary session took place (not the publication date of the document, which is usually one or more days later).
Within the <debate> tag, each page is enclosed in a <page> sub-tag that corresponds to the page number within the published journal containing the debate. This information is kept in the annotation scheme to help with the identification of utterances in the source journals. Finally, within each page there is one or more <utterance> sub-tags, containing the words spoken by mp s and other actors in the Parliamentary debate session. Utterances contain several attributes: Page-start . This is the page number where the utterance begins. Speaker-string . The original string identifying the speaker, from which the other speaker attributes are derived. We keep this in the document because it is useful when the speaker is not (correctly) identified by the pipeline. Speaker-id . This is a universal id that identifies the mp uniquely across the entire corpus. Speaker-name . This is the short name of the speaker; speaker-id will support any possible need for disambiguation. Speaker-party . This is the party the speaker belonged to when the utterance was produced. Speaker-role . This is currently only used for utterances by the President of the National Assembly, where its value is ‘president’. Other utterances do not have this attribute. Order . Is the ordinal number specifying the order of the utterance in the current debate.

Section: 5. Conclusion

The corpus comprises 4,448 debates, divided into thirteen legislatures (see Table 1 ), each of which may contain up to four legislative sessions. The average number of utterances per debate is 305.12 (with median 273) and the standard deviation is 194.38. The maximum number of utterances in a single debate is 2,104. There are, on average, 95.20 words per utterance (median of 19 and standard deviation of 198.30), with the longest utterance having 16,558 words.
A web application was developed to browse and search the annotated debates. There is a calendar view to browse the corpus chronologically and a search feature where utterances can be found based on keywords, speakers (both by mp and by party), date and/or legislature. In addition to the search results – a list of utterances filtered by the search conditions, with a link to see them in the context of the debates – the user can see a plot of the frequency of these utterances through time, by month or by year. Figure 1 shows an example of such a search, highlighting the usage of the word ‘austeridade’ (Portuguese for austerity) during economic crises that prompted imf interventions.
Our corpus adds to an ongoing effort to annotate plenary debates of several European Parliaments. As a multi-party system with little freedom of vote, the Portuguese Parliament is particularly interesting for comparative political studies. This effort was also complemented with a web platform with a simple user interface, that allows for searches and simple longitudinal analysis. This access is free and interested parties should contact the authors.
The corpus, as well as the web interface to explore it, described above, is available online 7 with access on request. We are working on a full re-design of the website, increasing accessibility and ease of use. Upon completion both the corpus and the interface will be released with an open license.

Section: Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by ptdc ivc esct 5337 2012, funded by the Portuguese Fundação para a Ciência e para a Tecnologia ( fct ) and by the Welcome dfrh wiia 60 2011, co-funded by the fct and the Marie Curie Actions, both awarded to jgs . This work was produced with the support of incd funded by fct and feder under the project 01/SAICT/2016 no. 022153. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
