Title: Annual Meeting - Human Biology Association


Section: Current Officers and Members of Standing Committees




Section: GREETINGS FROM HBA PROGRAM COMMITTEE CHAIR!

The 45th Annual Meeting of the Human Biology Association will be held at JW Marriott Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California from Wednesday April 15 to Friday April 17, 2020. Pre-registration is less costly and is possible on-line at www.humbio.org through March 29, 2020. Non-members who register for the meeting are also welcome to attend.
The meetings open with a Poster Session on Wednesday morning from 8:00-11:00 a.m. This session provides attendees with the opportunity to discuss the presented research one-on-one with individual investigators. These posters will be on display during the session and will be available throughout the day for individual viewing. As we had another year of with a high number of submissions, we are trying a new, additional poster session format, with 16 posters presented during the reception on Wednesday night. Long ago, I remember enjoying the posters session/reception as a great way to talk about our science in a relaxed atmosphere. Two exciting Breakout Sessions follow the morning poster session: one on engaging marginalized communities and the other session on science communications by our student representatives.
Wednesday afternoon features the Plenary Session , “The normal and the normative in human biology” organized by Jennifer Cullin and Virginia Vitzthum. This session brings together researchers from diverse backgrounds to tease apart the statistical, cultural and clinical conceptualization of “normal” in relation to a variety of biological markers ranging from bone health to ovarian function. This year’s Raymond Pearl Memorial Speaker is Dr. Andrea Wiley . She will present “ Biological Normalcy: A new way forward for biocultural analysis of human population variation ” at 5 p.m. Dr. Wiley is a Professor of Anthropology at Indiana University at Bloomington and a former HBA President and Secretary/Treasurer. Her research explores feedback relationships between cultural norms and population biology. Specifically, she has focused on the relationship between non-human milk consumption and child growth, how this may have contributed to the evolution of alleles for milk digestion, and how ideas about milk and growth have played a role in the current global spread of milk drinking.
The day concludes with our members’ Reception and Poster session from 6:30–9:30 p.m. During the reception we will have 16 posters presented.
The scientific program on Thursday, April 16th consists of 24 podium presentations and is organized into four sessions: (1) New directions in human biology: Environmental context and health across the lifespan; (2) Diet, growth, development and nutrition; (3) Culture, environment and adult health and (4) Stress, immune function and health outcomes
The Annual Awards Luncheon will be held on Thursday from 12:00-1:15 p.m. The HBA Executive Committee will present the Franz Boas Distinguished Achievement Award to Professor Carol Worthman of Emory University, and the Michael A. Little Early Career Award to Professors Zaneta Thayer (Dartmouth) and Lee Gettler (Notre Dame). Additionally, the recipients of the Edward E. Hunt, Jr., Phyllis Eveleth, and Hilde Spielvogel Awards for outstanding graduate and undergraduate student presentations will also be announced. Tickets are available for advance purchase (and it does sell out!), so please buy your tickets early and join your colleagues to celebrate this year’s awardees. The HBA Annual Business Meeting will follow the final podium session and your participation is also encouraged for this event. Thursday’s activities will end with the Student Reception from 7:00-9:30 p.m., which is open to all registered student members and should not be missed! Thank you to Wiley for their continued support of this valuable activity!
Friday morning will feature Flash Talks from 8:30 am-11:30 am. Amanda Thompson introduced this new format last year and we got very positive feedback. I was happy to be able to make it possible again. This podium session will feature flash talks highlighting submissions that are asking interesting questions, using novel methodologies or incorporating new research areas. In this rapid-fire session, speakers will have 5 minutes to present a single slide and 2 minutes to respond to audience questions.
As always, there are a number of sessions of interest at the AAPA meetings. This year’s joint AAPA/HBA Session is titled, “Human responses to climate change: What anthropologists want climate scientists and policymakers to know,” and is organized by James Holland and Anne Pisor. It will take place on Saturday morning.
A detailed schedule of presentations and events, abstracts, and an index of presenters follow this summary and is also available at www.humbio.org .
Thank you to the 2020 HBA Program Committee members, Dan Eisenberg, Morgan Hoke, Asher Rosinger, Zaneta Thayer and Sharon Williams. A special thanks to the American Journal of Human Biology and to Wiley for their sponsorship of the meetings. We welcome you to the meetings, thank you for your participation in this exciting group of presentations and events, and sincerely hope that you enjoy your time in LA!
Gillian Ice
HBA Program Committee Chair
FLOOR PLANS
45th Annual Meeting
HUMAN BIOLOGY ASSOCIATION
PROGRAM SUMMARY
Los Angeles, CA

45TH Annual Meeting
HUMAN BIOLOGY ASSOCIATION SCIENTIFIC PROGRAM

