Title: “It was all taken away”: Lactation, embodiment, and resistance among mothers caring for their very-low-birth-weight infants in the neonatal intensive care unit


Abstract: Abstract

The prevalence of infants born before 37 weeks of gestation continues to rise in the United States. Advances in neonatology have led to improved survival rates among preterm infants, including those born at a very-low-birth-weight (VLBW). Exclusive human milk feeding is a therapeutic intervention for VLBW preterm infants, and mothers are encouraged to provide their own milk. Yet, it is well-established that mothers and infants may face extraordinarily complicated lactation and infant feeding challenges in NICU settings, many of which emanate from birth trauma . The purpose of this study is to gain a deeper understanding of the ways in which the hyper-medicalized management of preterm birth and infant feeding in NICU environments affect mothers' postpartum health and well-being. Seventeen mothers of VLBW preterm infants were interviewed August 2016–June 2017 within three years of their infant's NICU discharge about their feeding decisions and experiences. Narrative analysis yielded five themes: (1) the physical and emotional trauma of giving birth prematurely impacted mothers' lactation experiences; (2) separation from their infants intensified mothers' suffering and disrupted lactation; (3) mothers experienced being marginalized in their infant's NICU care; (4) mothers practiced embodied forms of resistance to cope with both trauma and marginalization; and (5) skilled support was central to mothers' positive lactation experiences in the NICU. We draw upon feminist theory in the anthropology of reproduction to examine the fundamental hierarchies of power in U.S. neonatal critical care systems that fracture mothers' interembodied relationships to their newborns , exacerbate lactation failure, and engender traumatic postpartum neglect. Moreover, we theorize mothers' expressions of suffering in the context of preterm birth and lactation insufficiency as idioms of distress engendered by the violence of neglectful care. Narrative inquiry is instrumental to designing structural transformations in the systems of care available to mothers of preterm infants who are admitted to a NICU.

Section: 1. Introduction

The prevalence of preterm births , defined as births occurring <37 weeks of gestation, continues to rise in the United States. Approximately 10% of all U.S. births are preterm, and about 1.5% of all of these infants are born at <1500 g, or very-low-birth-weight (VLBW) ( Martin et al., 2018 ). VLBW preterm infants are at high risk of developing serious medical complications, and formula feeding increases the risk of life-threatening necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) ( Quigley et al., 2018 ). The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends exclusive human milk (EHM) feeding of VLBW infants along with micro- and macro-nutrient fortification, to achieve optimal growth and developmental outcomes ( AAP, 2016 ). Yet, there are numerous factors that complicate the implementation of recommended EHM feeding practices in neonatal critical care settings ( Cotten, 2019 ).
Giving birth prematurely is associated with complex challenges in establishing and maintaining lactation ( Hoban et al., 2018 ) and psychological distress ( Beck and Woynar, 2017 ; Roque et al., 2017 ). To improve recommended feeding practices, timely access to skilled lactation support, mental health care, and psychosocial support is critical for mothers of NICU-admitted infants ( Meier et al., 2017 ). Supportive lactation care along with access to pasteurized donor human milk (PDHM) in NICUs may contribute to improved EHM-feeding outcomes ( Israel-Ballard, 2018 ). Yet, PDHM is not universally available, accessible, or acceptable in circumstances where its use is medically indicated ( Palmquist et al., 2019 ). Therefore, it is important to understand the intersections of preterm birth experiences, the NICU care environment, lactation outcomes, and parents' infant feeding decisions.

Section: 2. Making milk for preterm infants in the NICU

Flacking and colleagues ( Flacking et al., 2006 ; Flacking and Dykes, 2013 ) were among the first to explore specific ways that neonatal critical care settings in Sweden and England fractured maternal-infant reciprocal trust, attachment, and breastfeeding. Subsequent studies have reported similar findings among mothers who express milk/breastfeed in NICU settings, who often describe lactation practices as emotionally and physically taxing, and disruptive to their transition to motherhood and bonding with their infants ( Bower et al., 2017 ; Hurst et al., 2013 ; Ikonen et al., 2015 ; Maghaireh et al., 2016 ).
At the same time, many mothers view expressing milk/breastfeeding in the NICU as important to their sense of coherence in a stressful environment ( Thomson et al., 2013 ). These mothers point to the symbolic meaning of expressing milk/breastfeeding and emphasize the importance of having practical and emotional support in the process ( Froh et al., 2015 ; Parker et al., 2018 ). Similarly, having the option to use PDHM for feedings is commonly described as profoundly meaningful to parents ( Cassidy and Dykes, 2019 ), helping to ease the physical and emotional stress of maintaining intensive pumping regimens or worries about their own milk supply ( Kair et al., 2015 ).
Preterm birth trauma is linked to postpartum mental health sequelae along with poor lactation and infant feeding outcomes. Beck and Watson explored barriers and facilitators of breastfeeding following traumatic birth, which they characterized as “an event that occurs during any phase of the childbearing process that involves actual or threatened serious injury or death to the mother or her infant ( Beck and Watson, 2008 : 229).” Subsequent studies have addressed mothers' subjective experiences caring for preterm infants receiving neonatal critical care, emphasizing hardships associated with adjusting to motherhood in these highly medicalized settings including learning how to care for their infant, navigating relationships of power, information-seeking, and cultivating social support networks ( Beck, 2016 ; Beck and Woynar, 2017 ; Roque et al., 2017 ). This work has raised awareness of the need for multilevel support in NICUs, comprised of clinician support, peer support , and family-centered care ( Franck and O'Brien, 2019 ). Nonetheless, there remains an opportunity to critically examine the fundamental ideological and structural systems of neonatal critical care medicine that perpetuate parents' vulnerabilities to postpartum trauma, marginalization, and disrupted lactation.

Section: 3. Medicalized infant feeding in the NICU

Anthropological scrutiny of medicalization and authoritative knowledge as mutually reinforcing facets of technologically managed reproduction ( Davis-Floyd, 2001 ; Davis-Floyd and Sargent, 1996 ) have challenged the notion that pregnancy, birth, and lactation are de facto pathological states ( Cheyney, 2011 ; Davis-Floyd, 2003 ; Dykes, 2006 ; Jordan and Davis-Floyd, 1992 ; Martin, 1987 ; Rapp, 2000 ; Tomori, 2015 ). Anthropologists and sociologists alike have employed careful comparative ethnographic, historical, sociocultural, and political economic analyses to demonstrate the various ways in which reproduction has been subjected to surveillance and regulation across time and space, often in ways that stratify reproduction ( Colen, 1995 ) along categories of race, ethnicity, gender and sexuality, class, and citizenship ( Bridges, 2011 ; Casper, 1998 ; Dána-Ain Davis, 2018 ; Dana-Ain Davis, 2019 ; Ginsburg and Rapp, 1991 , 1995 ; Guillemin and Holmstrom, 1986 ; Mamo, 2007 ; Mullings and Wali, 2001 ). Moreover, they have provided numerous examples to illustrate how capitalist economic regimes, which drive social reproduction and factory-like conditions of reproductive health care in WEIRD (Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, Democratic) countries ( Henrich et al., 2010 ) become embodied ( Clarke et al., 2010 ; Conrad, 2007 ; Dykes, 2005 , 2006 ; Rapp, 2011 ; Tomori, 2015 ; Tully and Ball, 2014 ).
Among the consequences of hyper-medicalized, technocratic, and biocapitalist (cf. Tomori, 2015 ) systems of maternity care in the U.S. are the highest rates of preterm birth and maternal and infant morbidity and mortality among WEIRD societies ( Bronstein, 2016 ). Racism, along with other intersecting forms of oppression, perpetuates disparities in access to the resources needed to buffer against the trauma of preterm birth and having an infant admitted to a NICU ( Davis, 2019 , 2018 ; McLemore et al., 2018 ). Neglectful postpartum maternity care and care of NICU-admitted infants is more likely to be fatal among Black and indigenous mothers and infants in the U.S. ( Boghossian et al., 2019 ; Jammeh et al., 2018 ; Sigurdson et al., 2019 ). Although the medicalization of infant feeding is pervasive in hospital-based postpartum care generally ( Dykes, 2005 , 2006 ; Torres, 2014 ), it is especially pronounced in NICUs where data-driven feeding protocols, including the production, surveillance, and distribution of human milk, are controlled by neonatologists ( Bronstein, 2016 ).
In this paper we are concerned with how the technocratic systems of managing preterm birth and infant feeding in U.S. NICU settings give rise to gendered expressions of postpartum suffering. To this end, we interrogate lactation support and infant feeding experiences at the intersections of extremely preterm birth and neonatal critical care medicine in the U.S. We consider mothers' experiences in dialogue with feminist perspectives in the anthropology of reproduction ( Bridges, 2011 ; Rapp, 2001 ; Davis, 2019 ; Mullings and Wali, 2001 ) to uncover root causes of suffering among mothers whose infants are admitted to the NICU. Moreover, we theorize the pervasiveness of mothers' varied expressions of failure, guilt, inadequacy, and grief in the context of preterm birth and lactation insufficiency as idioms of distress ( Kaiser and Weaver, 2019 ; Nichter, 1981 ) which are emblematic of systematic and institutionalized neglect, social marginalization, and isolation. We critically examine the fundamental hierarchies of power in U.S. neonatal critical care systems that fracture mothers' interembodied relationships to their newborns , exacerbate lactation failure, and engender traumatic postpartum neglect.

Section: 4. Materials & methods

We conducted a cross-sectional, qualitative study to understand the experiences of mothers who decided to breastfeed or express milk when their premature VLBW infant was admitted to a NICU. Information on patient characteristics was collected during the interviews and via a brief electronic survey. Ethics approval to conduct this study was granted by the Elon University Institutional Review Board (IRB ID 16-151).
Seventeen participants self-referred to the study August 2016–June 2017. An initial group of participants (n = 7) were recruited from a single NICU during the exploratory ethnographic phase of the research project. A description of methods for the ethnographic study is published elsewhere (Holdren et al., 2019). Additional participants, who were based in different locales across the U.S. (n = 10), were recruited online. Study information was shared through print flyers and online social media platforms. Individuals were eligible for the study if they were at least 18 years of age, based in the U.S., had given birth to a VLBW infant within three years of the study start date, and their infant had experienced a serious gastrointestinal disease in the NICU. Participants were interviewed either in-person or by telephone. All interviews were conducted in English. Active recruitment ended when thematic saturation was reached ( Charmaz, 2014 ; Riessman, 2008 ).
All interviews were audio recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed using Dedoose (Dedoose V6.1.18). Quality of the transcriptions were confirmed by A.P., S.H. and C.F. Thematic narrative analysis ( Riessman, 2008 ) was completed through a group process that included: (i) line-by-line coding of interviews and constant-comparison to refine codes; (ii) weekly discussions to finalize codes and code organization; (iii) development of narrative themes; (iv) identifying points of thematic saturation within the dataset; (v) finalizing the interpretation of themes. We developed analytic domains that were grounded within participants' experiences in order to anchor our interpretations, strengthen theoretical rigor, and minimize individual researcher biases. In the final analysis, we consider narrative themes in dialogue with feminist anthropological literature of the medicalization of birth and infant feeding.

Section: 5. Results

All participants self-identified as mothers. Twelve had singleton births, and five gave birth to multiples (1 set of triplets and 4 sets of twins, including 1 neonatal death). Table 1 summarizes participant demographic characteristics, parity, incidence of NEC diagnoses, infant feeding outcomes in the NICU and post-NICU discharge, and breastfeeding support in the NICU. Table 1 . Participant characteristics. Descriptors n (%) Race/Ethnicity Non-Hispanic white 13 (76.5) Hispanic/Latinx 2 (11.8) Asian/Pacific Islander 1 (5.9) Multiracial/Mixed Ethnicity 1 (5.9) Age 20–29 6 (35.3) 30–39 10 (58.8) ≥ 40 1 (5.9) Income $0–24,000 2 (11.8) $25,000–49,000 1 (5.9) $50,000–74,000 3 (17.6) $75,000–99,000 5 (29.4) $100,000+ 6 (35.3) Education High School 2 (11.8) Two-Year College 1 (5.9) Four-Year College 7 (41.2) Graduate Degree 7 (41.2) Parity Primiparous 9 (53.0) Multiparous 8 (47.0) Weeks of Gestation at Birth <26 weeks 8 (47.0) ≥ 26 weeks 9 (53.0) Infant Feeding Outcomes in NICU a Exclusively human milk (fortified) 11 (47.8) Mixed human milk (fortified) and formula 12 (52.2) Exclusively formula 0 Infant Feeding Outcomes Post-NICU Discharge b Exclusively human milk post-discharge - 6 months adjusted 11 (50.0) Mixed human milk and formula post-discharge - 6 months adjusted 0 Exclusively formula post-discharge - 6 months adjusted 11 (50.0) Feeding-Related Infant Conditions b Confirmed NEC (medical or surgical) 6 (27.2) Suspected NEC 2 (9.1) Severe reflux 6 (27.2) Oral aversion 5 (22.7) G-tube feeding required 4 (18.2) Other 6 (27.2) Breastfeeding Support in NICU Breastfeeding attempts supported in the NICU 7 (41.2) No breastfeeding attempts supported in the NICU 10 (58.8) a Total n and % reflect 23 live births and 1 neonatal death among the 17 participants. b Infants may have presented with more than one condition.
Our analysis yielded the following narrative themes: (1) the physical and emotional trauma of giving birth prematurely impacted mothers' lactation experiences; (2) separation from their infants intensified mothers' suffering and disrupted lactation; (3) mothers were actively marginalized in their infant's NICU care; (4) mothers practiced embodied forms of resistance to cope with both trauma and marginalization; and (5) skilled support was central to mothers' positive lactation experiences in the NICU.
When asked to describe their lactation experiences in the NICU, participants invariably began by sharing their birth stories. Giving birth prematurely was experienced as a crisis of survival for both mothers and infants: “For me it was probably the worst day of my life. I never really even felt him kick, you know? I was approximately 6 months along, and I couldn't even fathom how a baby could survive under those conditions …. the whole experience was just extremely traumatic, and I don't care what parent you are or how long you stayed in the NICU, I don't think you ever fully recover from the experience. No matter what, it stays with you.”
Over half of the participants in this study gave birth to an infant at <26 weeks of gestation. Some mothers described how healthcare providers encouraged them to consider terminating their pregnancies, which was an emotionally harrowing decision for which they were provided very little support. One mother's infant who was born <500 g at 23.5 weeks recalled, “ When my water broke, I still was just at 23 [weeks], so they wanted to abort the baby, because they said she would not be ready yet …. I had a C-section, and so I was in a lot of pain, and then I needed like two or three blood transfusions after I had the C-section, because I was super anemic. I was just feeling terrible and the lactation nurse would come in and she was like, ‘I know you're not feeling good, but if you want your milk to come in, you have to pump.’ And I was just feeling, like I was feeling really depressed, it was just a bad scenario for me. I felt so bad. I felt like it was my fault that she was born the way she was. I was just depressed. I didn't even want to do anything, you know? ” In several cases, the crisis of preterm birth was circumscribed by mothers' conversations with physicians who conveyed messages about how dangerous pregnancy was for the fetus, and that early delivery was required to save its life. Two other participants recalled vivid memories of nearly dying while giving birth.
Mothers described seeing their premature infants for the first time as “terrifying” and “traumatic”: “ It's scary, especially scary in the beginning, when they're super unstable, and the things that they're telling in rounds that, ‘your son is in super critical condition and, may or may not make it.’ That's super emotional and terrifying. ” Mothers commonly framed their preterm birthing and disrupted lactation experiences as a loss, for example: “ I think a lot of parents take for granted the firsts, like the first feedings at birth. And for us, it was all taken away. ” Infant death was also another source of postpartum trauma. A mother of twins, described the death of Lily , at 9 days old, “ Within 48 h we lost her. ” Nearly all participants discussed the lasting effects of having their infant placed in a NICU: “ I think when you have a baby in the NICU and you see your own child, you see your own child struggle when they're that small, and seeing other babies struggle when they're that small that are also in the NICU with you at the same time, it stays with you.”
The ways in which birth crises and lactation are bound together in participants' narratives are significant for understanding risks of retraumatization that may occur once lactation support is initiated in the NICU. The cascade of feeding interventions used to feed medically fragile infants were often intermingled with descriptions of stressful feeding interactions: “… when you tried to sit her down and feed her, she wouldn't turn her head. She would not take it [bottle]. I mean, I was desperate. I was in tears. I hated feeding her. ” Another mother reflected on how birthing trauma affected her responses to feeding her infant, “ The feeding ended up being a trigger for my PTSD . Like I would try and feed her, and she would lose it, and then I would lose it, and everything would come crashing down.”
The violence of separation from their infants was a common theme across all participants' narratives. Varied contexts of separation were named, including geographical, spatial, physical, and emotional separation. Each context of separation presented unique challenges, particularly at the intersection of mothers' adjustment to giving birth prematurely and their infant's vulnerability.
Although individual circumstances differed, most mothers were not able to see their infant for several days after they were born. Many recalled being torn between the desire to go to their infants and struggling to recover from giving birth: “ About the 5th or 6th day [postpartum] I was like, ‘Hey, I'm trying to learn about what's going on here. I'm trying to be involved in her care. I want to see her, spend time with her,’ and I'm just in this fog. I would go down to the nursery and stand by her bed, and I would literally just stand up. I would fall asleep standing up …. I didn't get to hold her for eleven days. ” Mothers were usually discharged from the hospital while their infants were still in a NICU. Mothers' experiences of being separated in this way were conveyed through narratives of suffering, for example: “ Then they finally had to discharge me. That was a nightmare. I hated it …. My dad pretty much had to pick me up off the floor and take me home, because I was adamant I was not leaving. I was like, ‘You're taking my heart of out my chest. I, I can't – making me leave her behind, how am I supposed to breathe? ’ (cf. Holdren et al., 2019:6).”
Mothers described agonizing over tradeoffs between following doctors' orders to maintain separation and a strong intuitive desire to be physically close to their infants: “ Basically, for the first, probably month, I didn't even feel like a mom.…we couldn't hold him, feed him, diaper him, do anything without someone else helping us tor telling us we were allowed to …. It was absolutely heartbreaking. ” Another mother recalled, “ she [the infant] was on an oscillator for almost three weeks before I could hold her …. And I was like ‘ok, you guys have got to give me this [permission to hold her] because I'm losing my mind,’ and I was afraid she wasn't going to know who I was.”
Participants described the ways in which forced separation from their infants in the NICU was detrimental to their lactation experiences and outcomes. Because physical touch and holding were not permitted for most premature VLBW neonates in any of the different NICUs, breastfeeding was discouraged in the early postnatal period : “ I couldn't go to the NICU for 24 h and breastfeed him because of medicines I was taking, and then I couldn't hold him because of his early struggles with breathing and being on a ventilator. ” Out of the 17 participants interviewed, 12 stated they intended to breastfeed their infant; but of these, only 5 were able to ever feed their infant(s) at breast. Participants who planned to breastfeed noted: “ They definitely encouraged pumping and wanted us to provide breast milk, but when it came to breastfeeding, actually - you know, latching and nursing - I don't think that they were as welcoming of that.”
In many cases breastfeeding attempts were delayed, often for long periods, during which mothers were encouraged to express milk for feedings. Neonatologists generally were portrayed as “ ambivalent about breastfeeding ” at best, or actively discouraging it at worst: “ I had one neonatologist tell me not to even bother trying to breastfeed, that it would be way too difficult. ” Mothers described being censured when breastfeeding made the clinical work of precision feeding more onerous for the doctors. Most participants framed their description of preterm births and lactation insufficiency as personal “failures,” and these internalized feelings of inadequacy were often reinforced in the ways that health care providers spoke to and treated them. Many participants attributed the long-term consequences of not being able to successfully transition their infant to breastfeeding post NICU discharge to the fact that they were “ never really offered breastfeeding early in the NICU stay. ” Not being able to breastfeed led to mothers' feelings of loss or grief: “ My plan was to breastfeed, and it was heartbreaking not to be able to do it right away.”
Participants shared an understanding of the importance of expressing milk for their premature infants, but many framed milk expression as care work that was emotionally and physically burdensome. Mothers who were required to express their milk in a designated lactation room talked about how the amount of time spent away from their infant's bedside to pump led them to miss physicians' rounds and other opportunities to engage with healthcare providers. One mother said, “ I pumped for 3 or 4 months , but it got to the point where it was just - the stress of living in the NICU was too much …. I was trying to do the power pumping and whatever, and it was like killing - I couldn't spend as much time doing her cares and talking to her nurse and just being in the room involved, because you know, I was sitting in the pumping room, and that frustrated me. So, I had to make a choice. Do I spend more time with her and be involved? Or do I really, really, really, really try to make this work?”
In their narratives, participants shared their experiences struggling with being entirely dependent on NICU staff, who often provided care that was perceived by mothers to be dehumanizing: “ …. they treated the babies as numbers. They just looked at the baby and said, ‘Okay, this is what they have, what does the book say?’ ” One mother explained how the highly technical language used by the neonatologists to describe her infant's condition intimidated and frightened her, leading her to avoid conversations with them and seeking to speak with nurses instead. Another participant recalled that even though she attended daily rounds at a teaching hospital to better understand her infant's care, the doctors talked past her, as if she were invisible: “ I don't know how to explain it. I was there, but it wasn't like I was talking to the doctors …”
Mothers were often frustrated by being actively excluded from care decisions, “ I didn't really have a lot of info given to me about what was happening with my children while I was in recovery. ” Many expressed feeling devalued by the medicalization of the NICU and how it impacted their confidence as a mother: “ Not being able to do things for your child makes you feel less of a parent. ” Others emphasized the dissonance between authoritative knowledge and their own intrinsic knowledge, “… there were definitely times when I was there that I pointed out stuff to them, because as a mother … – as the person who looks at her [the baby] the most – you know when something's wrong, even before the monitor does, even before that kind of stuff. ” Similarly, another mother reflected, “ Obviously as his parent you want to do everything you can and whatever you think is right, and that didn't always match up with some of the physicians thought.”
Participants revealed that they felt valued primarily for their ability to make milk. A singular emphasis on supporting mothers to initiate and sustain milk production in the NICU was experienced as a form of marginalization, and even violence, by several study participants: “ There were two NICU teams to take each baby. I was taken back to my high-risk floor. The breast pump was wheeled into my room and basically shoved down my throat. ” Mothers also touched upon the paradox of being told that it was important for them to express milk for their infant at the same time the neonatologists were concerned with “ measuring ” and “ testing ” their milk. One mother recalled being told, “ Well, your milk alone is inadequate. ” The medicalization of human milk and infant feeding in the NICU meant that attempts to breastfeed were highly controlled by neonatologists: “ They limited breastfeeding attempts to one a day. You weren't allowed to start until you had at least three completed bottle feedings a day, and you were only allowed one breastfeeding a day. I did multiple times say, ‘Man, I wish I could come every feed and do this,’ because I feel like we would be so much better at it, and it just wasn't considered an option.”
Mothers commonly described being dismissed, bypassed, and even ignored by health care providers when it came to infant feeding decisions. One mother recalled, “ He was readmitted to the NICU, but I felt the GI team wasn't really hearing me and wasn't listening to my concerns.… I felt like my concerns weren't being addressed, and it was a huge deal to me that he couldn't eat and was losing weight . ” Another noted, “ I got into this argument with an attending on whether or not we would fortify his milk again. And ultimately, I lost that battle.”
Participants described varied experiences related to the use of PDHM for their infant in the NICU, including practices that left parents out of the decision entirely. Only a few participants described a neonatologist or other healthcare provider personally reviewing the evidence for exclusive human milk feeding for premature infants with them. While participants whose infants received PDHM indicated they were comfortable with the decision, many were critical of the ways it was discussed : “We did donor breast milk for the first 30 days along with whatever I could provide, and it's fine. I'm glad we did it. However, I felt they pushed it on us ….I hadn't even got to see my kids yet when the lactation specialist from the NICU was up like forcing the donor breast milk. ” One participant noted that their hospital had all parents of premature infants sign a consent form to use PDHM as a standard practice, regardless of the parents' stated feeding preference. Similarly, another participant recalled, “… it wasn't really our choice. I don't know who made that choice to use donor milk versus formula.”
In a few cases, mothers noted that PDHM was not available in the NICU. One participant reached out to her husband's cousin, who had “ gallons of milk ” that she was willing to share. However, their infant's neonatologist explained that the hospital would not accept her cousin's milk, because it was not screened. Another mother recalled the story of one of her twins, born at 27 weeks, who developed surgical NEC after her infant was supplemented with formula instead of PDHM: “ I was not at all involved in infant feeding decisions …. There were no discussions about what the feeds were or what that meant for their outcomes or what the benefits or risks of the different feeding options were. I wish that had been discussed with me, and that I had made a different choice.”
Expressing milk in the NICU was the most acceptable way for mothers to be involved in their infants' care, particularly early in the NICU stay when any physical touch was restricted: “ I couldn't hold him until he was almost a week old. So that was really – pushed me into feeling the only thing I could do was pump for him. ” Mothers often described the pressure they placed on themselves to make milk, so they could feel part of their infant's care: “ Here was this liquid gold I could be giving my baby, you know, fighting for their life, and I can't do it. ” Maintaining a milk supply meant that mothers could resist being completely erased from their infant's NICU care plan. Yet, mothers also employed hyper-intensive milk expression regimens for other reasons, such as to cope with anxiety, loss of control, and disempowerment: “ I think I was a little obsessive about it. But for me, it was also comforting. Because at least it was something I had control over. But, I had no control over how they [the twins] were doing, and I wanted them to be healthy and grow strong. That was the one thing that I had, that I was able to do, that I knew was helping them. So, I was pretty crazy about it.”
Among mothers who felt supported in the NICU, lactation consultants , many who were also NICU nurses, appear as critically important characters, as they were often the only advocates mothers had. They often supported mothers' embodied resistance to clinical decisions that created barriers to mother-infant proximity or to mothers being able to breastfeed/express their milk. For example, one mother recounted that her neonatologist along with several of the NICU nurses “were not breastfeeding friendly.” She described how her lactation consultant, “ would have me pump until I was empty so they [the infants] wouldn't get any milk. Then she would have me latch just afterwards, just to practice. I thought that was really helpful and I also noted that, I think that really helped my milk supply, because, I would pump until I was empty, but then I was stimulating my breasts with my baby, and then afterwards I would feel myself filling up a lot faster.”
Some lactation consultants also assisted mothers in resisting the medicalization of feeding by helping mothers to practice skin-to-skin care, against physician's orders, and considering an infants' satiety cues at breast as equally valid as recording the volume of milk consumed via a bottle-feed. For example, one mother explained, “ Once he started feeding again, they were more encouraging to have a bottle-feed rather than letting him go to the breast, because then the nurses … can't see how much he takes. So, it was frustrating. You know, the nurses were just kind of - it depended on what nurse you would get - a lot of them would just be like, ‘Well, if you think he ate [at breast] until he was satisfied, then I'm just going to mark it as a full feed.’”
Another mother recalled a time when an attending neonatologist was pushing for formula supplementation post-discharge, because he believed that human milk alone would not be sufficient: “ I was so angry, and he left and the nurse said, ‘He's your baby, and when you go home, you can feed him how you want to feed him.’ … That was all the motivation I needed in feeding my kid, and he's still nursing to this day. ” A doctor's skepticism and lack of support to breastfeed post-discharge strengthened another mother's resolve to “prove” that her milk was enough: “ Within a week of having him home, he gained almost a full pound, whereas he had been gaining so much more slowly in the NICU on the fortified milk. So, I remember when I would bring him up and they said, ‘Well he's gaining so well, he's getting so big!’ I said, ‘Yep, and it's just straight breast milk. I'm just nursing him,’ and they couldn't believe it.”
Early weaning was another form of embodied resistance. The time required to interact with NICU staff made it difficult to pump as often as they needed to maintain their supply: “ I'm not just here to make milk, I want to participate in other ways of caring for my baby now. ” Some participants were hypervigilant in their infant's care plan, which included arranging their daily schedules to attend rounds, conducting research on the treatment recommendations that were being presented to them, doing their best to keep track of whether the care team was following-through on the agreed upon plan, and requesting care conferences: “ I knew every single doctor that took care of him, I knew every single procedure that he was having done. I followed along with everything so closely. ” Hypervigilance was a key strategy mothers used to gain visibility in the NICU, and it typically meant abandoning sessions expressing milk or attempting to breastfeed.
Lactation support tethered mothers to their infant's care in the NICU, but the perceived quality of lactation support across NICU settings was markedly inconsistent. Differences in the lactation care that mothers received were narratively linked to the extent to which skilled lactation support was integrated into their infants' care plan. For example, one participant described being “ offered a couple of visits with lactation consultants ” who “ did check in a few times just to see how I felt I was doing. ” She noted that the doctors did not “ offer any kind of advice, and neither did the nurses ” regarding lactation issues. Another participant recalled having to “ stay on the staff to say, ‘ … I need to start expressing as soon as possible. I need to pump now. I don't want to wait for somebody to come. I want to pump now.’”
In contrast, several mothers described a more supportive environment for lactation in which skilled lactation support was strongly integrated into the NICU and family-centered care was standard: “ I felt very supported , actually. They kept encouraging me. Her [the infant's] primary doctor - actually, when she was still on CPAP - was like, ‘Well, she can't breastfeed yet, but you can try taking her to a dry breast so she can just get the feel for it, which for me - just being able to do that at all - being able to do any sort of normal mom thing was really, really amazing. ” This participant also spoke about how important family care conferences with the NICU staff were: “ Every time they did rounds, they'd be like, ‘How's the breastfeeding going? And they had not just lactation consultants, but physical therapists, occupational therapists to help with the feeding as well. They'd come around and help.”
The integration of lactation-specific support was particularly meaningful for mothers who had a strong intention to breastfeed or express milk, for example: “ Whether it was the neonatologist, the nurses, the lactation consultant, everybody kind of worked in tandem to figure out exactly what he needed and, of course, involving and educating us as we went. I feel there was a very strong support system as feeding went. ” Another mother highlighted how she was encouraged to latch her baby even before her milk came in, “ They were very pro-breastfeeding. I mean, they would have me take the baby to breast before I could necessarily breastfeed, just to kind of help them, and work on anything to be like really orally stimulating. ” Supportive environments for lactation also included conversations with parents about different feeding alternatives and the importance of PDHM for VLBW infants: “ All the nurses and doctors were very encouraging of, ‘this is the best thing you can do for him. Babies who are breastfed, premature babies who are breastfed, do so much better. There's much less risk of infection. It's better for their stomachs, their development, they catch up faster,’ and they were really encouraging. So, it was important for me to try for that.”

Section: 6. Discussion

Narrative inquiry as a vehicle to understand idioms of distress has been a cornerstone of anthropological studies of mental health and well-being across diverse sociocultural settings ( Kleinman, 1988 ). Nichter (1981) has asserted that idioms of distress often reflect human suffering that is perpetuated by structural violence. Anthropologists have described idioms of distress as being both linguistic and behavioral, which allow individuals to navigate complex political landscapes of suffering in different ways ( Kaiser and Weaver, 2019 ). They also note the need for research that focuses less on “individual psychopathology” and more “on the broader structures or forces that are being contested, whether implicitly or explicitly, through the use of idioms of distress,” ( Kaiser and Weaver, 2019 : 594).
In this paper we theorize mothers' experiences with postpartum neglect after preterm birth as a form of violence, which is communicated through various linguistic and embodied idioms of distress. These narratives reveal that mothers suffer in spaces between neglectful postpartum care and the liminality of their infant's survival (cf. Shattnawi, 2015 ; Watson, 2011 ). Mothers' feelings of failure, inadequacy, guilt, and grief are commonly reported in the literature on preterm birth and caring for a medically fragile infant in a NICU. Anthropologists have linked these expressions of suffering to biocapitalist, technocratic management of preterm birth and neonatal critical care, characterized by a factory-like, production-line approach that requires separating mother and baby, ignoring mothers postpartum mental health and psychosocial support needs, and treating infant feeding as a medical intervention rather than nurturing care practice ( Dykes and Flacking, 2010 ; Flacking et al., 2012 , 2006 ). Technocratic systems of birth and infant feeding reinforce both authoritative knowledge and dependencies on technocratic medicine, which often disempower mothers ( Davis-Floyd, 1994 ; Dykes, 2005 , 2006 ). In settings where family centered NICU care has been redesigned to better integrate caregivers into NICU environments, such efforts have required pushing against conventional ideologies, spatialities, and modes of NICU care delivery ( Beck et al., 2009 ; Dykes et al., 2016 ; Robson et al., 2016 ). These are settings in which qualitative insights from mothers, family members, and care providers have informed the co-creation of innovative NICU environments and experiences. The institutional cultures of different NICU settings are also highly variable, which reflect how broader cultural ideologies (e.g., about the importance of mother-infant proximity, breastfeeding, and human milk) may play out in the implementation of care ( Holdren et al., 2019 ). Nevertheless, even in many instances where there is family-centered NICU care, where mothers are empowered to be in closer proximity to their infant and involved in decision-making, there are often still gaps in the provision of mothers' postnatal physical and mental health care ( Finlayson et al., 2014 ). Participants in the present study shared clear examples of alienation, neglect, and disempowerment in their narratives, including in hospitals where family-centered care was the primary model of NICU care.
The present cross-sectional, qualitative study included a small, convenience sample of adult mothers from the U.S. All participants were cis gender, and most were non-Hispanic white mothers. All participants indicated a strong intention to breastfeed or provide their infant with human milk during pregnancy and after their infants were born. Future studies are needed that interrogate the intersectionality of infant feeding disparities for VLBW infants, particularly studies that examine racism and obstetric violence against women of color (cf. Vedam et al., 2019 ) and how this contributes to differential rates of EHM feeding and use of PDHM in NICU settings.

Section: 7. Conclusion

A growing literature continues to document the negative effects of medicalized birth on perinatal maternal and infant outcomes in the U.S. In this paper we examine the fundamental ideologies underlying the management of preterm birth and of infant feeding in neonatal critical care medicine, which often undermine the postpartum health and well-being of mothers and their VLBW preterm infants. We illustrate how systems of technocratic medicine constrain health care providers' ability to provide compassionate family-centered or trauma-informed postpartum care in NICU settings. We also center mothers' stories of birth trauma, postpartum neglect, and disrupted lactation in different NICU settings across the U.S. Participants' narratives are considered in the context of anthropological critiques of technocratic birth and medicalization of infant feeding, and we attend to the ways that mothers experiences convey idioms of distress associated with traumatic birth, disrupted lactation, and postpartum neglect. Moreover, we highlight different ways that mothers enact embodied resistance to authoritative knowledge in the NICU.
Narrative methods are not only a powerful way to understand lived experiences with preterm birth and having one's infant admitted to a NICU ( Davis, 2019 ), they are also invaluable to health care providers who are seeking to improve NICU care ( Adkins and Doheny, 2017 ; Righam, 2012 ; Wiebe and Young, 2011 ). While efforts to improve the quality of lactation support in NICU settings are important, radical ideological, educational, and structural transformations to NICU care will be required to address the root causes of maternal suffering, postpartum neglect, and disrupted lactation in the U.S. The most effective solutions for increasing equitable access to quality care in NICU settings are likely to emanate from the lived experiences of people in communities that bear the greatest burden of adverse outcomes associated with preterm birth. Community-engaged research, critical ethnographic research, and tools like the Research Prioritization by Affected Communities (RPAC) protocol, in which the studies are conducted in collaboration with mothers in communities that experience racism and obstetric violence in the U.S., are urgently needed ( Davis, 2019 ; Franck et al., 2018 ; McLemore et al., 2019 ; Reaching Our Sisters Everywhere ROSE, 2019 ).

Section: Funding

This study was funded by the Lumen Prize and Honors Fellows programs at Elon University.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

The authors of this study declare no potential conflicting interests with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to express our deepest gratitude to all of the study participants who so generously shared their stories for this study. We also wish to thank the anonymous reviewers whose critique greatly improved the quality of our manuscript.
