Title: English lexical bundles in a learner corpus of argumentative essays written by Korean university students


Abstract: Abstract

This study examines the use of recurrent multi-word sequences (lexical bundles) found in a learner corpus of English argumentative essays written by L1 Korean college students at three different proficiency levels: low, mid and high. After compiling a list of the most frequently occurring four-word bundles in the three sub-corpora of the learner corpus, the study categorises them by structure and identifies which bundles appear in more than one sub-corpus. It then identifies frequent bi-grams embedded in the bundles in each sub-corpus to ascertain how the learners at each proficiency level construct multi-word sequences in context. The findings indicate that more proficient learners favour phrasal bundles, often producing them along with post-modifiers and in longer sentences, and thus approximating norms for academic prose. Lower proficiency learners, however, tend to use more clausal bundles, often including first-person pronouns and employing only a few specific verbs such as want and be , all of which are characteristic of spoken and informal registers. Taken together, these findings reflect L2 development in the use of formulaic language as they describe the uses of lexical bundles that are specific to each proficiency level.

Section: 1. Introduction

As a collection of ‘naturally occurring examples of language’ ( Hunston, 2002 : 2), a corpus can be used in a variety of ways to help both teachers and learners of English (e.g., Römer, 2011 ; Meunier, 2012 ; and Crosthwaite et al ., 2019 ). With the advent of the Brown Corpus in the 1960s and the Corpus of Contemporary American English ( coca ) in the 1990s, corpus linguistics provided ‘a methodological basis for pursuing linguistic research’ ( Meyer, 2002 : xi) and produced a plethora of findings that can at times overwhelm teachers and learners of English. Nonetheless, various findings from corpus-based studies can indeed inform English education, and one area of research that has garnered much attention in recent years is the use of lexical bundles ( lb s), which are ‘recurrent expressions, regardless of their idiomaticity, and regardless of their structural status’ ( Biber et al ., 2021 : 982).
Several studies have documented the usage of lb s in various registers (e.g., Hyland, 2008 ; Biber and Gray, 2010 ; and Salazar, 2014 ). Biber et al . (2021) , for instance, proposed a taxonomy of basic structural lb types and linked these types to register. They showed that verb-based clausal bundles, (i.e., sentence fragments containing verb phrases [ vp s], such as I would like to , or dependent clauses, such as if you want to ), are characteristic of spoken conversation, while phrasal bundles (i.e., sentence fragments that start with noun phrases [ np s], such as the beginning of the , or prepositional phrases [ pp s], such as at the beginning of ), are characteristic of academic writing. Most prior research on lb s produced by learners of English has focussed on comparisons of L1 and L2 writing; relatively few have conducted developmental research by studying the production of learners at different English proficiency levels. Among these few, Staples et al . (2013) reported that the writing of efl learners of different proficiency levels relied heavily on the clausal bundles that native speakers tend to prefer in speech rather than in writing. Similarly, in a study with L1 Chinese learners of English, Chen and Baker (2016) compared lb s in writing from lower- and higher-proficiency level learners. They also found that the less proficient learners employed bundles typical of L1 conversation (e.g., have a lot of ) to a greater extent than did the more proficient learners, who used more of the lb s expected in academic written registers, such as anticipatory it structures (e.g., it is true that ) and phrases with of fragments (e.g., the end of the ). While Chen and Baker’s findings are meaningful, it remains uncertain whether the differences observed are due to proficiency, as the authors claimed, or to features unique to L1 Chinese learners of English, or both. Furthermore, their learner corpora contained writing on a variety of topics, which might have had a confounding effect, given other studies’ findings of register differences in the usage of lexical bundles ( Pérez-Llantada, 2014 ; and Pan et al ., 2016 ).
To the best of our knowledge, the only L2 lb study to date to control for writing topics is a comparative analysis by Shin (2019) , which focussed on different language groups rather than different proficiency levels. The study analysed the structures and functions of lb s occurring in comparable corpora consisting of L1 and L2 novice academic writing and found that the two groups display many features unique to learner lb use (i.e., idiomatic pp bundles, stance-expression bundles, heavy use of vp -based bundles, and informal quantifying bundles). With these findings, she was able to conclude that native writers do not always have a head start over non-native writers as lb s produced by both groups exhibit similar features that are common to novice academic writers. In order to compare L2 data with L1 data, however, Shin retrieved L2 data only from the essays that received scores of four or higher (with one being the lowest and six being the highest) and, as a result, could not provide a comprehensive analysis of the lb s found in the learner corpus. This is an important task and will be addressed in this study through the following three research questions: ( 1 ) What are the most frequent four-word lb s in English essays written by L1 Korean college students at three different proficiency levels? ( 2 ) Do the three groups use different lb structures (i.e., np -based, pp -based and vp -based bundles)? ( 3 ) What two-word sequences, or bi-grams, do learners at different proficiency levels rely on when producing four-word lb s?

Section: 2. Description of the learner corpus

The learner corpus used in this study, the Sogang English Learner Corpus of Argumentative Essays ( selcae ), consists of essays written by incoming freshman students at Sogang University in Seoul, Korea, from 2009 to 2012. Before the start of a new academic year, all freshman students were required to take a placement test for their two-semester mandatory general English courses. The placement test consisted of an oral interview and a written essay exam, for the latter of which they were given fifty minutes to write an argumentative essay in response to one of eight randomly assigned writing prompts (see Appendix A for the prompts). The writing samples were evaluated by a commercial service, the Educational Testing Service ( ets ), which uses an evaluation tool (i.e., et s’s Criterion® Online Writing Evaluation) to produce a holistic essay score from one to six.
This study divides the corpus data into three sub-corpora according to the ets holistic scores. The Low corpus comprises essays that received scores of one and two; the Mid corpus, three and four; and the High corpus, five and six. As Table 1 shows, while the High corpus contains considerably fewer essays than do the Low and Mid corpora, the average length of its essays are much longer than those of the Low and Mid corpora. The argumentative essay samples collected to build the learner corpus were written by 6,047 students. The average length of the essays is 248.9 words, and the entire corpus contains about 1.5 million words.

Section: 3. Method

The concordance software AntConc ( Anthony, 2020 ) was used to identify all four-word lexical bundles that appeared at least thirty times per million words and in at least three separate essays. The choice of four-word bundles is in accordance with Hyland’s (2008) observation that the structures and functions of three-word lb s can be unclear, while the frequency of five-word lb s is often too low to allow valid analysis. The threshold of thirty times per million words used for this study is more conservative than Biber et al .’s (2021) ten times per million words threshold. According to these criteria, a string of four words must appear fifteen times in the Low corpus (which consists of about half a million words), thirty times in the Mid corpus (about a million words), and three times in the High corpus (86,366 words) to be included in the analysis. The four-word strings identified by the concordance software were then manually checked to exclude any overlapping bundles derived from the same longer sequences as well as essay-topic-dependent bundles, such as knowledge gained from books , which is a direct quote from the essay topic ‘Compare and contrast knowledge gained from experience with knowledge gained from books’.
Subsequently, the bundles were grouped according to the three main structural taxonomy proposed by Biber et al . (2004 , 2021 ): vp -based, np -based and pp -based bundles. vp -based bundles include a verb (e.g., I am going to ). np -based bundles begin with a noun phrase, usually followed by an of -phrase fragment (e.g., the beginning of the ) or a post-modifier fragment (e.g., the fact that the ). pp -based bundles begin with a preposition, which is followed by an np fragment (e.g., in the center of ).

Section: 4. Results and discussion

This section presents the lb s identified in the three sub-corpora. As Appendix B shows, the final lists consist of 110 lb s in the Low corpus, 108 lb s in the Mid corpus, and 118 lb s in the High corpus. Within each proficiency level, fifty lb s are unique to the Low corpus, thirty-seven lb s to the Mid corpus, and sixty-eight lb s to the High corpus. The three corpora share thirty-three bundles, which are indicated in boldface in the table. The shared bundles comprise 30 percent of the Low corpus lb s, 30.5 percent of the Mid corpus lb s, and 28 percent of the High corpus lb s. In addition, twenty-six bundles are shared by only the Low and Mid corpora (underlined), and fourteen bundles are shared only by the Mid and High corpora (italicised). Three bundles are shared by only the Low and High corpora (underlined and italicised); this very small number of lb s shared by the non-adjacent levels suggests a developmental sequence of lb use.
The percentages of the three major structures of lexical bundles in each sub-corpus are presented in Figure 1 . This shows that vp -based bundles, which are considered to be characteristic of conversational spoken registers ( Biber et al ., 2004 , 2021 ; and Chen and Baker, 2010 , 2016 ), comprise the majority in all three corpora. The proportion of these bundles, however, decreases as proficiency increases (Low: 79.1 percent, Mid: 73.1 percent, High: 53.4 percent). Characteristic of academic written registers, phrasal bundles (i.e., np -based and pp -based bundles) amount to only 21 percent and 27 percent of the bundles in the Low and Mid corpora, respectively, but to over 45 percent of those in the High corpus.
As for the bundles that appear in all three corpora, almost 70 percent of them are vp -based (e.g., I think it is and there are so many ), while 30.3 percent are np - or pp -based (e.g., a lot of people and on the other hand ). Of the bundles shared by the Low and Mid corpora only, 73.1 percent are vp -based bundles (e.g., I really want to and I want to say ). Of those shared by the Mid and High corpora only, 63.4 percent are vp -based (e.g., when it comes to ). Thus, the proportion of phrasal bundles (e.g., with the statement that ) is higher in the writing produced by higher proficiency groups. Table 2 shows the distribution of the structural sub-categories in each sub-corpus and presents the specific types of bundles favoured by different proficiency levels.
With respect to np -based bundles, the High group used more bundles that consist of an np followed by of -phrase fragments (e.g., the development of the and the center of the ) or other types of post-modifier fragments, such as who -relative clauses and that -clauses as an np complement (e.g., the person who is , the fact that there and things that can be ). In contrast, many of the np -based bundles used by the Low and Mid groups fall into the ‘other noun phrase’ category. In particular, the lower proficiency groups frequently produced np -based bundles that begin with a premodifier, which is then followed by an np (e.g., a lot of time and a lot of information ). The informal a lot of has been noted in prior research as characteristic of native-speaker conversation but frequently used by learners in their writing (e.g., Chen and Baker, 2016 ; and Bychkovska and Lee, 2017 ) – an observation that is supported also by the findings of this study. In addition, the Low and Mid corpora contain fewer lb s characteristic of academic prose: those consisting of np s followed by of -phrases.
Similar discrepancies between the proficiency levels appear in the use of pp -based bundles as well. While pp s with of -phrase fragments were almost never used across levels, the number of other types of pp -based bundles gradually increases as the proficiency also increases (Low: 11.8 percent, Mid: 14.8 percent, High: 22 percent). Of the small number of pp -based bundles found in the Low and Mid corpora, most are related to idiomatic phrases, such as in my opinion the , and the pp s are often followed by a personal pronoun, such as at that time I and as a result I . None of these pp -based bundles were found in the High corpus, which instead shows more diverse uses of prepositions in bundles, such as despite the fact that , with the statement that , as a matter of and for the sake of .
It is in the use of vp -based bundles, however, that the three proficiency levels diverge most. All three groups used vp -bundles with personal pronouns quite frequently, but at decreasing rates as the proficiency increases (Low: 45.4 percent, Mid: 29.6 percent, High: 16.1 percent). Notably, the two lower proficiency groups strongly favoured lb s based on a single verb, want , which occurs along with the first-person pronoun in the form of I don’t want to and I want to say . Another difference involves the use of the copula be (e.g., is very important to and is a lot of ), which also decreases with increasing proficiency (Low: 9.1 percent, Mid: 8.3 percent, High: 3.4 percent). All three groups often use vp s along with I think and existential there- constructions, as in I think it is , I think there are , there are many things and there are lots of (see Section 4.3). This finding is consistent with previous research showing that English learners overuse want to , I think and there -constructions in their writing to a greater extent than their native counterparts do (e.g., Ping, 2009 ; and Chen and Baker, 2010 , 2016 ). It also supports the sequence of development in L2 writing that Biber et al . (2011) proposed, in which earlier stages are characterised by features of lower linguistic complexity (e.g., dependent clauses with common verbs such as think , know and want ). The study suggested that L2 learners use in their writing complexity features that are typical of L1 spoken language at earlier stages and only later begin to use complexity features typical of L1 writing.
This section addresses the two-word sequences, or bi-grams, that learners at different proficiency levels rely on when producing four-word lexical bundles. As Table 3 shows, all three corpora contain a number of bundles, several of them shared, that include the two-word bundle there are (over 10 percent of all bundles across the corpora). This finding suggests that, as students learn to deploy formulaic language, they may latch onto the smaller units of multi-word sequences, treating them as building blocks. There are seven such bundles shared between the three groups, indicated in boldface in Table 3 . In addition, adjacent groups’ bundle preferences overlap: three bundles are shared only by the Low and Mid proficiency groups (e.g., there are many people ) and two are shared only by the Mid and High proficiency groups (e.g., there are several reasons ).
One bundle appeared in the Low and High corpora, but not in the Mid corpus: there are three reasons . Its use, however, greatly differed between the Low and High corpora despite the identical writing topics. In the Low corpus, the most frequent uses of the bundle occur as a full sentence (i.e., There are three reasons ) or are preceded by a sub-ordinating conjunction to form an incomplete sentence, as in Example 1. In all occurrences in the High corpus, this bundle is followed by a post-modifier such as a wh -relative clause or that -clause, as in Example 2. (1) Because there are three reasons. (Low) (2) There are three reasons why my hometown’s cultural events should be changed. (High)
Table 4 presents the lexical bundles with embedded I think that occur in all three sub-corpora. As the table demonstrates, the lower the proficiency group, the heavier the dependence on this bi-gram when constructing lexical bundles (Low: thirteen types, 12.4 percent of all tokens; Mid: seven types, 6.4 percent of all tokens; High: four types, 2.5 percent of all tokens).
The following examples illustrate how the learners at different proficiency levels use the same bundle I think it is ; all of the examples come from essays on the same topic. In many cases, the Low group learners begin with a co-ordinating conjunction (e.g., and , so and but ) and produce quite short sentences, often fewer than ten words, as shown in Example 3. The Mid group learners often start a sentence with the bundle and follow it with a sub-ordinating conjunction, as in Example 4. In contrast, the High group learners tend to use this bundle to combine two short sentences to form a longer sentence, as in Example 5. (3) But I think it is not true. (Low) (4) I think it is because subway station is too far from apartments. (Mid) (5) This important change could take more time, but I think it is the best method for students to learn. (High)
Table 5 shows bundles including the bi-gram want to that occur in the Low and Mid corpora. These two proficiency groups show a strong preference for this bi-gram, which occurs in 18.3 percent of all the tokens of bundles in the Low corpus and 10.6 percent of those in the Mid corpus, while appearing only rarely in the High corpus. In particular, the two lower proficiency groups excessively produce a single bundle, so I want to (Low: 136 tokens, Mid: 174 tokens), in line with their tendency to start a sentence with a co-ordinating conjunction. Note that the Low and Mid corpora also contain considerably more bundles with embedded I think that is preceded by a conjunction – so I think that , but I think it and but I think the (see Table 4 ), none of which were found in the High corpus.
As mentioned earlier, the High group overall produced more phrasal bundles than did the Low and Mid groups (see Figure 1 ). Among the np -based bundles, many instantiate one particular frame, consisting of a determiner, a slot for a noun, and a following of -fragment: the + Noun + of the . This frame has previously been identified as typical of English academic prose (e.g., Biber and Gray, 2010 ); no instance of this frame was found in the Low and Mid corpora. Twenty-eight tokens of this frame were found in the High corpus with the noun center in seven tokens, development in five, member in eleven and matter in five. Example 6 shows two uses of the frame with the noun development filling the Noun slot. (6) The government should prioritize the development of the nations’ internet service, as it holds diverse merits that can benefit Myanmar. The nation has not yet fully transitioned into the globalized information society, and I worry that Myanmar will fall behind other nations in terms of development. Furthermore, the standard of living needs to be improved greatly and the development of the internet can improve it significantly, as I have mentioned above. (High)

Section: 5. Conclusion

By analysing essays written in response to identical writing topics and under the same time constraint, this study investigated the use of lexical bundles produced by English learners at three different proficiency levels. The findings show both common and unique features of the use of bundles across proficiency levels. All three sub-corpora show a strong preference for clausal bundles (containing verbs) over phrasal bundles (both np and pp ), but the proportion of clausal bundles, considered to be characteristic of face-to-face conversation, sharply decreases as the proficiency level increases. Of all the bundles identified as occurring frequently in the three corpora, thirty-three were found in all three ( Table 2 ); however, the details of the use of bundles in context significantly differ in different corpora. In particular, the bundles in the High corpus frequently appear with post-modifiers, while the same bundles in the Mid and Low corpora tend to appear in quite short sentences, often preceded by co-ordinating conjunctions and even in incomplete sentence fragments. While all three groups appear to latch onto certain bi-grams when producing multi-word sequences, the two lower proficiency groups were more bi-gram dependent: the number of bundles in which the same bi-grams are embedded greatly increases in the lower proficiency levels (see Tables 3 to 5 ). The lower proficiency L2 writers also used more clausal bundles (about 80 percent) than did the high proficiency L2 writers (about 50 percent).
As noted earlier, the three groups differed in how they used the same bundles in context. This finding indicates that, while English learners may be somewhat familiar with recurrent sequences or other types of idiomatic expressions, they may have difficulty producing them in sentences – a skill which is crucial for structuring academic prose ( Shin, 2019 ). For that reason, the details of how different proficiency groups use the same bundles in sentences, which can be identified by corpus analysis using concordance software (e.g., Gilquin and Granger, 2010 ; and Flowerdew, 2015 ), could serve as a useful resource for writing instructors. Specifically, to implement such data-driven learning, instructors could provide students with sentences that include the shared bundles used by different groups; then they could be asked to compare the structures of the bundles, to note frequently occurring words and bigrams embedded in the bundles, or to underline the words and phrases that precede and follow the same bundle in various sentences, with the goal of leading learners to notice different ways of putting sequences in context and to identify uses appropriate for academic prose. Moreover, instructors could ask students to fill in various frames appropriate for academic discourse (e.g., the + Noun + of the ) in diverse contexts.
This study has several limitations. One obvious limitation is the fact that the essays were rated not by human raters but by an automated rating system. The three sub-corpora were also different in size, the High corpus in particular being quite small (less than 10,000 words in total). Considering that the High corpus data was notably distinct from the Low and Mid corpus data in displaying features of academic writing, future research with a larger corpus of writing produced by higher proficiency learners may lead to findings that can prove beneficial for designing teaching materials. Moreover, while this study identified certain types of structure that learners use as building blocks when producing four-word sequences, the larger structures in which lb s are embedded merit further investigation so as to offer a more comprehensive picture of learners’ use of sequences beyond lexical bundles.

Section: Acknowledgments

This research was supported by Hallym University Research Fund (HRF-202201–004).
