Section: Abstract

The interest in the exploitation of corpora in the study of Korean L2 learners’ use of English has risen dramatically over the past two decades, leading to the compilation of learner corpora and to numerous empirical investigations into Korean learners’ use of English. This paper will give an overview of the compilation and characteristics of English learner corpora in Korea and will also provide an analysis of the recent trends in learner corpus research. It was not until the mid-2000s that Korean academics started to compile English learner corpora, such as the snu Korean-speaking English Learner Corpus ( skelc ), the Yonsei English Learner Corpus ( yelc ), the Gachon Learner Corpus ( glc ), the Neungyule Interlanguage Corpus of Korean Learners of English ( nickle ), the efl Teacher Corpus ( etc ), the Korean English Learners’ Spoken Corpus ( kelsc ) and the ets Corpus of Non-native Written English (TOEFL11). There have also been a growing number of learner corpus-based studies that used the existing learner corpora as well as self-compiled corpus data. All the learner corpus-based research articles published in two Korean academic journals ( English Teaching and Korean Journal of Applied Linguistics ) will be reviewed and analysed in terms of research topics and areas, data types, analysis methods and corpus compilation practices. Finally, this paper will suggest some future directions for learner corpus compilation and research in Korea.

Section: Introduction

Learner corpora are defined as systematic collections of authentic, continuous and contextualised language use (spoken or written) by L2 learners stored in electronic format ( Callies and Paquot, 2015 : 1). Learner Corpus Research ( lcr ) is a relatively new field of study that collects and analyses computer learner corpora to investigate topics in second/foreign language acquisition and learning, and also offer insights into language teaching. lcr as a field of study emerged at the turn of the 1990s from the then developing field of corpus linguistics, when academics started to realise the potential benefits of the systematic analysis of authentic language use for foreign language learning and teaching ( Callies and Paquot, 2015 ). The starting point of lcr is usually dated to the emergence of the exemplar computer learner corpus, the International Corpus of Learner English ( icle ) ( McEnery et al ., 2019 : 77). 2 Since the creation of icle , the range of learner corpora around the world, privately collected and publicly available, has grown dramatically. And world-renowned publishers and testing organisations have also developed their own learner corpora (e.g., the Longman Learner Corpus, the Cambridge Learner Corpus, and the TOEFL11 Corpus). In Korea, while general corpus research articles began to appear in Korean academia in the second half of the 1990s, English learner corpora started to be compiled by academics and publishers in the late 2000s.
The purpose of this paper is to give an overview of the range of Korean-speaking English learner corpora and to provide an analysis of English learner corpus-based studies which have been published in Korea over the last two decades. I will focus, specifically, on the two Korean journals: English Teaching ( et ) and Korean Journal of Applied Linguistics ( kjal ). The selection of academic journals to be used for this study was determined by the fact that the two journals have been widely recognised as the leading journals for the publishing of studies that are specifically related to English language education, foreign/second language acquisition, and interdisciplinary subjects.
English Teaching is a journal published by the Korean Association of Teachers of English ( kate ) 3 founded in 1965. It is committed to promoting empirical and theoretical research that addresses critical issues related to English language education. All of the articles in the journal are available at the homepage of kate . The Korean Journal of Applied Linguistics , an academic journal published by the Applied Linguistics Association of Korea ( alak ) 4 founded in 1978, launched its inaugural issue in 1983. The journal publishes: ( a ) research articles based mainly on experimental studies, case studies, new research methodologies on second language acquisition; and ( b ) research articles in all areas of applied linguistics, such as language acquisition, language education and interdisciplinary subjects, aiming to offer solutions to language-related issues and to promote discussion amongst scholars. All of the articles in the two journals have been carefully scrutinised to determine if the article used a learner corpus as data for analysis and investigation.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion

There are currently six L1 Korean L2 English learner corpora listed in the Learner Corpora Around the World webpage provided by the Centre for English Corpus Linguistics of the University of Louvain. 5 These corpora include: the SNU Korean-speaking English Learner Corpus ( skelc ), the Yonsei English Learner Corpus ( yelc ), the Gachon Learner Corpus ( glc ), the Neungyule Interlanguage Corpus of Korean Learners of English ( nickle ), the efl Teacher Corpus ( etc ) and the Korean English Learners’ Spoken Corpus ( kelsc ). In addition to these corpora, another learner corpus will be introduced: the ETS Corpus of Non-native Written English (also known as the TOEFL11 Corpus). Table 1 provides a list of L1 Korean L2 English learner corpora.
The SNU Korean-speaking English Learner Corpus ( skelc ) is a collection of writings by students of Seoul National University. It is made up of short essays written mostly by fresher students enrolled for College English courses and contains a total of 899,505 words collected from the fall semester of 2005 to the spring semester of 2008. The short essays, of which the length varies from 200 to 400 words, cover a variety of topics. Students are given the choice of writing about a subject from the topic list: nine topics from the fall semester of 2005 to the fall semester of 2006, and fourteen topics from the spring semester of 2007. The most distinctive feature of the skelc is that attributes such as academic year/semester, colleges/majors, level of proficiency and essay topic are systematically encoded in the file name of each essay, which will enable researchers to carry out various comparative analyses. As for the level of proficiency, the corpus is divided into five sub-corpora according to the students’ scores on the teps , an English proficiency test developed by Seoul National University. Details about the design and compilation of the corpus can be found in Kwon (2009) .
The Yonsei English Learner Corpus ( yelc ) consists of 6,572 written texts, with a total of 1,085,828 words. These texts were written in 2011 by 3,286 college entrants who took the English placement test (Yonsei English Placement Test) which consists of two writing elements. Prospective students wrote two short essays: one essay about casual topics (about 100 words) and the other about academic topics (about 300 words). Thus the corpus contains two parts: Part 1 (3,286 texts, 315,317 words) and Part 2 (3,286 texts, 770,511 words). One notable feature of the corpus is that each participant’s writings under different proficiency levels are rated on a nine-level scale ranging from A1 to C2. More details about the design and compilation of the corpus can be found in Rhee and Jung (2014) . The corpus is freely available on request to all researchers through the website 6 of the English Informatics Laboratory of Yonsei University.
The Gachon Learner Corpus ( glc ) was collected from 2012 through 2014 at Gachon University in Korea ( Carlstrom and Price, 2012 –2014). The texts were collected using twenty topic questions. Participants were asked to write about one of the topics in Google Forms using 100 to 150 words per text. This corpus is available in two versions: Version 2.1 and the Final Version. Version 2.1 released in 2013 contains 1,609,517 words from 16,113 texts produced by 1,607 participants and the Final Version released in 2015 consists of over 2.5 million words from 25,073 texts produced by 2,500 participants. All versions are freely downloadable online in text or Excel format from the website. 7
The Neungyule Interlanguage Corpus of Korean Learners of English ( nickle ) is a one million-word corpus compiled in 2009 as part of the Neungyule-Longman English–Korean Dictionary project, which was jointly developed by Neungyule Education Inc. of Korea and Pearson Longman of the UK ( Yoon and Choi, 2015 : 52–3). The corpus consists of essays in seven genres, and transcriptions of interviews and oral tests. The corpus data are a collection of the writings and speeches of first- and second-year intermediate-level college students. Various universities across Korea participated in this corpus compilation project with the help of the Korea Association of Teachers of English. Unfortunately, however, the corpus is not available for public use. Perhaps because of this limited availability, there is only one research article that used this corpus in the two journals examined here.
There are very few learner corpora of spoken English available for public use in Korea. This may be because – especially in the case of spoken corpora – scholars mostly have constructed them for their own research purposes. In this regard, the efl Teacher Corpus ( etc ) is noteworthy for being one of the few spoken corpora in Korea. According to Kwon and Lee (2014) , they compiled a total of sixty-two hours of recordings from efl classes: thirty-two hours of four non-native efl teachers ( nnet ) and thirty hours of five native English teachers ( net ). The corpus contains a total of 247,398 words: 123,122 words from nnet and 124,275 words from net . This corpus is different in some ways from typical learner corpora. The notable differences are that the efl teachers, albeit non-native, are technically proficient speakers of English; they are very likely to use structured classroom interaction, and the number of participants is very small for a corpus.
The Korean English Learners’ Spoken Corpus ( kelsc ) consists of 36,588 words of 474 texts collected from 237 participants. Korean adults and students from ten universities across the country participated in an English speaking test online through video conferencing. Participants were given two speaking tasks: Task A (a summarising speaking task after listening to a passage about everyday life) and Task 2 (a summarising speaking task after reading a passage about everyday life). Their speaking performances were recorded, transcribed and assessed on a six-grade scale based on the Common European Framework of Reference ( cefr ). The corpus is thus divided into six sub-corpora based on cefr ’s six-band scale, which will facilitate the exploration of learner data at different proficiency levels. Since most English learner corpora in Korea consist of data from a limited variety of written sources, the corpus will provide academics with valuable spoken data for research. kelsc , which is available from January 2022 at the website 8 of the Institute for Corpus Research of Incheon National University, will be particularly valuable in this respect. Details about the design and compilation process of this corpus are described in Yoon (2020) and Jung (2021) .
ets Corpus of Non-Native Written English (also known as TOEFL11 Corpus), developed by the Educational Testing Service ( ets ), contains 12,100 English essays. These essays were written in 2006 and 2007 by speakers of eleven non-English native languages (Arabic, Chinese, French, German, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Spanish, Telugu and Turkish) as part of the Test of English as a Foreign Language ( toefl ). This corpus contains 1,100 essays for each of the eleven native languages sampled. Contributors wrote on one of eight topics and information about the test takers’ proficiency level (whether low/medium/high) was given. The Korean section of the corpus consists of a total of 328,384 words (low proficiency: 30,787 words; medium proficiency: 202,531 words; and high proficiency: 95,066 words). This corpus (LDC Catalog No.: LDC2014T06) is available online. 9
Some general observations can be made about the aforementioned learner corpora. First of all, most of the data used in the compilation of these corpora are written data, rather than spoken data. Second, the data contained in each corpus are collected from a fairly homogeneous group of participants (e.g., first-year students). Third, the data are mostly derived from timed output (e.g., classroom assignments and placement tests). Another shared feature of these corpora is that the corpus data are not annotated. 10
In general, before the year 2000, learner corpus research was very rare, and very little corpus research was done in the fields of applied linguistics and English teaching. There were no corpus research articles published in either et or kjal . Although some corpus-related research articles were published in other academic journals such as English Language and Linguistics , those articles were written by Korean authors from abroad or international scholars. As a result of this, it would not be wrong to say that before 2000 there was virtually no corpus research in the fields of English language and linguistics and English education in Korea. It is from the beginning of the twenty-first century that corpus-based research articles began to emerge in academic journals in Korea. Corpus studies started to be published in growing numbers after 2005 and this trend has continued since then.
Learner corpus research now serves as a popular research method for studying issues in foreign/second language acquisition and L2 learning and teaching. This section will examine English learner corpus-related studies published in two Korean academic journals, et and kjal . The year 2002 saw the publication of the first learner corpus-based article in et . Since its initiation two decades ago, there has been an exponential rise in the publication of learner corpus studies in various Korean academic journals as well as in et and kjal .
Google Scholar is a powerful web search engine, allowing users to retrieve a list of publications on specific scholarly topics. For reference, the search query ‘Korean English learner corpus’ (in Korean) on Google Scholar returned thirty-one results for the period 2001 to 2005, 128 for 2006 to 2010, 240 for 2011 to 2015, and 455 for 2016 to 2020. There were no relevant results before 2000. Based on the query results, we can conclude that the number of studies (including articles, theses and books) that used English learner corpora have increased substantially in Korea since 2000, nearly doubling every five years over the past fifteen years.
Although this study is limited in scope compared to the large number of studies retrieved by the aforementioned search, a total of sixty-two learner corpus-related research articles published between 2001 and 2021 were selected from et and kjal for the investigation of this study: thirty articles out of a total of 627 articles published in et and thirty-two articles out of a total of 987 articles published in kjal . Table 2 provides a list of learner corpus-related articles published in et , and Table 3 provides a list of articles published in kjal . The full list that includes article titles and publication information is given in Appendices A and B.
Beginning in 2002, learner corpus-based articles started to be published in et and, later, in kjal in 2005. During the period from 2006 to 2010, with the availability of skelc and nickle the number of articles expanded rapidly: five articles in et and eight articles in kjal . The 2010s saw a notable increase in the number of articles to twenty-two in each journal. Considering the beginning of the compilation of the learner corpora in the late 2000s and early 2010s, the increase in interest and use of learner corpora in subsequent years is a natural progression, and is clearly reflected in the growing number of learner corpus-related articles. In the following sections, all pf these articles will be reviewed and analysed in terms of their research topics and areas, data types, analysis methods and corpus compilation practices.
The research topics and areas of the articles can be broadly divided into five categories: lexico-grammar, 11 discourse analysis, conversation analysis, eap / esp , and others (Rhetoric, Syntactic, Semantic, Computational, Pragmatic). However, not every article falls neatly into one of the four categories. Many articles cover more than one category, and some fall outside them. Despite this, all of the articles under investigation are classified on the basis of these four categories. Even though most learner corpus studies concentrated on lexico-grammar (twenty-one articles in et and sixteen articles in kjal ), there are studies ranging from discourse analysis (five articles in et and three articles in kjal ) and conversation analysis (three articles in kjal ) to eap / esp (two articles in et and five articles in kjal ). The range of research areas has also broadened to include syntax, semantics and rhetoric. The more recent studies attempted not only to address new research areas, but also to employ new research methods such as the computational analysis of lexical richness/diversity and syntactic complexity.
Here, it is worth noting that, although much research in Korea has focussed on lexis and grammar, the overall picture is not very different from global research trends. McEnery et al . (2019: 84) conducted an analysis of 1,144 publications in the bibliography of learner corpus research. 12 They found out that 148 (12.9 percent) explore questions that are broadly related to lexis/lexicography and that eighty-five (7.4 percent) of the papers focus on features of grammar. In contrast, a mere 111 (9.7 percent) explore speech and only sixteen (principally) focus on pragmatics.
Linguistic exploitation of learner corpora usually involves one of two methodological approaches: contrastive analysis and error analysis ( Granger, 2002 : 11–12). A characteristic feature of the learner corpus research in this study is that more than half of the articles in each journal employed a contrastive research approach, comparing the use of various linguistic features between non-native speakers ( nns ) and native speakers ( ns ). This approach has been adopted in twenty articles in et and in seventeen articles in kjal . The most common practice is to carry out an analysis of some linguistic features and to compare the results from the learner corpus with those from a native corpus. In many contrastive studies, the native corpus usually serves as a ‘norm’, and instances of linguistic items which are either underused or overused in the learner corpus are investigated and compared to the native corpus.
On the other hand, error analysis is also a common method used in learner corpus research. Error analysis usually does not make comparisons between native and non-native data; instead it focusses on errors in learners’ language. Typically, researchers select an error-prone linguistic item, retrieve all instances of the misuse of the item, and analyse them. Three articles in et and three articles in kjal conducted an error analysis, and most of them focussed on the lexico-grammatical errors in the text. This kind of analysis, however, is often limited to those items which researchers consider to be typical of specific learners. A more systematic means of error analysis is to devise a standardised system of error tags and to tag all the errors in a learner corpus. This process is very time-consuming and labour-intensive, but the advantages of a fully error-tagged corpus are huge ( Granger, 2002 : 14). Alongside these two methods, most articles tend to employ descriptive and statistical analysis methods.
Learner corpus research typically draws on two types of corpus data: written and spoken. Owing to the difficulties inherent in collecting and processing spoken data for corpus compilation, there are far more written than spoken learner corpora around the world. The majority of research articles are also based on written corpora. Similarly, due to the lack of spoken learner corpora in Korea, the number of articles using learners’ spoken data is relatively small (four articles out of thirty in et and six articles out of thirty-two in kjal ), but it seems to have been growing in the latter half of the 2010s. While two articles in et used pre-existing corpora (i.e., icnale ), two articles in et and five articles in kjal used self-compiled spoken corpora. This indicates that many scholars had to construct their own corpora for their own research. It is at least encouraging that some spoken corpora have so far been constructed by individual scholars, albeit on a small scale; but when considering the amount of time and effort that goes into building them, it is of utmost importance to build more and better spoken learner corpora and to make them available to the public.
The most distinctive characteristic of learner corpus research in Korea is that while half of the articles made use of pre-existing learner corpora (i.e., nine articles in et and eleven articles in kjal ) or corpora complied from placement tests (i.e., nine articles in et and one article in kjal ), the other half of the articles (i.e., twelve articles in et and twenty articles in kjal ) made use of self-compiled corpora. The percentage of articles using self-compiled corpora is particularly high in kjal (65 percent). Many researchers compiled their own corpora using tasks such as classroom assignments and written exams rather than using pre-existing corpora. Academics often used self-compiled corpora in the 2000s when learner corpora were rarely available, but with the availability of learner corpora in the 2010s many academics began to use the then newly compiled corpora such as skelc and yelc . In the 2010s, almost half of the articles used existing learner corpora. Yet, notwithstanding these existing corpora, there were also many academics who resorted to using self-compiled corpora. One major drawback of this practice is that these corpora are usually privately held and remain the property of an individual compiler.

Section: Conclusion

Learner corpus research has evolved remarkably over the past three decades, but in Korea it is still in its infancy compared with recent developments in corpus building and research methods around the world. In this paper, I introduced seven Korean-speakers’ English learner corpora. I also reviewed learner corpus-based research articles published in two major Korean academic journals and identified some practical issues and problems related to corpus building practices and corpus research methods.
Many learner corpora are generally small, especially in the case of self-compiled corpora, comprising only tens of thousands of words. A number of limitations are inherent in these corpora. One of the reasons why in many studies the size of learner data is rather small is that the data is collected by individual researchers from classrooms, exams or assignments. There can also be various different factors (i.e., corpus design, size and proficiency level) involved in data collection, which requires an enormous amount of time and effort on the part of the researcher. Therefore, in the matter of corpus building, we have to move from self-compilation to more systematic and large-scale construction.
The quality of the corpus in terms of various elements is also very important. In particular, Granger (2003 : 465) emphasises that learner corpora should be supplemented with proper annotation, such as error tagging. These annotations will allow for more systematic searches of corpus data, more accurate error statistics, and in-depth analyses of specific error types. However, despite the possibility of automated error tagging, in the case of learner data, manual annotations of learner errors are still needed.
Given the small number of English learner corpora in Korea, there is a strong need for the construction of systematically designed learner corpora that are available for the public. Such learner corpora have several advantages. First, they will allow researchers to have access to large databases of learners’ language use. Second, researchers can share the same corpus data instead of always compiling their own. Lastly, the findings of corpus analysis can easily be verified or replicated by other researchers. Not only is the number of learner corpora available quite small but the variety is still very limited. This situation is particularly serious with regard to spoken data. It is also important and necessary to collect various types of data, such as interactive conversation and data from diverse learner groups.
This paper is rather limited in the scope of analysis because it reviewed only a total of sixty-three learner corpus-related articles published in two journals. As mentioned earlier, there are 839 English learner corpus-related articles retrieved by the Google Scholar search. So the articles in this study might not represent the whole picture of English learner corpus research in Korea. Despite this limitation, the results of the analysis and classification of the articles by topics do not differ substantially from global research trends. Interestingly, studies of topics or areas that have been undertaken with learner corpora in Korea are highly skewed toward grammar and lexis, following the international trend. It is encouraging, however, to see that the range of research areas in Korea has been broadening to encompass various other areas of language use as well as new computational analyses of learner data.
Korea lags a little behind some other Asian countries like Japan and China in the compilation of learner corpora and learner corpus research. There is a pressing need for Korean academics to keep abreast with the latest developments in this field. The availability of high-quality learner corpora will no doubt promote the collaborative research of scholars and lead to the development of new teaching and learning methods. It is hoped that this survey will provide some inspiration and insights for compiling learner corpora and fostering the academic motivation to embark on learner corpus studies in Korea.
