Section: Abstract

The earliest South African hominids (humans and their ancestral kin) belong to the genera Australopithecus , Paranthropus , and Homo , with the oldest being a ca. 3.67 million-year-old nearly complete skeleton of Australopithecus (StW 573) from Sterkfontein Caves. This skeleton has provided, for the first time in almost a century of research, the full anatomy of an Australopithecus individual with indisputably associated skull and postcranial bones that give complete limb lengths. The three genera are also found in East Africa, but scholars have disagreed on the taxonomic assignment for some fossils owing to historical preconceptions. Here we focus on the South African representatives to help clarify these debates. The uncovering of the StW 573 skeleton in situ revealed significant clues concerning events that had affected it over time and demonstrated that the associated stalagmite flowstones cannot provide direct dating of the fossil, as they are infillings of voids caused by postdepositional collapse.

Section: Introduction

Traditionally, the term hominid from the zoological family Hominidae was applied to humans and their ancestral kin as far back as their divergence from the great apes, which were classed as pongids (Pongidae). In recent years, there has been, with some exceptions, widespread abandonment of this traditional usage in favor of schemes that also place apes in the family Hominidae and classify humans and their ancestral kin in the zoological tribe Hominini, or hominins. There is, however, no consistency in how such revision is applied, either to the term hominin or to hominid. For example, Goodman et al. (2001) classified Pongo , Gorilla , and Pan together with Homo in the tribe Hominini and placed the gibbons together with the great apes and humans in the family Hominidae. In contrast, Stringer & Andrews (2005) put gibbons in a separate family, Hylobatidae, and placed orangutans, gorillas, and humans with chimpanzees in their own subfamilies within the family Hominidae. They put chimpanzees in the tribe Panini and humans in tribe Hominini, but Andrews (2015) later placed gorillas in the subfamily Homininae and chimpanzees together with humans in the tribe Hominini. This classification by Andrews contradicts the earlier definition by Stringer & Andrews (2005 , p. 16) that “humans are distinguished from chimpanzees by inclusion in a separate tribe Hominini, abbreviated to hominin,” which is the sense in which most researchers use the term hominin. Nonetheless, the confused and contradictory revisions mentioned above tend to be unhelpful, and some researchers (e.g., White 2002 , Schwartz & Tattersall 2005 , Clarke 2012 , Tattersall 2015 ) have preferred to retain the traditional terminology, with the family Hominidae (hominid) applying only to humans and their ancestral relatives dating back to their divergence from the great apes. That is the sense in which we use the term here.
The earliest South African hominids belong to the genera Australopithecus , Paranthropus , and Homo . We first summarize historical views of these taxa and then discuss how more recent discoveries and research have introduced new perspectives concerning the systematics, dating, and taphonomy of these hominids. For clarity, recent discoveries and interpretations must be framed in the context of earlier concepts and misinterpretations of fossils.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion

The unique Pliocene and Pleistocene geological and taphonomic contexts of northern South Africa allowed for capturing and preserving paleoanthropological information in the form of fossils and our ancient ancestors’ artifacts. The most relevant fossil sites are underground caverns formed in the dolomitic limestone country rock of the Witwatersrand Basin ( Figure 1 ). These caverns occasionally open to the surface via vertical shafts called avens ( Brain 1958 ). It was through these avens that bones and artifacts entered the caves by a variety of processes (including, prominently, through the activities of bone-accumulating predators who ate their prey in the vicinity of the avens or in the trees that grew above them) millions of years ago (e.g., Brain 1981 ). Afterward, they were gradually covered by soil and rocks that had washed and collapsed into the caverns. In many cases, this complex admixture was then sealed and hardened by calcium carbonate–charged water dripping from stalactites on the cave ceiling or flowstone on the walls and floor, forming a sedimentary deposit called breccia. The major exception to this scenario is the site of Taung. In contrast with sites such as Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai, and Drimolen, Taung is a cave within tufa (calcium carbonate layers precipitated by water running over the edge of a dolomite escarpment). The Taung Australopithecus skull and associated fauna were accumulated by eagles ( Berger & Clarke 1995 ). These bones were mixed with red sands blown in from the Kalahari and eventually were sealed from the outside by the continuing accretion of calcium carbonate across the cave's opening ( Broom 1925a ).
The dating of the South African Pliocene and Early Pleistocene hominids is ever-improving. It is beyond the scope of this survey to summarize and evaluate various relevant dating techniques and specific results, but generally accepted dates for the known fossils of the main taxa that we discuss are as follows: ca. 4.0–2.5 Ma for Australopithecus africanus and Australopithecus prometheus ( Vrba 1982 , 1985 ; Partridge et al. 2003 ; Granger et al. 2015 ), ca. 2.2–1.0 Ma for Paranthropus robustus ( Pickering et al. 2012 , Herries et al. 2020 , Kuman et al. 2021 ), and at least 1.8 Ma for Homo habilis at Swartkrans ( Pickering et al. 2012 ).
Almost a century has passed since Raymond Dart (1925 , p. 198) revealed the Taung child fossil skull as representing an “extinct link between man and his simian ancestor,” naming it Australopithecus africanus ( Supplemental Figure 1 ). Early twentieth-century views in paleoanthropology were entrenched, and the reception of Dart's bold announcement was mixed. For instance, Arthur Smith Woodward was skeptical and disdainful, lamenting that Dart had chosen for the fossil “so barbarous (Latin-Greek) a name as Australopithecus ” (in Keith et al. 1925 , p. 236). On the other hand, Arthur Keith, Grafton Elliot Smith, and Wynfrid Duckworth welcomed Dart's discovery, but tempered their approval—noting the need to better date the specimen and stressing that its immaturity might confound Dart's taxonomic diagnosis (in Keith et al. 1925 ). Two months later, Robert Broom (1925b) published his observations on the skull. His conclusion that the fossil provided a connecting link between apes and humans supported Dart's. He predicted that there seemed a “considerable probability that adult specimens will yet be secured, and if the skeleton as well as the skull is preserved, the light thrown on human evolution will be very great” ( Broom 1925b , p. 571). He followed this work ( Broom 1925a ) with a more detailed assessment of the skull and repeated his conviction that a skeleton would yet be found.
The discovery of just such a skeleton would have to wait another 73 years. In the interim, it was Broom (1936 , Broom & Schepers 1946 ) himself who would discover that first adult Australopithecus at Sterkfontein Caves, a crushed cranium (TM 1511) that he classified as Australopithecus transvaalensis ( Supplemental Figure 2 ). Broom's drawn reconstruction of the adult cranium ( Broom & Schepers 1946 ) is remarkably similar to his drawings in two earlier publications ( Broom 1925a , b ), which are reconstructions of an adult A. africanus based on the Taung child skull. It is important to note that in these drawings, he gave the adult skull large, projecting maxillary and mandibular canines that, like those of the great apes, interlock—even though the Taung child skull has smaller, less pointed deciduous canines than those of the great apes ( Dart 1925 , Broom & Schepers 1946 ). It seems that Broom was influenced by his acceptance of the fraudulent Piltdown skull ( Dawson & Woodward 1913 ), with its large ape-like canine, as a genuine fossil hominid. In his 1946 drawn reconstruction, he gave large projecting canines to the adult skull for a new reason: It was because of his discovery at Sterkfontein ( Broom 1938 ) of a child mandibular symphysis (TM 1516), with its large unerupted canine (cataloged later as Sts 50). He used this canine in his drawn reconstruction of the cranium TM 1511, which had no canine preserved ( Broom & Schepers 1946 ), and also in a model that he made of the reconstructed skull ( Du Toit 1948 ). He stated that the mandibular symphysis, with its associated anterior half of the left first deciduous molar, was so markedly different from Taung and Paranthropus that it had to be placed in a new genus, Plesianthropus . In retrospect, it seems he was correct in noting TM 1516 to be different from Taung but mistaken in assuming that all Sterkfontein fossils differed from Taung, as we discuss later.
Broom ( Broom & Schepers 1946 ) even considered that the chimpanzee-like TM 1516 mandibular symphysis, with its large canine, would help to restore the missing part of the Piltdown mandibular symphysis, which he noted was chimpanzee like but believed that it belonged with the human braincase. Piltdown was proven, in 1953, to be a forgery ( Weiner 1955 ), but its 40-year acceptance does demonstrate how even experienced researchers, including Dart (1925) , Broom (1925a , b) , and Louis Leakey (1934) , can be misled by preconceptions.
In the same publication, Broom & Schepers (1946 , p. 143) made another remarkable prediction that “within three or four years we will discover more of the origin of man than has been revealed during the past hundred.” That did indeed prove to be the case. Broom, aided by John Robinson, recovered a great number of Australopithecus fossils at Sterkfontein ( Supplemental Figure 3 ), including the undeformed Sts 5 cranium and a partial skeleton with a pelvis (Sts 14) ( Broom et al. 1950 ). From 1948 onward, Broom and Robinson also discovered many fossils at the nearby site of Swartkrans of a large-jawed, megadont genus Paranthropus . This genus was first discovered at Kromdraai and named Paranthropus robustus ( Broom 1938 ), but the Swartkrans fossils were placed in a new species, P. crassidens ( Broom & Robinson 1949 ) ( Supplemental Figure 4 ). Also of great importance was that, at Swartkrans, Broom and Robinson in 1949 uncovered the first proof that early Homo (the SK 45 mandible fragment) was contemporary with Paranthropus ( Broom & Robinson 1950 , 1952 ). Dart (1948b) named, from Makapansgat, a second species of Australopithecus , A. prometheus , on the basis of the posterior portion of a braincase, MLD 1, which he found to be different from both the Taung and Sts 5 crania. This find was quickly followed by the recovery of another A. prometheus specimen, an adolescent mandible (MLD 2), with large bulbous-cusped premolars and molars ( Dart 1948a ; Supplemental Figure 5 ). [For discussion about the validity of the name A. prometheus , see Clarke (2019a) .]
So it was that, for 35 years, South Africa led the way in producing fossils of Australopithecus , Paranthropus , and early Homo . During that same period, the only known early hominids from East Africa were the Garusi (Tanzania) maxillary fragment and molar found by Ludwig Kohl-Larsen (1943) in 1939 and the contentious Kanam (Kenya) mandible fragment championed by Louis Leakey as archaic Homo , contemporary with primitive stone tools, which he named the Oldowan ( Leakey 1934 ). The situation changed dramatically in July 1959 when Mary Leakey discovered at Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania) a well-preserved, flat-faced cranium with very large premolars and molars (OH 5), which Louis Leakey (1959) named Zinjanthropus boisei . This discovery provided the impetus for sustained and widespread research that has produced a large inventory of fossil hominids from Tanzania, Kenya, and Ethiopia that has tended to overshadow the South African discoveries for the following reasons.
East African hominid fossils, together with abundant and varied nonhominid faunal remains, continue to be recovered from extensive open-air, stratified lake beds interleaved with volcanic tuffs and lavas that can be dated absolutely using radioisotopic methods. By contrast, South African fossils come from a few limestone cave sites with faunal remains that are usually fragmented and scattered within the difficult-to-date, calcite-cemented talus deposits. The East African fossils are recovered on surfaces of sedimentary deposits from which they weathered out, and associated sites can be carefully excavated with fine tools to expose large areas in which bones and (often) stone tools can be studied in their original depositional contexts. In contrast, the South African hominid fossils had to be recovered for many years by blasting or drilling and breaking open the concrete-like cave breccias. Only rare decalcified deposits allow more precise excavation techniques. Nevertheless, continued South African excavations, particularly at Swartkrans ( Brain 1981 , 1993 ) and Sterkfontein ( Tobias & Hughes 1969 ) since 1966, using ever-improving techniques for stratigraphic recording and dating, have produced a wealth of information in the form of significantly increased fossil and stone tool collections that can be compared with the East African discoveries to provide a more pan-African view of early hominid and cultural evolution (for information on artifacts in the relevant sites, see Clark 1993 ; Kuman et al. 1997 ; Field 1999 ; Kuman 1994a , b , 1996 , 1998 ; Kuman & Clarke 2000 ; Kuman & Field 2009 ; Kuman et al. 2018 ; and see the Supplemental Text and Supplemental Figure 6 for a summary of the earliest archaeology in South Africa).
The generally held opinion has long been that the Australopithecus fossils from Sterkfontein and Makapansgat, despite their morphological diversity, all belong to A. africanus , the species first recognized by Dart at Taung ( Table 1 ). This opinion dates back to Robinson (1954) , who decided that Broom's (1938) Plesianthropus transvaalensis from Sterkfontein and Dart's (1948a , b) A. prometheus from Makapansgat—and even the Tanzanian Garusi maxilla ( Kohl-Larsen 1943 )—should all be placed in A. africanus . Tobias (1967) agreed with this lumping and later even suggested ( Tobias 1980 ) that the Hadar and Laetoli fossils of Australopithecus afarensis ( Johanson et al. 1978 ), including Garusi, should be classed as A. africanus . He did, however, note significantly that
Differing classifications of certain key fossils referred to in this text
the specimens from Makapansgat, although commonly classed with A. africanus , show some features more reminiscent of A. robustus : These features include very large buccolingually expanded molars, very robust jaws and the probable presence of a sagittal crest. In these respects, the Makapansgat specimens seem to show a somewhat nearer approach to A. robustus than do the Sterkfontein specimens. ( Tobias 1967 , p. 244)
For Tobias, this similarity of features in some Makapansgat fossils to those of A. ( P. ) robustus supported a notion that Paranthropus was an invalid genus, and he disagreed with Robinson (1962) , who maintained that Paranthropus showed dietary specializations in its dentition and cranial structure that rendered it distinct generically from Australopithecus . As with Dart and Broom before him, Tobias apparently did not entertain the possibility that pronounced morphological variation in the samples from Sterkfontein and Makapansgat could indicate that two distinct species were both present within each of the two sites.
Tobias (1967 , 1980) envisioned the purportedly variable A. africanus as ancestral to both A. ( P. ) robustus and the early Homo species, Homo habilis ( Leakey et al. 1964 ). He also stated that the “discovery of further specimens and new sites will provide better information on variability” ( Tobias 1967 , p. 244). It would be his own long-term excavations, initiated with Alun Hughes in 1969 at Sterkfontein ( Tobias & Hughes 1969 ), that would produce an extensive sample of hominid cranial and postcranial fossils to provide that better information. Moreover, it would be a member of Tobias's research unit ( Clarke 1988 ) who would reconstruct a fragmented cranium, StW 252 ( Supplemental Figure 7 ), recognize its Paranthropus -like features, and suggest that two Australopithecus species were present at Sterkfontein and Makapansgat. Even this find did not prompt Tobias to change his opinion that the combined Sterkfontein and Makapansgat fossils simply represented great diversity within one species ( Tobias 1991 , pp. 818–19).
Kimbel & White (1988 , p. 189), however, stated that Clarke's suggestion deserved serious consideration and that if “there are two hominid species in the Sterkfontein Member 4 deposit, they are very similar morphologically and may be difficult to define unequivocally, at least at present. But the inability to adequately diagnose closely related species in practice in no way diminishes their reality in nature.” They quoted Tattersall (1986 , p. 168), who stated, “To brush morphological diversity under the rug of an all-encompassing species is simply to blind oneself to the complex realities of phylogeny.”
The increasing inventory of Australopithecus fossils from Sterkfontein Member 4 (e.g., Moggi-Cecchi et al. 2006 ) convinced Clarke (1994a , 2008 , 2013 ) that two contemporaneous species were distributed throughout the depth and lateral extent of the deposit, as well as in the lower and older Jacovec cavern ( Partridge et al. 2003 ). These two species also occurred at Makapansgat, and Clarke (2013) decided that Dart's name A. prometheus , based on the MLD 1 parieto-occipital fossil, was a valid name for this second species (see also Clarke 2019a ). Most recently, Clarke & Kuman (2019) provided a list of those cranial fossils that can be placed into each species, with 28 of A. africanus and 26 of A. prometheus identified at Sterkfontein. They also provided definitions of each species and a new definition of H. habilis . Previous claims that such diversity within Sterkfontein Member 4 could be attributed to sexual dimorphism within the one species A. africanus (e.g., Lockwood & Tobias 1999 ) are countered by the demonstration that males and females are recognizable within each morphotype ( Clarke 2013 ). Comparably, fossils of the extinct monkeys Parapapio broomi and Parapapio jonesi are also contemporaneous in the Sterkfontein deposits ( Heaton 2006 ), but nobody suggests that they are males and females of a single species.
Equally pertinent, Tattersall (1996 , p. 47) noted that it “is the task of every generation of scientists to sort through its intellectual legacy and in doing so to retain and build upon what has stood the test of observation and repeated experience, while discarding the rest.” He noted a “reluctance to question received wisdom which has resulted in neglect or underestimation of taxic diversity in human evolution.” One prominent researcher who could not be accused of this practice was Louis Leakey (1961) , who explained his views for continuing to recognize Australopithecus , Paranthropus , and Zinjanthropus as distinct genera, as well as his belief that there were other hominids contemporary with Australopithecus that were likely ancestors of humans. In that publication, he also mentioned the newly discovered fossil juvenile (OH 7), which would later become the type specimen of H. habilis ( Leakey et al. 1964 ), commenting that it was associated with crude stone tools on a living floor. Leakey's (1961 , p. 42) opinion that both Australopithecus and Paranthropus “are clearly ‘near men’ rather than ‘man’ for there is no really valid evidence at present that any of these South African Australopithecines can be regarded as making stone tools to a set and regular pattern” had a significant impact on how he and others classified some East and South African fossils. Earlier, he argued that the OH 5 cranium Z. boisei (now classified as Paranthropus boisei ) from Olduvai exhibits specializations that foreshadow the morphology of Homo and should thus be considered on the evolutionary line leading to Homo ( Leakey 1960 ). He argued further that this opinion was reinforced by the fact that Oldowan stone tools were found in association with the cranium. Then, Leakey (1961 , p. 43) expressed his belief that some Sterkfontein teeth, associated with stone tools, which Robinson had classed as Australopithecus , were not truly diagnostic, and he believed that “they could quite as well represent some much later hominid which had retained certain Australopithecine characters in its dentition.”
This preconception that Australopithecus could not be associated with stone tools led to Leakey classifying non- Paranthropus fossils associated with Oldowan tools as early Homo . Thus OH 24, a cranium from Olduvai ( Leakey et al. 1971 ), which is morphologically very close to Sterkfontein A. africanus in the form of the crania Sts 17 and Sts 5 ( Clarke & Kuman 2019 ), became an iconic H. habilis ( Tobias 1991 ), and when the cranium StW 53 was found supposedly associated with artifacts at Sterkfontein, that too was classed as H. habilis ( Hughes & Tobias 1977 ). In truth, it was not associated with artifacts ( Clarke 1994b ) and is virtually identical morphologically to the first-discovered adult A. africanus , TM 1511 ( Kuman & Clarke 2000 , Clarke 2013 ; and see Supplemental Figure 8 ). The teeth also match those of A. africanus ( Supplemental Figure 9 ). Its larger maxillary canine socket and wider intermastoid dimension compared to the A. africanus cranium Sts 5 suggest that StW 53 is male and Sts 5 is female. The widespread unquestioning acceptance of StW 53 as H. habilis (e.g., Tobias 1991 ) over the past 45 years in numerous publications has denied the cranium its rightful place as a reasonably complete A. africanus , as first demonstrated by Ferguson (1989) . Furthermore, the partial skeleton from Olduvai, OH 62, has been widely accepted as H. habilis because Johanson et al. (1987) found its maxilla so similar to that of StW 53. That very close morphological similarity is indisputable and suggests that OH 62, like StW 53, is an individual of A. africanus and not of H. habilis .
The reality is that if these fossils are evaluated on the basis of their anatomy rather than their supposed association with stone tools, they group with A. africanus . This evaluation is important because designating OH 24 and OH 62 as A. africanus shows that at Olduvai these specimens represented one of three distinct, temporally overlapping genera of hominids, i.e., A. africanus , P. boisei , and H. habilis . Such a scenario corresponds with that of Koobi Fora, Kenya, where important H. habilis specimens, such as KNM-ER 1470 and KNM-ER 1590, and A. africanus specimens, including KNM-ER 1813 ( Leakey 1974 ), co-occur stratigraphically with many more numerous P. boisei fossils. Walker (1981) also concluded that OH 24 and OH 13 were an East African late population of A. africanus .
Another South African fossil that has a bearing on this taxonomic issue was found at Swartkrans in 1949. SK 15, a mandible with molars and a left third premolar, was recovered from a pocket of seemingly younger breccia than the one that contained abundant fossils of P. robustus . It was considered more human-like in morphology than the mandibles and teeth of P. robustus , and Broom & Robinson (1949 , 1952) named it Telanthropus capensis. Robinson (1961) later placed it in Homo erectus , a species well-known from Java and China, which had also just been found at Olduvai (OH 9). As suggested by Clarke (2017) , it was probably the resemblance of SK 15 to an Olduvai mandible, OH 13, that caused Tobias on his first viewing of that fossil to exclaim to Louis Leakey, “Louis, this is Homo ” ( Tobias 2013 , p. 278), prompting them to make it the paratype of H. habilis , despite its differences with the H. habilis type specimen, OH 7 ( Leakey et al. 1964 ). If OH 13 and the strikingly similar KNM-ER 1813 are considered late A. africanus or a closely related species, then the similar SK 15 T. capensis mandible may also be an Australopithecus . If it represents a late species distinct from A. africanus , its correct name would be Australopithecus capensis . Ferguson (1995) analyzed the taxonomy of the KNM-ER 1813 cranium and gave it the species name Homo microcranous.
Some other South African fossils that have similarities to OH 13 and KNM-ER 1813 are from Malapa. They were named as a new species, Australopithecus sediba ( Berger et al. 2010 ), although Kimbel & Rak (2017) concluded that this species is uniquely related to A. africanus . Whether any or all of these Early Pleistocene fossils at ca. 1.9 Ma belong to A. africanus or to a distinct species created for them is debatable, but they certainly do not fit easily into H. habilis as represented by OH 7, OH 16, KNM-ER 1470, KNM-ER 1590, and OH 65. There is, however, one South African fossil, SK 27, that does fit. It was found in 1949 at Swartkrans and was classified by Broom & Robinson (1952) as a large-brained Paranthropus child that they considered to have an atypical, unerupted large canine. Twenty-five years later, it was demonstrated by Clarke (1977a) to be a Homo juvenile specimen, with a brain size and large canine that are usual for that genus. Clarke (2017) found that the SK 27 dentition compared well with that of the Olduvai (OH 65) H. habilis maxilla ( Blumenschine et al. 2003 , Clarke 2012 ; see Supplemental Figure 10 ), and he recognized SK 27 as a South African H. habilis . Ironically, as Clarke (2017) observed, it may have been the sizeable cranial capacity (750–800 cc) of the supposed Paranthropus cranium SK 27 that caused Tobias (1991) to initially wonder if the OH 7 fossil (that became the H. habilis type specimen in 1964) could be accommodated within Australopithecus variability ( Tobias 2013 , p. 276). If SK 27 is accepted as H. habilis , it would mean that the species was first uncovered in South Africa 15 years before it was named on the Olduvai juvenile fossil, OH 7.
Yet another South African first discovery not recognized at the time was Homo ergaster in the form of the SK 847 cranium from Swartkrans found and cataloged in 1949 as Paranthropus . Clarke recognized it as Homo and found that it joined with the anterior maxillary portion SK 80 that had been classified by Robinson (1953a , b ) as Telanthropus (i.e., early Homo ) ( Clarke et al. 1970 ; Clarke & Howell 1972 ; Clarke 1977b ), and it is very similar to the KNM-ER 3733 cranium of what was considered an early African H. erectus from Lake Turkana, Kenya ( Walker 1981 ; see Supplemental Figure 11 ). KNM-ER 3733 was classed by some researchers as H. ergaster ( Groves & Mazak 1975 ).
Swartkrans, South Africa, has been well known since 1948 for the abundance of fossils belonging to the genus Paranthropus ( Supplemental Figure 12 ), recovered initially by Broom & Robinson (1952) . The site was later methodically excavated by Brain (1993) , and many more specimens were recovered, some of which, including three of the missing teeth of the best-known cranium SK 48, were blasted out by lime miners ( Clarke 1990 ). Most recently, a continuous program of excavation by Pickering ( Pickering et al. 2005 , 2007 , 2008 , 2012 , 2016 ; Sutton et al. 2009 ; Gibbon et al. 2014 ; Kuman et al. 2018 , 2021 ) has further detailed stratigraphic, cultural, and dating issues and revealed more fossils. The Kromdraai site, where the first Paranthropus was recovered and recognized by Broom (1938) , has also been extensively excavated in recent years ( Braga et al. 2017 ) and has yielded a quantity of Paranthropus material that is being prepared for publication.
A relatively new site, Drimolen, discovered and excavated by Keyser beginning in 1992, produced many P. robustus fossils, including a virtually complete skull, DNH 7, of a very small female ( Keyser 2000a , b ). This female skull led Lockwood et al. (2007) to conclude that most of the Swartkrans crania and dentitions were male because of their larger size compared with the diminutive female DNH 7. They interpreted 14 Swartkrans specimens as male and 3 as female. Lockwood et al. (2007) envisaged a gorilla-like social structure, with nondominant males on the periphery of a group being more vulnerable to carnivore predation and thus being disproportionately represented in these fossil assemblages, which are hypothesized to have formed through the predatory and feeding behaviors of large felids ( Brain 1981 ). Lockwood and colleagues also concluded that this pattern differed from the A. africanus sample, which had either a preponderance of females or showed no bias. As discussed above, this observation was based on a supposed A. africanus hypodigm that is actually composed of two species, each of which contains male and female fossils. They concluded that this difference in sex bias suggested different social structures between P. robustus and A. africanus . Their hypothesis has now been brought into question by discovery of a clearly male P. robustus cranium from Drimolen, DNH 155, which also has postcanine teeth smaller than the Swartkrans sample ( Martin et al. 2020 ; see also Pickering et al. 2012 , 2016 ). Martin and colleagues concluded that the differences between Drimolen and Swartkrans were unlikely to be due simply to geographic variation because the sites are only 6.3 km apart, and they discussed structural differences related to a weaker bite force in the Drimolen specimens compared with other P. robustus fossils. They attributed this difference to microevolution, possibly driven by temporal separation and climate change. The age of Drimolen is about 2.04–1.95 Ma and thus purportedly older than the relevant Swartkrans P. robustus assemblage. However, new cosmogenic nuclide dating at Swartkrans now brackets the relevant P. robustus fossils to between 2.2 and 1.8 Ma ( Kuman et al. 2021 ).
Although South African Australopithecus and P. robustus are well-represented by cranial material, postcrania are mostly fragmentary. No P. robustus skeletons have yet been found. Before 1998, only two very partial skeletons of Australopithecus , Sts 14 ( Robinson 1972 ) and StW 431 ( Kibii & Clarke 2003 , Toussaint et al. 2003 ), had been recovered from Sterkfontein. In 1994 and 1997, the first parts of a virtually complete skeleton, StW 573, were found through the identification by Clarke of Australopithecus foot bones and lower leg bone fragments that had been blasted out of Sterkfontein's deep underground Silberberg Grotto by lime miners and classified wrongly as bovid and monkey fossils ( Clarke & Tobias 1995 , Clarke 1998 ). Clarke gave a cast of the right distal tibia fragment to Stephen Motsumi and Nkwane Molefe and asked them to search for a contact in the Silberberg Grotto. They did indeed locate and find perfect contact with the sectioned-through tibia shaft in the in situ breccia of the grotto, and so began a long-term, careful excavation of StW 573 in place ( Clarke 1998 , 2019b ). This discovery of a virtually complete Australopithecus skeleton was, as Broom (1925a,b ) had predicted, of great significance, not only from an anatomical perspective, but also because, for the first time, postcranial bones were indisputably associated with a skull of a South African Australopithecus individual. Previously, postcranial fossils from Sterkfontein, including the Sts 14 and StW 431 partial skeletons that lacked cranial material to identify taxon, had all been widely accepted and published as belonging to the one species, A. africanus . The StW 573 skeleton, with its complete skull and dentition identifiable to species (see below), provides a template against which less complete postcranial fossils can be compared and contrasted ( Figure 2 ).
Another important aspect is that, for the first time at Sterkfontein, it was possible to expose in situ a full Australopithecus skeleton with its skull. This process not only ensured the integrity and recovery of every bone and fragment but also revealed fascinating insights into the taphonomic history of this one Australopithecus individual. The skeleton is the only Australopithecus fossil among the large quantity of other fauna that had previously been blasted out of the Silberberg Grotto breccias by extensive lime mining activity and, much later, by limited controlled blasting of a vertical face of the grotto's breccia at the opposite, eastern end of the cavern. That faunal material, consisting mainly of fossil monkeys and carnivores with very few antelope, included some articulated parts of skeletons, and this together with the rarity of carnivore chewing damage on the recovered fossils, suggested that the accumulation resulted from a natural death trap via a vertical drop from the surface ( Pickering et al. 2004 ). The Australopithecus skeleton being so complete with many parts in articulation must also have entered through the trap. Still, one wonders how and why it is the only Australopithecus in that considerable faunal accumulation. A possible clue presented itself when a cranium, tibia, and some vertebrae of a very large male Parapapio broomi monkey were uncovered in direct contact with the skeleton. It occurred to Clarke (2019b) that the individual may have engaged in an altercation with this or another large male monkey while feeding in a big fruiting tree at the shaft entrance, with both falling to their deaths. The cranium was beneath the pelvis of StW 573, and we anticipate that when excavation continues into the lower levels, other parts of this large monkey may be recovered. Many parts of the StW 573 skeleton are articulated, including the bones of a complete left hand, which are in correct anatomical association ( Supplemental Figure 13 ). The left humerus and attached scapula had separated cleanly at the elbow joint and slipped downslope. In addition, during excavation, Clarke (1999) noticed that there were some gaps between the encasing breccia and the bones of the hand. This observation indicates that the body had been mummified in dry conditions and had lain on the talus slope prior to the onset of a lengthy wet period that calcified the bones and the encasing sediment into a hard breccia. At a later time, subsidence of the infill caused breakage and slippage, with the proximal halves of the femora sliding beneath the distal halves. Large voids created by this collapse were then filled by a calcareous flowstone that formed over the breccia containing the upper part of the skeleton but beneath the tibiae and fibulae ( Clarke 2002 , Bruxelles et al. 2019 ). This is of particular relevance to dating in limestone caves because it shows that the flowstone formed after, in this case long after, the deposition, fossilization, and subsequent collapse and breakage of the skeleton. Thus any dates on the flowstones (e.g., Walker et al. 2006 ) are younger than the skeleton's actual date. The age of the skeleton was determined by cosmogenic burial dating of the encasing sediment to be ca. 3.67 Ma ( Granger et al. 2015 ). Such an age is in keeping with the deep stratigraphic position of the fossil ( Bruxelles et al. 2014 , 2019 ) and also with the morphology of the cranium, which has striking similarities to MRD-VP-1/1, a 3.8 Ma cranium from Woranso-Mille (Ethiopia) that is assigned to the archaic species Australopithecus anamensis ( Haile-Selassie et al. 2019 ). These similarities include a bell-shaped outline in posterior view, a very long nuchal plane, a wide interorbital distance, a large canine relative to cheek teeth, a diastema (gap) between the upper canine and the incisor, and a small cranial capacity. The estimated brain size of StW 573 is ∼408 cc ( Beaudet et al. 2019b ), and it is 365–370 cc in MRD-VP-1/1. Such parallels between the very early Ethiopian Australopithecus and that of South Africa are intriguing. While more anatomical comparison is required, it shows that the age given for StW 573 is not surprising. It is interesting that Pickering et al. (2004) found that the inferred Sterkfontein paleoenvironment at the time of StW 573 conforms broadly to that of A. anamensis at Kanapoi and Allia Bay (Kenya). Another notable point of similarity between StW 573 and A. anamensis is the strongly sloping heavy tooth wear anteriorly, contrasting with the less worn posterior teeth ( Ward et al. 2010 ).
Anatomical description and analysis of the skull of StW 573 ( Clarke & Kuman 2019 ) concluded that it is a mature female, comparable in morphology to crania and mandibles of A. prometheus from Sterkfontein and Makapansgat, a species that contrasts markedly with crania and mandibles of A. africanus ( Figure 3 ; Supplemental Figure 14 ). For that study, they utilized and illustrated for the first time a newly reconstructed A. africanus maxilla with complete adult dentition (StW 576) from Sterkfontein. This specimen demonstrates a notable distinction between A. africanus and A. prometheus in the anterior dentition ( Supplemental Figure 15 ). The canines of A. prometheus are larger, with large roots of oval cross-section, and there is a wide diastema between the maxillary canine and the lateral incisor, along with procumbent incisors and a long palate. This morphology contrasts with the absence of a diastema, the presence of vertical incisors, and a much shorter palate in A. africanus , which also has smaller canine roots with rounded cross-section. The study showed that if the large unerupted mandibular canine of another A. prometheus specimen, TM 1516, is placed in its correct erupted position on StW 573, it is accommodated by the upper diastema and projects superiorly, anterior to the maxillary canine ( Clarke & Kuman 2019 ). This anatomy recalls the 1925 Broom drawings that reconstructed the imagined adult A. africanus on the basis of the Taung child. However, we now know that such morphology in Sterkfontein fossils clearly applies only to A. prometheus and not to A. africanus . It is noteworthy that the complete dentition of A. africanus StW 576, though equally worn, does not exhibit the heavy, sloping anterior wear of A. prometheus . Instead, it shows more even, horizontal wear across the whole tooth row ( Clarke & Kuman 2019 ).
For the first time, we can measure accurately complete lower and upper limb lengths in an Australopithecus , showing that at least in this species, the legs are longer than the arms ( Clarke 2019b ) ( Figure 4 ). Heaton et al. (2019) conclude that the limb proportions differ from both modern African apes and humans, which have become specialized over time, whereas StW 573 exhibits a primitive retention of proportions similar to Old World monkeys and to the Miocene ape Proconsul and purported basal hominid Ardipithecus ramidus . The upper limb shows traits consistent with arboreal locomotion, while the lower limb shows it to have been an obligate terrestrial biped. Results of the StW 573 study suggest that a small increase in length of the lower limbs occurred along with shortening of the forearm between the time of Ardipithecus and that of Australopithecus . This development was followed in time by further lengthening of the lower limb and shortening of the humerus and forearm in Homo ( Heaton et al. 2019 ).
Indications of both arboreality and bipedality have also been found in detailed studies of other elements of StW 573, including the hand (T. Jashashvili, K.J. Carlson, B.A. Patel, K. Kuman, J.L. Heaton, T.R. Pickering, A. Beaudet, R. Crompton, L. Bruxelles, D. Stratford, R.J. Clarke, submitted), the shoulder ( Carlson et al. 2021 ), and the foot and ankle ( Clarke & Tobias 1995 , Clarke 1998 , Deloison 2003 ). Micro-computed tomography (microCT) studies of the endocranial and inner ear anatomy and the atlas vertebra have also been published by Beaudet et al. (2019a , b , 2020 ), revealing both ape-like and human-like features relating to arboreal and terrestrial adaptations.

Section: Conclusion

The expression “thinking outside of the box” is particularly appropriate to the history of research into human ancestry. The tibia fragment that provided the key to the location of the world's first virtually complete Australopithecus skeleton was found in a box of long-ago excavated monkey fossils. Cranial remains of A. prometheus had long been metaphorically placed in the A. africanus box, and A. africanus fossils had been metaphorically boxed under the H. habilis label. At Swartkrans, H. habilis and H. ergaster had been boxed into the Paranthropus hypodigm, and a possible A. africanus mandible was boxed into the H. erectus category. In 1925, Smith Woodward had lamented the mixture of Latin and Greek in the naming of Australopithecus . We should lament even more the continued mixing of two different species under the name A. africanus , and we should think outside of the box to correctly analyze the contained fossils rather than simply accepting the labels that have, often incorrectly, been given to them.

Section: Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the paleoanthropology pioneers and their African assistants, whose endeavors revealed the fossils that we discuss above. Pickering is very grateful to Karen Strier for instigating this contribution; her preeminent example of what it means to be a scientist is a constant source of inspiration. Pickering also thanks his colleagues in South African paleoanthropology, including his coauthors, as well as Bob Brain, Laurent Bruxelles, Matt Caruana, A.J. Heile, Abel Molepolle, Andrew Phaswana, and Dominic Stratford.
