Section: Abstract

Academic disciplines are shape-shifting zones of inquiry yet notably bounded by regimes of training, truth, genre, and aesthetics. This article journeys into liminal zones in between disciplines as an existential space to ponder matters that beg for release from disciplinary syllabi. Can one thrive or even survive in the academy while dwelling in intervals between scholarly footprints? I lay bare a life of thinking in between anthropology, linguistics, and psychology for the reader to pursue and complicate this question. Try as I might to steer clear of folly, I have thrown caution to the winds to suggest affordances that nourish transgressive thinking in ways that expand and reassemble thinkable objects of inquiry.

Section: Introduction, Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion, Conclusion

The paths of autobiographical disclosure run the gamut from tightly plotted turning points of before and after to less threaded events that have no tidy resolution, as living is open-ended and reflexive becoming is a modern experience. The latter fits my inclination, as I tumble over academic cliffs, treading unfamiliar waters and losing myself in intellectual currents that beckon me away from my home country of anthropology. So much is out there in relevant disciplines to absorb. Bibliographies become a gateway drug. Facilitated by Internet search engines, I download one cited article after another, take notes, and build folders for front- and back-burner research projects. It is unfair, however, to lay blame for such wanderlust on software. I am, simply, disciplinarily errant.
As an undergraduate at George Washington University, I became enamored with geology and then drifted into anthropology by way of archaeology. I excavated a Tewa Pueblo ancestral site one summer and then worked at the Smithsonian Institution to curate Japanese ceramics produced before and after the arrival of Commodore Perry. But it was language that eventually caught my interest after enrolling in a field methods course to build a grammar of an indigenous language. Also taking that field methods course was Ed Keenan, a MA student in linguistics. We struck up a friendship, which became a marriage.
In 1966, I entered The University of Pennsylvania PhD program in Anthropology, joining the second generation of ethnographers of communication under Dell Hymes and David Sapir. I also assisted Ward Goodenough in his kinship studies. Linguistic anthropology was an inventive program, with contributions from Sol Worth (in the Annenberg School of Communication) and Erving Goffman (from the Department of Sociology). Faculty put the fear of God in those of us taking the two-day timed bluebook comprehensive four-field examination. A fellow student's hand froze during the exam, and he had to wait a year to successfully complete this rite de passage. I studied like a maniac and could mumble only a few words to my parents when they checked in on me.
In 1969, I received a National Institute of Mental Health grant and Ed received a National Science Foundation grant to conduct fieldwork in Madagascar. On the way, we stopped in London to meet Maurice Bloch, who helped us navigate fieldsites. Once we were settled in Vakinankaratra in the central highlands, I recorded poetic Malagasy oratory, while Ed tackled Malagasy's unusual subject–final word order.
Fieldwork was followed by four years in Cambridge (1970–1974), where Ed was Senior Fellow at King's College and I wrote my dissertation in the suite of a kindly King's Fellow. I sat at a huge antique desk with lion's head drawer pulls. After some time, I learned that the desk had belonged to John Maynard Keynes, when he was bursar of Kings. Yes! And one drawer was stuffed with as yet unrevealed letters, artwork, and photos exchanged between Keynes and Bloomsbury luminaries, including Virginia Woolf and Keynes's lover Duncan Grant. I took a month-long break to read this riveting correspondence and became utterly absorbed in the existential concerns of this coterie.
In 1973, I completed my dissertation draft and was appointed Assistant Lecturer in Linguistics at the University of Cambridge, one of only a handful of female faculty holding a departmental appointment, as most women were college tutors. Before assuming this position, I was ceremonially awarded an honorary Master of Arts degree. I was never certain if the degree was in recognition of being appointed as Cambridge faculty or, given that I did not graduate from Cambridge or the University of Oxford, a prerequisite to being faculty, similar to receiving a title before marrying royalty. Meanwhile, my dissertation committee at the University of Pennsylvania, in heated dispute over tenure denial of one committee member, took another year to award my PhD degree (in 1974).
Cambridge is where my academic path turned nonlinear—permanently. One might call this moment a turning point, even if I do not calibrate my life in terms of heavens-opening transformations. Rather, the Cambridge experience ushered in a cluster of events that reconfigured my professional imagination. Fresh from fieldwork, I encountered the Department of Social Anthropology at Cambridge in fall 1970. Meyer Fortes was the William Wyse Professor; Edmund Leach was Reader and King's College Provost; and Jack Goody was soon to become Reader (in 1971). Seminar talks were sites of faculty trench warfare. During one talk by a protégé of Fortes, Leach stood up, walked toward the speaker, lifted the carafe of water on the podium, poured himself a glass meant for the speaker, and walked back to his seat. Fall 1970 was nearly two decades after Leach's signal dialogues with Roman Jakobson about structural linguistics and shortly before Goody ushered in orality and literacy as anthropological concerns. Fortes, fluent in at least 10 languages, had firmly sidelined language from anthropology ( Drucker-Brown 1983 ). I was cognizant that linguistic anthropology was not part of British social anthropology but unnerved to be identified as linguist when meeting an anthropologist. I was rescued by US-born, Cambridge-trained anthropologist Esther Goody, who was Fellow of New Hall. We talked about the language of respect, which broadened to politeness when Penny Brown and Steve Levinson arrived in Cambridge ( Goody 1978 ).
While social anthropology found little interest in relating language to transactions of social order, linguistics had carved a space for anthropological linguistics, ever since J.R. Firth utilized Bronisław Malinowski's “context of situation” to analyze socially situated meanings, functions, and styles of language. The Cambridge linguists who graciously hired me viewed me as adhering to this precedent. Entering the Department of Linguistics, I was surrounded by scholars feverishly forging the burgeoning study of pragmatics. I sat in on colleagues’ classes and became a semi-linguist. It was heady and wonderful. And it determined my academic employment for the next 27 years: an anthropologist in a linguistics department, part anthropological linguist and part linguistic anthropologist.
A few weeks after arriving in Cambridge, I gave birth to beautiful twin boys, Toby and David. At the time I was the only woman in my student cohort who was a mother. My dissertation committee sent congratulations, and two members wished me well pursuing a life outside academia. In the height of the feminist movement, I lived the mantra “the personal is political” and improvised a life that comprehends heart and mind. With breastfeeding as my biological clock, I rode my bike each morning from our house in Grantchester to Cambridge to write my dissertation. I also shifted the focus of my dissertation from strictly oratory to the gendered division of formal and informal talk in Madagascar.
When I became pregnant during fieldwork, women instantly knew my condition, having diagnosed my face. They protected me from male-dominated events that could harm my health, and I began spending more time with the women than with orators. I realized the critical import of women's speech, which was more forthright than the exquisite indirectness of men's speech. Though denigrated, women's directness gave them power to barter goods in the market and to accuse and criticize others ( Keenan 1974a ). 1 This revelation ushered me into scholarship on language and gender, which endured in future fieldwork in Samoa and the United States ( Ochs 1992 ).
While women's language rose to the fore in the 1970s, there was little corresponding anthropological interest in the communicative practices of young children. I, however, was fascinated by the conversations between my toddlers Toby and David and decided to correspond with Susan Ervin-Tripp, one of the contributors to “A Field Manual for Cross-Cultural Study of the Acquisition of Communicative Competence” ( Slobin 1967 ). I also joined a research group studying the social worlds of infants and young children, led by Cambridge psychologist Martin Richards (1974) . With one foot in anthropology and another in linguistics, I slid into this third academic environment and learned a new set of research tools. I borrowed an enormous reel-to-reel video recorder, set up a video camera in Toby and David's bedroom, and documented their early morning sociality ( Keenan 1974b ).
In 1974, our family moved to Los Angeles. I joined the young, lively, close-knit, and madly ambitious Department of Linguistics at the University of Southern California (USC), while Ed joined the established Department of Linguistics at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), across town. During my interview at USC, I gave one talk on Malagasy indirect speech and Gricean conversational implicatures, gave a second talk on young children's conversational competence, and confessed that I could not teach Introduction to Linguistics. The faculty were academically expansive and hired me nonetheless.
At the 1974 American Anthropological Association meetings in Mexico City, Susan Ervin-Tripp and Claudia Mitchell-Kernan invited me to join a session on children's discourse ( Ervin-Tripp & Mitchell-Kernan 1977 ). After presenting my paper, I sat down next to Bambi Schieffelin, who struck up a conversation after the session ended. We kept talking for the rest of the meeting, indeed the next 47 years, and are still going. Bambi was earning a PhD in anthropology at Columbia University and a MA at Teachers College, and she was soon to conduct an ethnographic and language developmental study among the Kaluli (Papua New Guinea). Bambi's son, Zachary, was the same age as Toby and David. The overlap in our professional interests and personal lives was remarkable, and we decided to collaborate.
In spring 1975, en route to fieldwork, Bambi and Zachary came to Los Angeles. While our children played, we drafted papers on young children's and adults’ conversational discourse ( Keenan & Schieffelin 1976a , b ; Keenan et al. 1978 ). We named our research endeavor “developmental pragmatics” and then edited a volume with this title to inaugurate this line of inquiry. Developmental Pragmatics ( Ochs & Schieffelin 1979 ) signaled an affiliation with linguistics and linguistic anthropology. It marked a first step toward establishing the broader domain of inquiry known as language socialization. But I am getting ahead of myself.
The academic tale thus far appears full of lucky breaks and headed toward a promising future, maybe a Hollywood ending. Yet, a parallel tale blows through the windows, throwing uninvited chaos and devastation. In August 1974, my three-year-and-eight-month-old son Toby is diagnosed with a congenital heart defect during a routine checkup required by the preschool he is about to enter. In May 1976, Toby dies during open-heart surgery. In the interim, my marriage falls apart. My son David and I become broken and vulnerable, and our loss binds us and never leaves us. In a city where we have lived for less than two years, USC faculty and students help us and become lifelong extended family. I feel a wisdom within me that is beyond my years, a wisdom that I neither chose nor desired.
Two years later the NSF granted funds to conduct a language acquisition study in Western Samoa. Samoan, an ergative language, with verb–subject–object word order and two phonological registers, is a challenge for toddlers to acquire. The study built upon Keith Kernan's earlier study ( Kernan 1969 ), Margaret Mead's classic Coming of Age in Samoa ( Mead 1928 ), and Bradd Shore's in-depth ethnographic accounts of personhood, kinship, conflict, and power in Western Samoa ( Shore 1976 , 1977 ). Along with my son David and me were two researchers: Martha Platt and Alessandro (Sandro) Duranti, who later became my life partner. In the village of Falefā on the island of Upolu, Martha and I followed psycholinguistic protocols to periodically audio record six toddlers and other children in their midst ( Ochs 1979 , 1982 , 1988 ; Platt 1986 ). Sandro audio recorded primarily adult–adult interaction and took hundreds of photos to document children's and adults’ life-worlds ( Duranti 1981 , 1994 ). We had brought along a heavy reel-to-reel portable Sony video recorder, which, with no electricity in the village, we could use only sparingly ( Figure 1 ).
As we transcribed in A4 notebooks, I filled a box with notecards on the hierarchical organization of caregiving, corporeal alignment of infants’ and toddlers’ bodies, caregivers’ responses to toddlers’ unintelligible utterances, visual and audible affordances of dwellings, affective language not in the dictionary, moral responsibility, discipline, and more. The developmental psycholinguistic study gradually became anthropological. Most astonishing to me was my own comportment in the presence of small children. Endless hours of recording and transcribing indicated that Samoan caregivers tended not to simplify their utterances or use baby talk lexicon, yet I could not stop myself from using a high-pitched and simplified language when I communicated with an infant or toddler. I wondered if I had internalized some form of deep culture when I myself was an infant. By the end of fieldwork (in summer 1979), I brought home a longitudinal corpus of recordings, notes, and thousands of pages of transcript that documented—psycholinguistic style—young children's acquisition of Samoan morpho-syntax. And tucked alongside was a box now overflowing with observations of the sociocultural underpinnings of language acquisition.
When Bambi and her family visited us in Falefā, we dreamed of integrating psychological and anthropological approaches to children's language development. Once we were both back from fieldwork, we initially spoke to linguists and psychologists about cultural dimensions of children's language development. Dancing at the margins of linguistics, psychology, and anthropology, however, proved challenging. We then created a single line of inquiry within anthropology called language socialization, which considers how young children are socialized into and through embodied communicative practices, participation frameworks, and linguistic structures. We fused Edward Sapir's notion that “[l]anguage is a great force of socialization, probably the greatest that exists” ( Mandelbaum 1963 , p. 15) with ethnography of communication, pragmatics, conversation analysis, and sociocultural paradigms of human development.
In 1980, Sandro and I married, and our son Marco was born. We took nine-year-old David and two-month-old Marco to Canberra for a year, where we joined the Working Group in Language in Its Cultural Context under Roger Keesing's leadership at The Australian National University. The university supported us to return to Western Samoa for further fieldwork, which led to collaborative studies on literacy instruction and the grammar of agency ( Duranti & Ochs 1986 , 1989 , 1990 ). And in Canberra, we spent mornings in heady discussions with Penny Brown, John Haviland, Steve Levinson, and Robert Van Valin, with Judy Irvine, Bambi Schieffelin, and Michael Silverstein joining us in the summer. We lived across from Penny and Steve, whose son Nicholas was born shortly after we arrived. We shared a washing machine, tended to our kids, drank excellent Australian stout, and managed to have a life of the mind.
Once Bambi arrived in Canberra, she and I dedicated ourselves to drafting a paradigm-generating paper that compared Kaluli, Samoan, and US mainstream middle-class language socialization practices ( Ochs & Schieffelin 1984 ). It made visible the sociocultural underpinnings of mother/caregiver–child communication and denaturalized becoming a speaker of one or more languages. Our first foray in presenting this oeuvre took place that summer, an experience that turned out to be both hilarious and an exercise in modesty. We were asked to give a talk and advise a student interested in child language at the University of Newcastle. Two congenial faculty members met us at the airport. Walking toward the building where we were to give our talk, Bambi politely asked, “What do you work on?” We understood their response to be “pidgins.” Bambi followed up, “Oh which pidgins?” But we had misunderstood. Our hosts had responded, “pigeons.” In a flash, we realized that the objective of the trip was to help a student and that our talk justified the funding. We entered an empty kindergarten classroom and gave our talk while sitting on miniature chairs to two “pigeon” specialists and one young woman whose aspirations matched our expertise. We went on to give other versions of this talk in lofty academic venues, but this initial venture remains indelible.
Returning to the United States, Bambi and I organized a session at the 1982 American Anthropological Association meetings, gathered our papers into the volume Acquiring Conversational Competence ( Ochs & Schieffelin 1983 ), and led a language socialization workshop at the 1985 Linguistics Institute. We published a ream of articles and book chapters linking psychology, linguistics, and anthropology, including “Language Socialization” in the Annual Review of Anthropology ( Schieffelin & Ochs 1986a ). Children's socialization into attention, accommodation, reciprocity, affect, and participation in multiparty interaction became thematic threads. Together with Shirley Brice Heath, we contacted the anthropology editor of Cambridge University Press about a possible book series, which eventually broadened to become Studies in the Social and Cultural Foundations of Language. The series published the edited volume Language Socialization Across Cultures ( Schieffelin & Ochs 1986b ), followed by Culture and Language Development: Language Acquisition and Language Socialization in a Samoan Village ( Ochs 1988 ) and The Give and Take of Everyday Life: Language Socialization of Kaluli Children ( Schieffelin 1990 ). Since these first-generation endeavors, language socialization research has addressed globalization, inequality, (dis)ability, healing, care, and ethics. It also deciphers the complexities of immigrant/refugee, multilingual, second language, heritage, home, school, workplace, online, religious, moral, and aesthetic embodied language socialization practices. Three decades after we drafted “Language Acquisition and Socialization: Three Developmental Stories” in Canberra, Bambi and I joined forces with Sandro to integrate these lines of research into The Handbook of Language Socialization ( Duranti et al. 2011 ).
Narrative cast a spell on me as I began to document US family life during the 1980s. Then, as now, dinnertime was idealized as a locus of family unity but experienced as a hotbed of familial fissure lines. A Guggenheim Fellowship and a National Institute of Child Health and Human Development grant with Thomas Weisner supported a study of low- and middle-income families as they reunited in the late afternoon and evening after school and work. As Ruth Smith, Carolyn Taylor, and I video recorded family activities, dinnertime became the riveting moment that drew us in. Parents wanted children to eat and recount their day; children wanted to leave the table as soon as possible. Our recordings captured the sharply gendered and generational division of familial conversational labor and endless attempts to involve children around the table as interlocutors ( Ochs & Taylor 1992 ). Mothers recounted the travails of their day, while fathers tended not to disclose their own unresolved matters in their workplace and instead offered panoptical assessments and advice to the rest of the family. The recordings also captured family members collaboratively making sense out of events that they recently experienced. As these were events that had not yet been put into words, the narratives were disjointed. Missing details emerged haphazardly, and implications were objects of discussion and dispute. Family dinner narratives exacted collaborative problem-solving, with children drawn in as players ( Ochs et al. 1989 ).
Narrative is a genre that one does not approach lightly. Literary philosophy runs deep, and anthropology, sociology, linguistics, and psychology have cast storytelling as sociality, performance, vernacular logic, and succor to the distressed. Manifesting a sweep of genres and universal, narrative is likely the defining genre of the human species. Once our research team dug into storytelling, we took a long drink of the unendingly fascinating potentialities of narrative and married them to the moment-by-moment, haphazard piecing together of events that plunged interlocutors into Heideggerian interrogations of past-present-projected-possible events. In our recordings, narratives were often interrupted then recommenced; settings that might explain what happened took a while to elaborate. Such rough draft co-narrating was more than what these families did; co-narrating as a work in progress configured what it means to be a family. Spencer Foundation grants moved this line of thinking further, as we saw a resemblance between how families work through tentative narrative drafts of lived experiences and how scientists collaboratively construct knowledge about the world. That is, we saw family narratives-in-the-making as possible hypotheses that are queried, clarified, and revised ( Ochs et al. 1992 ).
In 1990, I joined the UCLA Department of Applied Linguistics. The department pursued interfaces with conversation analysis, linguistic anthropology, neuroscience, developmental psychology, and education. I asked Sally Jacoby and Patrick Gonzales to join me in video recording a lab of physicists over several months. The physicists talked and gestured to graphs on the board and computer printouts to build a narrative of experimental results. Both at family dinnertime and in the physics lab, more experienced persons asked the less experienced to report events and positioned themselves as evaluators of accounts. Physicists, however, went to great lengths to achieve shared understandings of events, which they will eventually recount to colleagues. When the physicists could not figure out why atomic spins in their experiments reacted in a certain fashion, they often pointed to or touched locations within a graph under scrutiny and uttered schizoid propositions whose subject was a first personal pronoun (“I,” “we”) but whose predicate referred to changes of state of inanimate atomic spins, e.g., “Why don't I go to the long range ordered phase in the Kleeman experiment?” The physicists blurred boundaries of physicist and inanimate physical matter, with the graph offering a liminal playing field to approach, reenact, and ponder changes in the physical state of a crystalline lattice of atomic spins ( Ochs et al. 1996 ).
When I watch and listen to scientists and families piecing together what happened when and why it matters, I feel an affinity with scholars poring over rough drafts of literary works, with their uncertainties, crossed-out words, fragments, sequences that go nowhere, and becomings that gain some traction. One can feel the creative, messy pulse of narrating. As rough narratives with starts and stops and unfinished questions are transformed, narrating introduces awakenings that transform how narrators and their audiences configure the world. The thin line between narrating experience and experiencing narrating becomes, inevitably, existentially porous.
In the science lab and at family dinner, recountings of enigmatic events evoke vivid present-time (re)experiencing of those events. At family dinners, however, the past becomes entangled with the now in ways that can be unsettling. Spouses may bicker extensively over one another's divergent versions of a recent event in which they are protagonists. Or, as a parent recounts a child's distressing early life experience, the child may reexperience the pain in the here and now and punish the parent ( Ochs et al. 1992 ).
Narrating lived experience that promiscuously bleeds into present concerns is a model of Heideggerian temporality, wherein orderly chronicity bends to bursts of uninvited anxieties that unbalance the ego. It is easy to understand, then, how delighted I was when a doctoral student in clinical psychology, Lisa Capps, asked if I might collaborate on a project relating narratives of personal experience to mental illness and gender. Lisa had worked with Jerome Bruner at Oxford on narrative analysis, and we both participated in a UCLA seminar on narrative led by Bruner in the late 1980s and in an informal discussion group at Bruner and Carol Feldman's house.
In the middle of a clinical study of mothers diagnosed with agoraphobia, one mother, Meg, lamented to Lisa that structured interviews and questionnaires measuring anxiety did not capture her experiences. Meg wanted to explain her perspective. It was at this juncture that Lisa walked into my office and we commenced an ethnographic project. For more than two years, Lisa listened to Meg talk about panic in her own words and recorded family interactions. We pored over recordings to decipher experiences of panic, recounted breath by breath. Meg's stories spiraled out of control: Being stuck in traffic on a freeway led to anxious feelings, which led to telling her husband to get off, which led to his telling her that he could not, which led to heightened anxiety and so on ( Capps & Ochs 1995 ). Meg used “a grammar of panic” to cast herself as irrational (e.g., “out of the blue”) and self-absorbed (e.g., “I would think, Okay, This sign says next town you know 20 miles”). Meg became proximal to the panic experiences that she was recounting, using the present tense and the place adverb “here” (“Here I am. I'm so damn mad I could just—storm out of here in the car. But—I can't leave”).
While narrative is among the greatest gifts to humankind, it was consuming Meg, as she ruminated about what happened, could have happened, and might happen. Meg was unable to causally connect her panic experiences to a dilemma that she recurrently experienced. Long before a panic attack, Meg would accommodate a family member's desire that she participate in an activity despite her own strong reservations, only to become overwhelmingly anxious at some point in the middle of her involvement in that activity. In Meg's narratives, the background circumstances were only skimpily linked to the immediate panic attack. Instead, panic was tied to the immediate setting, primarily the location where the attack occurred (e.g., freeway, bottom of Niagara Falls). Through the structuring of her narratives, we understood that panic may be a delayed, agonizing non-accommodation to others’ plans after reluctantly accommodating loved ones (“ Don't get on the freeway,” “I just can't ”).
While writing Constructing Panic: The Discourse of Agoraphobia ( Capps & Ochs 1995 ), Lisa gave birth to baby David. We completed the remaining chapters with one of us alternately holding David and the other writing. At times, Sandro took David to his study and held him while typing his textbook, Linguistic Anthropology ( Duranti 1997 ), with one hand. Baby and all, Constructing Panic poured forth, as we realized that the architecture of Meg's narratives was emblematic of agoraphobia and relevant to self-understanding.
In 1997, Lisa and I began a new ethnographic and clinical study of how high-functioning children diagnosed with autism or Asperger syndrome engaged in narrative activity with peers and family members. The study built on research carried out by clinical psychologist Marion Sigman and Lisa ( Sigman & Capps 1997 ). Lisa had joined the psychology faculty at the University of California, Berkeley. (A Berkeley colleague later told me that Lisa's file floated above hundreds of applications.) Together with Molly Losh (Berkeley), Tamar (Tami) Kremer-Sadlik (UCLA), and Olga Solomon (UCLA), we video recorded children at school and at home in the evenings and left an audio recorder for each family to record before and after school to document the arc of the day. Laura Sterponi and Karen Sirota later joined the UCLA team. As narrating experiences is fundamental to membership in social groups, the UCLA team decided to analyze the fine-tuned ways in which children across the autism spectrum navigate participation and rejection, reporting their bewildering experiences with peers at school to their parents at dinnertime ( Ochs et al. 2001 , 2004 ). We eventually expanded our research to include nonvocal children diagnosed with autism and articulated the defining features of “autistic sociality” ( Ochs & Solomon 2010 , Ochs et al. 2005 ).
The late 1990s brought many academic gifts. I had the good fortune of becoming a MacArthur Fellow and an American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellow. Lisa and I submitted a first draft of Living Narrative: Creating Lives in Everyday Storytelling ( Ochs & Capps 2001 ), in the midst of which Lisa's second child, Walter, was born. Then the tides of fortune drastically changed: Lisa was diagnosed with advanced lung cancer. Her family and dear friends rallied to support her creative life, including revising the book to include her sensibilities about narrating experience in the midst of severe illness. Like the many others touched by Lisa's compassion and imagination, the three generations living in our household and members of our research team grieved mightily Lisa's death at age 35 in 1999.
In 2000, I joined the UCLA Department of Anthropology, returning at last to my academic home. The departmental culture normalized “thinking in between disciplines,” and I straddled linguistic, psychological, and medical anthropology, coteaching with Linda Garro a seminar on “Narrative in Times of Trouble” and another on “Genres of Emotion.”
One Friday afternoon as I arrived home, I noticed a town car and driver in front of our house. When I stepped into the living room, I found Kathleen Christensen, program director at the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, chatting with Sandro. She had stopped on the way to the airport to see if we might be interested in submitting a proposal to examine how middle-class families manage family and work life. Sandro demurred, but I giddily gathered extraordinary linguistic and medical anthropologists, archaeologists, clinical psychologists, and education specialists to design an ethnographic and clinical study of dual-earner middle-class families. The UCLA Sloan Center on Everyday Lives of Families (CELF) became the thinking-in-between-disciplines experience of my dreams. From 2001 to 2010, CELF faculty, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and technical staff gathered once a week for 2 hours to discuss the 32 diverse families whom we had followed. All of us conducted research: filming family life (1,540 hours), taking photos (20,860) of household possessions, tracking family members’ locations and activities at home, interviewing, measuring biological stress, assessing health, and much more. We began observing family life a few months after the events of September 11, 2001. Parents closely monitored and prepared children for academic success, filling their calendars with extracurricular activities. Homes burst with possessions that overflowed into garages. Mothers assumed most domestic labor and could not reduce their biological stress levels following work as did fathers.
Tami (Director of Research) and I (Center Director) coordinated CELF from its earliest stages to book publications ( Arnold et al. 2012 , Ochs & Kremer-Sadlik 2013 ) and public outreach. Sloan also generously funded CELF studies of Swedish (Karin Aronsson, principal investigator) and Italian (Clotilde Pontecorvo, principal investigator) dual-earner, middle-class families. Across three countries, we examined family communication, relationships, emotions, responsibilities, schedules, commensality, material consumption, and social networks. Altogether, CELF was a grand exemplar of collaboration at all levels of seniority, an intellectual extended family. CELF has built, to my knowledge, the richest archive of the private and public life-worlds of middle-class families at the start of the twenty-first century.
As CELF wound down in 2010, Tami and I took a deep breath and dove into scholarship relating modernity and capitalism to childrearing. We yearned to historicize a pervasive observation across the US family corpus. Parents and young children constantly verbalized for one another what they were thinking, feeling, and doing. They queried, explained, labeled, moralized, negotiated, and problem-solved. It has been daunting to piece together—from the Industrial Revolution to the postindustrial knowledge economy—the rise of the parent–child dyad, in which an infant or toddler is democratically positioned as addressee and speaker ( Ochs & Kremer-Sadlik 2015 ). We have contextualized developmental models of children's intelligence that privilege verbosity within early and late modern paradigms that privilege (hyper)reflexive communication as vital to individual agency needed in times of heightened uncertainty. Our journey has delineated the extraordinary talk labor that neoliberal parents (typically mothers) undertake in hopes of accelerating a toddler's neurodevelopment and school readiness ( Ochs & Kremer-Sadlik 2021 ). These sociohistorical framings, however, confront a massive worldwide democratizing crusade to train low-income mothers to dyadically engage infants and toddlers in middle-class-style reflexive dialogue as the ticket to academic achievement and entry into the global economy. Like many linguistic anthropologists caught in a thicket of moral reservations, we agonize over such governmentality, justified by evidence-based developmental neuroscience, the intent of which is to reorganize socially structured, culturally infused communicative ecologies of infants and toddlers. The sobering anthropological corollary of these postcolonial incursions is that informal sociality is economically nuanced from birth. That is, how infants around the globe participate in informal sociality primes them to naturalize economically consequential communicative frameworks and participant roles.
I am wired to collaborate, to the point that it feels shiveringly lonely to think and write solo. I can do it, but the creative process is not nearly as inspiring as thinking in concert with others. Sometimes I pretend to collaborate with myself, treating a paper draft as the product of a former me as I now rethink it. Thinking with others is gratifying and fun. Thinking with others in labs, research centers, and institutes can lead minds in unexpected directions. And co-thinking articles and books can be thrilling, as one idea feeds another. Below, I reach into my co-thinking life to note a few affordances that nourish such rich and enduring dialogues.
Thinking with others works well when co-thinkers have a life outside the dialogic space. Crucial to thinking with others is that co-thinkers are not afraid of close relationships; they know how to sustain them, be vulnerable to transformations they bring about, and thrive alongside them. In other words, ideal collaborators exude the Mensch factor. I have had the good fortune of thinking in motion with the finest of mensches. Sandro, Bambi, Lisa, and Tami are the most sustained. And other treasured colleagues and friends have brought their capacity for building lives together into co-thinking with me. The best kept secret of the mensch factor is that life experiences with friends and family expand how we look at the world and open up the horizons of creativity. In my own life, nothing has expanded my mind more than thinking with my children David and Marco from birth to adulthood.
It is dangerous to lose oneself in thinking with others and follow ideas wherever they lead, heedless of disciplinary boundaries. What if, at the end of the rabbit hole, your colleagues do not get the point of your endeavor? Or they become distressed that you have stepped out of disciplinary methodologies? Or they do not recognize the genre of your writing? Or you cannot find a journal to publish your insights? All these fears are very real. But, as anyone who has fallen in love knows, the experience of pursuit itself can be delirious. So what if you fall off curbs or almost burn the house down because you are chasing ideas wherever they may lead? Some academic fields are more amenable to transgressive thinking and some are less. Happily, anthropology as practiced in the United States has a big umbrella.
The creation of ideas through sustained dialogue is the air I breathe. Imagine the decades-long dialogic engagement around language socialization that Bambi and I have sustained. Imagine years of dialogue with Lisa on narrating illness, health, and life more generally. Imagine the intellectually diverse CELF researchers sustaining nearly a decade of discussions of the same family life corpus, followed by another decade of dialogue with Tami on the political economy of nonstop reflexive dialogue in middle-class households. What I have learned from a long history of thinking in between disciplines with others is that dialogue gives oxygen to ideas under the condition that dialogue is continuous. Dialogic continuity, however, does not have to be measured in years to yield the thrill of ideas in motion. Dialogue can be bountiful in teaspoons of time. What is crucial is that dialogue has to be freed to continue threads of thought. It is frustrating that the life of the mind in academic meetings is sabotaged by stifling genres of presentation and turn-taking protocols that kill discussion. Thinking with others is crushed by the intellectually paralyzing practice of one person deciding who speaks next on the basis of the order of who raises their hand. Why not liberate turn-taking to build on ideas with others? All the pity when the solution is incredibly simple: Dialogue blossoms through informality.
Endless advice is available about cyber-collaborations through screen media platforms. Yet, there is something palpable in being near others in the same physical space while co-thinking. When I am generating ideas with another person, sitting together at a table or standing at a white board seems indispensable to co-creativity. When generating ideas in a large group, nothing is quite like a single, solid table to bring bodies and minds together. In designing both the UCLA Applied Linguistics Lab and, later, the CELF and Anthropology Discourse Lab, I ordered the same large boat-shaped solid wood table because of its affordances for face-to-face conversation and creative thinking with others. The table's surface plane continues to support researchers’ arms, notepads, computers, gadgets, cups, and more ( Figure 2 ).
I cannot say that I ever explicitly asked myself, “Can eating together—especially eating good food together—enhance academic dialogue?” The discovery happened improvisationally. Early in my career at USC, faculty and students routinely prepared delicious food at academic events and gathered at one another's homes for big dinners, all on a very low budget. In our home, Sandro's parents came every winter from Rome, and Sandro's mother would cook delirious meals for a slew of academic friends. Linguists and anthropologists from USC and UCLA came to eat and talk about ideas, draping themselves on pillows on the floor. When we moved, we bought couches but had to remove them to accommodate long folding tables, around which endless meal-fueled dialogues across disciplines transpired. Everything came together in these scenes—mensches who like each other and do not take themselves too seriously, eating to-die-for lasagna or spaghetti all'amatriciana, engaged in transgressive thinking. Years later, one of the signal glories of the CELF project was the amazing food served during meetings. I suspect that researchers and staff continued co-thinking for nearly a decade because we ate incredible meals for the duration. During the first quarter of an hour, we chatted about our lives and then submerged ourselves in ideas.
At home, my study and Sandro's study are on two different floors. Hours go by in front of our respective computers. But Sandro is wont to intermittently pop into my study to tell me about his latest idea. In addition to our published collaborations, over the decades these ideas have wound their way into the disciplinary liminal intellectual journeys that I have undertaken. When Sandro brought home the writings of Soviet psychologists that he had been reading in Michael Cole's Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, these paradigms seeped into nascent renderings of language socialization as a line of inquiry. And I cannot begin to tell you how many conversations—in my study, in the car, and at breakfast, lunch, and dinner—have centered on phenomenology and how these conversations made their way into my understandings of narrative, autism, panic, scientific problem-solving, and experiencing language across the life span. Across the arc of my career, the key of all keys to the transdisciplinary journeys that I have undertaken with others is a lifetime of pop-up conversations with an irrepressible life partner who delights in incipient flights of the imagination.
I have been telling stories, stories in their most ancient service as life lessons, in this instance to bring flickers of insight into thinking in between disciplines, thinking with others, thinking in between disciplines with others. The stories concern wonder and the life of mind. Behind their curtain of wisdom are experiences of indelible loss and sensibilities about how to love and think in the midst of choppy waters. My touting of mensch-hood and other doors to thinking in between disciplines with others is not a perspective that I expect readers to adopt. Instead, I have brought the reader along to fathom why, in the midst of life's war stories, I am instinctively drawn to dance partners who are mensches to co-think freely and keep the unwieldy journey going.

Section: Acknowledgements

This career perspective is deeply informed by a lifetime of co-authorship of ideas and publications. Signal moments with cherished partners guided my renderings of scholarly adventures. In writing acknowledgments, it is tempting to bend toward idioms to contain sentimentality. How, then, does one convey the gift of mentoring astonishing students who reciprocally inform my thinking? And what expression comprehends the abiding support and affection that have helped me to forge a life amidst unfathomable loss? “Fortunate” and “grateful” come to mind but do not come close.
