Section: Abstract

The first case of coronavirus was reported in Ethiopia on March 13, 2020, and the number of cases has been rising continually. This study examined the level and correlates of risk perception, knowledge, and attitude in relation to COVID-19 in Ethiopia. It also assessed the level of adoption of various preventive practices and their association with risk perception, knowledge, and attitude. The rapid assessment was made using data collected in a telephone survey. Correlates of knowledge, attitude, and risk/impact perception were assessed using Poisson regression. Econometric estimation was used to identify the correlations of knowledge, attitude, and risk/impact perception scores with the adoption of preventive practices. A total of 1,037 respondents participated in the survey. Although the level of knowledge about the pandemic was generally good among the population, a significant proportion of the population (the elderly and less educated) still do not have correct knowledge about the disease symptoms and means of transmission. Some respondents revealed unfavorable attitudes about the virus, and around two-thirds of respondents did not perceive the fast-expanding pandemic to be a major risk. A significant correlation was found between the adoption of preventive practices and knowledge, attitude, and impact perception in relation to COVID-19. Health education interventions would be more effective if they were to target certain demographic groups, such as the elderly and less educated, whose overall average knowledge about COVID-19 is lower. The use of a multiple media outlet for disseminating information on COVID-19 may improve choices and enhance knowledge.

Section: Introduction, Literature Review

Infectious disease is still a major threat to human survival, taking the lives of millions of people and leaving others with serious disabilities and deformities every year ( Klepac et al. 2013 ). The novel coronavirus pandemic emerged in late 2019 and continues to spread rapidly across the globe ( Zhong et al. 2020 ). The outbreak spread to 207 countries in less than five months. In the initial stage of the pandemic, sub-Saharan Africa reported one of the lowest infection rates of COVID-19. However, numbers began to rise in late March 2020, with confirmed cases increasing across the continent ( Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center 2020 ). Global health experts and African governments have expressed concern about the potential health, social, and economic impacts ( Abuya et al. 2020 ; Walker et al. 2020 ). The pandemic has already brought the sluggish economies of most African countries to a halt, and affected service delivery, transportation, tourism, and movement of people ( World Health Organization [WHO] 2019 ).
Ethiopia is not immune to this widespread deadly disease. The first case of coronavirus was reported in Ethiopia on March 13, 2020, since when the number of cases has continued to rise. With 106,615 tests conducted as of May 30, 2020, there were 1,063 cases reported and eight deaths ( Ministry of Health Ethiopia 2020 ; Worldometer 2020 ). As of June 14, 2021, 1,487,270 tests were conducted out of which 274,000 cases are reported and 4,237 died ( WHO 2021 ).
When COVID-19 was first identified, the Ethiopian government organized various information dissemination activities about the virus and the effective preventive measures that people can take. Given the social life and living conditions in Ethiopia, in which dense communities are at particular risk, implementation of these preventive measures have enormous advantage of saving lives and avoiding the spread of the virus. Moreover, the Ethiopian government undertook various preventive measures to reduce the spread of the pandemic, including the suspension/closure of schools, sporting events and public gatherings, a regulation for anyone entering Ethiopia to undergo mandatory government-supervised quarantine for 14 days, and subsequently a declaration of a five-month-long state of emergency (SoE) on April 8, 2020. Currently, the SoE due to COVID-19 has been lifted, and the government has cautiously eased travel and other public restrictions. However, the wearing of masks is still mandatory, and efforts continue to raise public awareness about coronavirus, its means of transmission, and preventive measures. Nevertheless, there are serious concerns that a further spread of the virus could have devastating effects in large cities such as Addis Ababa, Ethiopia’s capital city, where a significant proportion of the population lives in slums and informal settlements with inadequate access to health services ( Office of the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs-Ethiopia 2020b ).
Despite these efforts, a great many people are not taking preventive measures either due to poor knowledge or unfavorable attitudes and risk perceptions of this deadly disease. It is generally assumed that people who know more about the phenomenon in terms of its origin, occurrence, causes, and economic and health-related consequences will be more concerned about it than those with a lower level of awareness. It is also largely expected that people with a greater knowledge and concern about its impacts engage more in effective protective behaviors ( Ajilore et al. 2017 ; OCHA-Ethiopia 2020a ; Tachfouti et al. 2012 ; Zhong et al. 2020 ). This being the case, however, there could also be time lag between knowledge acquisition and actual practicing or change of behaviors.
Since the outbreak of COVID-19, studies are emerging that have assessed knowledge, attitude, and risk perceptions in relation to the pandemic and the implications of this on the adoption of preventive practices. Most of these studies are based on self-administered/online surveys in China ( G. Huynh et al. 2020 ; Shi et al. 2020 ; Zhong et al. 2020 ), Vietnam ( T. L. D. Huynh 2020a , 2020b ), Malaysia ( Azlan et al. 2020 ), India ( Tomar et al. 2020 ), Uganda ( Olum et al. 2020 ), and Ethiopia ( Jemal et al. 2020 ; Kebede et al. 2020 ; Tadesse et al. 2020 ) to mention just a few. Some of these studies were based on cross-country data and provided an overall understanding of the role of culture, economic status, media, and public education in the control of the pandemic ( Dang et al. 2020 ; Vietnam— T. L. D. Huynh 2020a ). The very few studies conducted on the subject in Ethiopia in the last year were either limited in scope or focused on specific groups of the population. For instance, some of them (e.g., Jemal et al. 2020 ; Kebede et al. 2020 ; Tadesse et al. 2020 ) have drawn samples from health facilities and focused on health professionals. Other studies (e.g., Addis et al. 2020 ; Feyisa 2021 ; Handebo et al. 2021 ) are population-based but had a small sample size from a particular region or town. Although such assessments are vital and provide useful insights into outbreaks of a pandemic such as COVID-19, these studies may be less useful for policy making.
This study examined the level and correlates of risk perception, knowledge, and attitude in relation to COVID-19 among the public in Ethiopia by means of a telephone survey. The level of adoption of various preventive practices and their association with risk perceptions, knowledge, and attitude were also assessed. Given Ethiopia has unique demographic and socioeconomic characteristics (a significant proportion of its people has poor education, lives in poverty, already under high early mortality regime, and customs and values put unpresented pressures), studying the knowledge and perception of the general population has paramount importance in the fight against the pandemic. The aims of this study were to inform prevention, control, and mitigation measures during the pandemic, and yield critical evidence to guide response and recovery efforts, health education, and social mobilization to foster safer pandemic management. The paper is organized as follows: The “Materials and Methods” section provides details of the telephone-based data collection methods, the “Results and Discussion” section presents and discusses the descriptive and econometric results, and finally the “Conclusions and Recommendations” section summarizes the findings and presents conclusions.

Section: Methodology

The rapid assessment survey was employed using a telephone-based data collection approach with a cross-sectional design to target citizens aged 18 and above in nine regional states and two city administrations in Ethiopia 1 ( Figure 1 ). The sampling of this survey aimed to construct a nationally representative urban and semi-urban sample that could help draw inferences about understanding of the various preventive practices being undertaken in response to COVID-19 as well the public’s level of risk perception, knowledge, and attitudes. A telephone-based survey was the preferred option because it was impossible to conduct face-to-face interviews during the onset of COVID-19. A stratified random sampling strategy was used in which the regional states/city administrations constituted the strata. A sample size of 1,050 respondents was estimated for the eligible population based on a 3 percent sampling margin of error at a 95 percent confidence level.
The sampling frame for a telephone survey could be from three sources: sampling from an existing nationally representative survey with the telephone numbers of respondents, sampling from a list of valid telephone numbers from the telecommunications company, or random digital dialing ( Himelein et al. 2020 ). Of these three alternatives, the most viable and immediately accessible option for rapid assessment was provided by the first option, with a sample of respondents taken from a nationally representative survey that had already been conducted and included the respondents’ registered telephone numbers. To reduce the selection bias, all efforts were made to strictly use random drawing of respondents from the available list, repeated trial/call to increase participation rate with properly replacement plans.
Sixteen enumerators were trained to conduct the telephone-based survey and 1,037 respondents were interviewed between April 9 and 25, 2020, with an interview taking 25 minutes on average. Ethical clearance was granted by local institutional review board (IRB). Verbal consent was obtained from all the participants before administering the questionnaire.
The data collection focused on a wide range of issues pertaining to COVID-19 and included some background information on respondents’ demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Awareness of COVID-19 was assessed by asking whether participants had heard of coronavirus and, if so, what their main sources of information were. Demonstrated knowledge of COVID-19 was captured through closed-ended questions asking participants to select the main transmission routes and symptoms. Six attitude questions were asked, each with five choices, where “agree” and “strongly agree” were considered the most favorable/positive attitudes. Perceived risks of COVID-19 were assessed by asking participants to rate their feeling of being at risk of coronavirus on a scale of 1 to 4 ( high , medium , low , and no risk at all ). An additional question probed participants to report their perceived impacts of coronavirus based on a list of 10 possible socioeconomic impacts.
Adoption of self-reported preventive practices was captured using a question, “Did you [type of preventive measure] in the past seven days to avoid contracting coronavirus?” Respondents were asked to provide separate responses to each of the preventive practices. Nine preventive practices were considered in the survey: wearing facemasks, wearing disposable hand gloves, using hand sanitizers/disinfectants, washing hands for 20 seconds or more, avoiding large gatherings, avoiding touching your face, avoiding shaking hands, avoiding touching objects/surfaces in public, and avoiding public transportation. Respondents were also asked the number of times they had washed their hands during the day before the interview, whether they had practiced social/physical distancing in the past seven days, and whether they had “stayed at home” in the seven days leading up to the interview.

Section: Results, Discussion

A total of 1,037 participants drawn from nine regions and two city administrations in Ethiopia completed the survey questionnaire. There were 13 nonrespondents, giving an overall response rate of 99.98 percent. About 63 percent lived in urban areas and a large majority (66.8 percent) were male respondents. About 75 percent of the respondents were married, more than two-thirds were aged between 25 and 50, and the youth population (16–24 years) constituted 12.8 percent of the total sample. Those in the old age group (64+) accounted for just 4 percent of all respondents. The average age was 33.0 years (standard deviation [ SD ] = 10.7, range = 16–87). Two-thirds of the study participants reported that they lived in medium-sized households (4–7 members) and 11 percent in large households (7+). Most of the participants were Orthodox Christians (55.2 percent), followed by Muslims (29.4 percent) and Protestant Christians (14.4 percent). Finally, in terms of literacy level, about 87 percent had at least primary-level education.
Given that this telephone-based survey excluded those individuals who do not have a telephone, and this could create a bias, the findings on knowledge, attitude, and practice reported in the following sections should be interpreted cautiously.
The vast majority (73 percent) of respondents washed their hands as a preventive mechanism, with about 50 percent of them washing their hands about 6 to 10 times per day. The average number of times respondents washed their hands was about eight times per day. Urban residents had higher mean values of hand-washing frequency (nine times) compared with those living in rural areas (seven times) ( Table 1 ). However, it should be noted that access to hand-washing facilities is very rarely made available in rural parts as the overall access to water was very poor even before the pandemic. The preventive measure has been widely communicated by the media (radio and television) as the most viable means of prevention. Both government and private media, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and civic societies take part in information provision. However, the national TV and radio played a significant portion in such endeavor.
The second preventive measure most reported by respondents was avoiding shaking hands (65.9 percent), followed by avoiding large gatherings/busy queues as the third preventive measure reported by about 47.7 percent of the respondents. The survey also examined whether respondents had practiced social distancing/physical distancing in the previous seven days. Respondents were asked whether they had attended a funeral or wedding, gone to a large marketplace, or attended other celebrations during the reference period. The findings revealed that about 70 percent of respondents reported practicing social distancing ( Table 1 ). However, this figure should be considered with caution. In the context of Ethiopia, where the intensity of social interaction and social networking is high, the concept of social distancing might be hazy. About 52.27 percent of respondents reported that they had “stayed at home” in the seven days leading up to the telephone survey ( Table 1 ). It was mostly respondents from urban location who reported that they had “stayed at home.”
Given that COVID-19 is a rapidly spreading infectious disease, wearing facemasks to protect yourself and others is among the key preventive measures. However, this self-reported survey conducted in Ethiopia in early April 2020 revealed that only 17.5 percent of respondents wore facemasks ( Table 1 ). This figure is low and worrying. According to the self-reported survey data, the majority of those who reported wearing facemasks were respondents from urban locations.
The survey indicated that all sampled respondents had heard about COVID-19. In terms of their level of knowledge about coronavirus, over 95 percent correctly recognized physical contact with an infected person as a means of transmission ( Table 2 ). Droplets from an infected person through sneezing and coughing was recognized by 80 percent of the study participants. Interestingly, a relatively small proportion of participants correctly recognized contact with infected materials as a means of transmission. Over 80 percent of the study participants knew that someone who is infected with the virus can recover. Furthermore, compared with those living in urban areas, rural residents were found to have a much lower level of correct knowledge of symptoms and means of transmission. The data showed that most (97 percent) of the respondents obtained information about the virus from the radio or television.
For a greater understanding of the knowledge dimension, a comprehensive knowledge score was created from a linear combination of a set of knowledge questions that are presented in Table 2 (i.e., knowledge about means of transmission and symptoms). The minimum and maximum values were 2 and 10 out of 11 knowledge questions, respectively, with an overall mean and SD of 6.9 and 1.65, respectively. Higher values of the score indicated good knowledge. It was noted that the mean knowledge score of urban respondents was almost the same as that of rural respondents ( Table 5 ). The average knowledge level was found to be higher for men than women. Respondents in the 25 to 34 age group had a slightly higher knowledge score (7.09), while those in the older age groups (50–64 and 64+) had a lower knowledge score (6.40), than the other groups.
The findings suggest that there is a good level of knowledge about the COVID-19 outbreak. The reported finding on correct responses to most of the knowledge questions was expected because the survey was conducted at the very peak stage of the pandemic worldwide (early April 2020). A recent study conducted in northern Ethiopia (Gondar) based on 370 secondary school students reported that only a quarter (23.5 percent, 95 percent confidence interval [CI] = [19.5, 28.1]) of the participants had good knowledge of COVID-19 ( Handebo et al. 2021 ). Comparable studies conducted in China and other South Asian countries at the peak of the pandemic report a similarly higher knowledge level among the public ( G. Huynh et al. 2020 ; Zhong et al. 2020 ). The present findings revealed that there were still evident knowledge gaps among women compared with men, among older age groups compared with younger ones, and among residents of certain regions (such as Afar, Harer, and Dire Dawa) when correctly identifying the means of transmission and key symptoms among the population. It is worth mentioning that poor COVID-19 knowledge scores for a good proportion of participants could lead to a greater chance of having negative attitudes and risk perceptions ( T. L. D. Huynh 2020b ) and may potentially lead to some practices having adverse effects in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The percentage distribution of respondents for responses to a set of attitude questions is presented in Table 3 . Cronbach’s alpha of the attitude questions was .69, indicating acceptable internal consistency among the items ( Taber 2018 ). It appeared that the overall attitude toward the virus was somewhat worrying as a good proportion of respondents reported unfavorable attitudes about how the virus is transmitted and prevented. For instance, close to a third of the study participants believed that practicing social/physical distancing made little difference to preventing contraction of the virus. About 33 percent believed that coronavirus is more of “an act of God,” and therefore there is nothing they can do to prevent it. The belief that anyone who does not show the common signs and symptoms is free from the virus was shared by close to 25 percent of respondents. Some believed that the virus is more likely to attack a certain group of people (e.g., white people more than blacks, men more than women).
The findings about the public’s attitudes toward the pandemic were alarming for two major reasons. First, unfavorable attitudes/beliefs about the means of transmission among such a large proportion of the population undermine the huge efforts being made by the government to curb this deadly pandemic. Second, it adversely affects those who strictly adhere to the advice and believe that the pandemic is a dangerous and imminent threat if the correct behavior is not practiced.
The percentage distributions of the attitude questions were used to compute a composite score for each respondent based on a linear combination of the questions presented in Table 3 . The scores ranged between 1 and 5, with an overall mean and SD of 3.62 and 0.62, respectively. Any value above 3 (which represents a neutral attitude) was considered a favorable attitude or positive concern. It was noted that urban respondents had slightly better attitudes than rural residents ( Table 5 ). Those with no education had a marginally lower score than literate respondents. The average attitude score was relatively low for farmers (3.44) compared with respondents in other job categories. Overall, there was not much difference between the sexes in their mean attitude score. In addition, the mean score for all categories was found to be marginally above the cutoff point.
The study found that more than two-thirds of respondents did not consider coronavirus to be a threat. Only 32 percent of urban respondents and 30.5 percent of rural respondents considered the virus to be a threat. Likewise, the reported perceived chance of contracting the disease was very low, with only 9.4 percent feeling that there was a high probability of contracting the disease. A recent Internet-based study in Vietnam, using a scale of risk perception ranging from 1 ( less concerned ) to 10 ( most concerned ), found an average risk perception of 7.65 (standard error [ SE ] = 0.092). The reported figure was considered high risk perception as it was higher than the midpoint of the 10-point Likert-type scale ( t -statistics = 28.94, p < .001; T. L. D. Huynh 2020b ).
Those stating a high chance of contracting the disease provided several reasons for this, including the nature of their work, a lack of knowledge, a lack of protective material (hand gloves, masks, and disinfectant), poor practice of social/physical distancing, and not washing hands frequently (mostly due to knowledge and access to facilities). Respondents who reported that there was a medium probability of contracting the disease accounted for 27 percent of all respondents. More than half of the study participants (56.4 percent) had either little or no concern at all about the possibility of contracting the disease. Study participants were also asked what their exact feelings were about the fast-expanding pandemic at the time of the survey. About 38 percent of respondents reported that they were more worried about the health of their immediate family members and 38 percent were more concerned either about the duration of the pandemic or generally the fact it was happening. Only 6 percent were concerned about their personal well-being. The self-reported actual risk indicated that about 10 percent of survey respondents had a chronic disease (such as diabetes) and 3 percent smoked cigarettes.
Study participants were asked to report the potential impacts/effects of COVID-19 on their personal life. Most of them reported that they were particularly concerned about travel restrictions (47 percent), restrictions on religious gatherings (37 percent), and restrictions on social gatherings (36.5 percent). Only a small proportion of them considered being sick (14 percent) as a major threat of the pandemic. The results of the Pearson’s chi-square test clearly indicated statistically significant rural-urban differences in the way people perceived the potential impacts of the pandemic. More importantly, significant urban-rural differences were observed in the fear of dying, travel restrictions, and restrictions on social and religious gatherings.
The perceived impact perception score was constructed by aggregating the 10 dichotomous impact variables presented in Table 4 . The minimum and maximum values reported were 1 and 7, respectively, with an overall mean and SD of 2.265 and 1.564, respectively. In the study of any disease perception, correct responses (more precisely, favorable responses) are those agreeing with the actual disease risk, and incorrect responses are those that either overestimate or underestimate the risk. The overall differentials in mean impact perception score shown in Table 5 indicate that respondents from rural areas felt the potential impacts slightly more strongly than those residing in urban areas. The mean impact perception score was higher for men than women, and higher among those with no education or with primary-level education compared with those who have a college diploma/degree or master’s level of education. In terms of job category, those working as daily laborers and traders had higher impact perceptions ( Table 5 ).
Further analysis of the above five factors using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA; see Table A1 of the appendix ) indicated that residence type was significantly associated with attitude and perception scores but not with knowledge score. The sex of the respondent was found to have a significant association ( p < .05) with the knowledge and perception score. There was a significant mean difference according to the age and education of the respondents for both knowledge and attitude scores. The job category variable appeared to be significant across the three outcomes ( p < .001).
First, the correlates of knowledge, attitude, and risk/impact perception were assessed to substantiate findings from descriptive results. For dependent variables with count data, such as knowledge index and risk/impact perception, the Poisson regression model fitted well. For this, the overall equation to be estimated is given in Equation 1 :
where Y i is the dependent variable capturing knowledge and risk/impact perception (estimated separately), X i is a vector of the respondents’ demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, and ε ε i is the error term. Once the Poisson model was formulated, a check for dispersion was made and the conditional variance was found to exceed the conditional mean, that is, there was over-dispersion in the count data (see Table A2 of the appendix for test results of over-dispersion). Hence, a negative binomial regression model was used that is considered a generalization of the Poisson regression. The results of negative binomial regression are shown for each of the dependent variables in Table 6 (columns 1–4).
For the attitude scale, the ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model was applied using the following equation:
where Y i is the dependent variable capturing the attitude scale, X i is a vector of the respondents’ demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, and ε ε i is the error term.
As shown in Table 6 , knowledge about coronavirus was found to be significantly correlated to the respondents’ age, education, and marital status, with older respondents having a lower knowledge index. The expected mean knowledge score was higher among educated and married respondents compared with the reference category, namely, no education and nonmarried respondents. These results indicated that being educated increased the knowledge index by 2 percent and being married increased it by 5 percent. Respondents who obtained information about the virus from various media sources had a significant knowledge index, increasing the index by 2.4 percent. The findings also showed that both farmers and those involved in business-related activities (including traders, the self-employed, small business owners, and daily laborers) had a positive and significant relationship with the knowledge index, increasing it by 8.7 and 5.3 percent, respectively, as compared with the reference category, namely, nonfarmers and those not involved in business-related activities, respectively. To capture the combined effects of job categorization and education level, an interaction term of education and sector was included in the regression (shown in column 2). The interaction of these job categories with education provided a different picture. The results of the interaction term implied that farmers who are less educated had a lower level of knowledge about the coronavirus, which was also the case for those involved in business-related job categories.
Regarding the risk/impact index, the number of media outlets as a source of information about the coronavirus was found to have a significant and positive relation with respondents’ risk/impact perception. A higher number of media sources was found to increase the risk/impact perception by 10.2 percent. This was expected because having appropriate information enabled respondents to have a proper understanding of the risk. In addition, those in the job category of business-related activities had a positive and significant impact index. Being in business increased the risk/impact perception index by 20.6 percent. That said, various travel and stay-at-home restrictions had implications for business-related jobs; therefore, the positive and significant risk/impact perception of this category of respondents was expected. The interaction of respondents’ job categories and their educational level was not found to have a significant correlation with the risk/impact perception index in the sample respondents.
In relation to their attitude, urban respondents were found to have a significant and favorable attitude to the virus. The regression result showed a positive and statistically significant result among older respondents (although the coefficient was not economically significant) and those with a higher education level. Similar to knowledge, obtaining information from many media sources increased the likelihood of respondents having a favorable attitude/positive concern in relation to coronavirus. The various job categories and their interaction with education level were not found to have a significant correlation with attitude in the sample respondents.
The survey data allowed an assessment of correlations of knowledge, attitude, and risk/impact perception scores with the adoption of various preventive practices. The most common preventive practices as depicted in the descriptive analysis were used, namely, the number of times respondents washed their hands per day, whether respondents avoided shaking hands with others, and whether respondents avoided large gatherings. In addition, following the notion that preventive measures against COVID-19 are not just one single practice but an array of measures that should be used to effectively contain the virus, the total number of preventive measures adopted by respondents was used.
Following the standard method for count data, the Poisson model was applied to estimate correlations of adoption of preventive practices to knowledge, attitude, and risk/impact perception. The following equation was estimated:
where Y i is the dependent variable capturing the adoption of preventive practices, that is, the number of times respondents washed their hands per day and the total number of preventive mechanisms adopted (estimated separately); Z i is a vector of demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of respondents; K i is the knowledge score of respondents; A i is the attitude score of respondents; R i is the risk/impact perception score of respondents; and ε ε i is the error term. An over-dispersion test was conducted to assess the suitability of the Poisson model. The results indicated that over-dispersion was dictated for both the number of times respondents washed their hands per day and the total number of preventive practices (see Table A3 of the appendix ). Therefore, a negative binomial regression was used. Incidence rate ratio results are given in Table 7 .
As avoiding shaking hands and avoiding large gatherings were dummy variables, a logistic regression was used:
where the dependent variables are avoiding shaking hands and avoiding large gatherings (estimated separately), and explanatory variables are as explained in Equation 3 .
Table 7 shows the results of the econometric estimation. The findings revealed that the average number of times hands are washed per day was positively and significantly associated with the attitude score, as depicted in column (1). The results indicated that having a favorable attitude to the pandemic increased the hand-washing count per day by almost 20 percent. The results also showed that the knowledge score and impact perception score were positively associated with the total number of preventive practices employed, both significant at a 1 percent level (column 2). Better knowledge and a favorable risk/impact perception in relation to the virus increased the sum of preventive practices employed by almost 10 percent. With regard to avoiding shaking hands, the knowledge score and impact perception score were found to stand out as significantly and positively associated, as shown by logit model results of column (3). The knowledge score, impact perception score, and attitude score were found to be significantly and positively correlated with the preventive measure of avoiding large gatherings/busy queues, significant at a 1 percent level, as shown in logit model results of column (4).
Overall, the findings showed a strong correlation between the adoption of a single practice and the total number of prevention practices with knowledge, attitude, and risk/impact perception in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic. These results are in line with those from a recent study conducted by Khosravi (2020) , which reported that considerable risk perceptions (which usually starts with some worry, an affective emotional response to a threat) can predict protective behaviors independent of the severity of the risk. A large body of research in recent decades has shown that risk perception is a subjective psychological construct that is influenced by cognitive, emotional, social, cultural, and individual variations both between individuals and between different communities ( Dryhurst et al. 2020 ). Hence, the findings from the present study build on and are in line with existing risk and impact perception literature. Furthermore, in a study of 58 countries, T. L. D. Huynh (2020a) reported that cultural determinants play an important role in risk perception and behavior of people.
Finally, it should be noted that the findings should be interpreted with caution as there are some methodological limitations that restrict the generalizability of the findings at national level. First, there are unavoidable biases (mainly due to the study using a telephone survey) in the sample which led to a disproportionately high number of males, urban and better-educated respondents. As these do not reflect national averages (i.e., urban respondents are overrepresented), the generalizability of the findings could be limited to urban areas in Ethiopia where close to 80 percent of the prevalence of COVID-19 is reported. Second, by its very nature, a telephone-based survey excludes those individuals who do not have a telephone, and this could create a bias, making it hard to draw inferences about the population as a whole. In Ethiopia, data show that only half of the population subscribe to Ethio Telecom’s mobile services. 2 In the same vein, urban bias cannot be ruled out because most people with a mobile phone live in urban areas. Third, there may be reporting bias because responses about preventive practices employed due to coronavirus pandemic were self-reported and could not be validated. Finally, this study used a cross-sectional design, which means associations and correlations, rather than causal effects, are reported. However, despite these limitations, the findings of this study are considered useful for policy making and for monitoring and evaluating progress pertaining to the pandemic. It is also worth noting that the findings are easily transferable and applicable to other populations that have similar characteristics.

Section: Conclusion

A significant correlation was found between the adoption of preventive practices and knowledge, attitude, and risk/impact perception in relation to COVID-19 among respondents in Ethiopia. This finding is robust to a range of preventive practices, such as washing hands, avoiding shaking hands, and avoiding large gatherings, and to the total number of preventive practices employed. The overall finding indicates that knowledge of the pandemic was generally good among the population. Yet a significant proportion of the population still lacked correct knowledge about the symptoms and means of transmission. The findings concerning the demographic factors associated with knowledge about COVID-19 were generally consistent with previous studies on SARS in 2003 ( Zhang et al. 2003 ) and the most recent COVID-19 studies around the world ( Zhong et al. 2020 ). It suggests that health education intervention would be more effective if it were to target certain demographic groups, such as the elderly and less educated, where the overall average on COVID-19 knowledge is lower. As most people were reportedly obtaining information about the outbreak from one or two sources, use of multiple media outlets may improve choices and enhance the level of knowledge.
More importantly, the study also found the presence of unfavorable attitudes to COVID-19. Although gaps in knowledge can be overcome with mass education and media campaigns, the existing resistance to attitude change can only be overcome with more rigorous persuasion using behavior change communication (BCC) tools and committed change agents who resemble members of the target communities. This would also significantly boost prevention practices and reduce potential stigma and discrimination related to the disease.
The findings indicated that two-thirds of the study participants did not perceive the fast-expanding pandemic to be a major risk. There was also a significant rural-urban difference in the way people perceived the possible impacts. Those residing in urban areas were more concerned about most of the impact indicators, such as travel restrictions, shortages in food supplies, unemployment/loss of income, getting sick, and even dying. Given the very low level of risk and impact perceptions in relation to the pandemic, it is important to improve risk communication strategies at all levels to encourage realistic perceptions of risk. Engaging social influencers, such as religious leaders, would be useful to prompt the reflections, stories, and images of local people who have experienced COVID-19 and recently recovered. Media reporting should be contextualized and give consideration to experiential, social, and cultural factors that drive COVID-19 risk/impact perceptions in Ethiopian society.
