Section: Abstract

This study examines how men with one Black parent and one white parent variably construct their racial identities through both linguistic practice and explicit testimonials, with a specific focus on how this construction is realized in narratives about law enforcement. The data consist of interviews with five young men, aged 18-32, in Washington, D.C., and the analysis compares use of intonational phenomena associated with African American Language (AAL) in response to questions about aspects of their racial identities. Declarative intonational phrases from responses to questions were MAE-ToBi annotated and analyzed for use of intonational features subject to racialized stylistic variation, including use of L+H* versus H*, focus marking, and peak delay interval length. Results of multiple regression models indicate speakers avoid intonational features associated with AAL in police narratives, especially L+H* pitch accents with broad focus marking and longer peak delay intervals. These findings illuminate an important aspect of the relationship between linguistic performance and identity: both racial and linguistic identities are subject to topic and audience/referee-conditioned variation and individuals can use specific intonational variables to align themselves within specific audience and topic-influenced constraints. In the context of police narratives, avoidance of salient features of AAL intonation can serve as linguistic respectability politics; these speakers have motivation to employ linguistic behavior that distances them from the most societally and physically precarious implications of their identities.

Section: Introduction

On March 6, 2015, an unarmed Black/biracial teenager, Tony Robinson, was shot and killed by a police officer in Madison, Wisconsin. Robinson had a history of mental illness and had reportedly been behaving erratically with friends when one of them called the police. 1 Once the officer entered the house that Robinson was in, he fired seven times within ten seconds, fatally wounding Robinson with the third shot ( Arceneaux 2015 ). While stories like Tony Robinson’s may be all too familiar to American audiences, particularly Black readers, this shooting’s aftermath bore important differences from other high-profile police shootings that have received increased public and media attention during the advent of the Black Lives Matter movement ( Arceneaux 2015 ). Following the incident, journalists conducted a series of interviews with Robinson’s mother, and uniquely focused on the picture of a white mother mourning her Black son, whom she believed had been a victim of racial profiling ( Arceneaux 2015 ). Andrea Irwin, Robinson’s mother, was vocal in the media about the ways in which she believed her son had been unfairly targeted as a result of the fact that the police saw him as a young Black man and therefore, naturally, a threat ( Arceneaux 2015 ).
The psychological literature shows that both Black and white parents of Black and biracial children routinely warn them about the dangers they may face in interactions with law enforcement ( Dottolo & Stewart 2008 ). Given the high stakes and the cultural backdrop, as well as the U.S.’s historical and present struggles with racism, it is not surprising that parents of Black boys, who are two and a half times more likely to be killed by the police than whites ( Edwards, Esposito & Lee 2018 ), raise them to be aware of this fact and especially careful in their interactions with law enforcement. As a result of their racially and emotionally charged nature, these types of conversations between parents and children have the potential to affect how individuals view themselves as racialized subjects and objects in society. In particular, the role of language and linguistic variation in such discussions has the potential to shed light on how aspects of identity are portrayed in high-stakes interactions, and how others’ perceptions may affect an individual’s use of ethnolinguistic stylistic variation. These issues may also show us how language can be subject not only to ethnolinguistic variation in a traditional sense, but also affected by perceptions of self in response to institutional power.
This study addresses issues of variation and stance through close examination of intonational variation. The data come from sociolinguistic interviews with young men, who, like Tony Robinson, grew up with one Black parent and one white parent. The men were recorded discussing a variety of identity-related topics and their speech was analyzed for a number of intonational variables linked to AAL (African American Language) and MUSE (Mainstream U.S. English). Overall, results of these analyses indicate that participants are significantly less likely to use intonational patterns associated with AAL when discussing aspects of their identities in the context of interactions with law enforcement than when discussing other types of identity topics. Building on earlier research about ethnolinguistic variation in the realm of intonation, I highlight the ways in which prosodic variables can act as a tool for individuals to highlight or obscure aspects of their identity which may be advantageous or disadvantageous in specific sociolinguistic contexts. Additionally, I demonstrate the value of carefully observing audience/referee and topic-influenced sociolinguistic shifts as factors that may influence how intonational variation works in a particular context. This research has important implications for our current sociolinguistic as well as sociopolitical moment, since using the contextually “right” language can contribute to individuals and groups either receiving justice or having it withheld from them ( Rickford & King 2016 ).

Section: Literature Review

With the rise in prominence of the Black Lives Matter movement and increasing awareness of racial disparities in treatment by official and proxy law enforcement structures, linguists have begun to address the role of linguistic profiling and stereotyping and related power relationships in these types of interactions. In their influential 2016 study, John Rickford and Sharese King provide a vivid example of this in their discussion of the trial of George Zimmerman, a white Neighborhood Watch person, for the murder of Trayvon Martin, a Black Florida teen. Zimmerman pursued Martin, stating that he perceived Martin as a threat, eventually fatally shooting him ( Rickford & King 2016 :949). At the moment of his murder, Martin was talking on his phone with his friend, Rachel Jeantel. Jeantel thus became a key witness in the murder trial, subjected to hours of questioning about the death of her friend. Rickford and King (2016) argue that because of Jeantel’s status as a young Black woman with immigrant parents, as well as because of her use of a number of features of AAL and linguistic influences from her Haitian heritage, she was not taken seriously as a witness. She was repeatedly mocked online and in the media for her language and appearance, and Rickford and King (2016) argue that she was treated by the lawyers as unintelligent, untruthful, and not credible because of the way she sounded. Rickford and King (2016) conclude that as a result of the linguistic discrimination Jeantel faced, justice was not served. Overarching this trial and social setting is a system that persistently discriminates against users of non-standard varieties of English ( Lippi-Green 2012 ; Baugh 2015 ). As a result, Black speakers in the U.S. may be denied a fair judicial process, in addition to experiencing racial profiling and discrimination on the basis of both race and language. Given this context, speakers may be under pressure to modify their language to protect themselves from judicial mistreatment, especially because the stakes can be so high.
A number of studies addressing questions about the intersection of language and power have described specific types of stylistic variation among individuals who are demographically disempowered. O’Barr and Atkins (1980) find that demographically disempowered court witnesses, such as women and working-class individuals, are more likely to use a style characterized by uptalk, hedges, hesitation forms, tag questions, hypercorrect grammar and pronunciation. The authors partially attribute use of these features, which are frequently stereotyped as weak and/or “women’s language,” to the fact that in the speech situation the witnesses are all situationally disadvantaged. O’Barr and Atkins (1980) argue that lack of power encourages a linguistic performance that embodies a style reflecting hyperawareness, insecurity, and desire to perform appropriately in the given situation. As a result, they rename this style “powerless language.” This analysis of such powerless language is further supported by Erickson, Lind, Johnson, and O’Barr (1978) , who, using the same recordings in an experimental context, observe that speakers in recordings containing features of powerless language are indeed rated as less credible and less competent.
Indeed, patterns of linguistic variation conditioned by a speaker’s social position and level of power have received increased attention in recent years. This is especially the case for Black speakers, who may be affected by the possibility of negative evaluations of their speech. Holliday and Squires (forthcoming) discuss how Black students in white college spaces report needing to consistently perform sociolinguistic labor to avoid being perceived following negative Black stereotypes: “loud,” “angry,” or “dumb.” They believe these are characteristics that white peers and professors expect from them. As a result, some students report pressure to engage in the use of hyper-standard language in order to avoid the prejudiced ideas that their real and imagined interlocutors may have about them. As with the court witnesses in O’Barr and Atkins’ (1980) work, these students’ linguistic patterns are affected not only by the setting itself, but also their awareness of the ways in which they may be negatively perceived in a particular social context due to their demographic and linguistic features. Of particular note is the fact that the students in Holliday and Squires (forthcoming) report a great deal of metalinguistic awareness about their use of stylistic variation; they discuss their own uses of hyper-standard language in a social context in which they feel they are disempowered.
The findings of Holliday and Squires (forthcoming) demonstrate that speakers can and do tailor their language for the audience and potential referees, in a phenomenon that Bell (1984 , 2001 ) describes as “audience design.” Bell’s theory of audience design describes how speakers may modify their language for real or perceived interlocutors (referees), In essence, speakers are conscious of both their social position and the real or imagined people around them. As a result, their linguistic style is influenced by both sets of factors. In the case of Holliday and Squires (forthcoming) , the students report using a “hyperstandard” style to appeal to white audiences or referees. The court witness in O’Barr and Atkins (1980) also use a “hyperstandard” style that is likely influenced by both their position and (real or imagined) audience. However, the perceptual study conducted by Erickson, Lind, Johnson, and O’Barr (1978) demonstrate that this “hyperstandard” style may actually cause speakers to be negatively evaluated. Taken together, the fact that demographically disempowered speakers may be influenced to use such features in stressful situations and the fact that these features may be negatively evaluated creates a double-bind for them. If they do not comply with the norms of an imagined standard, the audience may downgrade their speech (Lippi-Green 2012:55-63). However, if they work hard to comply with an imagined standard and overshoot the mark, they may be negatively evaluated for using language that is “hypercorrect.” In this type of sociolinguistic context, speakers may experience significant pressure to attempt a style that strikes such a balance despite the fact that such a style may be unattainable.
In addition to considerations of linguistic context and social power conditioned by speaker demographics and orientation to setting, crucial to the backdrop of the current study is linguistic style and how it may operate in context-dependent ways. Sociolinguists generally take it as axiomatic that intraspeaker variation exists and that differences within a speaker’s use across different registers, interlocutors, topics, social settings, etc. are due primarily to style, though they are also influenced by larger community-level patterns ( Bell 1984 ). In the current study, style is first and foremost conceptualized within the frameworks of audience and referee design, which essentially claim that style shift occurs in response to a change in audience, both real and imagined ( Bell 1984 , 2001 ). While there have been many approaches to style in the sociolinguistic literature, in narratives audience design has the advantage of highlighting speaker agency and accounting for real-time identity performances.
Bell’s (1984) original presentation of audience design focused on the ways in which speakers tailor their speech to their audience. His later work on referee design ( Bell 2001 ) better accounts for variation motivated by the intersection of interlocutor identity, speaker identity, and speaker expectations. The audience and referee design frameworks allow us to conceptualize speakers as dynamic sociological actors whose reality changes with the world around them, and who respond to other actors and topics in fluid ways. Bell (2001) claims that “ingroup referee design seems to require a general sociopolitical situation in which in-and outgroups and their linguistic codes are in conflict and a set of social psychological circumstances which bring that conflict to the surface in a specific situation” (2001:162). In contexts where speakers could experience a threat-based tension between their ingroup and a particular outgroup, such as between Black citizens and law enforcement, referee design thus predicts that a speaker may indeed shift in the direction of the style they would use when speaking to officers, regardless of whether law enforcement is physically present in that speech situation or not.
Stance, or the speaker’s position with respect to topic and self, may also condition stylistic variation. Kiesling (2009 :172) defines stance as “a person’s expression of their relationship to their talk (their epistemic stance—e.g., how certain they are about their assertions) and a person’s expression of their relationship to their interlocutors (their interpersonal stance—e.g., friendly or dominating).” Kiesling (2009) thus builds on Bell’s work on audience and referee design by positing that, in a particular speech moment, a speaker is responding and orienting themselves to both their interlocutor and their feelings about the topic at hand. In an analysis of narratives, therefore, conceptualizations of style as audience and referee design, as well as how speakers may position themselves in terms of stance, provide a lens through which to interpret the variation we may observe. Evidence for this type of effect, especially with respect to phonetic variables, comes from recent work on topic (e.g., Walker & Hay 2011 ; Hay & Foulkes 2016 ). For example, Hay and Foulkes (2016) examine diachronic variation in the production of medial word-medial intervocalic /t/ in the speech of New Zealanders. They find not only classic change over time (lenition of /t/ becomes more frequent) but also patterns by frequency and topic. They posit a possible effect of audience design to account for their finding that when participants are discussing more recent events, /t/ is more likely to be lenited than /t/ in contexts when older events are discussed. In this way, their findings support the earlier claims of Bell (1984 , 2001 ) and Kiesling (2009) that speakers’ use of sociophonetic variables may be influenced by their orientation towards a particular type of socially-contextualized topic.
A number of papers have also provided evidence for how Black speakers in particular may use specific style and stance-taking strategies that are also context and topic-dependent. Rickford and McNair-Knox (1994) demonstrate the potential for intraspeaker stylistic variation by looking at the speech of one participant, Foxy Boston. They examine Foxy’s use of a number of well-documented morphosyntactic features of AAL, including copula absence, possessive /s/ absence, and use of invariant be . Rickford and McNair-Knox (1994) observe that Foxy is significantly more likely to use these AAL features when talking to a familiar Black interlocutor and/or when discussing topics related to her neighborhood or community. Given the frameworks of style and stance discussed in sections 2.2 and 2.3, Rickford and McNair-Knox’s (1994) data seems to describe Foxy as a Black speaker engaged in a complex negotiation of referee design that is also affected by her orientations towards the topics of conversation and the interlocutor.
Hay, Jannedy, and Mendoza-Denton (1999) present an analysis of the speech of Black television host Oprah Winfrey, specifically examining her use of the /ay/ vowel when discussing absent interlocutors with the studio audience. They find that Winfrey is significantly more likely to use a more monophthongal production of /ay/ when discussing a Black individual than when discussing a white individual. The authors attribute this pattern to the type of referee design phenomena described by Bell (2001) , in which the mention of a Black guest can trigger Winfrey to shift towards a style that she may associate with that guest, or that she herself may be likely to use if she were speaking with them. This finding builds also on the work of Rickford and McNair-Knox (1994) in that it more explicitly shows how Black speakers may alter their use of a specific phonetic variable as a result of referee design even when the relevant interlocutors are not physically present.
The results of these studies also complicate some longstanding assumptions about the types of Black speakers under consideration as sociolinguistic subjects and agents, which in turn complicates discussions of the interaction of ethnolinguistic variation and style. Though AAL is among the most well-studied cluster of varieties of American English in sociolinguistics (e.g., Rickford 1997 ; Wolfram 2007 ; Lanehart 2015 ), most studies have not examined how speakers’ conceptualizations of themselves and their own racial identities in particular moments may impact sociolinguistic variation. In general, participants are classified as either Black speakers of some variety of AAL or non-Black speakers who are generally not speakers of AAL, prioritizing researcher assumptions about participants without necessarily interrogating the identities contained in their specific sample ( Blake 2014 ). However, if speakers command both AAL and MUSE, like those analyzed in Rickford and McNair-Knox (1994) and Hay, Jannedy, and Mendoza-Denton (1999) , analysis of their speech may take this into account.
Intraspeaker variation among Black speakers may shed light on the range of ways in which sociolinguistic behavior reflects speaker motivation and identity in specific moments. In this way, examining speakers and groups who move between traditional sociodemographic boundaries will allow researchers to more precisely describe stylistic phenomena. One example of a recent study that addresses these issues within a population of speakers with such motivations is Holliday (2016) . Using a sample of individuals with one Black parent and one white parent (BWIs), I examine how these speakers deploy intonational variables to perform their (variable) ethnolinguistic identities in specific contexts. 2 This study contained data from twenty BWI men aged 18-32, in three conditions. In the first condition, they were recorded talking to a close friend (either Black or white) and in the second condition, they were talking to another close friend that was either Black or white, though each participant ultimately spoke with one Black friend and one white friend. In the third condition, I (who am also a BWI) conducted a sociolinguistic interview with the participants that focused on their upbringings and experiences with race. In Holliday (2016) , I was especially interested in how the participants made use of intonational variation, specifically differences between the H* pitch accent and the L+H* pitch accent, as annotated in the Tones and Break Indices framework (ToBI) ( Beckman & Ayers Elam 1997 ). I found that the more that a participant identified himself as Black and/or aligned with Black communities, the more likely he was to use the L+H* pitch accent and to do so with longer peak delay intervals, thus patterning more like speakers of AAL in other studies ( McLarty 2018 ). In this way, the participants’ linguistic behavior was conditioned not primarily by the interlocutor who was present, but rather how the participants oriented themselves, which I attribute to a type of referee design phenomena ( Hay, Jannedy & Mendoza-Denton 1999 ; Bell 1984 , 2001 ). The results of this study are especially important for the current work because they represent a point of departure for studying intonational variables as context-dependent stylistic resources.
One challenge for studying intonational variables as context dependent, however, is the paucity of studies on intonational variation in American English varieties, despite the salience of these features in differentiating ethnolinguistic varieties ( Thomas 2015 ; Burdin, Holliday & Reed 2018 ). For speakers with complex and variable Black identities, such as the middle-class speakers examined in Spears (1998) or the BWI speakers examined in Holliday (2016) , this type of work is crucial. Intonation is one of the primary linguistic resources that they may draw on in style-shifting and expressing their racial identity. That few studies have specifically examined intonational variables in a systematic way therefore means that our understanding of the full spectrum of linguistic resources available to Black speakers remains limited. The primary foci of studies with Black speakers that have investigated intonational variables have been ethnic identification tasks and comparisons between the systems of AAL and MUSE. From this work, we know that listeners are sensitive to ethnolinguistic variation, including in the realm of intonation, which makes such variables important in understanding linguistic profiling and discrimination. However, differences in production require further explanation ( Thomas & Reaser 2004 ; Thomas 2015 ). The current study begins to address this gap by examining how intonational variation is conditioned by audience and referee design phenomena in the speech of BWI speakers in specific narrative contexts.

Section: Methodology

There are a number of frameworks and methodologies for studying intonation, though much of the work conducted in the U.S. in the last few decades has employed auto-segmental/metrical (AM) theory ( Pierrehumbert 1980 ). The AM theory is a phonological theory that applies cross-linguistically, but its specifications and the inventory of possible tones differs by language and variety. Broadly, the theory posits that fundamental frequency movements (F 0 ) (i.e., pitch) are the result of an underlying sequence of tones that determine their structures. In the AM theory, the tones are either high (labelled as H) or low (labeled as L), and movements of the pitch contour are decomposable into a series of low and high sequences.
The labeling system for intonation based on the AM theory is called the Tones and Breaks Index system (ToBI), and each language, dialect, or variety requires its own distinct ToBI system that reflect that variety’s intonational phonological specifications. At present, the MAE-ToBI (Mainstream American English-Tones and Breaks Index) system, originally developed by Beckman and Ayers Elam (1997) for MUSE, is the only ToBI system generally in use for American English. MAE-ToBI has previously been used for descriptions of Jewish English ( Burdin 2016 ), Appalachian English ( Reed 2016 ), and AAL ( Holliday 2016 ; McLarty 2018 ). However, it is important to note that some researchers have posited that the intonational phonological inventory of AAL may differ from that of MUSE. As a result, MAE-ToBI has some limitations in its utility for non-MUSE varieties, but it remains among the best tools currently available for studying intonation in American English, even across varieties ( Thomas 2015 ; Holliday 2016 ). 3
MAE-ToBI contains two types of pitch movements: pitch accents, which are movements that occur on some stressed syllables, and edge tones, which occur at phrase boundaries. For the purposes of the current study, it is important to note that the most common pitch accent in MAE-ToBI is posited to be the simple rise (H*), with some American English speakers also employing a fall-rise (L+H*) ( Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg 1990 ; Clopper & Smiljanic 2011 ). The H* pitch accent frequently appears as a rise in F 0 that arrives at a target tone higher than the preceding F 0 , while the L+H* appears as a low target F 0 followed by a rise in F 0 leading to a high target. Table 1 illustrates some of the relevant differences between Black and white speakers that have been observed in earlier studies of AAL and MUSE intonation, including Jun and Foreman (1996) , Thomas and Reaser (2004) , Holliday (2016) , and McLarty (2018) .
The MAE-ToBI system is phonetically underspecified by design and therefore does not include some phonetic features, which have been found to differ between varieties in studies that have combined both MAE-ToBI and phonetic methods. Of particular interest for the current study is peak delay, which is the interval between the onset of the stressed vowel in the syllable containing the pitch accent and the maximum F 0 in that same vowel. Figure 1 shows a spectrogram labeled using the MAE-ToBI conventions, providing examples of the relevant pitch accents in Tier 3 and peak delay intervals in Tier 4.
The first pitch accent, labeled H*, is characterized by a simple rise, and the second one, labeled L+H*, is characterized by a fall-rise. The peak delay intervals begin at the onset of the stressed vowel in the syllable containing the pitch accent, and end at the maximum F 0 in that same vowel.
The current study therefore focuses on the distribution of different types of pitch accents (H* versus L+H*), as well as the length of their corresponding peak delay intervals. A final variable of interest is broad versus narrow focus and its interaction with pitch accent. Focus is defined here as whether a phrase contains a word that is emphatic/contrastive (narrow) or not (broad), since earlier works such as Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg (1990) posit that L+H* appears more frequently in MUSE in narrow focus contexts. Additionally, Holliday (2016) reports that the appearance of L+H* pitch accents in broad focus contexts was particularly characteristic of BWI speakers who aligned themselves with a Black identity.
The data set for the current analysis come from men aged with one Black parent and one white parent (BWI), drawn from the corpus for Holliday (2016) . The interviews were conducted in 2015 in Washington, D.C., and Virginia. The full corpus consists of twenty participants who were each recorded in three conditions: two peer activities (one with a Black friend and one with a white friend, both of their choosing) as well as researcher-led interview. The subset used here draws on the approximately one-hour-long sociolinguistic interviews with five college-educated BWI men, aged 18-32, who were living in Washington, D.C., at the time of interview in 2015. I (also a BWI, with one Black parent and one white parent) conducted the interviews myself and then, with the support of a research assistant, transcribed them in ELAN. Seven of the twenty participants had volunteered discourses about law enforcement, but two are excluded here because their police narratives were too short to conduct a thorough analysis: they are less than ten intonational phrases long.
The full list of questions employed in the sociolinguistic/identity interview can be found in the Appendix . Notably, none of the questions ever asked about law enforcement or participants’ attitudes towards the police; all such responses were spontaneously volunteered. Interestingly, however, these narratives emerged in response to questions about how their parents talked to them about race (see, e.g., 1). The participants included here reported that the most common message they heard from their parents was to be especially careful around police, a theme that occurred repeatedly throughout the interviews.
After examining the transcriptions of the full sociolinguistic interviews, I coded responses to three different types of identity questions in order to examine how participants talked about themselves and their racial identities, and to then compare the intonational contours they used for each question type. Because the current study is interested in stylistic variation as a result of audience/referee, the questions of interest focused on how the participants oriented themselves to others. The questions selected for analysis thus focused on three different types of identity: how their parents discussed race, how others asked them about race, and how they presented themselves racially in different settings. The specific questions that the participants responded to are given in examples (1)-(3); topic-based responses were categorized as “police” (1), “what are you” (2), and “difference” (3).
Responses to these questions were then isolated into individual intonational phrases from the larger data set, and manually coded for pitch accent type (H* or L+H*) using the MAE-ToBI conventions ( Holliday 2016 ; McLarty 2018 ) and peak delay intervals ( Holliday 2016 ; Reed 2016 ; McLarty 2018 ).
The analysis includes 508 declarative intonational phrases from the five speakers, excluding instances of reported speech, false starts, fillers, and bad pitch tracking because of creak. Following the labeling and extraction, I created mixed effects regression models using the lme4 package in R that accounted for topic by variable, with speaker as a random effect. For the variable of pitch accent type (H* versus L+H*), broad and narrow focus phrases were analyzed separately, since L+H* has been shown to be more frequent in narrow focus phrases for speakers of MUSE ( Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg 1990 ; Watson, Anenhaus & Gunlogson 2008 ). Finally, I also ran generalized linear mixed effects regression models (GLMER) models for peak delay interval length and analyzed H* and L+H*-containing syllables separately, due to the fact that bitonal pitch accents typically contain longer peak delay intervals because of their two pitch targets. I also controlled for nuclear versus non-nuclear pitch accents, here operationalized as either the final PA in a phrase (nuclear) or any PA preceding it (non-nuclear), due to the fact that nuclear PAs are likely to be longer and may be subject to phrase-final effects such as lengthening ( Holliday 2016 ).

Section: Results

Rates of use of L+H* versus H* pitch accent were considered separately for broad and narrow focus intervals, due to the fact that the L+H* may be more likely in narrow focus intervals for all speakers ( Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg 1990 ), and separate GLMER models tested pitch accent type by topic, with a random effect of speaker. The results indicate no significant differences in pitch accent type in the narrow focus intonational phrases (IPs) by topic ( p = .617). However, L+H* is significantly less likely in broad focus IPs when topic is police as compared to difference or what are you topics ( p = .04). The model results are displayed in Figure 2 , and Figure 3 shows the proportion of L+H* (versus H*) pitch accents by speaker and topic.
As we can see from Figure 3 , though there is some variation in which speakers use greater proportion of L+H* compared to H*, there is a much lower rate of use of L+H* overall when the speakers discuss topics related to the police (1) as opposed to the question on situation or interlocutor (3) or how they respond to questions about their race (2). Indeed, for all speakers except Chris, the pattern of use is clearly different for the police topic as compared to the others. Indeed, Chris may be an outlier, as his rate of use of L+H* does not seem to be as strongly influenced by topic. This may be due in part to the relatively low number of L+H*s that Chris had in total. The overall result for this group remains and it is especially of interest because L+H* in broad focus may be more marked and characteristic of AAL due to the fact that it occurs so infrequently in MUSE ( Holliday 2016 ; McLarty 2018 ). As a group, these speakers are thus demonstrating a more MUSE-like pattern of pitch accent use, characterized by the avoidance of L+H* specifically in broad focus contexts, when they are discussing the police topic rather than the other topics.
Results for peak delay interval length were determined by running separate GLMER models for delay by topic, with speaker as random effect. H* and L+H* pitch accents were considered separately, due to the fact that L+H*s will generally be longer, since the nature of the L+H* is that it has two targets. Nuclear and non-nuclear pitch accents were also considered separately, due to the fact that nuclear pitch accents also tend to be longer ( Holliday 2016 ), though the same pattern was observed for both types here. Results for the H* pitch accents again indicate no significant difference by topic ( p = .74). However, results for L+H* show that the intervals in the police topic are significantly shorter than in the difference or what are you topics ( p = .02). This is particularly notable given that AAL intervals are posited to be longer than MUSE intervals ( McLarty 2018 ). Figure 4 reports the results of this model, and Figure 5 shows the distribution of peak delay length in L+H* pitch accents by speaker and topic.
Figure 5 shows that there is some variation in which speakers use variable peak delay interval length in L+H* pitch accents, but, overall, the intervals are shorter when the speakers are discussing topics related to the police as opposed to how they identify in different situations or how they respond to others asking questions about their race. Though this pattern is less clear than the results for the use of L+H*, with Jesse and Dylan having the shortest intervals in response to the what are you question, it is worth noting that the peak delay intervals examined here are very short, introducing a bit more variability into the results. For example, Jesse’s mean delay interval for the police topic is 0.823 seconds, while his delay interval for the what are you topic is 0.791 seconds. However, when each interval for each phrase for each speaker is taken into account in the model, the results still indicate an overall pattern of shorter intervals for the police topic, despite the extremely short duration of the intervals and the narrow margins of difference. These overall results are notable: longer peak delay intervals are more characteristic of AAL than MUSE ( Holliday 2016 ; McLarty 2018 ). This would seem to indicate that as a group these speakers are again employing a more MUSE-like pattern use when they are discussing the police topic than the other topics.
Overall, the results show that the L+H* pitch accent is less likely to be used in the police topic than in the other topics, and this is particularly the case for broad focus intervals. Also, peak delay intervals for L+H*s are also shorter in police topic than the other topics. Together, these findings show that in the police topic, these BWI speakers are employing a more MUSE-like pattern of intonation, a pattern I interpret as being due to the law enforcement referee triggering a stylistic response away from patterns associated with AAL.
Responses to questions (1)-(3) were also examined qualitatively for additional context related to how participants oriented themselves to the topics of interest, in order to gain a better understanding of their epistemic and interpersonal stances. This section presents some participant responses to the questions to provide a better understanding of narrative data itself. Additionally, these discourses provide support for the stylistic analysis and categorization of the responses by topic and by the speaker’s audience and absent referees ( Bell 2001 ).
In response to the question about parents and race (1), the participants frequently focused on how their parents told them to be hyperaware of how the police saw them. One participant, Jesse, described the message he received from his white mother in (4).
Jesse is explicit about the fact that as a child, he tried to explain to his white mother that he did not see himself as fully Black, which caused her to issue him a serious warning about the fact that, even though he might feel that way, he should still be cautious around law enforcement. Jesse’s mother’s response also carries some coded information, which is that it is important for him to be aware of how he is perceived due to the long and fraught relationship between the police and communities of color, especially young Black men. Importantly, Jesse states that this realization about how police would perceive him was crucial in his own identity formation and conceptualization of self.
In response to the question about how they may identify differently based on the audience (3), another participant, Dylan, describes a situation in which he was interacting with law enforcement and had to choose how to fill out a form that asked about his race (in 5).
In this narrative, Dylan shares that in this particular context, where he was interacting with law enforcement, he felt that it was better to identify as white because he believes that Black people may be disadvantaged in such situations. Importantly, like Jesse, Dylan also mentions that he knows he would be perceived by the police as Black as a result of this structural disempowerment, regardless of how he may have identified himself.
In response to the question about how others inquire about their racial identity (2), participants also indicated that this may vary depending on the context of the question and what the consequences may be as a result. In (6), Sydney describes how he responds to the what are you question (2).
Here, Sydney explains that he has a variety of strategies that he uses when people ask about his race, but ultimately, when he has to fill out paperwork that may influence his outcomes, he writes that he is Black. Like the other narratives from Jesse and Dylan, Sydney is sensitive to others’ perceptions and the consequences of claiming a particular identity, even though in this case he does not specifically discuss interactions with law enforcement.
These narrative examples demonstrate that all of the speakers indicated explicit awareness of how they are perceived by their audience, both physically present as well as imagined outsiders. In this way, the qualitative information contained in the participants’ responses supports the findings of the quantitative analysis: participants are explicit about the fact that thinking and talking about their race in the context of law enforcement causes them to consider how they are racially disempowered in that specific context.

Section: Discussion, Conclusion

For the BWI young men in this study, discussions about different aspects of their identities may trigger topic-based stylistic differences in the use of intonational variables contextualized by physical or imagined presence of specific interlocutor types. Such audience/referee design phenomena support previous claims about a potential for a general pattern of maximally “standard” language use by speakers who may be demographically disempowered in certain situations, especially with respect to law enforcement. Indeed, in the referee design framework proposed by Bell (1984 , 2001 ), speakers have motivation to adjust their speech in response to an interlocutor, one that is either physically present or even one that is imagined due to a particular topic and/or context.
Additionally, as a result of both epistemic and ideological stance-taking practices, speakers may use linguistic variation to reflect their position in relation to the issues and individuals involved in particular narrative context ( Kiesling 2009 ). In the current study, BWI young men have clear motivations to adhere to a more MUSE-like intonational pattern when discussing law enforcement: they express a high degree of awareness of their social identities in interactions with police. As these speakers have the ability to shift between intonational patterns associated with MUSE and AAL, the results indicate a movement toward a “standard” linguistic style which employs more MUSE-linked features, paralleling the speakers in Holliday and Squires (forthcoming) . Indeed, the fact that the young men also specifically discuss hyperawareness of their race and the way that it may place them in danger in law enforcement contexts indicates a particular sensitivity to their sociolinguistic position vis-à-vis the police. This is an important finding for research that focuses on individuals with multiple and/or complex racial identities, since the context that may trigger their use of specifically ethnically-linked variables is not always predictable, clear, or well-understood. Examining linguistic patterns driven by audience and referee provides us with a new approach for understanding speakers who may challenge our traditional conceptualizations of language and race. The results of this study therefore provide further motivation for sociolinguists interested in both ethnolinguistic variation and style to pay greater attention to audience and referee design effects and how they may influence a speaker’s use of variables linked with different sociolinguistic communities and identities.
With respect to the variables considered here, the finding that specific intonational features may be subject to topic-based stylistic variation adds to the body of knowledge about Black speakerhood in the U.S. There exists a complex relationship between linguistic variation and social power, how speakers employ audience design to adjust to their interlocutors, and the sociolinguistic contexts of AAL. I argue that examining intonational variables such as pitch accent identity and its interaction with focus marking, as well as peak delay, is one of the most effective ways to capture variation among Black speakers who may not use stigmatized morphological and syntactic features of AAL (e.g., zero copula or habitual be ) in a given speech sample. Particularly in formal or laboratory contexts, Black speakers may avoid such features yet still sound identifiably Black to listeners ( Spears 1988 ). As a result, speakers like those in the current study may also be subject to linguistic profiling and discrimination because they still are evaluated as “sounding Black” by listeners as a result of their use of these intonational features ( Purnell, Idsardi & Baugh 1999 ; Thomas & Reaser 2004 ). The BWI speakers in this sample exhibit a controlled avoidance of such AAL-linked intonational features, demonstrating that intonational variables which may not be overtly stigmatized are subject to stylistic variation that may be motivated by audience and topic.
Rickford and King (2016) demonstrate how speaker credibility can affect outcomes for Black participants in the judicial system. Their analysis of the speech of Rachel Jeantel clearly illuminated how witnesses from marginalized groups, especially Black witnesses, are not treated equitably in the criminal justice system and how racialized language contributes to this type of injustice. While the participants in the current study were recorded in a very different type of situation, the lessons from Rickford and King (2016) hold particular relevance for this study. If the topic of law enforcement seems to affect the use of intonational variables among these young men, then it would stand to reason that in an interaction with police on the street or with lawyers in a courtroom, the participants may also style-shift in the direction of a more MUSE-like linguistic style. This may be a strategic move, triggered by the unique tension between the police and Black citizens, especially since the use of AAL-linked features in these situations may carry more material risk ( Holliday, Burdin & Tyler 2015 ).

Section: Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Renee Blake, Paul Reed, and Neal Fultz for feedback on data analysis and earlier drafts of the paper. I would also like to thank the audience at the 91st Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America in Austin, Texas.
