Section: Abstract

Hamadryas baboons ( Papio hamadryas ) are a useful model for human social evolution for multiple reasons, including their multilevel society, intense cross-sex bonds, and intermale tolerance. Their most stable social grouping, the one-male unit (OMU)—comprising a leader male, females, and sometimes follower males—is formed via successive takeovers of individual females by males. While takeovers occur via both aggressive and non-aggressive mechanisms, aggressive herding is common during and after takeovers and appears crucial in maintaining OMUs. Here we use behavioral and demographic data from Filoha, Ethiopia to examine the relationship between aggressive takeovers and fitness correlates. We found no relationship between a male's percentage of takeovers that were aggressive and his presumed number of infants sired, nor his number of females or followers. However, we did find that a leader male's average intensity of aggression toward both other males and females around the time of a takeover was negatively related to his presumed number of infants sired. In addition, a leader male's average intensity of aggression toward other males was negatively related to his maximum number of followers. Finally, leader males exhibited more intense aggression toward females in interband, compared to intraband, takeovers. Our findings suggest that (1) leader males who limit their aggression toward other males may have greater success in attracting followers, thereby increasing their fitness via enhanced defense of the OMU; (2) exceptionally aggressive takeovers may lead to lower birth rates via female reproductive suppression; and (3) the extent to which males use aggression toward females depends on the context in which the takeover occurs. Overall, these results both suggest that hamadryas males use aggression selectively and underscore the ubiquity of intermale tolerance and female suppression in the hamadryas social system. This study lends insight into the interplay between male–female and male–male social dynamics during human evolution.

Section: Introduction, Literature Review

Across mammals, primates—including humans—tend to exhibit the highest prevalence of aggression, including lethal violence toward conspecifics ( Gómez et al., 2016 ). Male primates generally use physical aggression more than females ( Muller, 2002 ; Archer, 2009 ; Georgiev et al., 2013 ), and this aggression can be directed toward both other males ( Bernstein and Gordon, 1974 ; Eaton, 1984 ) and females ( Smuts and Smuts, 1993 ; Slater et al., 2008 ; Muller and Wrangham, 2009 ; Stumpf and Boesch, 2010 ). Male aggression toward females, including sexual violence and coercion, is prevalent in both humans and non-human primates ( Smuts, 1992 ; Sousa and Casanova, 2005 ; Archer, 2009 ; Muller and Wrangham, 2009 ; Baniel et al., 2017 ).
Human male aggression against women extends worldwide ( Sanday, 1981 ; Levinson, 1989 ) and has likely been persistent throughout hominin evolution ( Trinkaus and Zimmerman, 1982 ; Carrier, 2011 ). Its predominant motivation, across cultures, appears to be male sexual jealousy and control ( Brown et al., 1992 ; Daly and Wilson, 2017 ). Given that sexual dimorphism in body size is posited to be an outcome of male–male competition and aggression ( Sefcek et al., 2006 ; Dixson, 2009 ; Puts, 2010 ; Plavcan, 2012 ), the evolutionary trend toward reduced sexual dimorphism during human evolution is likely associated with an increase in intermale tolerance and/or a shift toward the use of non-physical (e.g., tools) mechanisms of competition. Nevertheless, the persistence of sexual dimorphism in modern humans, combined with our understanding of modern human behavior, suggests a long history of male–male competition and male aggressive coercion toward females ( Clutton-Brock and Parker, 1995 ; Muller et al., 2009 ; Wrangham and Muller, 2009 ; Stumpf et al., 2011 ; Swedell and Plummer, 2019 ).
While the fitness benefits of affiliative interactions among social primates are well documented ( Silk et al., 2003 , 2009 , 2010 ; Schülke et al., 2010 ), less is known about the adaptive value of agonism, including aggression. It has been posited that aggression evolved so that individuals can effectively compete for resources or defend themselves and/or offspring from impending threats from conspecifics or predators ( Archer, 1988 ; Anholt and Mackay, 2012 ). Excessive aggression, however, can be detrimental to individuals, leading to psychological and physiological stress, energetic depletion, strained social relationships, and injuries, sometimes fatal ( Honess and Marin, 2006 ; Georgiev et al., 2013 ; Thompson and Georgiev, 2014 ). A minimal level of aggression may be necessary for survival, however, and thus, intermediate levels of aggression may be favored by selection ( Anholt and Mackay, 2012 ).
Baboons (genus Papio ) are recognized as useful models for human evolution owing to their complex sociality and similar ecology to that of early hominins ( Washburn, 1951 ; Washburn and DeVore, 1961 ; Jolly, 1970 , 2001 ; Elton, 2006 ; Swedell and Plummer, 2012 , 2019 ), but there is significant variation in social systems across species. Most baboons ( Papio anubis , Papio cynocephalus , Papio ursinus , Papio kindae ) live in multimale multifemale groups and are female philopatric with strong female–female bonds ( Barton, 2000 ; Jolly, 2020 ). In contrast, hamadryas ( Papio hamadryas ) and Guinea baboons ( Papio papio ) live in multilevel societies ( Grueter et al., 2012 , 2020 ) with male philopatry and female-biased dispersal ( Kopp et al., 2015 ; Städele et al., 2015 ). In hamadryas, the most stable social grouping is the one-male unit (OMU), which associates with other OMUs to form successively larger, less stable aggregations—clans: male kin-based associations among several OMUs; bands: comparable to other monkeys’ troops or groups; and troops: large, temporary aggregations of bands at sleeping sites ( Kummer and Kurt, 1963 ; Kummer, 1968 ; Swedell, 2006 ; Swedell and Schreier, 2009 ; Städele et al., 2015 ). Each OMU consists of a leader male, one or more adult females with dependent offspring, and often one or more ‘follower males,’ secondary males that are often close kin of the leader male ( Kummer, 1968 ; Abegglen, 1984 ; Chowdhury et al., 2015 ; Städele et al., 2016 ).
Unlike other primate multilevel societies, hamadryas baboon OMUs are formed via successive takeovers of individual females by males ( Swedell et al., 2011 ). These takeovers, whether they be at the initial establishment of an OMU or mechanisms to garner additional females, can occur in several possible ways: 1) ‘initial unit,’ in which a subadult male recruits a juvenile female from her natal OMU as the first female in his OMU; 2) ‘inheritance,’ in which a follower male gains one or more females via a peaceful transition at the end of a leader male's tenure; 3) ‘challenge,’ in which there is a competitive takeover of a female from a healthy leader male; and 4) ‘opportunistic,’ in which a male takes over a female when her leader male is no longer able to effectively defend her ( Pines et al., 2011 ). While all takeover strategies can involve both aggressive and non-aggressive mechanisms, toward both males and females, the use and extent of aggression varies among strategies. For example, ‘challenge’ takeovers tend to involve the most male–male aggression, whereas the other strategies usually do not necessitate much male–male aggression, if any ( Pines et al., 2011 ). All four strategies, however, usually involve aggression toward females, as a means of conditioning a female to shift her following response to a new leader male ( Swedell and Schreier, 2009 ).
Unlike most species that live in one-male social units, hamadryas males use aggression both during and after takeovers to condition females to maintain proximity; this, in combination with reciprocal cross-sex grooming, maintains the strong pair bonds that are essential to OMU cohesion ( Kummer, 1968 ; Swedell and Schreier, 2009 ). In most baboons ( P. anubis, P. cynocephalus, P. ursinus , P. kindae ), males form dominance hierarchies and aggressively compete for females only when they are in estrus ( Barton, 2000 ; Jolly, 2020 ). Hamadryas males, by contrast, do not regularly compete for estrous females but instead coerce females into their social units and then guard them from other males continuously, regardless of reproductive state; this coercive controlling relationship and associated mate guarding has been referred to as ‘possession’ of females ( Kummer, 1968 ). To maintain cooperative relationships with other males amid this competitive landscape, hamadryas males use ritualized ‘notification’ greetings ( Colmenares, 1990 , 1991a , b ; Fraser and Plowman, 2007 ), similar to the ritualized greetings that have been described for Guinea baboons ( Dal Pesco and Fischer, 2018 ). Male–male aggression in hamadryas baboons is concentrated during times of takeovers; at other times, males appear to ‘respect’ one another's ‘possession’ of females ( Kummer et al., 1974 ).
Female hamadryas baboons receive coercive aggression from males both when they are transferred among OMUs and on a regular basis depending on the dynamics of the particular leader male–female relationship. Typically, and especially at the beginning of a female's tenure in their unit, leader males are exceptionally attentive toward their females and will often threaten and neckbite females if they interact with members of other OMUs or stray from the male ( Kummer, 1968 ; Swedell, 2006 ). Neckbites are characteristic forms of aggression for hamadryas in which a male bites a female on the back of her head, neck , and/or upper shoulders ( Kummer, 1968 ). There are thus clear costs to females of non-compliance, and, correspondingly, females exhibit anxious behavior in anticipation of male aggression and often fervently groom the leader male following agonistic interactions ( Swedell and Schreier, 2009 ). Thus, male aggression toward females appears to be an important driver of pair bonding between hamadryas leader males and their females.
It is likely that selection for behavioral traits in hamadryas baboons has occurred during their evolutionary history owing to the fitness benefits that accrue to successful leader males in this system, such as nearly exclusive reproductive access to females in their OMU and increased offspring survival ( Kummer, 1968 ; Sigg et al., 1982 ; Swedell, 2006 ; Swedell and Plummer, 2012 ). Paternity certainty for leader males is likely very high ( Kummer, 1968 ; Chowdhury et al., 2015 ), and leaders that acquire a greater number of females likely garner direct fitness benefits from the greater number of infants born into their units ( Swedell et al., 2014 ).
Another factor shaping variation in hamadryas leader male fitness is the presence and number of follower males in an OMU, which are positively associated with the tenure of a leader male, the number of females acquired by the leader male, the duration that females are retained by the leader male, and the number of infants born into the leader male's OMU ( Chowdhury et al., 2015 ). Follower males are not permanent fixtures of OMUs but rather may transiently attach and detach from the OMU over time. The potential fitness benefits of follower males to leader males are thought to be a function of increased unit defense and infant protection provided by followers. Thus, it is likely that the ability of leader males to both attract and tolerate follower males has evolved as an adaptive strategy that increases leader male fitness.
The ‘respect’ among hamadryas males for each other's ‘possession’ of females ( Kummer et al., 1974 ) is an additional mechanism reflecting intermale tolerance and cooperation in this system ( Kummer, 1968 ; Abegglen, 1984 ; Sigg et al., 1982 ). Hamadryas males are philopatric at the levels of clan and band and maintain relationships with one another over time, which are overtly expressed among bachelor males and serviced via ritualized greetings among males in possession of females ( Kummer, 1968 ; Abegglen, 1984 ; Colmenares, 1990 , 1991a , b ). It has been suggested that intermale tolerance coincided with the evolution of pair bonding during human evolution ( Smuts, 1992 ) and developed in response to intergroup competition ( Alexander and Noonan, 1979 ). In addition, or alternatively, it may be that limited dispersal opportunities for males increased male–male relatedness, possibly via selection for male philopatry at an expanding frontier ( Jolly, 2020 ), and in turn led to increased male–male tolerance and cooperation and decreased infanticide risk ( Isbell et al., 2002 ). In humans, reduced intragroup male aggression has also been suggested to be an outcome of self-domestication, leading to more cooperative social dynamics ( Hare et al., 2012 ; Wrangham, 2019 , 2021 ). An increase in male–male cooperation in hominins would carry with it a corresponding increase in male tolerance of the exclusive mating relationships of other males and a reduced proclivity of males to attack the females or offspring of their allies ( Smuts, 1992 ). Similarly, in hamadryas society, it is likely that males that limit their aggression toward other males are more likely to maintain cooperative relationships with those males. Moreover, leader males that are less aggressive toward other males may have greater success in attracting followers, thereby reaping the benefits associated with the presence of followers in their units and in turn increasing their own fitness.
While hamadryas males may limit their male-directed aggression, the aggression they direct toward females is more frequent and obvious. One source of variation in female-directed aggression, however, may relate to within-band vs. between-band takeovers. It has long been thought that the primary mechanism for interband takeovers of hamadryas females is abduction during aggressive encounters ( Kummer, 1968 , Sigg et al., 1982 , Abegglen, 1984 ; Pines and Swedell, 2011 ). As intermale tolerance is thought to derive from increased intergroup competition ( Smuts, 1992 ), and because hamadryas males are philopatric within bands ( Sigg et al., 1982 ; Städele et al., 2015 ), it is likely that males are less aggressive during within-band than during between-band takeovers. Reduced aggression within bands may relate to variation in social and kin relationships among male rivals, as well as greater familiarity with within-band females.
A better understanding of how selection has shaped the use of aggression in the unusually male-driven hamadryas social system requires an examination of the relationship between male aggression and fitness outcomes. Here we assess fitness outcomes of aggressive takeovers in male hamadryas baboons to test the hypothesis that the use and/or restraint of aggression across contexts is an effective mechanism via which leader males maintain OMUs and accrue fitness benefits. We predict 1) a positive relationship between a leader male's percentage of takeovers that are aggressive and a) his number of presumed offspring sired and b) the number of females in his OMU; 2) a negative relationship between a leader male's percentage of takeovers that are aggressive and his number of follower males; 3) a positive relationship between the intensity of a leader male's aggression toward the female around the time of a takeover and a) his number of presumed offspring sired and b) the number of females in his OMU; 4) a negative relationship between the intensity of a leader male's aggression toward other males around the time of a takeover and a) his number of presumed offspring sired, b) his number of follower males, and c) his number of females; 5) a higher intensity of aggression toward both males and females during takeovers across bands compared to those within the same band; and 6) differences in infant fate depending on the takeover mechanism, with a greater likelihood of infants dying or disappearing following aggressive vs. non-aggressive takeovers.

Section: Methodology

Data for this study were derived from a population of wild hamadryas baboons inhabiting the region around the Filoha field site in Awash National Park located in central lowland Ethiopia. The Filoha outpost and surrounding landscape consists of semi-arid acacia scrubland and doum palm trees among natural hot springs . Study subjects comprised members mainly from Band 1, which has been studied by the Filoha Hamadryas Project (FHP) intermittently since 1996 ( Swedell, 2006 ; Swedell et al., 2011 ).
Our primary dataset for these analyses consists of behavioral and demographic data collected by members of the FHP (L. Swedell, A. Schreier, M. Pines , T. Tesfaye, and/or B. Davis) from 2002 through 2009. In addition, five takeovers from 1996, one from 2010, three from 2012, and one from an unknown post-2009 date, contributed to the takeover dataset (for analysis of variation among males) but not the fitness dataset. FHP members followed Band 1 on foot and observed the baboons for 2–12 h per day. Data on takeover events and other changes in OMU composition were collected ad libitum. Takeover data were collected on an all-occurrence basis and, for each takeover, observers noted the previous and new leader males and their band memberships as well as associated aggression and evidence of physical injuries. While takeovers typically resolve within one day, observation conditions are highly variable, and we included circumstantial data (e.g., evidence of wounds or injuries indicating that aggression occurred) recorded within several days of a takeover. We analyzed data associated with these takeovers, including the mechanism via which they occurred (‘takeover strategy’) as well as the presence or absence of aggression and the intensity of aggression toward the female and/or between the two males involved. We assessed fitness correlates using demographic data, including the number of females, follower males, and births in an OMU during a leader male's tenure.
We used takeover data from 51 leader males from Band 1 and one or more unidentified males from Band 3, with data on aggression intensity directed toward males from 22 of the 51 Band 1 males and ≥1 Band 3 male and data on aggression intensity directed toward females from 31 of the 51 Band 1 males. We analyzed data from a total of 129 takeovers with associated information on the use of aggression (mean number of takeovers/leader male = 2.48, SD = 1.86, range = 1–9; mean number of takeovers/leader male with female-directed aggression intensity data = 1.74, SD = 0.89, range = 1–4; mean number of takeovers/leader male with male-directed aggression intensity data = 1.45, SD = 0.67, range = 1–3). Of these 129 takeovers, 13 are from six leader males from Band 1 and one or more unidentified males from Band 3 for which we do not have fitness data during the study period, and one additional takeover is from a leader male for whom we have fitness data, but the takeover itself occurred in 2010 (after the study period); therefore, they are not part of the dataset used for fitness analyses. However, we do include data from these males in our analyses of variation (in both takeover mechanisms and aggression intensities) and correlates of within-band vs. between-band takeovers.
To differentiate between takeovers that occurred via aggressive and non-aggressive mechanisms, we noted the presence or absence of typical agonistic behaviors that have been observed in male hamadryas baboons ( Swedell and Schreier, 2009 ). Agonistic behaviors included visual threats, for example, stare threats and eyebrow raises, and physical aggression such as chasing, grabbing, hitting, biting, and pushing directed toward both other males and females as well as characteristic female-directed aggression such as neckbiting, biting on a female's back, and holding a female in a ‘possession grip,’ the latter of which involves a male embracing and physically restraining a female's movement ( Swedell and Schreier, 2009 ). Takeovers were classified by the presence of aggression or non-aggression observed as well as the intensity of aggression of the leader male toward the female and/or other contending males.
For each leader male, we calculated the percentage of takeovers that were aggressive (total takeovers: n = 129; aggressive takeovers: n = 57, non-aggressive takeovers: n = 72). Aggressive takeovers include those in which the observer witnessed any instance of visual or physical aggression by the male directed toward the female and/or the leader male being challenged, as well as takeovers for which aggression between males or toward the female was suspected (e.g., observations of wounds following the takeover event). Non-aggressive takeovers include takeovers for which there was no indication that either visual or physical aggression was observed toward the female or among males, including those for which there was no indication by the observer of the presence or absence of aggression, based on the assumption that overt aggression would have been recorded if it had been observed.
The intensity of male aggression around the time of a takeover was scored on five levels: 0 = none; 1 = visual threats only (stare threats, eyebrow raises); 2 = minor aggression (chasing, grabbing); 3 = moderate aggression (hitting, pushing); 4 = severe aggression (neckbiting, biting on the back, holding in a possession grip). We calculated two aggression intensity scores for each leader male combining data from all his takeovers: average aggression intensity toward the female and average aggression intensity toward other males. The average aggression intensity score for aggression toward other males was calculated as the sum of toward-male aggression intensities divided by the total number of takeovers for which toward-male aggression data were available. Similarly, the average aggression intensity score for aggression toward females was calculated as the sum of toward-female aggression intensities divided by the total number of takeovers for which toward-female aggression data were available.
We used demographic data from 45 of the 51 leader males for which we had both takeover and fitness data. As correlates of leader male fitness, we used the number of adult females, number of follower males, and total number of infants observed to be born into a male's OMU over his entire tenure length during the study period. For each leader male, we calculated the mean monthly number of females in his OMU during the observation period (cf., Chowdhury et al., 2015 ), his total number of female-years (sum of the number of months that females were in his OMU during the observation period divided by 12), and the maximum number of females in his OMU at any given point during the observation period. We also calculated the total number of followers associated with a leader male during the observation period and the maximum number of follower males simultaneously present in his OMU at a given point in time. To estimate the total number of infants born into a male's OMU, we assigned probable paternity to a male when a female conceived while in his OMU, counting back 180 days from birth dates ( Swedell et al., 2014 ; Chowdhury et al., 2015 ). Paternity was assigned to a female's previous leader male if she gave birth within 180 days of being taken over. We divided the male's total number of presumed offspring sired by his total number of female-years during the observation period to report the male's yearly per-female birth rate. To account for the possibility of non-leader male paternity, we subtracted 5%, which is the estimated percent of copulations and conceptions with non-leader males ( Nitsch et al., 2011 ; Chowdhury et al., 2015 ). Although genetic data would verify paternity, conception dates rarely fell around the time of takeover, and we thus do not think we have made any errors in paternity estimates stemming from variation in gestation lengths.
To evaluate leader male individual patterns of using or limiting aggression and how males differ in their takeover style over time, we chronologically ordered each male's takeovers, ranking them in sequence, and assessed the relationship between the takeover number in the sequence and the takeover mechanism (aggressive vs. non-aggressive). We did not have enough data to reasonably assess the relationships between the intensity of leader male aggression directed toward other males or the female around the time of the takeover with the sequential takeover number.
To assess interindividual variation in the use of aggression, both in percentage of takeovers that were aggressive and intensity of male aggression toward the female and other males, we calculated, and report here, means and SDs of these traits among males. We used linear regression to assess the relationships between a leader male's percentage of takeovers that were aggressive and all fitness correlates, i.e., yearly birth rates based on the number of infants born into a leader male's OMU, mean monthly number of females, maximum number of females at a time, total number of female-years, total number of followers, and maximum number of followers at any given point. In addition, we used linear regression to examine the relationships between leader males’ average intensity of aggression around the time of a takeover and all fitness correlates. We log-transformed response variables in all linear regressions and confirmed that linear regression assumptions were not violated via visual assessments of diagnostic plots. For all analyses of birth rates, we ran both linear regressions and Spearman correlations and report both the parametric and non-parametric results. We report r 2 values for linear regression and r s values for Spearman correlations.
Using the dataset of takeovers with data on aggression and the context of band takeover (within Band 1 vs. between Band 1 and another band, n = 118 takeovers), we applied Fisher's exact test to assess the relationship between the context of band takeover and takeover mechanism (aggressive vs. non-aggressive). In addition, we used independent two sample t-tests to assess the relationship between aggression intensity (toward other males and toward the female) and the identity of the band from which the takeover occurred, that is, whether it was within Band 1 or between two bands.
To examine the relationship between aggression and infanticide, and the potential effects of infanticide on reproductive output, we used a Fisher's exact test to examine the relationship between takeover mechanism (aggressive vs. non-aggressive) and the fate of the infant following the takeover (i.e., if the infant lived vs. died/disappeared within 6 months after the takeover).
We conducted all statistical analyses in R and considered the outcomes significant at the alpha level of 0.05.

Section: Results

We found considerable interindividual variation across leader males in their percentage of takeovers that were aggressive (mean = 39.4%, SD = 39.2%, range = 0–100%, n ≥ 52 leader males, including 51 males from Band 1 and ≥1 male from Band 3).
In addition, we found variation in each male's average intensity of aggression directed both toward other males (mean = 1.47, SD = 1.32, range = 0–4, n ≥ 23 leader males, including 22 males from Band 1 and ≥1 male from Band 3) and toward females (mean = 1.27, SD = 1.16, range = 0–4, n = 31 males). There was no significant difference between the intensity of aggression directed toward males vs. females (independent two sample t-test: mean difference = 0.20, t = 0.59, df = 43.84, p = 0.561).
Among males with multiple takeovers ( n = 29 males with 2+ takeovers), we found variation both among males in their use of aggression and within males in their use of aggression over subsequent takeovers. Notably, eight of these males engaged in exclusively non-aggressive takeovers and two engaged in exclusively aggressive takeovers, suggesting that there may be some consistency in individual strategies. Nevertheless, there was considerable variation across males in the percentage of takeovers that were aggressive (mean = 41.3%, SD = 31.0%), indicating flexibility more broadly across males. In addition, we found variation in the use of aggression by individual males over time, that is, over their sequence of takeovers ( Fig. 1 ; percentage of takeovers that are aggressive: 1st takeovers: 43.8%, n = 32 takeovers; 2nd takeovers: 36.7%, n = 30 takeovers; 3rd takeovers: 60%, n = 15 takeovers; 4th takeovers: 87.5%, n = 8 takeovers; 5th takeovers: 40%, n = 5 takeovers; 6th takeovers: 40%, n = 5 takeovers; 7th takeovers: 33.3%, n = 3 takeovers; 8th takeovers: 100%, n = 1 takeover; 9th takeovers: 0%, n = 1 takeover). Of note, four males (Felix, Jef, Len, and Loo) had multiple takeovers on the same day. We categorized each set of multiple takeovers occurring on the same day as the same sequence number ( Fig. 1 ). For three of these males, these same-day takeovers were included in the aforementioned calculations of variation in the use of aggression by individual males over their sequence of takeovers. We did not include Felix in these calculations, however, as all of his takeovers occurred on the same day and thus would not reflect change over time. Download: Download high-res image (269KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 1 . Takeover mechanisms (aggressive or non-aggressive) of leader males over subsequent takeovers. Filled circles: aggressive takeovers, open circles: non-aggressive takeovers. Four males, Felix, Jef, Len, and Loo, had multiple takeovers on the same day (Felix: 3 same-day takeovers categorized as ‘takeover number 1’, all non-aggressive; Jef: 3 same-day takeovers categorized as ‘takeover number 1’, all non-aggressive; Len: 3 same-day takeovers categorized as ‘takeover number 1’, all non-aggressive; Loo: 3 same-day takeovers categorized as ‘takeover number 2’, 1 aggressive, 2 non-aggressive); given that these would not be representative of variation over time, takeovers occurring on the same day were combined and are represented here as single points for each of those males.
Contrary to our expectation, a leader male's yearly per-female birth rate (based on the number of infants born into his OMU) was not predicted by the percentage of his takeovers that were aggressive ( Table 1 ; r 2 = 0.003, F[1, 40] = 0.140, p = 0.710; r s = 0.075, p = 0.638; n = 42 leader males). Similarly, we found no significant relationships between various measures of the number of females in a leader male's OMU and that male's percentage of takeovers that were aggressive (mean monthly number of females in a leader male's OMU: r 2 = 0.013, F[1, 43] = 0.581, p = 0.450; total number of female-years: r 2 = 0.005, F[1, 43] = 0.206, p = 0.653; maximum number of females acquired by a leader male at any given point in time: r 2 = 0.001, F[1, 43] = 0.027, p = 0.871; n = 45 leader males; Table 1 ). Table 1 . Results of linear regressions investigating relationships between leader males’ percentages of takeovers that were aggressive and average aggression intensity scores toward males and females, with fitness proxies. a Dependent variables Independent variables Percentage of takeovers that are aggressive Aggression intensity to males Aggression intensity to female Yearly birth rate r 2 = 0.003, F(1, 40) = 0.140, p = 0.710 r 2 = 0.232, F(1, 17) = 5.145, p = 0.037 r 2 = 0.172, F(1, 25) = 5.186, p = 0.032 Mean monthly number of females r 2 = 0.013, F(1, 43) = 0.581, p = 0.450 r 2 = 0.012, F(1, 17) = 0.201, p = 0.660 r 2 = 0.075, F(1, 26) = 2.101, p = 0.159 Total number of female-years r 2 = 0.005, F(1, 43) = 0.206, p = 0.653 r 2 = 0.114, F(1, 17) = 2.176, p = 0.158 r 2 = 0.046, F(1, 26) = 1.254, p = 0.273 Maximum number of females r 2 = 0.001, F(1, 43) = 0.027, p = 0.871 r 2 = 0.011, F(1, 17) = 0.186, p = 0.671 r 2 = 0.073, F(1, 26) = 2.045, p = 0.165 Total number of followers r 2 < 0.001, F(1, 43) = 0.006, p = 0.940 r 2 = 0.184, F(1, 17) = 3.842, p = 0.067 r 2 < 0.001, F(1, 26) < 0.001, p = 0.987 Maximum number of followers r 2 < 0.001, F(1, 43) = 0.001, p = 0.971 r 2 = 0.216, F(1, 17) = 4.692, p = 0.045 r 2 = 0.003, F(1, 26) = 0.086, p = 0.771 a Statistically significant results are highlighted in bold.
We found no relationship between a leader male's number of follower males and his percentage of aggressive takeovers (total number of followers: r 2 < 0.001, F[1, 43] = 0.006, p = 0.940; maximum number of followers in an OMU at any given point during his tenure: r 2 < 0.001, F[1, 43] = 0.001, p = 0.971; n = 45 leader males; Table 1 ).
We found a significant negative relationship between a leader male's birth rate (based on the number of infants born into his OMU) and the average intensity of aggression directed toward females around the time of a takeover ( Fig. 2 a; r 2 = 0.172, F[1, 25] = 5.186, p = 0.032; r s = −0.415, p = 0.032; n = 27 males). We did not, however, find a relationship between a leader male's average intensity of aggression directed toward females and the number of females in a male's OMU (n = 28 males), including the mean monthly number of females in that male's OMU (r 2 = 0.075, F[1, 26] = 2.101, p = 0.159), maximum number of females (at any point in time) in his OMU (r 2 = 0.073, F[1, 26] = 2.045, p = 0.165), and total number of female-years (r 2 = 0.046, F[1, 26] = 1.254, p = 0.273). Download: Download high-res image (235KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 2 . Relationship between a leader male's yearly per-female birth rate and his (a) average intensity of aggression directed toward females (r 2 = 0.172, F[1, 25] = 5.186, p = 0.032) and (b) average intensity of aggression directed toward other males (r 2 = 0.232, F[1, 17] = 5.145, p = 0.037). Intensities: 0 = no aggression; 1 = threats only; 2 = minor aggression; 3 = moderate aggression; 4 = severe aggression.
We found a significant negative relationship between a leader male's yearly birth rate and his average intensity of aggression directed toward other males around the time of a takeover ( Fig. 2 b; r 2 = 0.232, F[1, 17] = 5.145, p = 0.037; r s = −0.393, p = 0.096; n = 19 males).
With respect to a leader male's number of follower males, we also found negative relationships between a leader male's average intensity of aggression toward other males around the time of a takeover and both that male's total number of followers (r 2 = 0.184, F[1, 17] = 3.842, p = 0.067, n = 19 males) and the maximum number of follower males at any given point in time ( Fig. 3 ; r 2 = 0.216, F[1, 17] = 4.692, p = 0.045, n = 19 males). Expectedly, we also found no significant relationship between a leader male's average intensity of aggression directed toward the female and that male's total number of followers (r 2 < 0.001, F[1, 26] < 0.001, p = 0.987, n = 28 males), nor that male's maximum number of followers at any given point in time (r 2 = 0.003, F[1, 26] = 0.086, p = 0.771, n = 28 males). Download: Download high-res image (161KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 3 . Relationship between a leader male's maximum number of follower males and his average intensity of aggression directed toward other males (r 2 = 0.216, F[1, 17] = 4.692, p = 0.045). Intensities: 0 = no aggression; 1 = threats only; 2 = minor aggression; 3 = moderate aggression; 4 = severe aggression. Jitter applied to response variable to visualize overlapping discrete values.
Unsurprisingly, we found no relationship between a leader male's average intensity of aggression toward other males and the number of females in a male's OMU ( n = 19 leader males), including the mean monthly number of females (r 2 = 0.012, F[1, 17] = 0.201, p = 0.660), maximum number of females (at any point in time; r 2 = 0.011, F[1, 17] = 0.186, p = 0.671), and total number of female-years (r 2 = 0.114, F[1, 17] = 2.176, p = 0.158).
Our comparison of within-band vs. between-band takeovers (i.e., female takeovers occurring within Band 1 compared to those occurring between Band 1 and another band) revealed a significant relationship between takeover mechanism (aggressive or non-aggressive) and context (within or between bands; Fisher's exact test; p = 0.006; n = 118 takeovers), with aggressive takeovers occurring more frequently between bands and non-aggressive takeovers occurring more frequently within Band 1 ( Fig. 4 a). Download: Download high-res image (240KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 4 . a) Frequency of takeovers between bands and within Band 1 that are aggressive vs. non-aggressive ( p = 0.006). b) Frequency of takeovers with varying intensities of aggression toward females occurring between bands and within Band 1 (mean difference = 1.33, t = 3.51, df = 20.80, p = 0.002). Intensities: 0 = no aggression; 1 = threats only; 2 = minor aggression; 3 = moderate aggression; 4 = severe aggression.
In addition, we found a significant relationship between the average intensity of leader male aggression directed toward the female around the time of a takeover and the context of the takeover (i.e., within-band vs. between-band). Specifically, leader males exhibited more intense aggression toward females more often in transfers between Band 1 and another band compared to transfers occurring within Band 1 ( Fig. 4 b; independent two sample t-test: mean difference in aggression intensity = 1.33, t = 3.51, df = 20.80, p = 0.002, n = 53 takeovers). We did not find a significant relationship between the average intensity of leader male aggression directed toward other males around the time of a takeover and the context of the takeover (mean difference in aggression intensity = 0.23, t = −0.29, df = 3.94, p = 0.787, n = 33 takeovers).
We found no relationship between takeover mechanism (aggressive vs. non-aggressive) and the fate of the infant following the takeover (i.e., if the infant lived or died/disappeared; Fisher's exact test: p = 1; n = 44 takeovers with infant fate data).

Section: Discussion, Conclusion

The results of this study suggest that aggression is an effective mechanism via which hamadryas leader males establish and maintain OMUs and accrue fitness benefits, but that such aggression may not be advantageous in all contexts. The interindividual and intraindividual variation we found among hamadryas males suggests that the tendency to use aggression is likely not a ‘personality’ trait ( Clarke and Boinski, 1995 ; Capitanio, 1999 ) but that each leader male is instead flexible in his use of aggression, using more intense aggression when needed (e.g., toward females in between-band takeovers) and limiting it in other contexts (e.g., toward other males).
While we had predicted that a leader male's percentage of aggressive takeovers—as an indicator of his proclivity toward aggressive coercion—would be strongly correlated with his presumed number of infants sired, our findings suggest instead that leader males that limit their aggression achieve higher fitness. This conclusion is supported by the negative relationships we found between a leader male's birth rate and the intensity of his aggression both toward other males and toward females, as well as the negative relationships between a leader male's number of follower males and his intensity of aggression toward other males. Although our findings suggest that males are flexible in their use of aggression, an alternative explanation for the relationship between reduced aggression and higher fitness is that generally less aggressive males, which presumably also have overall lower levels of testosterone, invest more in their offspring via infant carrying and protection, and thereby achieve increased offspring survival, as has been shown in humans ( Gettler et al., 2011 , 2020 ).
Similarly, although we predicted at the outset that a leader male's percentage of aggressive takeovers and/or intensity of aggression directed toward females would be associated with a greater number of females in his OMU, we did not find such a relationship. While this result may reflect our small sample size and the difficulty of observing takeovers in the wild, it may also indicate that leader male aggression directed toward females outside of the takeover period, in the form of coercive herding and/or threats and aggression when females stray from the OMU, is more important to a leader male's ability to acquire and retain females than aggression during takeovers ( Kummer, 1968 ; contra Swedell and Schreier, 2009 ). Future research on aggressive male herding and coercion toward females on a more regular basis will provide additional insight into the role of male aggression in conditioning females and its impact on both male and female fitness.
A further consideration is that, although hamadryas females do not typically voluntarily disperse across OMUs, clans, or bands but are usually forcibly transferred between them by males ( Abegglen, 1984 ; Swedell et al., 2011 ), female choice in some form may nevertheless contribute to OMU transfer outcomes ( Swedell, 2000 ; Städele et al., 2016 ). If so, this complicates the relationship between a male's own behavior and measures of his fitness. For example, females do appear to seek out their own relatives during opportunistic transfers (e.g., when a leader male becomes incapacitated and unable to defend his females, cf. Swedell, 2000 ), which results in more female kin dyads in OMUs than chance would predict ( Städele et al., 2016 ), and agent-based modeling suggests that female attraction to kin during takeovers contributes to overall transfer outcomes ( Ekanayake-Weber and Swedell, 2021 ). Moreover, qualitative observations at Filoha suggest that females vary in their compliance, that is, acquiescence to coercion, and it may be that males need to use more or less aggression to acquire and retain some females compared to others.
With regard to male–male relationships, our findings suggest that leaders that limit their aggression toward other males are more likely to have followers and benefit from those cooperative relationships. This conclusion is suggested by the negative relationship between the intensity of a leader male's aggression toward other males during takeovers and both his total and maximum number of follower males as well as his presumed number of infants sired. Although the negative relationship between a leader male's aggression intensity toward other males and his total number of followers was not significant at the alpha level of 0.05, this is likely an outcome of our small sample size of takeovers with associated male–male aggression intensity data. Similarly, it is probable that our limited data on male–male aggression intensity associated with takeovers account for the statistically significant relationship between the intensity of a leader male's aggression intensity toward other males and his birth rate using parametric analyses that became non-significant when using non-parametric analyses. Previous research on Filoha baboons has demonstrated that leader males with followers have longer tenures, acquire more females, and produce more (presumed) offspring than leaders with fewer or no followers ( Chowdhury et al., 2015 ). Together, these results highlight the importance of male–male cooperation in this system, suggesting an adaptive value to the demonstrated ‘respect’ among hamadryas males ( Kummer et al., 1974 ). Hamadryas males, along with Guinea baboon males, are philopatric at the clan and band level, which is unusual for baboons and likely leads to increased male–male tolerance and cooperation via kin selection . While the origins of hamadryas male philopatry are outside the scope of this study (but refer to the studies by Isbell et al., 2002 and Jolly, 2020 ), the resultant kin bonds among males within bands, and especially kinship between leaders and followers ( Städele et al., 2016 ), likely plays a major role in shaping the dynamics of male–male relationships ( Sigg et al., 1982 ; Abegglen, 1984 ; Städele et al., 2015 , 2016 ). For example, males may be less likely to take over females from close male kin and/or they may alter their takeover strategy in these contexts.
The negative relationship in this dataset between the intensity of a leader male's aggression toward females during takeovers and his yearly birth rate (based on the number of infants born into his OMU) suggests that heightened aggression during takeovers may lead to female reproductive suppression, resulting in a reduced number of infants sired. This conclusion is supported by previous evidence demonstrating that hamadryas female interbirth intervals are longer when they experience takeovers between births ( Polo et al., 2014 ; Swedell et al., 2014 ). High rates of received aggression have been shown to be correlated with elevated levels of cortisol and reduced or delayed reproductive function in many female primates ( Bowman et al., 1978 ; Adams et al., 1985 ; Kaplan et al., 1986 ; McCann, 1995 ; Beehner and Lu, 2013 ), including humans ( Morland et al., 2008 ), suggesting that hamadryas females that experience more aggressive takeovers and/or interact with more aggressive leader males may experience elevated glucocorticoid levels associated with reproductive suppression. Even merely the anticipation of aggression as a result of male immigration or takeover appears to lead to elevated cortisol and trigger reproductive suppression in wild female chacma baboons ( Engh et al., 2006 ), as well as spontaneous abortion in captive and wild hamadryas baboons ( Colmenares and Gomendio, 1988 ; Amann et al., 2017 ). Pregnancy termination following takeovers may be an adaptive strategy to cease further investment in offspring at risk of infanticide, particularly in the context of aggressive takeovers, as has been demonstrated hormonally in geladas ( Roberts et al., 2012 ; Amann et al., 2017 ).
Finally, we found aggression to be more frequent and intense toward females during takeovers occurring across bands compared to those occurring within the same band. This finding is consistent with the notion that male philopatry and kin bonds within bands ( Städele et al., 2015 , 2016 ) lead to higher levels of male cooperation within than between bands, as well as with the observation that males are willing to risk injury and the loss of additional females to retrieve females taken over by males in other bands during chaotic intergroup conflicts ( Pines and Swedell, 2011 ). In addition, our finding that a leader male's aggression toward the female, but not toward other males, is more intense during interband transfers further suggests the importance of tacit ‘respect’ among males, even across bands. It is also possible that males do not need to use as much aggression to acquire females within their own band owing to the already existing familiarity among them and that more force is required to acquire unknown females from another band. Moreover, many hamadryas females appear to remain within their natal clan and band and maternal female relatives are found in the same OMU more often than expected by chance ( Städele et al., 2016 ), suggesting that females may be more attracted or receptive to joining OMUs in which they have maternal kin. Thus, females may be more willing to be transferred, and in turn require less aggressive male coercion, during takeovers within the same band than across bands. Leader males’ reduced use of aggression toward females within their band may also be a function of males’ attempts to maintain affiliative relationships with other males within their band. Increased male–male cooperation may also be a result of male philopatry at the band level in that male–male cooperation may be correlated with higher relatedness among males within a band and in turn function to maximize inclusive fitness (e.g., via decreasing mortality risk of close male relatives). The higher prevalence of aggression associated with between-band takeovers is comparable to the intercommunity violence that has been observed in chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ) and humans ( Goodall, 1986 ), in which the restraint or use of aggression is determined by within-group male cooperation and between-group male competition for access to females, and so serves to improve reproductive success in various contexts.
The coupling of overt coercive aggression by hamadryas males toward females and limited aggression toward other males mirrors the intense cross-sex bonds and intermale tolerance that are presumed to have been selected for during human evolution ( Isaac, 1978 ; Lovejoy, 1981 , 2009 ; Fisher, 1983 ; Swedell and Plummer, 2012 , 2019 ). The sustained guarding of females by hamadryas males maintains the coercive pair bond, via which males are conferred fitness benefits from near mating exclusivity and increased offspring survival ( Swedell and Plummer, 2012 ). While the benefits of hamadryas pair bonds are more apparent for males than for females, the latter may in fact also benefit from maintaining social bonds with aggressive males that may be more likely to defend and protect females and their offspring from conspecifics or predators. Leader males appear to limit their aggression toward other males, however, which may enhance male–male cooperative relationships, increase inclusive fitness for males, and improve unit defense (cf., Snyder-Mackler et al., 2012 ; Chowdhury et al., 2015 ).
Given that the intense male–female and cooperative male–male bonds in hamadryas baboons are reflected in the social system of modern humans as well as that presumed during hominin evolution, these results highlight the potentially intertwined role of cross-sex bonding and intermale tolerance during human evolution. Elements of hamadryas social organization uniquely mirror developments in hominin evolution, in that both males and females maintain kin-based networks ( Städele et al., 2016 ) in which social bonds among and between both sexes are fostered at various levels in the system ( Swedell and Plummer, 2019 ). Although mating systems during human evolution and in modern humans are variable, it is generally agreed that some level of pair bonding also arose during human evolution, whether in association with polygyny or with monogamy ( Washburn and Lancaster, 1968 ; Swedell and Plummer, 2012 ).
The evolution of hominin pair bonding, in the context of male–male competition, may have coincided with a corresponding increase in male–male tolerance of exclusive mating relationships and a reduced proclivity of males to attack the females or offspring of their allies ( Smuts, 1992 ). Our results reinforce the importance of such intermale tolerance. In modern humans, males, compared to females, exhibit more cooperation in the context of intergroup competition ( van Vugt et al., 2007 ), limit their use of aggression within groups, and may exhibit greater tolerance toward individuals of the same sex, especially at certain stages of life ( Benenson et al., 1998 , 2008 , 2009 ; Archer 2009 ). Female–female relationships are not insignificant, however: female–female social bonds in hamadryas baboons may be more important than previously thought ( Swedell, 2002 ; Städele et al., 2016 ), and those in humans arguably provide more adaptive benefits than those among males ( Caldwell and Peplau, 1982 ; Wright, 1988 ; Dindia and Allen, 1992 ; Archer, 2009 ). It is also possible that social bonds among female hamadryas baboons, and the presumed benefits associated with these bonds, are in part shaped by male aggression. Although the social dynamics of our model species are comparable to those of modern humans and presumably our ancestors, more research is needed to elucidate the role of female–female social dynamics in the evolution of these social systems.
The results of this study provide insight into male aggression as a mechanism for maintaining social bonds in a male-dominated multilevel society. Our findings particularly underscore the importance of intermale tolerance in the hamadryas social system and suggest that there is an adaptive value to the limited aggression and ‘respect’ that exists among males. Overall, our results suggest that natural selection has favored the selective use of aggression by hamadryas leader males depending on context. It is likely that a leader male's flexible strategy of differentially using aggression, and limiting it when it is unnecessary, is beneficial because it reduces energy costs, associated stress, potentially irreparable damage to social relationships, and risk of injury or death ( Georgiev et al., 2013 ; Thompson and Georgiev, 2014 ). Given that multilevel social systems were likely an evolutionary intermediate between multimale multifemale groups of the late Miocene and the multifamily communities characterizing modern humans ( Chapais, 2008 , 2013 ), our findings provide valuable insight into the evolution of mechanisms associated with human social bonds, including pair bonding and tolerance among philopatric males.

Section: Acknowledgements

The Filoha Hamadryas Project operates in Ethiopia with the generous permission of the Ethiopian Wildlife Conservation Authority (EWCA), and we thank Kahsaye Gebretensaye, Fanuel Kebbede, Girma Ayalew, and Kumara Wakjira for making it possible. We sincerely thank Amy Schreier, Brittany Davis, Teklu Tesfaye, and especially Mat Pines for contributing to the long-term dataset used in the analyses in this study. We also thank Teklu Tesfaye, Demekech Woldearegay, Tariku Woldearegay, and the park scouts and other employees of the Awash National Park for facilitating this research. In addition, we thank Walter Kaczetow for help with the statistical analysis. Funding was provided by The Leakey Foundation , the Wenner-Gren Foundation , the National Geographic Society ( 6468-99 and 8309-07 ), and the PSC-CUNY Award Program .
