Title: Learner corpus research in New Zealand


Abstract: Abstract

Corpus linguistics has firmly established itself as a major area of research within linguistics. Arguably, one of the most practical applications of corpora and corpus linguistics has been in the area of second language (L2) acquisition research. Emerging from the integration of the fields of corpus linguistics and second language acquisition, learner corpus research has greatly enhanced our understanding of how language learners acquire and use their L2 ( Granger, 2002 ). Since its inception in the 1980s ( Granger et al ., 2015 ), learner corpus research has increasingly attracted scholarly attention from around the world. This paper highlights the state of learner corpus research in New Zealand, focussing, in particular, on lexical and syntactic aspects of learner language. In doing so, it reviews the learner corpus studies carried out to date by New Zealand-based researchers, describing the results and implications of such research in the context of L2 education, and discussing the current status and future prospects of learner corpus research in New Zealand.

Section: 1. Introduction

The scope of corpus linguistics has widened considerably over the years. Corpus-based methods are now being used in various branches of linguistics, broadening the range of their application to diverse areas of inquiry within the field. One of the applications of corpus linguistics has been in the area of Second Language Acquisition ( sla ). Prior to the advent of corpus linguistics, research in this area mostly relied on small-scale samples collected from learners through highly controlled experiments or language tasks, resulting in data that were not necessarily reflective of L2 learners’ actual production in natural communicative contexts ( Granger et al ., 2015 ). The application of corpus linguistics to the research on sla in the late 1980s allowed for large-scale aggregation and analysis of learner data, giving rise to a completely new strand of research within applied linguistics: learner corpus research ( Granger, 2002 ). Learner corpus research ( lcr ) relies on a principled collection of machine-readable learner texts (known as a learner corpus) to provide insights into how learners use a language that is additional to their mother tongue. Learner corpus studies draw their conclusions on the basis of large-scale samples of actual language output of learners and can be said, thus, to be in a better position to lay claim to generalisability (but see Biber et al . [1998 : 243] and Omidian et al . [2021] , for a discussion of the unique challenges related to research design in a corpus-based study).
Since its inception in the late 1980s, lcr has remained an active area of research and has been receiving increasing attention from around the world (to which this Special Issue of Corpora is partly a testament). In this paper, we aim to highlight the state of lcr conducted in New Zealand. In so doing, we provide a representative, rather than an exhaustive, review of learner corpus studies undertaken by researchers in this part of the world. All the studies reviewed here have been conducted by New Zealand-based researchers on learner corpus data collected in the country or overseas. The review is organised based on the primary aims of the studies into two broad categories: lexical studies and syntactic studies. It should be noted that findings from the studies described in this review often cut across the boundary of lexis and syntax, shedding light on both lexical and syntactic aspects of learner language. Thus, the categories mentioned in this review are considered to be overlapping and we do not intend to suggest a divide between lexis and syntax.

Section: 2. Learner corpus research into lexical features of L2 language

The studies into lexical features in language produced by L2 learners attest to a rich and versatile research agenda of New Zealand scholars. While the overarching theme of the studies reviewed in this section is the acquisition and/or use of L2 vocabulary, the research in question is extremely diverse in its aims and scope. In this section, we discuss studies that have focussed on single words and multi-word expressions (collocations and lexical bundles, in particular), produced by learners of different L2s (English, Italian), of various ages (secondary school pupils, university students) and proficiency levels (beginner, elementary, intermediate, advanced), in different learning contexts (foreign and second language, school, university), and in distinct types of written and spoken tasks (descriptive and argumentative essays, master’s dissertations, PhD theses, interviews).
In what follows, we first review learner corpus studies that explored the language produced in academic settings, and we then move on to the studies that considered non-academic discourse.
Learning and using a language successfully in the context of academic studies can be a very slow process. No one is a first language (L1) user (speaker or writer) of academic language: it is a skill that is acquired gradually through years of practice. For many, it is also a high-stakes endeavour, often determining future academic prospects, and at the very centre of this process lies mastering academic vocabulary. New Zealand is a destination for many international students (from South-East Asia, in particular) who wish to study towards a degree or qualification through the medium of English. Several recent studies have probed the academic writing skills of L2 learners in New Zealand and overseas contexts.
In one of the earlier such studies, Omidian et al . (2017) examined the use of academic words from the Academic Word List ( analyse and assess ; see Coxhead [2000] ) and academic formulae from the Academic Formulas List (‘in the context of’ and ‘with regard to’; see Simpson-Vlach and Ellis [2010] ) in argumentative essays written by L1 versus L2 school-age pupils. The L1 essays were part of the Louvain Corpus of Native English (university) Essays ( locness ; see Granger [eds, 1998]), while the L2 corpus was collected from English as a Second Language ( esl ) students who were attending English for Academic Purposes ( eap ) classes in a secondary school in Wellington, New Zealand. L1 and L2 writers differed in their use of single-word vocabulary, with L1 writers producing more lexically diversified texts, using much lower frequency general vocabulary and relying more on academic words compared to L2 writers. Interestingly, L1 and L2 writers’ use of academic formulae was found to be remarkably similar, with a high proportion of expressions overlapping between the two corpora. This study is important because it is one of very few studies to consider both single words and multi-word expressions within the same L2 dataset.
A different type of academic vocabulary was analysed by Li et al . (2017 , 2018). This team of researchers focussed on four-word, sentence-initial lexical bundles (e.g., ‘On the basis of’) in postgraduate and expert writing. Lexical bundles are extremely frequent in academic writing, serving as discourse building blocks. Li et al . (2017) analysed the use of lexical bundles in L2 (L1 Chinese) and L1 (New Zealand) English master’s and PhD theses. L2 writers were generally found to use more types of lexical bundles than L1 writers, and they also repeated them more frequently. A considerable variation in lexical bundle usage was also observed among L1 and L2 writers. For example, in the analysis of interactive bundles, L2 writers were found to rely more heavily on code gloss (e.g., ‘In other words, the’) and condition bundles (e.g., ‘In the case of’) than L1 writers; while L1 writers used more endophoric (e.g., ‘The results of the’) and introduction bundles (e.g., ‘There are a number’) than L2 writers. In the interactional bundles analysis, L2 learners’ theses were characterised by a heavy use of booster bundles (e.g., ‘It is clear that’) and a relatively low use of attitude (e.g., ‘It is interesting to’) and hedge bundles (‘It is possible that’) compared to L1 writers. The authors argued that L1 and L2 writers express their certainty rather differently, with L1 speakers being more cautious and tentative, and L2 writers being somewhat less so.
Continuing with sentence-initial lexical bundles, Li et al . (2018) compared lexical bundle usage in L2 English (L1 Chinese) master’s theses and published research articles (authored by L1 and advanced L2 speakers). Published articles were taken to represent expert writing due to the articles being published in peer-reviewed outlets. Similar to Li et al . (2017) , differences were observed between more versus less experienced writers. For example, it was found that some bundles were used more by L2 writers than expert writers ( vp -based bundles [‘In order to make’] and anticipatory it + verb bundles [‘It was found that’]), while others were preferred by expert writers ( np -based bundles [‘The results of the’] and anticipatory it + adjective bundles [‘It is important to’]). L2 writers were found to use pp -based bundles (e.g., ‘on the basis of’ and ‘on the other hand’) rather competently, which was partially attributed to the transparency of these bundles. This contrasts with some less transparent but commonly used in expert writing bundles (‘in terms of the’ and ‘in light of the’) which were underused in L2 writing. Interestingly, eight out of ten L2 learner-preferred lexical bundles rarely occurred in expert writing.
We now turn to two studies that have used the International Corpus of Learner English ( icle ; see Granger et al . [eds, 2009]). icle is one of the largest and most representative L2 corpora available to date. It contains essays produced by L2 learners of a similar L2 proficiency from many different L1 backgrounds, with topics and data collection methods closely controlled. Although the essays that make up the icle are argumentative in nature, they were nonetheless written in a university context and as part of L2 learners’ university degrees. In line with other researchers ( Parkinson, 2015 ), we consider these essays within the broad domain of eap . Parkinson (2015) used a mixed-method approach to analyse the use of n+n collocations (e.g., ‘university degree’) in three sub-corpora of the icle (ICLEv2; see Granger et al . [eds, 2009]): L1 Mandarin (a language that allows n+n combinations), L1 Spanish (a language that does not allow n+n combinations) and L1 Tswana (a language that does not allow n+n combinations). L1 Mandarin and L1 Spanish are English as a Foreign Language ( efl ), while Tswana is an esl . The study used a combination of quantitative measures and qualitative analysis. It was found that learners whose L1 allows n+n combinations (L1 Mandarin) produced significantly more of such combinations than those learners whose L1 does not (Tswana and Spanish). Interestingly, L1 Mandarin essays were characterised both by a larger number of appropriate as well as inappropriate n+n combinations relative to the other sub-corpora. The accuracy of n+n combinations was greater in L1 Tswana writing than in L1 Spanish writers, attesting to esl being a superior learning context than efl (where neither L1 allows n+n combinations). Interestingly, L1 Tswana writers also produced more acceptable n+n phrases which were unattested in the L1 reference corpora n+n phrases than the other groups.
Most of the above studies focussed on L2 multi-word expressions (lexical bundles and collocations). Barlow (2014) analysed the use of single word and multi-word adverbs ( then , again , of course , no longer and at least ) in L2 English writing from the L1 French, Polish and Swedish sub-corpora of the icle . L2 productions were then compared to those of L1 speakers extracted from a subset of locness . Barlow (2014) was, in particular, interested in the ordering (that is, position) of adverbs in a sentence in L1 versus L2 writing. Some similarities but also notable differences were observed between the groups. A distribution of simple adverbs in a sentence was found comparable across the four groups of writers, with the sentence-initial position being the most frequent. This was taken to suggest L2 writers’ mastery of the basics of English sentence organisation. Some relative position preferences, however, were observed. For example, the frequency of a sentence-initial simple adverb was by far the greatest in Polish writers, and the smallest in Swedish writers (who were nearly identical to L1 writers). Some instances of L2 adverb over-use were also observed. For example, all L2 writers were found to over-use time adverbs ( then and now ) in a sentence-initial position, using them nearly twice as often as L1 writers. L2 learners were also found to over-use multi-word adverbs ( as well and of course ) – in particular, in the sentence-initial position (L1 French) and towards the end of a sentence (L1 Swedish and L1 Polish).
Lastly, we discuss two studies that used L2 spoken data. Given that studies on L2 spoken language are still under-represented in lcr , they deserve a mention in our review. Vine (2013 , 2015 ) looked at the use of high frequency, category-ambiguous words in L1 and L2, written and spoken corpora, as well as a corpus of coursebook texts. Category ambiguous words are words that have one form but different grammatical uses (e.g., like as a preposition versus as a verb). Vine (2013) used the Louvain International Database of Spoken English Interlanguage ( lindsei ; see Gilquin et al . [2010]) and icle (ICLEv2; see Granger et al . [eds, 2009]) for L2 data analysis. Substantial variation was observed in the use of ambiguous words within and across the corpora considered. For example, some words (such as like ) occurred more frequently in the spoken than in the written L2 corpus, while the opposite was true for other words (such as up ). Interestingly, spoken L2 data had the highest frequency of like of all the corpora considered, suggesting L2 learner over-use of this word. In terms of its grammatical function, L2 learners used like both as a preposition and a verb in spoken discourse, but largely as a preposition in written discourse. The analysis of the L1 spoken and written corpora always showed like being used more frequently as a preposition than a verb. On the contrary, like as a verb was far more frequent in the coursebook corpus than in spoken or written (L1 or L2) corpora. Vine (2013 , 2015 ) argues that corpus frequencies of category-ambiguous words should be drawn upon to inform pedagogy, so that coursebook texts reflect general English usage rather than human intuition.
The examples discussed above were conducted mostly in the context of university study where L2 learners were studying towards a degree. In this section, we review a series of longitudinal studies, in which Siyanova-Chanturia and colleagues investigated the development of collocation in L2 Italian descriptive writing as part of pre-university language courses ( Omidian et al ., 2021 ; Siyanova-Chanturia, 2015 ; and Siyanova-Chanturia and Spina, 2020 ). In the first of the three studies, Siyanova-Chanturia (2015) traced the use of N+Adj combinations ( piazza grande [‘main square’]) in short essays (entitled ‘My free time’ and ‘My last holidays’) written by thirty-six beginner learners of L2 Italian (L1 Chinese) over a six-month period. A quantitative approach was adopted in which phrase frequencies and association strength were calculated for each learner combination. Assigning L2 combinations to different frequency and association score bands, the author reports on more idiomatic – that is, more frequent and more strongly associated – output over time.
In a follow-up study using a much larger participant pool ( n =175), Siyanova-Chanturia and Spina (2020) investigated the development of N+Adj collocations in beginner, elementary and intermediate L2 learner (L1 Chinese) writing over a period of six months. In common with Siyanova-Chanturia (2015) , this study adopted a quantitative approach, looking at five complementary frequency and association measures. Unlike Siyanova-Chanturia (2015) , this study employed mixed-effects modelling – a more powerful statistical technique which has been shown to be more suited for the analysis of longitudinal corpus data than the more traditional tests (such as anova and t- test). The results of this study overwhelmingly showed that greater exposure to an L2 does not necessarily lead to more idiomatic and target-like output. In fact, time (beginning of the language course versus six months later) was found to negatively affect four of the five measures analysed, in that after six months, L2 learners across all proficiency levels were found to produce less frequent word combinations whose constituent words were not associated or mutually attracted.
Continuing with L2 learners of Italian and employing the same longitudinal corpus as in Siyanova-Chanturia and Spina (2020) , Omidian et al . (2021) sought to shed further light on the development of L2 phraseological knowledge by looking at v+n combinations. Similar to the two studies discussed above, a quantitative approach was adopted, with three frequency and association measures being considered. The authors employed linear mixed-effects models because they not only offer statistical advantages over traditional regression models ( anova ), but they also allow the researcher to identify individual variation among learners and essays. The results showed that time was a significant predictor of only one of the three measures, while the significant effect of proficiency was present across the board. Similar to Siyanova-Chanturia and Spina (2019) , these findings suggest that L2 phraseological development is a highly complex, multi-faceted process, wherein greater exposure to the target L2 does not automatically lead to more target-like and idiomatic phraseological output.
The three studies reviewed here are important for a number of reasons. First, they focus on L2 Italian. Unsurprisingly, most studies in lcr , and in the field of sla more broadly, investigate L2 English, with other L2s being less well-represented. Second, in these studies, a strong emphasis was placed on collecting and analysing longitudinal data, which to date remain relatively under-represented in lcr . Looking at truly longitudinal data, collected from the same group of L2 participants over a period of time, can provide unique insights into learners’ lexical development (rather than merely use). Longitudinal corpora are, thus, ideal for testing the oft-cited premise that the development of collocation knowledge in L2 is slow and uneven ( Laufer and Waldman, 2011 ), and that it does not develop in parallel with general vocabulary (single word) knowledge ( Bahns and Eldaw, 1993 ). Finally, the well-defined and purposefully chosen quantitative measures, coupled with advanced statistical techniques, allowed for a rich and complex picture of L2 collocation learning and development to emerge.

Section: 3. Learner corpus research into syntactic features of L2 language

New Zealand scholars have employed corpus methods to investigate the syntactic features of learner language across a range of academic settings, including pre-university preparation classes, undergraduate study, as well as research writing in theses and journal articles. This research has often been undertaken from an English for Academic or Specific Purposes perspective, thus aiming to benefit eap , esp , and writing instructors and their students. In this section, we consider studies of pre-university writing, studies of undergraduate writing studies, and studies of L2 writing of theses and journal articles. Recurring themes are evident in the focus of New Zealand learner corpus researchers on syntactic features important in expressing stance and evaluation in academic writing.
Over the last two decades, the number of international students at New Zealand universities has risen substantially. Most of these students enter their university studies by improving their language proficiency in pre-university English language classes. The two studies considered below draw on writing produced by students in pre-university English language classes. These studies focus on syntactic features that are important in academic writing: noun phrases as sites of complexity in academic prose and modal verbs in conveying stance.
A mixed-methods study by Parkinson and Musgrave (2014) investigated development of noun phrase complexity using small corpora of writing by learners at different proficiency levels. These were essays written by learners in pre-university English classes and writing by more advanced learners in a course-work master’s programme. The motivation for this research was sla research findings that writing becomes more complex over the course of academic study ( Ortega, 2003 ). Parkinson and Musgrave’s (2014) focus on the noun phrase drew on findings that in writing complexity is largely constructed in the noun phrase ( Biber, 1988 ). This study is important in its contribution to testing Biber et al .’s (2011) proposal that, like L1 writers, L2 writers’ use of syntactic features moves through stages, from using unmodified nouns, to nouns modified by adjectives, nouns, prepositional phrases and complement clauses, and to -clauses.
The findings were that the pre-university learners favoured attributive adjectives to modify nouns. The master’s group used more nouns and prepositional phrases as noun modifiers than the pre-university learners. Overall, the more proficient master’s learners’ use of attributive adjectives, nouns and prepositions as noun modifiers was comparable to that of academic prose as quoted in Biber et al . (1999) . In contrast, the use of these features by the less proficient pre-university learners was significantly different from academic prose. The authors suggest that a pedagogical focus on these noun modifiers would accelerate the pre-university learners’ acquisition of the academic register.
Whitty (2019) investigated the use of the modal verbs can and could in a small corpus of learner talk and written essays in pre-university English language classes. The British National Corpus ( bnc ) was used as a reference corpus. The study found several differences between these corpora. Firstly, the learners used can in directives in contexts where could would be more polite. The study found an over-use of epistemic could by learners, with 32 percent of the use of could being inappropriate. In addition, can was inappropriately used in hypothetical contexts (‘If there would be any further research about this, there can be a new category for New Zealanders’). There was fairly frequent use of can and could in idiomatic expressions in the bnc , but this was absent from learner language. Based on these findings, the study recommended pedagogical applications, including the teaching of idiomatic expressions with can and could , the use of could in polite directives, and the use of could in hypothetical situations.
Acquiring academic language can be challenging for undergraduate students. In addition, it is increasingly recognised ( Hyland, 2004 ) that the register of language in different disciplines can vary substantially. The four studies that we review below ( Parkinson, 2011 , 2013 , 2020 , 2022) investigated the writing of first-year esl science students and compared the features of this writing to those of more expert writers. Most research on learner writing focusses on essays. In contrast, the focus of these studies is on laboratory reports – an important student genre in science disciplines – and so this focus on disciplinary writing in its early stages of development is valuable. As in the previous section, these four articles show a focus on syntactic features that are characteristic of academic writing. These include features that facilitate expression of stance (personal pronouns, modal verbs and that -complement clauses) as well as organisation of argument (conjunctions).
All four studies used a corpus of esl student laboratory reports produced by learners whose L1 was Zulu and who were enrolled in their first year of a science degree at a South African university. These mixed-methods studies sought to identify how this learner writing differed from the target register, with the aim of informing pedagogy.
Parkinson (2020) focussed on the use of personal pronouns ( I and we ) in ninety-seven learner laboratory reports (62,071 words). These were compared with reports from the British Academic Writing in English ( bawe ) corpus ( Nesi et al ., 2008 ), which, having received high grades, were regarded as examples of the target register.
The esl writers used personal pronouns more frequently than bawe writers: we was used 6.7 times per 1,000 words (1.7/1,000 for bawe ) and I 1.5 times per 1,000 words (0.1/1,000 words for bawe ). This greater use by the esl learners often indicated lack of caution (‘[my results] are reliable, because I ’ve proved it myself’). The learners also used I and we to assert their own opinions. Some inappropriate uses appeared to stem from using textbooks as a discourse model (‘ I will answer some questions that are going to make it easier for anyone to understand pulse rate’). Also inappropriate was using we to include a general audience (‘ we must take good care of the ozone layer’).
The study concluded that the esl students misconstrued their relationship with their reader, viewing themselves as writing for a general audience rather than an academic one. Discussing reader–writer relationship with students was recommended, as well as exposing writers to good examples of student writing.
Drawing on the same data, Parkinson (2022) investigated a second syntactic feature used in stance-taking: modal verbs of obligation and necessity, including must , should , have to and need to . Overall, the esl writers used obligation modals twice as frequently as the bawe writers. Must was particularly over-used in the esl data (18.8/1,000 words compared with 4.8/1,000 in the bawe data). Significant differences included the inappropriate use of deontic must and should , where the esl writers construed themselves as authorities (‘The investigation must be performed in a place where the temperature is constant’). Again, the study concluded that these inappropriate uses reflected a misconstrual of the writer–reader relationship. A second difference from the bawe writers was that the esl writers used a high frequency of must in dynamic contexts – that is, where the writer ascribes necessity to general surrounding circumstances rather than an authority (‘Taking the pulse must not be done using the thumb as the thumb has its own pulse rate’).
A further stance feature of student disciplinary writing, that -complement clauses, was the focus of Parkinson (2013) . A learner corpus (138,932 words) of reports discussing questionnaire survey data was compared with research articles (264,581 words) which also drew on surveys. A focus on that -clauses reveals how writers align themselves with or distance themselves from the literature, how they treat the opinions of their research participants, and how they make their own claims.
Learners used that -clauses more than twice as frequently as the research articles. They used controlling verbs ( say , think and believe ) that are common in conversation, but they also used controlling words common in academic writing ( find , show and fact ). The study views this as evidence of learners beginning to share academic values and language. Other evidence of drawing on conversational norms was students’ emphasis on their own beliefs and a tendency to draw on common knowledge.
Parkinson (2011) also drew on the esl science writing corpus described above and compared the lexico-grammatical features used to discuss the important research meanings of cause, purpose, conditional meaning and proof. The corpus was limited to the Discussion sections of esl physics reports (177,000 words) which were compared with a 204,000-word corpus of Discussion sections from physics research articles, which is an appropriate comparison in that laboratory reports share the imrd (Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion) structure of research articles.
A wide range of lexico-grammatical resources are used to express cause, purpose, conditional meaning and proof in academic writing. These include conjunctions ( because ), nouns ( result ), verbs ( cause ) and adverbials ( due to ). However, learner expression of these meanings was most typically through use of conjunctions joining clauses. The learners also relied on a more limited range of expression of these meanings than the research article writers. Learner reliance on conjunctions suggests their tendency to use clausal rather than nominal means of expressing these meanings compared with research articles. Learner claims of proof were also less tentative than those of the expert writers.
Thesis writing is, ideally, highly polished research writing, approximating the register of journal articles. Thus, it can be challenging for L2 writers. Published journal articles reflect an even greater level of control of research writing conventions. In this section, we review two studies that employed corpora of non-native research writing.
The use of meta-discourse in the Discussion and Conclusion sections of master’s theses was the subject of a study by Prommas (2020) . Meta-discourse refers to the linguistic features that writers use to organise their texts (transition markers) and to make interpersonal connections with their readers. Prommas compared corpora of Thai and New Zealand-English master’s theses (600,000 words) in the disciplines of English language teaching and business administration.
Using Hyland’s (2018 ) meta-discourse model, Prommas (2020) found that Thai writers used significantly less evaluative meta-discourse, including attitudinal lexis ( important ) and hedges ( possible ), than writers of New Zealand English. They made significantly less use of features that make interpersonal connections with readers, such as self-mention ( I and we ) and engagement features (imperatives). Thai writers also provided less elaboration by use of code glosses (including such as ) and fewer citations.
However, compared with the writers of New Zealand English, the Thai writers used more text-organising meta-discourse, including transition markers ( also ), sequencing adverbials ( finally ) and endophoric markers ( see fig .). Thai writers also used significantly more boosters/emphatics ( clearly ). Overall, Prommas (2020) concluded that Thai writers used less evaluation and less interpersonal engagement than writers of New Zealand English, instead relying more heavily on explicit text-organising features.
Prommas’s (2020 ) finding of the lower use of explicit evaluation and elaboration in her non-native corpus aligns with a study of published journal articles by Omidian et al . (2021) . Omidian et al . (2021) considered a corpus of non-native writing at the highest level of sophistication and accuracy. Their study conducted a new multi-dimensional analysis to compare the lexical and grammatical features of empirical journal articles written by L1 writers (L1 corpus) with writers whose first language was not English (LX). This article is important in shedding light on L1–L2 differences that persist even at this expert level, making this a useful study for LX writers. Omidian et al .’s (2021) 4.5 million-word corpus, drawn from high-ranking journals, was carefully constructed to ensure that every author in the LX corpus spoke an L1 other than English, and every author in the L1 corpus was an L1 English speaker. The LX writing in this corpus is not typical of learner corpora in that the writing in this corpus was not only highly accurate but also reflected sophisticated control of the conventions and norms of research writing, which is necessary for publication in a high-ranking journal. This allows comparison of LX–L1 lexical and syntactic differences that are not attributable to accuracy but, rather, to discourse features such as nominal phrases and hedging ( ElMalik and Nesi, 2008 ).
The findings of this mixed-methods study were that there were differences between the two corpora in the Discussion sections of the journal articles. Findings were that LX authors made use of significantly fewer positive Dimension 1 features, such as modals, that -clauses controlled by stance adjectives and stance verbs, epistemic and attitudinal adjectives in predicative position and stance adverbials. These syntactic features are characteristic of evaluation and elaboration, which are the key functions of Discussion sections. The authors suggest that the lower use of these features by LX authors indicate that evaluating and elaborating their findings were more challenging for LX authors than for L1 authors.

Section: 4. Conclusion

In this paper, we attempted to highlight the state of lcr in New Zealand by conducting a review of learner corpus studies carried out in the country to date. Prior to commencing this review, we conducted a survey of learner corpus studies undertaken by New Zealand-based researchers. This preliminary survey revealed two recurring themes in lcr in New Zealand: one relating to the acquisition and/or use of L2 vocabulary, and the other relating to syntactic characteristics of learner language. Consequently, we classified the studies we surveyed into two broad categories: lexical and syntactic. However, the review shows that the majority of corpus findings from these studies offer insights into both L2 lexical and syntactic knowledge, straddling the boundary between these two aspects of learner language and lending further support to the argument for the inter-relatedness of lexis and syntax in lcr ( Römer, 2017 ). Our review of learner corpus literature also shows that studies on L2 spoken language are quite rare in lcr in New Zealand. This is not surprising because studies focussed on L2 speech are generally under-represented in lcr , which is mainly due to the challenges involved in compiling spoken learner corpora ( Granger, 2019 ). Further research is required to enhance our understanding of the spoken production of learners in New Zealand.
Evidently, the nature of this piece and space restrictions allowed us to barely scratch the surface of learner corpus literature in New Zealand. It is, however, our hope that this piece will inspire more research on learner corpora by New Zealand based scholars in the future.
