Title: A corpus-based study of native speakers’ and Taiwanese EFL learners’ use of the adverb just


Abstract: Abstract

The polysemous adverb just is frequently used by efl learners, but many learners are still unaware of how just should be used. The aim of this study is to examine how frequently different meanings of the adverb just are employed by native speakers and Taiwanese efl learners in their essays and to identify the differences in the lexico-grammatical patterns. Drawing data from one native-speaker corpus and two Taiwanese efl learner corpora, we investigated ( i ) the overall frequencies of just , ( ii ) the frequencies of just by meaning categories, and ( iii ) the lexico-grammatical patterns of the different meanings of just , as well as their semantic and syntactic features. Results showed that the overall frequencies of just were similar in the native speaker and learner corpora, but there was a smaller variety of the use of adverbial just in the learner corpora. By examining the lexico-grammatical patterns, we found that the meanings of the adverbial just were induced in the following patterns: first, when it modified different syntactic structures; secondly, when it co-occurred with specific contextual clues; and, thirdly, when it interacted with particular tense/aspect of a verb. In addition, semantic features and lexical choices had a pivotal role in determining whether the use of a particular sense of just was acceptable in a sentence. By providing corpus-based teaching material for the uses of adverbial just , it is hoped that our study will shed light on the perplexing issue of adverb acquisition.

Section: 1. Introduction

The senses of just and the syntactic features of its environment have been widely discussed in a substantial number of L1 linguistic studies ( Lee, 1987 ; Kishner and Gibbs, 1996 ; Aijmer, 2005 ; Grant, 2011 ; Deroey and Taverniers, 2012 ; and Molina and Romano, 2012 ). However, little attention has been devoted to how learners use the adverb just . To date, there are only two studies concerning how just is used by learners: Hinkel (2003) , and Yilmaz and Dikilitaş (2017) . Both of the studies looked into the ‘restrictive’ reading of the adverbial just and pointed out a higher frequency for L2/ efl learners to overuse just as a restrictive adverb in their writing. However, a holistic review of how different meanings of just are used and its lexico-grammatical patterns has not been provided.
To fill this research gap, our study aims to examine how different meanings of just are employed in efl learners’ essays and how their use of just is different from that of the native speakers by addressing the following research questions: ( 1 ) How frequently do native speakers and Taiwanese efl learners use different meanings of the adverb just in written language? ( 2 ) What are the lexico-grammatical patterns of the adverb just used by native speakers and Taiwanese efl learners? Our study will offer a clearer picture of how the adverb just should be used, which will in turn make contributions to efl adverb acquisition.

Section: 2. Just and its meanings

The adverb just has its root in the Latin adjective iust (‘righteous, legitimate’). Just entered English in the early-fifteenth century as an adjective borrowed from the medieval French adjective juste ( Molina and Romano, 2012 ). Over time, the adverb has undergone a semantic expansion, growing from its core meaning ‘restriction’ ( Brown and Levinson, 1978 ; and Lee, 1987 ) into a rich variety of senses that it carries today.
The earliest study that proposed a classification of the senses of just was conducted by Lee (1987) . Drawing data from doctor–patient interviews, Lee identified four major types of meanings – the ‘depreciatory’, ‘restrictive’, ‘specificatory’ and ‘emphatic’ just , among which the ‘depreciatory’ just was the most obvious meaning. The function of the ‘depreciatory’ just is to ‘minimize the significance of some particular process by comparison with some other process explicitly mentioned in the discourse’ ( Lee, 1987 : 379). The process that falls into the scope of the ‘depreciatory’ just is referred to as the ‘focal’ process, while the process that was compared to the ‘focal’ process is labelled as the ‘referent’ process. As shown in Example 1, listeners can easily tell that the ‘focal’ process ( got a cold ) was considered something less serious than the ‘referent’ process ( get a high fever ) with the use of the ‘depreciatory’ just . ( 1 ) ‘Depreciatory’ just That’s to be used if you get a high fever. If you’ve just got a cold, there’s no point of using it. ( Lee, 1987 : 379)
There are also cases in which the ‘referent’ process of the ‘depreciatory’ just is implicit or does not exist. In cases of the implicitly contrastive use of the ‘depreciatory’ just , ‘detailed knowledge of the context and general social conventions’ ( Lee, 1987 : 381) are essential in helping the listeners to establish the nature of the implicit ‘referent’ process. The non-contrastive ‘depreciatory’ just is mostly used when just interacts with a directive. In such cases, the ‘depreciatory’ just modalises the proposed action, which mitigates the risk of face loss.
The second meaning identified by Lee (1987) is the ‘restrictive’ just . In other studies, the ‘restrictive’ use and the ‘depreciatory’ use of just were seen as the same. They were named collectively as ‘restrictive’ adjuncts by Quirk et al . (1972) and ‘minimizers’ by Lindemann and Mauranen (2001) . Lee (1987 : 387) clarified the difference between the two meanings by saying that the ‘restrictive’ just has ‘a stronger sense of limitation’ and that the ‘depreciatory’ just ‘acts as an exponent of modality’ ( Lee, 1987 : 385). As pragmatic factors play an important role in the interpretation, the distinction often depends on how the speaker and the hearer construct the proposition in context ( Lee, 1991 : 62). Take Example 2, for instance. If we only look at the contribution made by Speaker B, just can be understood as the ‘depreciatory’ just , downplaying the seriousness of the speaker’s silence. However, when taking the context into consideration, just is more ‘restrictive’ than ‘depreciatory’, for it helped Speaker B limit the situations that he failed to participate in ( didn’t speak at the meeting and didn’t listen ) to didn’t speak at the meeting alone. ( 2 ) ‘ Restrictive ’ just A: I understand you didn’t speak at the meeting and didn’t listen either. B: No, that’s not true – I listened very carefully – I just didn’t speak. ( Lee, 1987 : 62)
The third meaning that Lee proposed is the ‘specificatory’ just . This meaning deals with the concept of ‘marginal phase’, which suggests the closeness between two events or two objects ( Lee, 1987 : 388). The concept of ‘marginal phase’ can be applied to both temporal (Example 3a) and locative (Example 3b) cases. ( 3 ) ‘ Specificatory ’ just (a) The shingles I got just after he died. (b) It gets itchy just under the eyebrow. ( Lee, 1987 : 388–9)
The last meaning is the ‘emphatic’ just . Different from the other meanings which originated from the core meaning of just – ‘restriction’, the ‘emphatic’ just manifests an opposite reading, functioning as a particle to ‘emphasize the expression with which it enters into construction’ ( Lee, 1987 : 394). An example of the ‘emphatic’ just is presented in Example 4. ( 4 ) ‘Emphatic’ just I just can’t keep going. ( Lee, 1987 : 394)
Considering that Lee’s (1987 ) taxonomy was based on a small corpus of doctor–patient interviews, Kishner and Gibbs (1996) analysed how the adverbial just was used in the one-million word Standard Corpus of Present-Day Edited American English (the Brown corpus) and added two senses, the ‘comparative’ just and the ‘exact’ just , to Lee’s taxonomy. These two senses fall into the category of the ‘emphatic’ just in Lee’s (1987 ) study. Kishner and Gibbs (1996) singled out these two categories by observing how just derives its meaning through its interaction with different syntactic structures. The ‘comparative’ just , as shown in Example 5, precedes conjunctions that occur in comparisons. The ‘exact’ just , as shown in Example 6, arises when ‘emphasizing the referent of interrogative adjectives and adverbs introducing embedded questions (e.g. how , what , when , who ) and deictic or demonstrative pronouns or adjectives (e.g. that , these )’ ( Kishner and Gibbs, 1996 : 22). ( 5 ) ‘Comparative’ just Food may act as a sedative, giving temporary emotional solace, just as, for some people, alcohol does. ( Kishner and Gibbs, 1996 : 22) ( 6 ) ‘Exact’ just The direction, velocity, and season of these winds should be noted as to just how they will affect the recreation use and your maintenance of the area. ( Kishner and Gibbs, 1996 : 22)
From the studies reviewed, we can tell that the diverse meanings of adverbial just have much to do with the propositional components that fall into its scope and the context in which it is used.

Section: 3. How the adverb just is used

Research on native speakers’ use of adverbial just suggests that just was more frequently used in spoken language than in written language ( Tottie, 1986 ; and Biber et al ., 1999 ). In spoken language, just was found to frequently co-occur with imperatives and to -infinite clauses to minimise the imposition of directives, procedures and explanations in academic speeches ( Lindemann and Mauranen, 2001 ; Deroey and Taverniers, 2012 ; and Grant, 2013 ). In written language, just was most commonly used to express exclusiveness in fiction ( Aijmer, 2005 ). The exclusive use of just restricts the reference to the proposition just modifies and excludes all other members of the set of referents. Other meanings of just in fictions tended to be ‘textual’, interacting with contextual features to build up rhetorical stances in threats, praise and polite requests. Charles (2009) analysed how just was used as a restrictive adverb in theses. The findings indicated that just commonly co-occurs with negation (e.g., not ), markers of contrast (e.g., but ) and markers of reason/consequence (e.g., thus ) to help writers to justify their stances.
How just is used by L2/ efl learner has not received much attention. To date, only two related studies can be found, both revealing a high frequency of just in L2/ efl essays. Hinkel (2003) analysed the adverbial markers in L1 essays and L2 essays written by college students from four Asian countries. The findings suggested that L2 learners used just as a ‘downtoner’ more frequently than the L1 students in their essays, which is a phenomenon seconded by the study by Yilmaz and Dikilitaş (2017) on Turkish efl learners’ use of adverbs in argumentative essays. Since just is considered to be more prevalent in informal conversational discourse ( Biber et al ., 1999 : 562), the overuse of just has raised concern over learners’ restricted repertoire of adverbial markers in the academic genre.
Previous studies investigated the use of just as a minimiser in L1 academic lectures and the high frequency of just in L2/ efl argumentative essays. However, most studies focussed on how just was used in its ‘depreciatory’ and ‘restrictive’ meaning, leaving how the other senses of just were used unanswered. Therefore, this study attempted to fill the gap by examining how different meanings of the adverb just are used by native speakers and efl learners.

Section: 4. Corpora and methodology

The native speaker data was retrieved from the Louvain Corpus of Native Speaker Essays ( locness ), a corpus made up of argumentative essays written by American and British university students. Due to the predominance of American English in Taiwan, only essays written by American university students ( locness-usarg ) were adopted for our study. The sub-corpus consists of 150,573 words. 3 The Taiwanese efl learner data was originally drawn from the International Corpus Network of Asian Learners of English ( icnale ) alone. icnale provides argumentative essays contributed by learners from ten Asian countries. In our study, we collected only those written by Taiwanese learners. There were 400 essays in total and the word count was 92,384 words. However, we found only 168 instances after querying the node word just in icnale , which would be insufficient for a comprehensive analysis of how the Taiwanese efl learners use just . Therefore, data extracted from the English Learner Corpus of Language Testing and Teaching Center ( lttc-elc ) were included. lttc-elc is made up of essays by Taiwanese efl learners taking the General English Proficiency Test ( gept ). The size of the corpus is approximately two-million words. Given that the majority of the test takers were high school students rather than college students, we decided to label data obtained from lttc-elc as younger Taiwanese efl learners to observe how learners of different age groups use the adverb just . It should be noted that data from lttc-elc were not used in the calculation of the overall frequencies of just , for frequency counts were not available and the number of instances provided was limited to 500 tokens.
From the above three corpora, we searched the node word just and obtained 220 instances from locness-usarg , 168 instances from icnale and 500 instances from lttc-elc . Next, irrelevant instances, such as non-adverbials (e.g., ‘do not take just stands’), phrasal uses 4 ( just in ‘ just about’), and repeated instances, were filtered out. In total, seven instances from locness-usarg and two instances from icnale were removed. Lastly, we slimmed down the number of instances in lttc-elc from 500 to 200 through random selection to make the size of the corpora comparable. The final number of the instances were 213 in locness-usarg , 166 in icnale and 200 in lttc-elc .
To identify the meanings of just in our data, we developed a coding scheme based on three sources: the senses of just identified by Kishner and Gibbs (1996) , the semantic functions of just proposed by Lee (1987) and the corresponding definitions in three online dictionaries ( Cambridge Dictionary , Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English and Merriam-Webster Dictionary ). We adopted the taxonomy proposed by Kishner and Gibbs (1996) and modified it by including the ‘exact’ just as a part of the ‘emphatic’ just . This decision was made on the basis that the two meanings were separated by Kishner and Gibbs (1996) based on the syntactic structures they tend to modify. As the two meanings were considered to be semantically identical, we coded both as the ‘emphatic’ just as in Lee’s (1987 ) taxonomy. This made our coding scheme a taxonomy of five main senses as shown in Table 1 .
After the meaning annotation was completed, the concordance lines were scrutinised to analyse the lexico-grammatical patterns in which different meanings of just were used. We annotated the syntactic structures of the modified constituent and formed lexico-grammatical patterns accordingly. For example, ‘this is just another show promoting violence’ was summarised into the pattern [X + be + ‘ depreciatory ’ just + noun (phrase)]. We then examined the function of just in the pattern by identifying the semantic relation between the ‘referent’ point and the focussed element modified by just . Semantic features that co-occurred with the use of just were also discussed to provide a clearer picture of the environment in which the meaning of just was elicited.

Section: 5. Results

The overall frequencies of just , as shown in Table 2 , was similar in the NS corpus and the Taiwanese efl learner corpus, with the native speakers using just slightly more frequently than the learners. How frequently the different meanings of just were used is presented in Table 3 .
In the native speaker corpus, the ‘depreciatory’ just (29.5 percent) was the most frequently used meaning, followed by the ‘restrictive’ just (27.2 percent) and the ‘comparative’ just (19.2 percent). In the adult Taiwanese efl learner corpus, we found a smaller variety of meanings, with the ‘depreciatory’ just and the ‘restrictive’ just making up 78.4 percent of the total instances. The other three meanings were relatively rare, and none of them constituted more than 10 percent. In the younger Taiwanese efl learner corpus, the ‘depreciatory’ just and the ‘restrictive’ were also high-frequency meanings. One thing worth noticing is that the ‘comparative’ just , a less commonly used meaning in the adult Taiwanese efl learner corpus, accounted for as much as 23 percent of the younger Taiwanese efl learners. In general, the ‘depreciatory’ just and the ‘restrictive’ just were the top two high-frequency meanings in all corpora, while the ‘specificatory’ just was the least frequently used.
The ‘depreciatory’ just tended to precede its ‘focal’ process. Syntactic structures that were modified by the ‘depreciatory’ just in our corpus data included adjectives, nouns and noun phrases, verbs and verb phrases, prepositions and prepositional phrases, to -infinitive clauses, because -clauses, and imperatives.
Native speakers showed a tendency to use the ‘depreciatory’ just in the pattern [X + be + ‘depreciatory’ just + noun (phrase)] and [X + be + ‘depreciatory’ just + verb (phrase)], accounting for 38.5 percent and 33.3 percent, respectively. In such cases, the ‘depreciatory’ just limited the significance of a propositional idea or an action in the subject X to something no more than the ‘focal’ process. Some examples are shown in Example 7. In this example, the significance of the subject (‘football’) in the past was downplayed as something being ‘a game that children played on Sunday afternoon’ to make a contrast with how powerful it has become in recent years. In Example 8, the significance of the ‘focal’ process (‘bruised my arm’) was minimised by showing the readers that it was a symptom less serious than the ‘referent’ process (‘seriously hurt’). ( 7 ) [X + be + ‘depreciatory’ just + noun (phrase)] Football used to be just a game that children played on Sunday afternoon , but it has turned into nothing but power and a way to make a lot of money. ( usarg ) ( 8 ) [X + be + ‘depreciatory’ just + verb (phrase)] I wasn’t seriously hurt. I just bruised my arm real bad. ( usarg )
In the learner corpora, adult Taiwanese efl learners showed preferences for the pattern [X + be + ‘depreciatory’ just + verb (phrase)] (51.6 percent), [X + be + ‘depreciatory’ just + noun (phrase)] (16.1 percent) and [‘depreciatory’ just + imperative] (16.1 percent). As for the younger learners, [X + be + ‘depreciatory’ just + verb (phrase)] (43 percent) was also the most common, followed by [X + be + ‘depreciatory’ just + noun (phrase)] (26.4 percent) and [‘depreciatory’ just + imperative] (25 percent).
Since the pattern [‘depreciatory’ just + imperative] made up only 3.1 percent of the native speaker corpus, we suggest that learners had a greater tendency to modify an imperative with the ‘depreciatory’ just , especially younger Taiwanese efl learners. As shown in Example 9, by lessening the threat brought by the imperative with the ‘depreciatory’ just , learners made their proposal more acceptable to the readers. ( 9 ) [‘Depreciatory’ just + imperative] I suggest those who haven’t eat sushi before, just give it a try . ( lttc-elc )
Considering that imperatives ‘stand[] out as clear examples of bald-on-record usage’ ( Brown and Levinson, 1978 : 100), we speculated that the higher frequency of the pattern [‘depreciatory’ just + imperative] in the younger Taiwanese efl learner corpus might have resulted from a limited grasp of politeness strategies. For elder learners and native speakers, they might not risk damaging the hearers’ face and turn to other means of stating their opinions instead of adopting imperatives in their essays.
In terms of the semantic features, we believe that the ‘depreciatory’ reading arose when just was used to modify a proposition that denoted a lower significance in comparisons. For example, ‘a normal girl’ was compared to a ‘popular star’ in Example 10 to show that the singer rose from nothing more than a plain Jane to an artist of greater significance. ( 10 ) Even though she is the most popular star in Taiwan , in the beginning of her career she was just a normal girl . ( lttc-elc )
No specific semantic features were found when it comes to the pattern [X + ‘depreciatory’ just +verb (phrase)]. In most cases, we believe the ‘depreciatory’ reading was elicited by the context rather than lexical choices. One case of this is presented in Example 11. ( 11 ) I’m not writing this to advocate alcohol, sex, or anything else. I just feel we should not have a curfew period. ( usarg )
Just can be seen as the ‘emphatic’ just which highlighted the writer’s feelings when the sentence was analysed out of context. Yet when we interpreted it in a larger context, the ‘depreciatory’ meaning arose from negation in the preceding sentence. By denying that the purpose of writing the essay is ‘to advocate alcohol, sex, or anything else’, the writer showed that his or her intention was rather simple and less threatening.
Our corpus data revealed that the ‘restrictive’ just was used to impose a limitation on adjectives, noun (phrases), verb (phrases), prepositional phrases, to -infinitive phrases, and because -clauses. In the native speaker corpus, the top three most frequently used patterns were [‘restrictive’ just + noun (phrase)] (43.1 percent), [‘restrictive’ just + verb (phrase)] (29.3 percent), and [‘restrictive’ just + because-clause] (19 percent). In the learner corpora, [‘restrictive’ just + verb (phrase)] was the most commonly used, regardless of age, accounting for 66.2 percent in the adult Taiwanese efl learner corpus and 69 percent in the younger Taiwanese efl learner corpus. Second on the list was [‘restrictive’ just + noun (phrase)], taking up 23.5 percent of the adult learner corpus and 15.4 percent of the younger learner corpus. The other patterns made up only a small proportion of the data, with none of them higher than 10 percent.
We looked further into the semantic features of the high-frequency patterns and found that the restrictive reading of just often occurred when just was used in contexts that denoted negation and comparison. First, we will discuss the co-occurrence of the ‘restrictive’ just and negation. Table 4 presented the lexical terms and sentence patterns in which negation was expressed.
When interacting with negation in the context, the ‘restrictive’ just highlighted the fact that the focussed constituent was simply part of a more extensive propositional idea. In Example 12a, for instance, the co-occurrence of the ‘restrictive’ just and not extended the scope of the ‘statistics’ by saying that it was not limited to looking at ‘those who binge drink’. Similarly, in Example 12b, the benefits of having a part-time job were described as something more inclusive than the modified verb phrase (‘help your parents to pay your fee’), which helped justify the author’s positive attitude towards college students taking a part-time job. ( 12a ) They include statistics on all sides and do not just look at those who binge drink. ( usarg ) ( 12b ) Sum of all these reasons, having a part-time job can not just help your parents to pay your fee, but also teach you a lot. ( icnale )
The other contextual feature that co-occurred with the ‘restrictive’ just was comparison, most commonly found in the pattern [X + verb + more than + ‘restrictive’ just + Y]. As shown in Example 13, when the ‘restrictive’ just modified a rather limited set of propositional ideas in comparisons, it implied that proposition X (‘the flag’) entailed something more inclusive or important than proposition Y (‘fighting’). This not only clarified the author’s stance but also drew readers’ attention to the further explanation of the flag’s meaning. ( 13 ) The real confederation flag is much different. […] This flag means much more than just fighting. That flag stands for a way of life. ( usarg )
Whether the ‘restrictive’ just co-occurred with negation or comparison, in both cases it served as a tool to highlight the inclusivity and significance of the main proposition, which helped the author express his or her stance and support their position.
Although the ‘specificatory’ just was found in both temporal and locative examples in Lee’s (1987 ) study, no locative example was identified in ours, and all of them were used to specify a particular period of time.
In the native speaker corpus, we found that the ‘specificatory’ just was commonly used with verbs in perfect tenses, which is in line with Lee’s (1987 ) observation. Examples are given in below. The co-occurrence of the ‘specificatory’ just and perfect tenses illustrated the closeness of time between the event modified by just and the present moment (as in Example 14a) or another past event (as in Example 14b). In the learner corpora, however, the ‘specificatory’ just was more commonly used with verbs in past simple rather than perfect tenses, as in Example 15. A possible reason for this preference may be that past simple is taught in the earlier stage of Taiwanese English curriculum so that learners may be more comfortable using past simple to present a past event than perfect tenses. ( 14a ) [‘Specificatory’ just + present tense] in the NS corpus We have only just begun to realize the impact of this 20 th century miracle. ( usarg ) ( 14b ) After her mother heard the horrid details of the television execution of a death roll inmate that her daughter had just witnessed on public television, she was mortified. ( usarg ) ( 15 ) [‘Specificatory’ just + past simple] in the learner corpora It’s not good for their eyes because they just finished their study at school and their eyes need some rest! ( lttc-elc )
When looking into instances of the pattern [‘Specificatory’ just + perfect tense], we speculated that verb aspects ( Vendler, 1957 ) also had a lot to do with the formation of temporal proximity. The four lexical aspects proposed by Vendler (1957) are shown in Table 5 .
Among the four lexical aspects, the ‘specificatory’ just derived a sense of proximity only when it co-occurred with achievement verbs and accomplishment verbs. Here, we have invented four sentences with the four verb aspects to illustrate the difference. ( a ) Amy just wanted to finish her thesis. (State) ( b ) Amy just lived in Taiwan. (Activity) ( c ) Amy just won a game. (Achievement) ( d ) Amy just wrote a letter. (Accomplishment)
As state verbs and activity verbs lack ‘natural endpoints’ ( Vendler, 1957 ) for readers to specify the time range, just in ( a ) can only be interpreted as the ‘depreciatory’, ‘restrictive’ or ‘emphatic’ just , serving as a tool to downplay, limit or emphasize the things that Amy wanted to do. The same goes for activity verbs, as shown in ( b ). Without a clear temporal boundary, readers could hardly derive the ‘specificatory’ sense of just from the verb live . Verbs in ( c ) and ( d ), on the other hand, present an action that includes an endpoint. Thus, when just comes into play, readers can draw the marginal phase between the endpoint of the event (‘won a game’ and ‘wrote a letter’) and the present time of statement and this is where the ‘specificatory’ just derives its meaning.
The ‘comparative’ just is used in two lexico-grammatical patterns – [X + be + just like + Y] and [X + be + just as + Y]. Examples of these patterns are presented in Example 16. Both patterns used the ‘comparative’ just to draw an analogy between proposition X and proposition Y. Although the two propositions were not identical in nature, a shared quality was foregrounded when the patterns were adopted. ( 16a ) [X + be + just like + Y] People always said that school is just like a small society. ( icnale ) ( 16b ) [X + be + just as + Y] I am entitled to equal rights and I am just as intelligent. ( usarg )
Frequency counts of the two patterns showed that native speakers preferred using [X + be + just as + Y], which accounted for 70.7 percent. On the contrary, Taiwanese efl learners of all ages tended to opt for [X + be + just like + Y], which made up 86.7 percent of the adult Taiwanese efl learner corpus and 95.7 percent of the younger Taiwanese efl learner corpus.
Despite the high frequency of [X + be + just like + Y] in the younger Taiwanese efl learner corpus, not all instances were used appropriately. Some instances turned out to be a confusion between ‘just like’ and ‘such as;. One of these questionable uses is given in Example 17. ( 17 ) ? I like Italy’s food , just like pizza . ( lttc-elc )
When just was used to make comparisons between propositional ideas that were essentially the same, or hypernyms (‘Italy’s food’) and hyponyms (‘pizza’) as in Example 17, the analogy could hardly be drawn, nor could the ‘comparative’ meaning of just be elicited. Among the forty-four instances of [X + be + just like + Y] in the younger efl learner corpus, eight were found to be a misuse of ‘just like’ for ‘such as’. This is likely to be due to the fact that in Mandarin Chinese the word xiàng can serve as both ‘just like’ and ‘such as’, which causes the efl learners to mistakenly believe that the two are also interchangeable in English.
The ‘emphatic’ just was used to emphasise the adjectives, noun (phrases) and verb (phrases) followed by it. In the native speaker corpus, the pattern [‘emphatic’ just + verb (phrase)] and [‘emphatic’ just + adjective] had a higher frequency, constituting 42.4 percent and 30.3 percent, respectively. In the learner corpora, both adult and younger Taiwanese efl learners preferred to use the pattern [‘emphatic’ just + verb (phrase)], accounting for 80 percent in the adult Taiwanese efl learner corpus and 51.7 percent in the younger Taiwanese efl learner corpus.
Looking more closely into the semantic features of the patterns, we found that the ‘emphatic’ just often derived its meaning from contexts that denoted a ‘stronger’ effect. In the pattern [‘emphatic’ just + adjective], adjectives used in this pattern tended to be greater in degree and intensity, such as high , little and perfect . While in another high-frequency pattern [‘emphatic’ just + verb (phrase)], the ‘emphatic’ just was commonly accompanied by negation. Instances of this are shown in Examples 18 and 19. ( 18 ) [‘Emphatic’ just + adjective] The price was just too high for what they had in their paper. ( usarg ) ( 19 ) [‘Emphatic’ just + negation + verb (phrase)] There are still many people who just can’t quit it. ( icnale )
Different from the other meanings of just , the ‘emphatic’ just intensified the effect brought by its modified constituent instead of downplaying or limiting it. Therefore, adjectives of a ‘stronger’ ideational meaning (‘high’) and the opposing force brought by negation (‘can’t’) both created an appropriate environment for just to elicit its ‘emphatic’ reading.

Section: 6. Conclusion

The purpose of this study was to investigate how frequently different meanings of the polysemous adverb just were used by native speakers and Taiwanese efl learners in written language, and identifying the lexico-grammatical patterns in which different senses of just were used.
Our findings suggested that the ‘depreciatory’ and ‘restrictive’ just were, overall, the most frequently used meanings in all corpora, while the ‘emphatic’ and ‘specificatory’ just were less commonly adopted. By adding up the two high-frequency meanings in the learner corpora, we found that learners used the adverb just with a smaller variety of meanings. The two major meanings made up a great proportion of the sub-corpus, while the other meanings each accounted for less than 10 percent.
The lexico-grammatical patterns in which different meanings of just were used were developed by analysing the syntactic structures of the modified constituents and the semantic features co-occurred with just . We believe that the difference between native speakers’ and learners’ preference of lexico-grammatical patterns may differ because of understanding of politeness strategies, familiarity with particular tenses/aspects, and lexical choices. Questionable uses may also occur if the patterns were used in a wrong logical relation.
To help learners to better understand how the adverb just should be used in essays, teaching materials was made on the basis of our corpus analysis. As can be seen in Appendix A, the teaching materials provide clear instructions on how different meanings of just could be identified with definitions and synonyms, what the frequently used lexico-grammatical patterns were, and what the important semantic features as well as contextual clues that contributed to appropriate uses of the adverb just in written language are. Since our study was conducted based on a smaller quantity of data, future studies involving a larger number of instances are needed to make the results more representative.
