Title: Modeling “Remorse Bias” in probation narratives: Examining social cognition and judgments of implicit violence during sentencing


Abstract: Abstract

This research, utilizing semi-structured interviews with a sample of U.S. probation officers ( N = 151) and grounded theory, provides the first-known empirical study to examine ways in which implicit cognitive processes may influence how probation officers evaluate expressions of remorse by defendants during the sentencing of violent offenses. Particularly, I develop a model by which probation officers exhibit remorse bias toward defendants with characteristics that are stereotypically associated with violence and how such bias can negatively affect officers’ pre-sentencing reports and sentencing recommendations for such defendants. Data showed that officers exhibit remorse bias by linking certain personal and background characteristics of defendants that “signal” the potential for violence to implicit assumptions that their remorse displays are insincere through two social cognitive processes: fundamental attribution error and issues with out-group empathy. When probation officers exhibited remorse bias via these social cognitive processes, they described crafting
negative “remorse-based narratives” in their pre-sentencing reports that express doubt about the authenticity of defendants’ remorse displays and use such displays to make character assessments that portray defendants as being implicitly violent. Takeaways and implications of the developed model, as well as the need to provide trainings to probation officers on remorse bias, are discussed.

Section: INTRODUCTION

Criminal sentencing is thought to expose a “bounded rationality” in which individuals involved in making sentencing decisions must do so in a restricted time frame and with limited information about defendants’ character (Albonetti, 1991 ). This creates a sense of uncertainty that future behavior and other indications of “good character” may be misread or not fully known at the time of sentencing (Ulmer & Johnson, 2004 ). As a response, in order to “fill the gaps,” defendants’ characteristics, past actions, or observable behaviors are often utilized in order to make assessments about character when making sentencing recommendations and decisions (Farrell & Holmes, 1991 ). These character assessments may be especially important for defendants being sentenced for violent offenses, in which the crime's severity, victim impact, need for character reform, and potential future harm to the public are arguably viewed to be the greatest (Freiburger, 2009 ; Lynch, 2019 ; Ulmer & Bradley, 2006 ).
While several defendant-related factors are thought to “fill the gaps” during sentencing, expressions or displays of remorse, particularly about defendants’ previous acts of violence, are thought to be especially valuable when making assessments of character (Cohen et al., 2013 ; Deem & Ramsey, 2016 ; Gold & Weiner, 2000 ; Robinson et al., 1994 ; Robinson et al., 2012 ; Weisman, 2004 ). Yet evaluating displays of remorse, especially as evidence of good character, is thought to be inherently and subconsciously limited by implicit human cognition (Bandes, 2016 ; Hanan, 2018 ). Indeed, biased assumptions or expectations about whether certain defendants are and can be truly remorseful for committing acts of violence may lead those involved in the sentencing process to fall prey to a potential psychological phenomenon called remorse bias when they assess remorse displays of particular defendants (Hanan, 2018 ).
Although no empirical work has yet examined the effects of remorse bias on sentencing, literature has suggested that biases toward remorse displays may stem from well-established social cognitive processes and could affect whether individuals involved in sentencing decide whether to doubt the veracity of defendant's remorse displays (Bandes, 2016 ; Hanan, 2018 ). Particularly, remorse bias may be most pronounced in affecting the remorse and character assessments of defendants with characteristics that are stereotypically and implicitly associated with violence, which could lead those involved in sentencing to implicitly discount expressions of remorse by some defendants as disingenuous, even if they are, in fact, true (Hanan, 2018 ).
The present research, utilizing semi-structured interviews with a large sample of U.S. probation officers, represents the first study to examine ways in which implicit cognitive processes may influence how probation officers assess displays of remorse as they write pre-sentencing reports about violent defendants in the sentencing process. I develop a qualitative model that illuminates a process by which probation officers exhibit remorse bias toward particular defendants by linking their personal and background characteristics that “signal” the potential for violence to implicit assumptions that their remorse displays may be disingenuous through two social cognitive processes. Then, this model suggests how this remorse bias may negatively influence officers’ character assessments and crafting of “remorse-based narratives” about defendants in their pre-sentencing reports.

Section: Remorse in sentencing: the role of probation officers and pre-sentencing reports

Remorse, which may be either verbally (i.e., saying “I'm sorry” to victims) or non-verbally (i.e., crying, body language) conveyed, shows “acceptance of personal responsibility for an act of harm against another person” (Zhong, 2015 , p. 137). Particularly, once defendants are aware of the harmful impacts of their actions, remorse signals the degree to which they understand their effects on their victims and/or larger community, which also often encompasses feelings of sincere regret and expressions of verbal or behavioral (i.e., monetary restitution) apology (Etienne & Robbennolt, 2007 ; van Stokkom, 2002 ). Indeed, as stated by Goffman ( 2009 ), this may be likened to “splitting of the self into a blameworthy part and a part that stands back and sympathizes with the blame giving” (p. 113).
As sentencing typically involves weighing and evaluating whether defendants require and will respond to moral reform, especially in cases of violence, cultural, and normative understandings of remorse suggest that genuine remorse may “signal” that defendants condemn their actions and consequences, as well as indicate their potential for good character, and that their punishments should in turn be reconsidered (Etienne & Robbennolt, 2007 ; Robinson et al., 2012 ). Indeed, drawing from these narratives, if defendants convey sincere remorse during sentencing, the implicit or explicit assumption may be that their criminality is an anomaly that is not reflective of their character and that they are amenable to moral reform; however, if defendants fail to express remorse or it is viewed as disingenuous, the assumption may be that their bad behavior was a product of their “true character,” they are dangerous and likely to reoffend, and they may lack potential for rehabilitation or moral reform (Cohen et al., 2013 ; Deem & Ramsey, 2016 ; Gold & Weiner, 2000 ; Robinson et al., 1994 ; Weisman, 2004 ; 2014 ; Zhong et al., 2014 ). Unsurprisingly, although results remain mixed, experimental studies have found that expressions of sincere remorse often lead to less support for severe punishment (fines or prison time) and more support for rehabilitative sentencing options, while feigned or false remorse may lead to aggravated views on and support for punishment (e.g., Gold & Weiner, 2000 ; Proeve & Howells, 2006 ; Rumsey, 1976 ; Silver & Berryessa, 2021 ).
A limited body of literature has focused on whether and how sentencing decision-makers may be influenced by defendants’ remorse displays when making sentencing decisions in court (see Bandes, 2016 ; Zhong, 2015 ). Several arms of the Capital Jury Project have found that failure to show remorse or showing disingenuous remorse significantly increases capital jurors’ support for the death penalty, while true remorse can increase jurors’ support for life sentences (Eisenberg et al., 1997 ; Garvey, 1998 ; Sundby, 1997 ). Although its relevance can vary, several studies have found that judges, as the chief decision-makers in sentencing across almost all non-capital criminal cases, most often believe that remorse is an acceptable legal construct to consider during sentencing, that true remorse can be demonstrative of good character, and that it can convince them to be more lenient; as a contrast, insincere remorse displays can have the opposite effect on judges’ attributions of defendant character and on decisions related to sentence severity (Rachlinski et al., 2012 ; van Oorschot et al., 2017 ; Ward, 2006 ; Weisman, 2009 ; Wood & MacMartin, 2007 ; Zhong, 2015 ). The U.S. Sentencing Guidelines even allow for federal sentencing adjustments to be made in relation to “Acceptance of Responsibility,” which is a provision that allows judges to weigh remorse in their considerations of whether reduced, or aggravated, sentences are merited (Bennet, 2016 ).
Although judges may be swayed by remorse displays that they themselves witness in court (Weisman, 2014 ), it is probably more likely that judges and their sentencing decisions will be influenced by evaluations of remorse made by probation officers in their pre-sentencing reports (Drass & Spencer, 1987 ; Rush & Robertson, 1987 ). Judges most often have very little time to assess or interact with defendants before and during sentencing; thus, pre-sentencing reports, written by probation officers who have had more time to learn about, observe, interact with, and evaluate defendants and their cases, are considered one of the chief factors utilized by judges in sentencing (Hagan, 1975 ; Spencer, 1983 ).
Although the preparation of, procedure surrounding, and even the format of these reports varies by jurisdiction, Rule 32 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires that probation officers conduct and complete a pre-sentence investigation and report for the court for every case possible before sentencing (LII, 2022 ). These reports are requested by the court and are reviewed by judges, and in many cases, prosecutors and other court personnel; probation officers, by reviewing defendants’ records, interviewing them, and gathering other information from sources such as family members, victims, social workers, or previous employers, collect and synthesize information about defendants’ backgrounds and their criminal offenses (Converse, 2012 ).
Then, using this information, probation officers write reports that convey both legal (i.e., criminal record, previous probation history, mitigating/aggravating factors) and extra-legal (i.e., employment history, family background, mental health, financial background, ties to the community, information observed, or learned from client interviews) information about a defendant; based on their assessments of this legal and extra-legal information, probation officers use pre-sentencing reports to communicate their sentencing recommendations to the court and what, if any, factors or contexts that they feel that judges should consider or weigh when determining the gravity or type of sentence (Converse, 2012 ; Spencer, 1983 ).
After the report is completed and received by the court at least 35 days before sentencing, if requested by defendants, the court will allow defendants and their counsel to read parts of the officer's pre-sentence report, but defendants are not allowed to see the recommended sentence. However, the court may decline to let the defendant read the report because of its sensitivity or for other reasons related to confidentiality or harm to the defendant, and instead, may provide a summary of the factual information in the report to him (LII, 2022 ). Pre-sentencing reports are also used at other critical stages after sentencing, including deciding eligibility to participate in rehabilitative programs in incarcerated settings, as well as the type of correctional facility in which defendants will serve their sentences (Fennell & Hall, 1980 ).
Probation officers are thought to commonly incorporate information about remorse displays into their pre-sentencing reports in order to make inferences about defendants, their perceived character, and what such displays may suggest for their sentencing recommendations (Berryessa & Balavender, 2021 ; Everett & Nienstedt, 1999 ; Spencer, 1983 ; Weisman, 2009 ). In the writing of these reports, probation officers may craft “remorse-based narratives” for the court about defendants, any verbal or non-verbal displays of remorse in their interactions, whether displays are genuine, and what they might suggest about the capacity for moral reform (Berryessa & Balavender, 2021 ). Particularly, pre-sentencing reports may be most effectual in cases involving defendants being sentenced for violent crimes, in which questions surrounding character and the potential necessity for moral reform are potentially the most imperative and challenging (Felthous, 2017 ; Slobogin, 1999 ).
Thus, probation officers may describe defendants charged with violent offenses who show remorse displays believed to be sincere as showing errors in judgment, rather than in character, and as being amenable to rehabilitation in their pre-sentencing reports (Cohen et al., 2013 ; Deem & Ramsey, 2016 ; Gold & Weiner, 2000 ; Robinson et al., 1994 ; Weisman, 2004 ; 2014 ). Yet, if probation officers judge remorse displays to be disingenuous or absent, and that defendants’ violent acts could be artifacts of “true character,” pre-sentencing reports may be used to portray defendants as too violent, unlikely to change, and may include recommendations for more severe sanctions (Berryessa & Balavender, 2021 ; Everett & Nienstedt, 1999 ; Spencer, 1983 ; Weisman, 2009 ).

Section: The potential role of remorse bias in sentencing

Yet, as Hanan ( 2018 ) and others have suggested, assessing both verbal and non-verbal displays of remorse as indicators of credibility and character is a subjective process that likely offers rich opportunities for implicit cognitive processes termed remorse bias . When assessing another person's remorse, the assessor may unconsciously filter remorse assessments, as well as corresponding character attributions, through a lens of biased and stereotyped suppositions about how a person should feel or act when showing true remorse; particularly, people with certain social or background characteristics may be viewed as disingenuous or lacking intrinsic character necessary for rehabilitation or redemption when their remorse displays conflict with the assessor's implicit assumptions about people with such characteristics (Bandes, 2016 ; 2021 ; Gruber, 2020 ; Hanan, 2018 ). Thus, even if true, assessors may view others’ remorse displays as dishonest, feigned, or “forensically resourceful” if their words, cadence, or expressions differ from expectations or stereotypes, and in turn, may lead to a priori biased judgments of their poor character (Duncan, 2002 ; Gruber, 2020 ; Posner, 2004 ).
Although yet to be empirically studied, the exhibition of remorse bias has been theorized to potentially rely on two well-supported social cognitive processes (Hanan, 2018 ). First, the fundamental attribution error causes people to accredit their errors and errors of those they understand or identify with to external factors that may result from situational circumstances (Jones & Nisbett, 1987 ). However, people often use stereotypes to make sense of and understand the errors of people outside these groups; instead, they attribute their errors to unchanging, internal factors, such as personality or character factors, that are consistent across situational circumstances (Pettigrew, 1979 ). For example, if violence or criminality is perceived as inherent or consistent with certain social groups or those with specific characteristics, people may use stereotypes to make sense of the bad behavior of others in those groups, and accordingly, attribute their violence or criminality to internal factors that are likely to persist and unlikely to change (Maruna & Mann, 2006 ). Thus, in exhibiting the fundamental attribution error, individuals may perceive people in certain social groups as unlikely or unable to be truly remorseful for their bad behavior, due to their internal factors, and potentially disregard their genuine remorse displays (Bandes, 2016 ; 2021 ; Sen, 2007 ).
Second, described as issues with “out-group empathy,” people find it harder to empathize with people with whom they do not identify or understand; in such instances, people might misread others’ expressions of empathy or doubt their ability to empathize all together (Robinson et al., 2015 ). Empathy affects assessments of others’ remorse through attempts to read others’ emotions and envision others’ “inner worlds,” which allows people to identify and judge others’ expressions as remorse; thus, it is easier to feel the remorse of others when people identify with them or feel that they can understand or empathize with them (Richardson, 2010 ). Yet, interacting with those whom people do not identify or understand can impede the ability to show effective empathy toward them, and, therefore, people may be unable to accurately identify the depth of their remorse displays (Richardson, 2010 ). In such instances, people become more reliant on stereotypes to read and understand others’ emotional expressions, which could lead to the misreading and disregarding of genuine remorse displays (Rachlinski et al., 2008 ).
During the sentencing process, remorse assessments of defendants with certain characteristics, as well as any corresponding attributions of their character, might also be inaccurate and potentially disregarded because their displays may not align with inherent expectations or stereotypes about their abilities or capacities for “true remorse” (Bandes, 2016 ; Bowers et al., 2001 ; Gruber, 2020 ; Hanan, 2018 ; Khalikaprasad, 2020 ). Then, for probation officers, implicit remorse bias could foreseeably influence the crafting of remorse-based narratives about defendants in pre-sentencing reports. In order to provide useful and accurate remorse-based narratives, officers must correctly interpret defendants’ words, tone, non-verbal expressions, and speech cadence, and in doing so, refrain from any implicit biases (Bandes, 2016 ; 2021 ; Berryessa & Balavender, 2021 ; Hanan, 2018 ). Yet, due to remorse bias, probation officers could very well misread, doubt, and then discount genuine remorse displays, which may shape and be communicated in pre-sentencing recommendations as evidence of certain defendants’ poor or violent character (Hanan, 2018 ).
Further, in the sentencing of violent offenses, implicit assumptions about violence and its relationship to character may particularly intensify difficulties that those involved in sentencing have in accurately assessing remorse (Bandes, 2016 ; Hanan, 2018 ). Human cognition uses biases and stereotypes to “fill the holes” in judgments when knowledge of others is incomplete (Hilbert, 2012 ). In relation to violence, a wide body of research indicates that cognitive biases activate this ambiguity by pairing implicit associations between demographics or backgrounds (such as previous criminal behavior, maleness, gang affiliation, certain cultural backgrounds, substance abuse, or mental illness) and dangerous, violent behavior (e.g., Avery et al., 2020 ; Eckhardt et al., 2012 ; Kang et al., 2011 ; Lee, 2012 ; Levinson et al., 2010 ; 2017 ; Greenwald et al., 1998 ; Sen, 2007 ; Wittenbrink et al., 1997 ). As remorse often serves as a stand-in for character, evaluations of remorse could spiral into a “mutually reinforcing circle of cognitive errors” (Hanan, 2018 , p. 309), grounded in implicit biases, that associate these characteristics with the potential for violence (Bandes, 2016 ; 2021 ; Bowers et al., 2001 ). For example, Van Cleve ( 2016 ) notes an example in which a probation officer used “Black English” to doubt and even taunt an African American defendant's remorse for his violent crimes when arguing for his probation revocation in sentencing.
Further, Sen ( 2007 ) suggests that certain characteristics may “signal” to the court that a defendant's character, or even identity, is implicitly violent. For example, although not directly related to remorse, there is some evidence to suggest that probation officers show gender bias toward men, as compared to women, who have committed serious and/or violent offenses in the writing of their pre-sentencing reports and recommendations. Particularly, several pieces of research suggest that men are often described to have more choice in, culpability for, and be more dangerous when committing acts of violence, while female offenders are sometimes “pathologized” and described as victims of their lack of familial or social support, mental health, or competing responsibilities (i.e., motherhood) when weighing their intentions for or actions surrounding the commission of serious or violent offenses; unsurprisingly, and potentially stemming from assumptions about the implicit likelihood for violence, these portrayals can quantitatively and qualitatively lead to sentencing recommendations that are disproportionately more severe or focused on non-community based punishments for male offenders charged with violence offenses (e.g., Daly, 1994 ; Deane, 2000 ; Mallicoat, 2007 ; Wilkie, 1993 ).
Ultimately, if displays of true remorse are indeed misread and disregarded by probation officers during the sentencing of certain defendants charged with violent offenses, remorse bias is likely to have significant consequences. Indeed, as judges’ sentencing decisions are most often in line with probation officer recommendations in their pre-sentencing reports (Freiburger and Hilinski, 2011 ; Leiber et al., 2018 ), the potential effects of remorse bias could be both pervasive and meaningful for the punishment trajectories of defendants who are subjected to implicit assumptions of violence due to their backgrounds.
The present work represents the first-known empirical study to examine how implicit cognitive processes may influence how probation officers evaluate displays of remorse in their pre-sentencing reports in cases involving defendants charged with violent offenses. Utilizing data from a large sample of U.S. probation officers, I develop a model that illuminates a process by which probation officers exhibit remorse bias toward particular defendants and how it can negatively influence officers’ crafting of remorse-based narratives about the remorse and character of these defendants in their pre-sentencing reports. I employed qualitative methodology and a grounded theory analytical approach, as they allow for the development of theoretical models from data and the examination of relationships among the phenomena being studied (Strauss & Corbin, 1990 ).
This research attempts to develop an emergent, qualitative model from a grounded theory analysis of the data that links these three inquiries to explain the relationships between these phenomena. Indeed, using three comparative, iterative coding stages as detailed by Strauss and Corbin ( 1990 ; 1998 ), data were analyzed and organized into a process that best explains an emerging theoretical model. Ultimately, this framework and the relationships between these phenomena suggest how and through what processes probation officers may be triggered to exhibit remorse bias toward certain defendants charged with violent offenses and how this could correspondingly shape remorse and character assessments in their pre-sentencing reports.

Section: METHOD

The Rutgers University Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved this study. Purposeful sampling was used to provide “information-rich cases…from which one can learn a great deal about issues of central importance to the purpose of the inquiry” (Patton, 2002 , p. 273). Further, purposeful sampling techniques allow for collecting data that do not seek a single correct answer, but rather, seek to examine the complexity of different conceptualizations of the research objectives (Patton, 2015 ).
The sample included selected probation officers from across the U.S. who were members of the American Probation and Parole Association (APPA), which is the main membership organization for U.S. probation officers. Probation officers who had current or past caseloads involving criminal offenses that included some type of violence were targeted, but no other participant characteristics were used as inclusion criteria. APPA sent my email invitation to all its probation officer members (∼90,000 community officers) in September 2019. The email invitation included a consent document, information on the study objectives and procedures, and my contact information to schedule a telephone interview. Participants were also told that they could receive a $20 Amazon gift card if requested for their participation. Most officers ultimately declined this incentive.
Over 300 probation officers emailed expressions of interest in the study. Although I replied to every officer who expressed interest, only ∼50% of those 300 officers ultimately scheduled an interview. Thus, 151 probation officers were interviewed (∼2.5% of the total email list). Interviews were conducted via telephone, recorded, and transcribed in late 2019 and early 2020. Verbal consent was gathered from all participants.
Basic demographics of the sample ( N = 151) can be found in Table 1 . All participants were community corrections officers who reported having handled criminal caseloads that were either general criminal cases (i.e., a range of both non-violent and violent criminal cases) or caseloads that focused on specific violent offenses (i.e., sex offenses, domestic violence). More detailed demographics (e.g., race/ethnicity when officers chose to identify, officers’ education level) did not have any bearing on results unless noted. None of the themes or model observed in the data, unless noted, varied due to collected demographics of officers.
Interviews lasted an average of approximately 30 minutes (minimum length: 12 minutes; maximum length: 48 minutes) and included areas of questions that allowed for qualitative model development in grounded theory (see Patton, 2015 ; the interview protocol is in Supplemental Material ). Probation officers were asked questions in five broad categories: (a) about their definitions of remorse, and how and through what methods they assessed remorse in different clients; (b) factors that they felt were important to assessments of remorse in different clients; (c) the information they included and how they used categories (a) and (b) to write about the remorse displays in pre-sentencing reports about different clients; (d) their objectives in writing and information that they conveyed in pre-sentencing reports for different clients; and (e) officers’ basic demographics. The data presented here stems from how probation officers discussed categories (a) to (d) of the interview protocol specifically in relation to their clients charged with violent offenses.
A grounded theory approach was used to analyze the data (Strauss & Corbin, 1990 ; 1998 ). Even though my research goals were influenced by existing literature on remorse and related implicit bias, the model was developed from the data. While grounded theory is often depicted as a purely inductive methodology, grounded theory is usually a marriage of deductive framing from existing work and inductive framing arising from data (Goulding, 2017 ).
The online qualitative program, Dedoose, was used to organize and code the data. First, open coding was used for a random subset of 50 interviews, which is the initial process of iteratively defining codes and organizing data into preliminary themes (Strauss & Corbin, 1990 ; 1998 ). As is common in qualitative and grounded theory research, a combination of data-driven and theory-driven codes was established (Goulding, 2017 ). Next, axial coding was used following the coding of the full dataset, in which themes established during open coding were grouped and organized into categories; finally, selective coding was conducted, in which primary theoretical schemes were developed by comparing groupings of data to explain ways in which categories from axial coding relate to each other, in order to identify the process that best explains the emerging theoretical model from the data related to the study's research questions (Strauss & Corbin, 1990 ; 1998 ). A similar analysis plan has been used previously by Berryessa ( 2019 ) when developing models of judicial stereotyping using grounded theory.
Interrater reliability (see Guba, 1981 ) was calculated to validate the internal consistency of the coding scheme using Dedoose. After primary coding, a second independent co-coder analyzed a random sample of excerpts from all 151 interviews and calculated high interrater reliability of the coding scheme (Cohen's kappa = 0.88). Reporting standards from the Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research guidelines, including reflexivity practices during and after the coding process, were adopted in the writing of this article when appropriate (see O'Brien et al., 2014 ).

Section: RESULTS

Four principal axial coding categories (Violence “Signals,” Fundamental Attribution Error, Out-Group Empathy, Negative Remorse-Based Narratives in Pre-sentencing Reports) were observed and systematized in the coding process. Note that although Fundamental Attribution Error and Out-Group Empathy emerged as important categories, these data were not deductively coded for these phenomena (as seen in forms of thematic analysis; see Braun and Clarke, 2019 ). Instead, apart and separate from the theoretical framework described in the introduction, these categories were iteratively developed as coding categories in relation to the second research question and the observed social cognitive processes were labeled and categorized as such based on the similarity of their findings to those phenomena. Ultimately, by positioning relationships that emerged in the axial coding categories during selective coding, findings support the model presented in Figure 1 . This figure represents how probation officers exhibit remorse bias toward defendants with specific personal or background characteristics and how it influences their crafting of remorse-based narratives in their pre-sentencing reports for such defendants in cases involving violent offenses.
As described below, probation officers exhibited remorse bias by linking particular characteristics of defendants that “signal” the potential for violence ( Violence “Signals” ) to implicit assumptions that their remorse displays were insincere through two social cognitive processes (i.e., fundamental attribution error and out-group empathy). When probation officers exhibited remorse bias through these social cognitive processes, they described that they crafted Negative Remorse-Based Narratives in their Pre-Sentencing Reports that were suspect of defendants’ remorse displays as disingenuous, and used these displays as evidence to make character assessments that described defendants as implicitly violent (being inherently dangerous, exhibiting fixed violent thinking, and the futility of attempted moral reform). Each part of the developed model is presented in the following sections and summarized in Table 2 . Minor grammatical edits and clarifications were made for comprehensibility, but no edits changed the substantive meaning of the quotations presented below.
When discussing their experiences with defendants in cases involving violence, probation officers mentioned several characteristics of defendants’ backgrounds that they believed “signal” the potential for violence. Probation officers largely described them and their behavior as outside their “normal clientele” and “harder to understand” (Probation Officer 111). Across probation officers, these characteristics were predominantly related to the antisocial background of defendants, mental health, and potential issues with substance abuse.
Particularly, violent behavior that had begun or was previously observed in adolescence or in a juvenile record indicated to probation officers that defendants had and would continue to persist in violence. As Probation Officer 28 stated, “If they started with a juvenile history, they're [going] to create an adult history. That's what I would say.”
Further, and to a lesser degree than the characteristics noted above, some probation officers with certain backgrounds also expressed that two social attributes of defendants “signaled” the potential for violence. Probation officers serving in some areas of the country with larger client loads coming from specific cultural backgrounds that differed from their own indicated that defendants’ reliance on their cultural norms likely indicates their potential for future violence. Officers said that different cultures with which they often interacted, ranging from African American, Nepali, Hispanic, Muslim, Korean, and many other cultural backgrounds, had different perceived social norms that can lead individuals to continue to exhibit violence, even after interactions with the legal system for such behavior.
On the whole, no individual cultural backgrounds were more likely to be mentioned by probation officers as compared to others. Instead, their discussions of these cultural characteristics hinged on their own demographics, geographic location, and the demographics of their caseload.
Data showed that probation officers made implicit assumptions about the remorse displays of individuals with the characteristics discussed above (violence “signals”) through two social cognitive processes: fundamental attribution error and out-group empathy. These social cognitive processes, seemingly triggered by their interactions with and evaluations of these defendants, appeared to lead probation officers to doubt defendants’ remorse displays as being disingenuous. Probation officers were found to exhibit similar remorse bias across clients with different violent “signals.”
Fundamental Attribution Error . Probation officers exhibited the fundamental attribution error in two main ways when discussing their assessments of remorse displays by defendants with violence “signals.” First, officers appeared to be more likely to attribute defendants’ violent offenses to internal factors, rather than external or situational factors that were related to the particular criminal event. As violence was believed to be a product of or consistent with internal factors that “make a defendant who he is” (Probation Officer 69), probation officers often expressed distrust about the sincerity of defendants’ remorse displays.
Several probation officers who worked with gang clients also similarly discussed their experiences that gang members most often had little capacity for remorse, stemming from their “gang mentality” (Probation Officer 17), and this in turn led probation officers to be largely suspect of and even disregard their remorse displays as false. Probation Officer 119, discussing the violent behavior of his gang clients, said,
“that's their way of life, that's who they are, that's the way they think… they're rarely remorseful because that's just what they do.”
The second way in which probation officers exhibited the fundamental attribution error was their belief that violent offending of defendants with violence “signals” stemmed not only from internal factors, but factors that were also “fixed” and natural. Probation officers expressed doubt about defendants’ aptitude for actually feeling remorse and the realness of defendants’ remorse displays, even sometimes suggesting that remorselessness was the more “natural” state for these clients, because officers perceived their violence to stem from influences that are unlikely to change or be reformed. For example, several probation officers described how different clients’ fixed cultural norms, deep-seated from childhood, and in their communities, often prompted the exhibition of violence.
Out-group Empathy . Probation officers also exhibited issues with out-group empathy in two main ways when discussing their assessments of remorse displays by defendants with violence “signals.”
First, probation officers appeared to have trouble imagining the “inner worlds” of these defendants, which seemed to stem from officers’ difficulties in perspective taking and fully understanding the emotional content of defendants’ remorse displays. Similar to the fundamental attribution error, these struggles not only led probation officers to express doubt about the genuineness of their clients’ remorse displays, but also about their capacities for truly feeling remorse for their actions. For example, female probation officers appeared to wrestle with being able to imagine the “inner worlds” of their male clients in order understand their intentions in committing acts of violence. As a result, these female officers vocalized that they often had issues reading remorse in male defendants, often doubt whether their displays are genuine, and cannot necessarily recognize if they are truly taking responsibility for their actions.
When probation officers exhibited remorse bias towards defendants with violence “signals” through the social cognitive processes, they then discussed crafting remorse-based narratives in their presentencing reports that encompassed two types of succeeding information on and evaluations of defendants’ remorse displays and, correspondingly, evaluations of their character. In using these two types of evidence, officers’ pre-sentencing reports most often negatively depicted these defendants in the ways described below, which led to harsher sentencing recommendations.
Evaluations of Remorse . As described above and stemming from different beliefs, probation officers often doubted the genuineness of defendants’ remorse displays. Correspondingly, officers discussed that they often wrote about these reservations in their pre-sentencing reports to convey this information to the court. Some officers said this information was one of the most important things that they included in pre-sentencing reports. Probation Officer 144 stated that, to her, noting “in my report, if a defendant is remorseful or not…is more important than looking at a person's background history.”
Some probation officers vocalized that they often worried that defendants with violence “signals” might fool judges with their remorse displays and that it was important for officers to provide judges with the “full picture of a defendant” in their pre-sentencing reports so judges did not become victims of “puppy dog eyes and confessions of innocence” (Probation Officer 57). Officers’ concerns appeared to stem from recognition that judges received very little information about and time to interact with defendants, as compared to probation officers; thus, officers worried that judges would not be able to recognize all the “indicators” that defendants were not expressing sincere remorse (Probation Officer 49).
Evaluations of Character . Probation officers described how they utilized and extended their evaluations of remorse displays to make resultant character assessments of defendants in their pre-sentencing reports; they often crafted narratives that detailed their reservations and doubts about the sincerity of particular defendants’ remorse displays to illustrate that they suffered from violent “true character” as an explanation for their past and potential future violence. As detailed here, officers used these remorse assessments to make implicit judgments about three aspects of defendants’ character in pre-sentencing reports: their fixed violent thinking, their inherent dangerousness, and the futility of their attempted moral reform.
Probation Officer 68 also stated that she was interested in providing this context to the court, and explained that she used remorse assessments of this client load, when crafting her remorse-based narratives, in order to recommend that they be more harshly sentenced.
Similarly, commenting on the same type of clientele, another probation officer stated that disingenuous remorse is “a sign of being out of control” (Probation Officer 23), and that he chose to communicate that observation to the court to help scale punishment, especially surrounding prison or jailtime. Indeed, “if I have a violent criminal sitting in front of me or a person had violent tendencies in the past,” the officer said, the court must recognize that he will continue to be a threat unless he is “locked away for good” (Probation Officer 23). Officers said they not only described such violent behavior as persistent in their pre-sentencing reports, but also as unlikely to situationally change without some, likely punitive, intervention by the court.
Probation officers stated that they worried that any recommendations for the court regarding the use of treatment or rehabilitative sentencing options for defendants would be misguided and that including such recommendations could mislead judges into thinking moral reform was possible. However, as one probation officer said about his clients charged with domestic violence, these defendants will only ever move “backwards when receiving help” (Probation Officer 38).

Section: DISCUSSION

The current study provides the first known data on social cognitive processes that can underlie probation officers’ evaluations of the remorse displays of by particular defendants and the negative influence of related implicit biases on officers’ pre-sentencing reports and sentencing recommendations in cases involving clients charged with violent offenses. Previous work has suggested that individuals could fall prey to remorse bias by relying on biased expectations about whether people with certain characteristics are and can be truly remorseful for committing acts of violence; this, in turn, could lead defendants’ remorse displays to be viewed as disingenuous or as evidence that they lack the intrinsic character necessary for reformation (Bandes, 2016 ; 2021 ; Gruber, 2020 ; Hanan, 2018 ). The model developed in the present research offers the first empirical test of remorse bias and demonstrates its potential relevance to and influence in the sentencing process for defendants charged with violence.
From a sentencing perspective, the present study adds to and extends previous literature on the use and influence of certain defendant characteristics as “proxies” to mitigate uncertainty in decision-making during the sentencing process. Akin to previous literature, data presented here suggest that probation officers utilize expressions of remorse to “fill the gaps” when making assessments about defendants’ character in their pre-sentencing reports and sentencing recommendations in cases involving violence (Cohen et al., 2013 ; Deem & Ramsey, 2016 ; Gold & Weiner, 2000 ; Robinson et al., 1994 ; 2012 ; Weisman, 2004 ; Zhong et al., 2014 ). Probation officers made implicit assumptions about defendants’ potential for violence by using personal characteristics as “signals” for such behavior, which in turn fundamentally shaped views about defendants’ remorse displays and, correspondingly, their character.
Unsurprisingly, literature has also suggested that characteristics similar to those identified in the present study, such as criminal history, gang affiliation, mental illness, culture, or gender, are often as used “proxies” in making attributions about defendants’ past and future behavior during sentencing (Avery et al., 2020 ; Eckhardt et al., 2012 ; Kang et al., 2011 ; Lee, 2012 ; Levinson et al., 2010 ; 2017 ; Farrell & Holmes, 1991 ; Greenwald et al., 1998 ; Wittenbrink et al., 1997 ). The current study helps to illuminate the further relevance of these characteristics as potential “proxies” specifically in attributions and evaluations of remorse during sentencing.
The model developed here also supports literature that has theorized that the exhibition of remorse bias may stem from two social cognitive processes that can be triggered by interactions with individuals whose characteristics implicitly “signal” violence and criminality (Hanan, 2018 ). Echoing the fundamental attribution error, probation officers struggled to believe that defendants’ remorse displays were true, in part, because officers appeared to accredit their violence to internal factors, ingrained belief systems, and “fixed,” even natural, qualities that were then extended to attributions of violent character that was perceived to continue regardless of the situational context (Jones & Nisbett, 1987 ; Pettigrew, 1979 ). In the same vein, echoing issues with out-group empathy, probation officers doubted the sincerity of some defendants’ remorse displays because officers were unable to envision defendants’ “inner worlds” or feelings of remorse or its emotional content in their expressions, and often believed that certain defendants did not have the core capacity to effectively empathize with others (Richardson, 2010 ; Robinson et al., 2015 ). As a consequence of these social cognitive processes, the data ultimately suggested that officers often expected, and even defaulted to the notion, that remorse displays of defendants whose characteristics implicitly “signaled” the potential for violence were inherently disingenuous.
Correspondingly, the extent to which probation officers prioritized “exposing” disingenuous remorse displays in their pre-sentencing reports, and their interest in conveying that evidence to the court and what they believed it indicated about defendants’ intrinsic character, was striking. Remorse-based narratives have been often been considered as a minor part or section of information for officers in their pre-sentencing reports (Berryessa & Balavender, 2021 ; Everett & Nienstedt, 1999 ; Weisman, 2009 ), but data here indicate that probation officers may utilize their assessments of remorse displays, as influenced by implicit social cognitive processes, to shape detailed, often nuanced, descriptions of defendants’ implicitly violent character and resulting sentencing recommendations in their pre-sentencing reports.
Probation officers, painting defendants as having “fixed” violent thinking, being inherently dangerous, and as unlikely to be morally reformed, appeared to feel that it was quite important to recommend harsher, particularly non-community based, punishments to the court as a result of their doubts about the sincerity of defendants’ remorse displays. As authentic expressions of remorse may indicate that violence could be due to errors in judgment , probation officers instead appeared to draw from established normative and cultural narratives about false remorse when considering their sentencing recommendations; indeed, they described how they used remorse displays perceived to be inauthentic to conclude that defendants’ violent behavior may have stemmed from errors in character that are unlikely to be amenable to moral reform (Cohen et al., 2013 ; Deem & Ramsey, 2016 ; Gold & Weiner, 2000 ; Robinson et al., 1994 ; Weisman, 2004 ; 2014 ; Zhong et al., 2014 ).
The current study does have limitations. The interview sample does not allow for generalizability of these results to a larger population of probation officers across the U.S. or in certain communities. Further, although this sample is very large and diverse for qualitative research with probation officers hailing from 27 states and the District of Columbia, certain states were overrepresented in the sample, and in some cases, only one officer was interviewed from a state. Further, although level of education was prompted from participants, the major or area of study was not collected, and thus, it is unknown whether officers had received education in psychology, social work, criminology, or other areas that could have affected their views. However, data, including the themes and model presented above, did reach theoretical saturation, and officers’ characteristics did not appear to affect results unless otherwise noted.
Indeed, as mentioned above, some female probation officers and those officers with cultural backgrounds that diverged from specific clients expressed that male defendants and some clients with particular cultural backgrounds, respectively, can “signale” the potential for violence. Those who responded to the interview request through the APPA also may have resulted in a self-selected sample; specifically, those who participated here may be more likely than others to be interested in contributing to a study on this topic. Generalizability is not a goal of qualitative research (Ravitch & Carl, 2016 ), but future work should seek to examine remorse bias in cases involving violence with probation officers in specific jurisdictions, as well as expand inquiry on these issues to other research designs and approaches that involve methodological triangulation.
The present study also does not provide an examination or model of how remorse bias may function in or influence cases involving non-violent offenses. Indeed, the weight probation officers put on disingenuous remorse displays when making character assessments of defendants in their pre-sentencing reports and recommendations, as well as their exhibition of remorse bias as described here, may be unique to their clients charged with violent offenses. Previous research has suggested that remorse's role in making character assessments, particularly during sentencing, may be most impactful for violent offenses (Freiburger, 2009 ; Lynch, 2019 ; Ulmer & Bradley, 2006 ). Thus, it might be expected that models of remorse bias involving non-violent crimes would look different from the current model and should be developed in future work. Further, remorse bias may be exhibited in different ways by other individuals involved in the sentencing process, such as judges or prosecutors. Future work should examine the influence of remorse bias for other sentencing decision-makers.
It is also important to note that some statements made by probation officers in the present study appear to conflict with more general research on the effectiveness of treatment options that may be used during probation to reduce the recidivism of those convicted of particular violence offenses, such as domestic violence (e.g., compassion-based or schema therapies) (Kirby et al., 2017 ; Smith, 2011 ), the positive effects of using intensive psychological intervention in probation stipulations, rather than more severe sanctions, for high-risk or violent offenders (Latessa & Lowenkamp, 2005 ), and the benefits of grounding presentence assessments and reports in empirically-validated instruments (Viglione et al., 2015 ). The present research should not suggest that officers do not engage with or support these evidence-based practices; indeed, selected quotations and themes may speak to officers’ views on remorse assessments of a certain defendant population, rather than their general beliefs surrounding or practices in probation or supervision, and may not be generalizable to their experiences with their general client loads, other defendant populations, or types of pre-sentence assessments aside from their evaluations of defendant remorse. Thus, future work should examine how the present findings may relate to other work on different evidence-based probation practices.
Ultimately, the present research suggests that legal and social outcomes of defendants who are subject to violence stereotyping could be negatively shaped by remorse bias in the sentencing process and beyond. Social cognitive processes may bear on probation officers’ abilities to credit or even recognize the remorse displays of certain defendants as true because they may not align with officers’ implicit assumptions about defendants’ “true character” and because officers may not be able to relate to or envision defendants’ emotional “inner-worlds.” For remorse to be believed or viewed as genuine, a defendant's character must not be perceived as fundamentally or inherently violent (Hanan, 2018 ; Sen, 2007 ). Yet, for defendants with violence “signals” as modeled here, implicit beliefs about their potential for violence and violent character appear to be tightly intertwined with assessments of their remorse displays.
Thus, one can easily imagine that these processes may lead to biased pre-sentencing reports in cases involving violence that might not accurately portray feelings of remorse, as well as character assessments, of certain defendants (Bandes, 2016 ; 2021 ; Berryessa & Balavender, 2021 ). Indeed, given the purposes that they serve for courts and later for determining placement and programming in correctional settings, pre-sentencing reports can help to dictate defendants’ experiences in the criminal-legal system by shaping perceptions of their past and future behavior and character at multiple stages (Fennell & Hall, 1980 ). This is especially important as punishment practices in most jurisdictions have begun to shift away from mandatory sentences and strict guidelines toward practices in which more discretionary factors, like “remorse-based narratives” and character assessments, are known to be influential (O'Hear, 2005 ; Robinson et al., 2012 ). Thus, unless effects of remorse bias are identified and controlled, the model here indicates that pre-sentencing recommendations in sentencing practices involving cases of violence could produce pervasive discriminatory and particularly severe results for defendants with violence “signals” across the entirety of their punishment trajectories.
The current study should be used as a first step in developing training opportunities for probation officers as strategies to counteract the potential negative and misleading effects of remorse bias. By identifying it as a phenomenon that may bear on outcomes, trainings on implicit bias and its potential effects on assessments of remorse and character should be developed for officers in order to help them acknowledge, reflect on, and better understand the existence of remorse bias, which background or personal characteristics of defendants may lead to subconscious violence stereotyping, and the types of cases and violence that could trigger remorse bias in pre-sentencing reports and in sentencing recommendations.
Trainings may also aid officers in learning strategies to combat specific behaviors that can contribute to remorse bias in order to mitigate or combat it in their interactions with clients and the court. For example, in part, the exhibition of remorse bias appears to stem from difficulties with perspective taking as it relates to issues of out-group empathy (Robinson et al., 2015 ). Previous research has shown that strategies and skills that prompt effective perspective taking can help to combat automatic, implicit expressions of bias in interactions with individuals with stereotyped personal characteristics (Todd et al., 2011 ). This suggests that probation officers may benefit from trainings involving perspective taking exercises as a way to mitigate potential remorse bias in interactions with and assessments of their clients.
As remorse displays can still represent useful information for the court to consider during sentencing (Berryessa & Balavender, 2021 ), trainings may also provide workshops for probation officers on strategies that can allow them to individually consider the personal behaviors of defendants, including remorse displays, in their pre-sentencing reports, but also adjust for the negative influences that remorse bias could have for their sentencing recommendations. For example, as testing and feedback promotes shifts in occupational culture (Bloom, 2001 ), strategies could involve officers being systematically observed for remorse bias and then given feedback about their own client interactions, assessments, and pre-sentencing reports.
Further, although there is no set of acceptable or objective displays that signal “true” remorse across various defendant populations, trainings should also help officers to understand how defendants from disparate cultures, genders, mental health backgrounds, or other groups may show true remorse differently, as compared to more conventional, normative displays that are common and easily recognizable (i.e., crying or facial expressions recognized as sadness or regret, formal verbal apologies, paying restitution to victims). For example, certain psychiatric symptoms, such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD), may influence or mask defendants’ emotional displays or affect their abilities to match their expressions of remorse with expected affective responses (i.e., saying “I am sorry” but smiling or laughing during the apology) (Berryessa, 2021 ). Indeed, defendants with ASD often have problems maintaining eye contact in social interactions as a strategy to diminish stimulation; however, such behaviors may be viewed as a sign of false or disingenuous remorse if they are unable to look at their alleged victims in the eye during an apology in court (Berryessa, 2021 ). These types of trainings may differ based on the location and type of defendant caseload; for example, for probation officers who have mental health caseloads or large client loads with particular cultural backgrounds, trainings may focus on the types of expected remorse displays from defendants with those characteristics.
These and other techniques could help officers to confront their individual remorse bias and how implicit assumptions, especially surrounding violence, could impact their pre-sentencing reports, as well as make remorse bias more “salient” during sentencing by prompting them to be more likely to discuss it with their peers, judges, and even clients. However, it is critical to note that cognitive and implicit biases are common psychological processes exhibited by all humans across different cultural and social backgrounds (Norenzayan & Heine, 2005 ). The results presented here do not suggest that probation officers should be villainies for exhibiting remorse bias and other related implicit biases. Rather, the model developed here should be used to acknowledge and combat the existence of such biases. Thus, trainings might not only make it more acceptable for probation officers to admit that they could be influenced by implicit remorse bias, but, moving forward, should also begin to mitigate its potential negative effects for particular defendants during the sentencing of violent offenses.
