Title: Sketching women: a corpus-based approach to representations of women's agency in political Internet corpora in Arabic and English


Abstract: Abstract

In this paper, I use methods from corpus linguistics to examine patterns pertaining to the representation of women in online Arabic- and English-language political corpora. I highlight the discursive differences and similarities that characterise the two corpora. Using word sketches, I identify representational categories in each corpus that are indexed by patterns of collocation. Analysis of semantic preference and prosody in each corpus reveals the ways in which women are represented. An exploration of the representations of women and gendered agency in both corpora reveals incongruities between the message of women's empowerment that the outlets promote and the implicit discursive representations of gender and gendered agency.

Section: 1. Introduction

‘Who is this creature whose feet never touch earth?’ ( Kahf, 1999 : 5)
Critics of contemporary political discourse focus on the extent to which women's interests are served by liberal economic and political policies enforced around the Middle East and North Africa ( Moghadem, 2005 ). Some have observed that the theory of women's rights, a special subset of human rights that protect and promote women's interests by advocating secularisation and social and economic empowerment, is ‘incommensurate’ with the lived reality of women in the region ( Parisi, 2010 ; and Abu-Lughod, 2013 : 186–98). Other authors describe how liberal political, social and economic policies, which privilege free markets, global investment, education, secularisation, gender equality, democratic institutions and political processes, and infrastructure reform, can negatively affect women more than men ( Pfeifer, 2016 : 43–53). Finally, visual and textual representations of Arab and Muslim women, once used by colonial powers to justify economic and political policies, are today recycled by hegemonic political forces, commercial organisations, and international financial institutions to justify violence and economic exploitation ( Ahmed, 1992 ; Kumar, 2012 ; and Abu-Lughod, 2013 ).
The representations of women that inhabit these discursive formations have a long genealogy in western political discourse about ‘the Orient’ ( Said, 1978 : 166–94). Mohanty (1984 : 333) has written about the discursive ‘production’ of the ‘Third World Woman’ as ‘a singular monolithic subject’ in the writings of some feminist authors. If, a generation later, other euphemisms have replaced ‘Third World’ in development studies discourse ( Escobar, 1995 ), the spectre of the ‘singular monolithic’ woman continues to haunt visual representations of women in the Middle East 2 ( Kahf, 1999 ) and discursive representation in Arabic and English politics on the left as well as the right of the political spectrum ( Abu-Lughod, 2013 ). Kahf (1999 : 1–2) notes, for example, that the image of the victimised and exoticised Muslim woman is ‘so diffuse as to be part of conventional wisdom’ and ‘so ubiquitous as to be invisible’. These narratives are articulated not just visually but textually across different media. This study weds discourse analysis with corpus linguistics to reveal how contemporary discursive political representations of women are constructed in Arabic at the level of lexis in liberal and left-leaning online media. Through quantitative and qualitative analysis of authentic textual material in English- and Arabic-language political corpora, I will capture the incongruities between the empowering message of these contemporary liberal and left-leaning discourses about women and the discursive representations of gendered agency. 3
These incongruities raise linguistic and methodological questions, including: ( 1 ) To what extent are the forms of women's agency that these political discourses explicitly articulate consistent with patterns of representation of women in liberal and left-leaning political activist discourses in Arabic and English? ( 2 ) How do we develop qualitative and quantitative methods from discourse analysis and corpus linguistics to reveal these patterns at macro- and micro-levels by constructing and testing hypotheses about gendered agency on liberal and left-leaning Arabic- and English-language online political corpora?
The following section contextualises this study in existing research on the representation of women in media in the Middle East. I attempt to justify the study's methodological approach, which mixes quantitative and qualitative methods. This is followed by two results sections. I first describe the two corpora under examination and the gendered political cosmos they occupy. The second results section discusses the representation of women and issues relating to gendered political agency in liberal and left-leaning political discourse. I conclude by drawing attention to some limitations of my study, and highlight lessons that can be learned from combining quantitative and qualitative analysis for the study of Arabic political discourses today.

Section: 2. Representations of women in Middle Eastern media: problems and methods

The representation of women in anglophone and Arabic-language media is troubled. Al-Hejin (2015 : 2) observes that in English-language news media, the representation of Muslim women tends to ‘reinforce certain stereotypes’. In part, negative stereotyping of women in the Middle East, especially Muslim women, in English-language media is a consequence of growing Islamophobia and anti-immigrant sentiments in North America and Europe ( Scott, 2007 ; and Kumar, 2012 ). However, historians and anthropologists have highlighted how the negative representations of women in the Middle East are also a consequence of how European elites, beginning in the colonial period, spoke and continue to speak about the status of women in the Middle East and elsewhere using the concepts and terminology of democratic liberalism ( Mohanty, 1984 ; Ahmed, 1992 ; Mahmood, 2005 ; and Abu-Lughod, 2013 ). Ahmed (1992) has written about how Victorian-era feminism in Britain was transformed in the colonies into what she calls ‘Colonial feminism’, a discourse by which British colonial elites sought to justify their presence in the region by purporting to ‘save’ Muslim women, and empower and civilise them ( Ahmed, 1992 : 151). Today, representing women in the Middle East as being subjected to human rights violations and suffering from limited access to equal social and economic opportunities continues to be used to justify military aggression in the region. Abu-Lughod notes, for example, that it is no accident that the welfare and interests of women are made to align perfectly with the War against Terror in Laura Bush's speech soon after the invasion of Afghanistan, in which she declares that the ‘fight against terrorism is also a fight for the rights and dignity of women’ ( Abu-Lughod, 2013 : 32).
Traditional histories of liberalism in the Middle East offer positive assessments of its legacy ( Lewis, 1961 ; and Hourani, 1970 ), crediting Europeans political thinkers, philosophers, writers and scientists with the introduction of modern science, medicine, modern political institutions, modern political economics and governing techniques, and political theories about citisenship, democracy, freedom and rights ( Kuhnke, 1990 ; Crozet, 1994 ; Mitchell, 2002 ; Lewis, 2008 ; and Abu-Lughod, 2011 ). Recent studies, however, have focussed on the consequences of liberal economic and political policies in the region on the formation of subjectivities ( Moghadem, 2005 ; Fahmy, 2012 ; and Massad, 2015 ). These studies examine how liberal political and economic theories are implemented by Middle East states, and how medical science, political and administrative regimes, and economic reforms have transformed the way notions surrounding personhood, gender, sexuality, embodiment and then self are articulated.
Feminist scholarship on the Middle East has been critical of the representation of women by liberal anglophone and Arabic media outlets ( Al-Ariqi, 2009 ; Ibroscheva, 2013 ; Al-Hejin, 2015 ; Sjoberg and Whooley, 2015 ; and Mhajne and Whetstone, 2018). Most studies have focussed on Arabic and English news media, however. While several use critical discourse analysis ( cda ) (for example, Al-Ariqi, 2009 ; Ibroscheva, 2013 ; Al-Hejin, 2015 ; and Sjoberg and Whooley, 2015 ), Al-Hejin's (2015) study of the bbc 's representation of Muslim women is the only corpus-assisted study that combines cda with quantitative elements in corpus linguistics ( Baker, 2006 , 2014 ).
Cda and cl studies such as Al-Hejin's (2015) reveal how news discourse in particular contributes to the creation of subjectivities by constructing discursive worlds (e.g., the ‘Middle East’ and the ‘Muslim world’) and subjects to occupy them (e.g., ‘man’ and ‘Muslim woman’), and narratives that link the subjects to the world and to one another in time. These subjects are represented as actors (they ‘vote’ and ‘elect’) in events (‘war’, ‘Arab Spring’ and ‘9/11’) that occur in these worlds. By analysing frequent lexical patterns, scholars can detect how positive and negative associations discursively form around the subjects who occupy and perform in these discursive worlds, thereby implicitly creating norms of behaviour, tastes and preferences for readers who use these categories in different ways to parse lived experience. To the extent that the representations of world, event, time and subject in this news discourse are directed at subjects in the world, I call the news discourse a ‘first-order’ normative discourse.
But what of political discourses, 4 which are understudied in Arabic using either cda or corpus linguistic methods? In the two corpora that provide the data for this study, the political discourse involves, in effect, the representation of representations of subjects who occupy the world. These are second-order political discourses. They do not directly involve narratives representing subjects inhabiting and performing in discursive worlds. They are texts that speak about and categorise our representations of the kinds of subjects constructed by the first-order discourse. If we read ‘Dozens of women rally in front of Tehran University’ in the first-order discourse, these representations are incorporated into the second-order discourse about ‘women's empowerment in Iran’. These second-order discourses supply the reasons for the repugnance we feel over a story about fgc in Sudan or the praise we assign to women participating in the Green Movement in Iran. It is important to analyse these second-order normative discourses lest we leave our own presuppositions and analytical categories unexamined. Why should we associate women at rallies in Iran with women's empowerment there? What assumptions about the nature of female agency in the Middle East enable the association of attending rallies with empowerment?
Given its aim of studying discourse as a practice and reproduction of power (van Dijk, 1993), cda offers resources for observing how political discourses reproduce subjectivities within a network of power relations at the level of lexical representation. While this approach shows some promise, it has been criticised from various standpoints ( Fowler, 1996 ; Stubbs, 1997 ; and Breeze, 2011 ). In response, scholars have argued that combining corpus linguistics with cda addresses common criticisms that are directed at it ( Baker, 2006 ; Baker et al ., 2008 ; and Partington, 2013 ). Studies of the representation of women in English- and Arabic-language media ( Al-Ariqi, 2009 ; Ibrosheva, 2013 ; and Sjoberg and Whooley, 2015 ) may be justly criticised for failing to identify criteria for what counts as a salient collocation, to compensate for bias in the selection of data, to ensure that the data are representative, and for not taking into consideration the fact that the researcher's ideological orientation predetermines which lexical patterns are considered evidentiary.
Corpus linguistic methods have not, therefore, been used in studies of this kind. What is more, these studies are overwhelmingly concerned with English-language news corpora. This study, however, will examine political discourses (second-order normative discourses) in Arabic. Mohammed (2012) argues that Arabic corpus linguistics should adapt a view of collocation that is inspired by Sinclair's theory of extended lexical units to the study of collocation in Arabic. Mohammed conducts a case-study of how democracy and identity are represented by analysing collocations of the Arabic terms dīmuqrāṭīya (‘democracy’) and huwīya (‘identity’). To my knowledge, the representation of women in Arabic-language political discourse that uses a corpus linguistics method has not been undertaken.
In this study, I examine the linguistic context of keywords relating to the representation of women in the Arabic Political Internet Corpus ( apic ), a corpus of just over 1 million words. The corpus was constructed by first identifying well-regarded political websites in Arabic that use a political vocabulary inspired by liberal and leftist politics. Whilst articles in it range over a fifteen-year period (roughly 2000 to 2017), most articles in apic fall between the years 2016 to 2018. I attempted to ensure that the contributions of each outlet to the total word-count of the corpus were more or less equal. This meant that, for example, only a small number of long publications by the Arab Reform Initiative ( Mubādarat al-iṣlāḥ al-ʿArabī ) and Human Rights Watch Arabic are included in the corpus, whereas the short blog-length pieces published by Sasa Post required a larger number of articles to be uploaded.
After uploading the articles to Sketch Engine ( Kilgarriff et al ., 2004 ), the texts were automatically indexed and pos -tagging was applied. Using word sketches, I focussed mainly on noun modifiers and conjunctions ( Arts et al ., 2014 ; and Kilgarriff et al ., 2014 ). Unlike other studies of this kind (e.g., Baker et al ., 2013a ,b; and Al-Hejin, 2015 ) the corpus data were not captured using a keyword or a constellation of keywords relating to women from a newspaper or Internet archive ( Baker, 2006 : 31–2). In other words, interest in the political representation of women as such did not inspire the construction of apic . I sought, rather, to build a corpus that would enable me to explore the lexical properties of liberal and left-leaning Arabic political discourses on the Internet in an open-ended way. An initial examination of word frequencies, however, suggested that the political representation of women was a crucial factor in the subset of online Arabic political discourse in apic .
An initial assessment of the most frequent words in apic suggested that women would be a keyword in the corpus. That women is indeed a keyword was confirmed by further statistical analysis of the study corpus ( apic ) in relation to a reference corpus (arTenTen12) (see Jakubíček et al ., 2013 ). The effect-size metric Log Ratio ( Hardie, 2014 ; and Gabrielatos, 2018 ) revealed that women occurs with more than twice the frequency (per million words) in comparison with the reference corpus (see Table 4 on p. 33). Furthermore, the Bayes Factor ( bic ), which measures the statistical significance of this difference in frequency ( Gabrielatos, 2018 ), indicated that it was highly unlikely that the difference between the normalised frequency of women in apic and the reference corpus is arbitrary. 5 ‘Exploratory’ and ‘focussed’ keyword analysis combined with effect-size and statistical significance metrics indicated that the frequency of women in apic is motivated, and, therefore, deserved closer scrutiny at the level of collocation and qualitative analysis.
After identifying collocates in these lexical contexts with the aid of the above metrics, I turned to qualitative analysis of concordance lines. In order to fruitfully combine the ‘synergies’ ( Baker et al ., 2008 ) of corpus-linguistic and discourse analytic methodologies, I decided to use word sketches, or automatically generated summaries of a word's ‘grammatical and collocational behaviour’ ( Kilgarriff and Tugwell, 2002 ), to get a better sense of what sorts of rhetorical and lexical work women was performing in apic . Word sketches have been used before, for example, in the study of gendered language and the lexical construction of gendered stereotypes ( Pearce, 2008 ). Baker and his collaborators have used word sketches combined with cda to study the lexical features of discriminatory language and identity formation in large corpora of British newspapers ( Baker, et al ., 2008 , 2013a ,b). They characterise word sketches as a ‘broad-brush’ approach that should be combined with qualitative analysis ( Baker et al ., 2013a : 260). Baker has shown how word sketches can be used to identify salient collocational candidates for qualitative analysis as well, arguing that combining cda with quantitative corpus linguistics methods is an important way of triangulating research methods ( Baker et al ., 2008 ; see also Rychlý, 2008 ). Based on the corpus data and the collocation strength metrics, the word sketches revealed that the representation of women in apic could be meaningfully explored using a relatively limited number of Arabic lexical constructions. Of these I focussed on frames involving qualifiers (e.g., {[ nisāʾ *] Miṣrīya (Egyptian [ women ])}), prepositional qualifiers (e.g., {[ nisāʾ * fī ] al-sūq ([ women* in ] the marketplace)}) and the genitive annexations ( iḍāfa , e.g., { tamkīn [ nisāʾ* ] (empowerment [ of women ])}). I have not, however, considered all collocates of nisāʾ* / women * in the corpus. My analysis and conclusions are, rather, based on collocations that meet a minimum threshold for statistical correlation. After a comparison of Mutual Information, t-test and Log Dice metrics, I determined that collocates with Log Dice>6.5 should be included in the collocation analysis ( Rýchly, 2008 ) (see Tables 5 to 7 ).
The fact that a certain collocation reached a minimal threshold for collocation strength did not, however, immediately qualify it as a candidate for qualitative study. In addition to the above conditions, I sometimes refrained from drawing broader conclusions about the representation of women in apic from collocations that are strong, but are not, more or less, evenly dispersed in the corpus ( Baker, 2006 : 59–62). For example, nisāʾ * mutaḥawwila / transgender women * is a strong collocation in apic (Log Dice>9; see Table 7 ). A closer examination, however, reveals that this collocation is not evenly distributed in the corpus ( Figure 1 ), as it occurs very frequently, but in a small number of articles.
Of the the 162 instances in which mutaḥawwila * refers to the phenomenon of being transgendered, 161 appear in three reports published in Arabic by Human Rights Watch, while one instance of the term appears in Jadaliyya 's Arabic translation of Angela Davis's speech at the Women's March in 2017 ( Jadaliyya, 2017 ). And of the three reports published by Human Rights Watch that mention trans women, more than 85 percent of the instances of this collocation occur in a single article ( hrw , 2012). While the dramatic differences between the ways women and trans women are represented in apic raise fundamental questions about gender, language and representation in contemporary Arabic political discourse, my data do not permit me to draw definite conclusions on this issue.
Finally, in addition to triangulating research methods ( Hesse-Biber, 2013 ; and Malamatidou, 2018 ), I shall triangulate the Arabic corpus data with the Genealogies of Knowledge Internet Sub-corpus ( gkis ), a comparable English-language online political corpus being constructed as part of the ahrc -funded Genealogies of Knowledge Project. 6 The construction of gkis has been dictated by an interest in the nature of left- and right-wing politics and debates about the principles of science. At the time that I was carrying out the research for this paper, gkis mainly consisted of texts drawn from left-wing and left-leaning online political outlets. 7 Texts from these outlets were included in gkis when they were seen to discuss issues that were related to these two overarching themes.
The fact that gkis resembles apic in its themes, size and approach to compilation encouraged me to use these corpora together. There are several reasons for taking this combined-corpora approach. One is that that cda research requires contextualisation of the corpus data. In the case of this study, contextualisation means being aware of global trends in political discourse. I found it necessary, therefore, to triangulate the corpus data owing partly to the historical influence of English and other European languages on the genesis of the modern Arabic political vocabulary ( Ayalon, 1987 ; Lewis, 2008 ; and Abu-Lughod, 2011 ). Ever since Qasim Amin (1865–1908) published The Liberation of Women ( Taḥrīr al-marʾa ) with the assistance of the British colonial administration in Egypt in 1899, representing women has been an important ingredient in liberal Arabic political discourse ( Ahmed, 1992 : 145). Long after the British colonial presence had ceased, discursively representing women to advocate for political change became a centrepiece of Arabic nationalist rhetoric ( Baron, 2004 ), and it continues to play a major role in Islamist political rhetoric today ( Halverson and Way, 2011 ; and El Haitami, 2016 ). Since the inception of liberal politics in the Middle East, therefore, the political use of women in Arabic political discourse has responded to transformations in thinking about women, gender and political power in North-American and European political thought. A rigorous discourse analysis of the political rhetoric relating to women in the present, therefore, requires proper contextualisation of collocations about women against the background of contemporary liberal political discourses in European languages. I use gkis , therefore, to compare and contrast the political uses of gender in apic , in order to supply some of the political, social and intellectual context for the qualitative analysis.
More importantly, however, without triangulating the lexical data, I risk claiming that the representations of women in the Arabic political Internet corpus are a consequence of lexical features indexing categories of representation that are particular to political discourses in Arabic. Data triangulation allows me to determine to what extent these representations of women are a feature not merely of Arabic, but of a cross-linguistic political discourse that uses the lexical features of diverse languages to create common categories of representation that link agency and gender in similar ways.

Section: 3. Identifying online political discourses in Arabic and English

Gkis is being constructed as part of a larger, multiple-language project drawing on the methods developed in corpus-based translation studies. It aims to trace the role that translation has played in the evolution of key scientific and political concepts from the pre-modern into the modern period. The texts in the Internet corpus are drawn mainly from left-leaning political and scientific English-language websites. The sources of the texts suggest that gkis contains political discourse that is committed to global political and environmental activism from a leftist perspective (see Table 1 ).
This impression is strengthened by examining word frequencies and comparing them with another English-language Internet corpus, the enTenTen13 Internet corpus compiled by Sketch Engine, which serves as the English reference corpus in this study (see Jakubíček et al ., 2013 ). As a ‘snapshot’ of the English-language Internet in 2013, enTenTen13 is a large corpus that represents a much wider slice of English language usage on the Internet ( Baker, 2006 ). Table 2 presents the effect-size metric Log Ratio along with the bic metric for statistical significance for high-frequency words in gkis in comparison with the reference corpus. Clearly, not all of the top frequency words in gkis should be counted as keywords. For example, the Log Ratio metrics suggest that the normalised word-frequencies (per million words) for world , system , process , life and right do not differ dramatically from their normalised frequencies in the reference corpus. On the other hand, a number of high-frequency words in gkis are drawn from a vocabulary inspired by liberal economic and political concepts and terminology.
Words such as rights , citizenship , democracy , workers and just are used in gkis with much greater frequency per million words than in enTenTen13. In addition, the bic scores for these words are very high, 8 strongly suggesting that their frequent use is not arbitrary, but is motivated, rather, by the political alignment of the texts included in gkis , and possibly reflects a political narrative constructed by outlets. Such a narrative pits ‘right-wing’ and ‘neoliberal’ antagonists against ‘left-wing’ protagonists, who are associated with the working class. Gkis 's political narrative from the keywords identified above, or, we might say, what gkis is about, involves left-leaning protagonists who struggle to overcome class-based economic inequalities, discrimination and state power by demanding justice, the articulation of which is in terms of human rights that are guaranteed by citizenship in a nation-state.
In compiling apic , I sought to parallel to some degree the selection criteria of gkis , which avoids including news items (first-order discourses) in its corpus, preferring texts in which (mainly left-leaning) authors make explicit their political viewpoints and engage in debate about political principles. I included texts in apic on the basis of the aforementioned distinction between first- and second-order political discourses in a handful of Arabic-language political websites. Consequently, apic represents a wider range of viewpoints than gkis , including left-leaning as well as neoliberal outlets (see Table 3 ).
Left-wing perspectives are propounded by authors writing for Jadaliyya, Mada Masr and the New Syrian. Other outlets, such as the Carnegie Middle East Center and Brookings Doha, overtly align themselves with a US-focussed, neo-liberal political–economic agenda. Jazeera Center for Studies challenges US influence in the Middle East ideologically. However, its reform-minded political agenda mirrors US-backed institutions such as the Washington Institute or the Carnegie Center in some respects. Nevertheless, these sources seem to eschew a discourse of global revolution and reform, focussing instead on regional political debates and concrete challenges that affect the contemporary Middle East. Rather than speaking about the discursive construction of an absolute political cosmos as represented in gkis , it is more accurate to say that apic constructs a regional political cosmos for the Arab Middle East.
By comparing this Internet corpus of political Arabic with the large reference corpus arTenTen12, it is clear from Table 4 that many of these high-frequency words in apic are dramatically over-used per million words in relation to the reference corpus, and the high bic scores suggest once again that this usage is motivated by the nature of contemporary liberal/left-leaning discourse in Arabic on the Internet.
Even words with the low Log Ratio scores, such as Miṣr / Egypt and ḥukūma / government , are used almost twice as frequently in relation to the reference corpus. Only ʿArabī / Arab and ʿamal / work are used with nearly the same frequency per million words in both corpora. In apic , therefore, we have a political discourse whose political vocabulary shares many items with the political discourse in gkis .
A comparison of Tables 2 and 4 shows that the corpora are characterised by the following keywords pairs: dawla / state , siyāsa / politics , muǧtamaʿ / society , ḥukūma / government , siyāsī / political , ʿamal / working / work , ḥuqūq / rights , niẓām / regime and nisāʾ / women . To a large extent, then, both corpora use similar elements to the present political cosmos. There are, however, a number of differences between the corpora. Most noticeable is the high number of words in apic that refer to countries or regions where political events take place and political actors perform ( United [States, Arab Emirates, Nations], Egypt , Iran , Israel , Arab , [United] States ( wilāyāt ), Syria and Jerusalem ). Regional markers of this sort do not appear with high frequency in gkis . Other evidence for the regional outlook of apic , in contrast with gkis 's global outlook, is the high frequency of šurṭa / police , sulṭa / authority , ʿunf / violence and qānūn / law . These words mark out a distinct sub-discourse in apic that addresses the high incidence of illegal violence and brutality by police and domestic security forces across the Middle East ( usds , 2016). The concordance pairs in Figures 2 and 3 neatly illustrate this point.
On the other hand, keywords referring to political agents ( right , left , people , public , class and movements ) and words for key concepts in the liberal political lexicon ( democracy , citizenship , life and just ), which occur with high frequency in gkis , do not occur with equally high frequency in apic . These differences highlight gkis 's left-leaning and activist political orientation as well as its polemical nature.
Despite these numerous differences, it is remarkable, nevertheless, that women and nisāʾ are keywords in their respective corpora. Nisāʾ is used nearly four times as often in apic in comparison with the reference corpus, arTenTen12 (Log Ratio = 1.96; bic = 931). Likewise, women is used more than twice as frequently in gkis in comparison with the online English reference corpus (Log Ratio=1.29; bic =441). Far from being arbitrary, these frequencies appear to be motivated by political ideologies that link gender and politics in both corpora. Hence, despite the substantial differences in political orientation and the wide gap between the cultures, histories, languages, ethnic and religious composition, economic status and social forces from which these discourses originate, the representation of women is a central element in the political discourses in both corpora.
The frequency charts show that the representation of men is not an important element in either discourse, however. Men occurs 314 times in gkis ( women occurs 1,096 times), but women occurs within a span of five words to the right or left (a ‘±5 window’) in over one-third (110) of these instances. This suggests that the representation of men is merely an element in a larger political discourse about women. In gkis, men functions in two ways: as a way to speak about how a group of people share the experience of discrimination and suffering in equal measure; and second, as a way to speak about differences between men and women, whether social, economic, political or biological. For example, women and men (‘female firstness’) is used to express the idea that men and women share common experiences in a political struggle. These patterns are clear in the concordance in Figure 4 .
On the other hand, the more common phrase men and women (‘male firstness’) overwhelmingly appears in contexts in which the author speaks about the differences between men and women because of discrimination or biological difference, a semantic feature that Figure 5 illustrates well.
Finally, women shows a strong tendency to select for children . On the other hand, men occurs in a ±5 window with children exclusively when it is accompanied by women in the collocation ‘men, women, and children’. These collocations tend to appear in contexts in which authors are expressing moral outrage at the ‘indiscriminate suffering of a group of people’. Consider the concordance in Figure 6 , for example.
Women and children frequently collocate in ±5 window when men is absent. These instances are used by authors to express moral outrage at violence or discrimination against the weak. Authors in this instance are not speaking about populations, but about women who are subject to violence because of the ‘care they give to their children’. The concordance in Figure 7 nicely illustrates this point.
To summarise, representations of women as weak and subject to discrimination in gkis appears to be a rhetorical strategy that seeks to elicit moral outrage in readers, and to inspire them to become involved in the left's global political struggle against state-sponsored violence and patriarchy. Women are associated with children as both are portrayed as weak and helpless (but more on strong women later). Women are also portrayed as suffering because of the care they provide to their children.
The use of the terms children , women and men in apic is analogous. Like gkis , riǧāl */ men occurs 515 times ( nisāʾ */ women , 868 times). Of these instances men appears with nisāʾ */ women within a ±5 window 15 percent of the time (eighty-one instances). 9 The collocations riǧāl * wa-l-nisāʾ */ men and women and women and nisāʾ * wa-l-riǧāl */ men / are used overwhelming in apic to speak about and condemn gender-based discrimination. Unlike gkis , there does not seem to be a strong correlation between male and female firstness in relation to the collocations’ semantic prosody. Figures 8 and 9 show typical patterns.
Like gkis , riǧāl */ men rarely collocates in a ±5 window with aṭfāl / children (eight times) and in half of those cases it is accompanied by nisā* / women . In these instances, the corpus speaks about populations or groups of people who experience communal violence. This conclusion is illustrated well in Figures 10 and 11 .
Nisāʾ */ women collocates with aṭfāl / children in the absence of men more frequently. The authors represent women and children as weak and innocent victims of oppressive forces in these instances, as in Figures 12 and 13 .
In gkis and apic , therefore, the representation of men in is not an especially important element in the Arabic political discourse. Rather, men feature in a larger discourse about the political status of women. The outlets deploy men and women or women and men in a ±5 window in order to represent the forms of victimisation and discrimination that women experience because of war and oppressive social practices. On the other hand, men ( riǧāl* ) rarely occurs with children ( aṭfāl ) on its own in either corpus; instead, it collocates with women ( nisāʾ* ) and children ( aṭfāl ) to speak about the suffering of vulnerable ‘groups’ or ‘population’. On the other hand, women ( nisāʾ* ) and children ( nisāʾ* ) in both corpora co-occur in a ±5 window without men when authors wish to speak about the oppression of the most vulnerable members of society. In each corpus, women ( nisāʾ* ) shows a semantic preference for children ( aṭfāl ) in a way that men ( riǧāl* ) does not. 10 In gkis, the preference seems to be underwritten by the fact that women are portrayed as suffering discrimination and loss of opportunities because of the care they provide and not merely because they are weak. Women and children in apic are represented as suffering physically because they are weak. The notion that women suffer lost economic opportunities because of caring for children does not appear to underwrite the collocation.

Section: 4. Constructing gendered agency through difference

The foundation of contemporary representations of women rests on the distinction between the private and public sphere ( Parisi, 2010 ). Apic is no exception to this trend. The dichotomy is not as important, however, in the representation of women's political, economic and social empowerment in gkis . The collocations ‘private-sphere’ and ‘domestic sphere’ are not used. The ‘private sector’ features prominently, but refers to arenas of the capitalist enterprise, as we can see in the concordance in Figure 14 .
While the collocation ‘public sphere’ is prominent, there is only a single instance in which the public sphere is represented as a gendered arena, which is constructed as one from which women are absent. The problem now is that this notion of personal lives mattering within the political realm has also become a way to demarcate and restrict women's participation in the public sphere as well. ( Salvage Zone , 25 July 2016)
The fact that women are in the public sphere is not disputed in gkis . What is problematic are the conditions in which they are compelled to occupy it. In gkis , the public- versus private-sphere dichotomy does not do explanatory work, in the sense that it is not used as a way of representing women's lived experience, or the modes of oppression, discrimination or subjection they undergo.
Encouraging women's public participation is a pillar of the UN's political policy for the Middle East ( Moghadem, 2005 ; Braunstein, 2012 ; and Pfeifer, 2016 ). This policy also aims to reduce the abuse and discrimination that the women in the Middle East experience in the private sphere. The status of women in the Middle East is a popular liberal cause. Consequently, the division of the world into public and private spheres is a bedrock of apic 's political discourse. However, while women previously were thought to naturally occupy the private sphere, women in apic 's cosmos now occupy the public sphere with much greater frequency, though after much struggle. Table 5 , which shows the collocations for the frame { nisāʾ fī / women in + [ noun ]}, identifies the politically salient spaces that women are represented as occupying in the discourse. 11
Women are in society ( fī l-muǧtamaʿ ) but as long as they remain in the private sphere, they are subject to oppression and discrimination. Government policies for [economic] growth that have to do with the role of women in society continue to fluctuate, however, because of the continual political struggle between conservatives and reformers. ( HRW , 24 May 2017)
Open in Viewer Table 5 : Collocates for the frame { nisāʾ fī / women in + [ noun ]}. Yet, even when they brave the job market ( sūq al-ʿamal ) in the ‘public sphere’ ( al-maǧāl al-ʿāmm ), they rarely occupy positions of authority. The state is working to improve the alignment between men and women in the job market […] The state is also encouraging the promotion of women to positions of responsibility in public organisations and administration and at the level of private corporations. ( HRW , 23 April 2017)
In spite of the depredations visited on women in the public sphere, especially in the workplace, a retreat into the private sphere ( al-maǧāl al-ḫāṣṣ ) offers women in the Middle East little solace. Not only is the private sphere the location of women's domestic drudgery, but also a place of confinement, and frequently physical and emotional abuse. An opinion writer for Mada Masr writes about Egyptian women: Dealing with violence in the private sphere helps us to connect to the voices of some women ( Mada Masr , 21 December 2017)
In fact, out of the sixteen instances of the collocation fī l-maǧāl al-ḫāṣṣ ( in the private sphere ), women ( nisāʾ ) and violence ( ʿunf ) co-occur within a ±5 window in fourteen of them. This semantic preference is apparent in the following pair of concordances (see Figures 15 and 16 ).
The domestic sphere is, thus, never peaceful in the liberal representation of the Arab family. Domestic abuse and exploitation are as ubiquitous as education and medical services for women and girls are not ( Abu-Lughod, 2013 : 68–78).
This, then, is the discursive cosmos that women in apic and gkis occupy. Examining the frame {[ adj ] + women } and { women of + [ noun ]} gives us further insights into the politically salient categories of women that characterise these corpora (see Table 6 ).
In terms of semantic preference, in gkis these collocates index representations of the kinds of women who are especially prone to experience politically relevant forms of discrimination, marginalisation and violence, such as ‘working-class women’, ‘trans women’ and Muslim women’. The exception to this is ‘Kurdish women’, who, as we shall see presently, are used to represent an idealised form of female political actor. These collocations fall into categories that index the uses that woman * are put to in the corpus: ( 1 ) woman * is used to advance a critique of ‘neoliberalism’. This category is indexed by the frames {[working-class, migrant, Muslim, trans, indigenous] women } and { women of [colour]}. ( 2 ) woman * is used to speak about the exploitation of women and the challenges and experiences that women share globally. This representation of women is often tied to ( 1 ) a critique of liberal democracies or to ( 3 ). This category is indexed by the frame {[young, working-class, indigenous] women }. ( 3 ) woman * is used as a way to represent an idealised form of agency for the leftist woman political activist. This category is indexed by the frame {[indigenous, Kurdish] women }. Muslim women in gkis are represented as ensnared in the web of an intolerant liberal feminism that seeks to emancipate Muslim women from themselves by rationalising their choice to wear the veil as an instance of, in effect, false consciousness ( Scott, 2007 ). 12 On the one hand, these feminists and femocrats call Islam a misogynist religion and treat Muslim women who wear the veil as sort of self-enslaved individuals who do not understand what freedom and emancipation really are about. ( Salvage Zone , 13 July 2017)
Similarly, migrant women, indigenous women, trans women, working-class women and women of colour are enlisted in broadsides against a liberal politics that is presented as incapable of meeting or unwilling to see to the needs of these groups of women.
The second and third frames complement each other well. The former represents women as oppressed and particularly prone to individual as well as state violence. It is used as a way of representing the conditions of women as they actually exist. The latter frame draws an idealised picture of the woman political agent, primarily in the guise of the reified image of the militant Kurdish woman. On the one hand, the failings of current economic and political policies are faulted for the suffering of young working-class women: […] young women are often subject to the highest level of exploitation as informal and temporary workers. ( ROAR , 25 June 2016)
On the other hand, indigenous women and Kurdish women are offered as models for women on the left of the political spectrum: […] there was an upsurge in women's participation in the institutional apparatuses of the state, including new indigenous women ministers, such as Nemecia Achacollo, and Nilda Copa, and indigenous women in other prominent official positions […]. ( Salvage Zone , 26 September 2016)
Strong, fearless, organised, politically astute, involved, liberated, unified, knowledgeable, autonomous, radical, anti-establishment and armed with assault rifles – this is the ideal female political actor constructed in gkis , and it is contrary to a purportedly watered-down version of ‘corporate’ ‘Western feminism’: As young Kurdish women , we are very lucky to inherit this legacy. The knowledge that women in Kurdistan have led village uprisings, prison hunger strikes and rebellions, founded guerrilla armies, and risked their lives for political causes of course enriches our identity and breaks social chains and taboos. ( Salvage Zone , 8 March 2017)
This idealised leftist woman is represented as being Kurdish and indigenous , an ideal that has been achieved by an elect few who are outside and ‘non-western’. This model of female political agency is contrasted with a bleak vision of the everyday western woman, who is subject to numerous forms of discrimination and abuse. My concern here, as elsewhere in this paper, is not with the question of whether Kurdish women are really as empowered and radical as they are made out to be in the corpus. I am interested, rather, in how the representations of these women as empowered complemented by the dreary vision of ‘western women’ fits in nicely with an Oriental-them- versus -Occidental-us dichotomy, the rhetorical effect of which is to place the realisation of the left's political objectives out of reach. Rhetorically, this stark contrast is meant to incite sympathetic western readers to act to achieve these goals, while at the same time discursively constructing an idealised form of leftist woman activist who remains perpetually unrealised.
Collocation patterns with regard to women in apic confirm the regional rather than ‘global’ scope of the politically salient identities that woman assume. Table 7 shows the strongest collocations for the frame { nisāʾ * ( women *) + [ adj ]}. Owing to the fact that Arabic has a ‘rich’ and productive inflectional morphology ( Mohammed, 2012 : 112), I group all inflected variants under the same lemma. Furthermore, as the singular form of woman in Arabic, marʾa , is from a different root than its Arabic plural form, nisāʾ , the singular and plural are not, strictly speaking, inflected variants of a single lemma. Association measures for Arabic collocations are therefore calculated with lemmatic frequency and the operational assumption that nisāʾ is, in effect, an ‘inflected’ form of marʾa .
The collocates in Table 7 in this frame divide into four categories: ( 1 ) adjectives indexing membership in a nation : { nisā ʾ* [ Suʿūdīya */ Saudi , Filisṭīnīya */ Palestinian , Kurdīya */ Kurdish , Īrānīya */ Iranian , Tūnisīya */ Tunisian , Yamanīya */ Yemeni ]}; ( 2 ) adjectives indexing economic status in society { nisāʾ * [ ʿāmila */ working , rīfīya */ rural ]}; ( 3 ) adjectives indexing domestic status in the household { nisāʾ * [ mutazawwiǧa */ married , muʿannafa */ abused ]}; and, ( 4 ) an adjective that indexes a discourse about forms of gender embodiment { nisāʾ * [ mutaḥawwila */ trans ]}.
At first glance, Table 7 appears to confirm our conclusions about the regional nature of the political discourse in apic in contrast to the global scope of the gkis . The rich variety of adjectives for nationality reveals that the corpus is interested in the differences that characterise women of different nationalities. However, if we look at the semantic prosody of these collocates we can infer that other factors may motivate the frequency of certain collocates. 13 Collocates such as Muslim woman *, activist woman *, democratic woman * and Arab woman * are not statistically significant. 14 These observations suggest that the representation of women as Muslim or as Arab, for example, is not a central theme in the liberal-minded political discourse in the region. On the other hand, Saudi women* , Palestinian women* , Tunisian women* , Iranian women* , Kurdish women* and Yemeni women* are collocates whose co-occurrence cannot be explained as random. Representing these women as belonging to these particular nationalities is, in other words, an important part of the political representation of the region.
Why is it important to represent women as Saudi, Iranian, Kurdish and Palestinian, but not, on the other hand, as Egyptian? Remember that in gkis Kurdish women was used, in effect, to construct the woman super-agent. A similar dynamic appears to inform the representation of women's agency in apic . The focus on Saudi, Iranian, Yemeni and Tunisian women is not owing primarily to the ‘regional’ rather than ‘global’ scope of the texts in the corpus. Rather, authors focus on these women to construct idealised types of feminine agencies in the Middle East. In the case of Kurdish and Tunisian women, we a have a feminine agency that is liberated, autonomous and socially empowered by having equal access to education and the job market. In contrast, we have the oppressed non-agents, such as Saudi, Iranian and Yemeni women. In apic they are represented as oppressed and disempowered as a group. As individuals, however, these women struggle to throw off ‘native’ customs, fight systematic discrimination, move out of the private sphere where their agency lies dormant into the public sphere where it is able to come to life politically, socially and economically. [ ‘Iranian women face a wide array of legal and social barriers that limit not only their lives but their sources of livelihood, and that contribute to strengthening glaring economic inequality.’] ( HRW , 24 May 2017)
In a way that recalls how she is depicted and used in gkis , the Kurdish woman in apic is portrayed as liberated from the veil, as having achieved gender equality, and, unlike her hapless ‘Arab’ peers, as living in an egalitarian utopia where gender discrimination is not the norm. [‘In contrast to most of the nations in the Arab and Islamic Middle East, the Kurdish woman has nothing to do with the niqab, nor do women of the Kurds ever cover their faces (…).’] ( Mada Masr , 14 December 2017)
And again: [‘Many Kurdish men and women enjoy a good education, and they are well represented in administrative apparatuses. There has been a political activist movement that was organised in the middle of the last century, which supports democracy, peace, shuns violence and extremism, and is committed to secularism.’] ( Washington Institute , November 2017)
Tunisian women are also held up both as liberated and empowered, although this progress seems in perpetual danger of being thwarted by remnants of conservative cultural and religious customs. [‘(…) searching the while for what suited the Tunisian intellect, the educated Tunisian woman , and enlightened, modern Tunisian youth (…).’] ( Sasa Post , 21 January 2018)
Yet, dangers to their liberties – the exception rather than the rule in Tunisia – persist according to another author who writes for Jadaliyya. [‘Yet, in the midst of this system of progressive laws you find that we prohibit the Tunisian woman from marrying a non-Muslim. Is this not a contradiction?’] ( Jadaliyya , 13 August 2017)
Apic therefore constitutes a discourse about women that constructs Arab female agencies by painting caricatures of Saudi, Yemeni and Iranian women on the one hand, and Tunisian and Kurdish women on the other. Saudi, Yemeni and Iranian women in apic are used to construct the type of woman the liberal discourse seeks to eradicate. These women are associated with the domestic sphere, nurturing, and with families and children, as we can see from the concordance lines in Figures 8 to 13 . At the same time, the discourse devalues these roles by also associating them with helplessness, oppression, domestic strife, patriarchy, lost economic opportunities, rights abuses, lack of education, and the burdens of domestic responsibilities and reproduction.

Section: 5. Conclusion

Analysing the construction of women in this subset of online media discourse reveals that the representations of women in the Middle East by media outlets such as the bbc are not just a result of editorial bias. The evidence presented here suggests that the discursive representations of women in the news and in liberal and left-leaning political discourses are informed by a conception of agency as the free exercise of self-willed behaviour that is directed at what the individual deems to be in her interest ( Mack, 2003 : 149). This notion of agency rather than close familiarity with the complex lived reality of women in the region dictates how Saudi and Kurdish women are represented in the news and in liberal and leftist politics. The semantic prosodies that women* / nisāʾ* attract result from the absolute value that journalists and political writers place on this form of agency. Women whose modes of agentival embodiment do not conform to this model, whose behaviour is informed, for example, by norms aiming at self-transcendence ( Mahmood, 2005 : 148) will tend to be represented as ‘suffering from false-consciousness’ or ‘performing a disservice to the cause of women's rights’ ( Al-Hejin, 2015 : 22). A political discourse underwritten by a notion of political agency as ‘behaviour that transcends the self in the modern nation-state’ would construct women differently. As matters are, helpless, confined Saudi women and liberated, secularised Kurdish women are the liberal-leftist discourse's mythical creatures.
In this paper, I undertook a large-scale analysis of the word woman */ nisāʾ * in contemporary English- and Arabic-language political discourses on the Internet. By combining discourse analysis with corpus linguistics methods, I used the quantitative strengths of the latter to address the weaknesses in the former. In spite of these efforts, the study has several limitations. The first involves using word sketches, which are best suited to the anlysis of large corpora ( Baker et al ., 2013a ,b). In order to account for this shortcoming in the data, I have ensured that my results are not based on statistical measures alone. I have supplemented statistical analysis with extensive qualitative analysis. The second limitation is related to the size of the corpora. Token dispersion has affected the identification of salient word frequencies and collocations. However, problems of dispersion alone do not necessarily invalidate the quantitative and qualitative analyses I have carried out. These results should be taken, instead, as promoting further investigation into this important question.
I utilised large Arabic and English Internet reference corpora to give a quantitative understanding of my claim that the English and Arabic corpora are ‘political’ corpora. My analysis of collocations focussed on strong collocations that occur frequently. For this reason, I also used Log Dice measurements to dictate which collocations were selected for analysis. Finally, I attempted to account for the relatively small size of my corpora by comparing the keyness of keywords and the salience of collocations involving women in both corpora. Triangulating my data in this way reduced potential bias in qualitative analysis by showing that my results in Arabic were consistent and meaningful – not only in themselves but in relation to an English political Internet corpus with a comparable political outlook.
I began this paper by highlighting incongruities between the message of liberal-leftist political discourses, which emphasise women's empowerment and equality, and the representation of women as disempowered. I have shown how this incongruity in the representation of women's agency is constructed at a lexical level. Qualitative analysis shows that despite the differences between the political outlooks of the authors whose texts make up gkis and apic , women's agency is constructed in complementary ways. The message of both corpora is that women's empowerment is tied to ensuring individual autonomy, personal liberty, possessing the resources for pursuing the good life, being empowered by having equal access to education and material well-being, and being untrammelled by family obligations and the burdens of reproduction.
Women's agency was, however, constructed against the backdrop of the dichotomy between the public and private sphere, which discursively links women to the home, child-rearing and domesticity. At the level of semantic preference, women consistently co-occur with men, girls and children. In both discourses, however, this representation is only partially aimed at representing women in the domestic sphere. In both corpora women 's preference for men and children is part of a discourse about fighting women's disempowerment. In apic , though, this involves representing women as the most vulnerable individuals in Arab society; in gkis this collocation pattern involves representing women as vulnerable because of the care they provide to children. Above all, these representations are driven by the political objectives of the writers, who use women to justify and realise the broader objectives of their respective political campaigns.

Section: Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Arts and Humanities Research Council, UK, under the grant ah/m010007/1 . Open access publishing was funded by the University of Manchester.
