Title: The ordering of relative clauses and determiner phrases in Chinese interlanguage: a multifactorial study


Abstract: Abstract

In English, a relative clause ( rc ) follows the head noun phrase ( np ). Conversely, the rc in Chinese precedes the head np directly before it or is separated by a determiner phrase ( dp ). This is uncommon in the subject-verb-object order language and results in two types of constructions. For Chinese as foreign language ( cfl ) learners, this construction alternation is complex to acquire and is dependent on many factors. This study aims to explore the underlying factors influencing cfl learners’ outer modifier nominal ( omn )/inner modifier nominal ( imn ) alternation and whether they have multiple interactions. A multifactorial exploration of the significant predictors of the omn / imn alternation in Chinese interlanguage data, taken from the International Chinese Interlanguage Corpus, was conducted. Conditional inference trees and random forests were used to analyse the data. The predictors studied consist of head np animacy (HeadNPAnimacy), head np length (HeadNPLength), grammatical roles of head np s in matrix clauses (HeadNPMatRole), grammatical roles of head np s in rc s (HeadNPRelRole), length of rc s (RCLength), types of native languages (NLType), and learners’ Chinese proficiency (CHProficiency). Examinations of omn / imn alternation show predictors’ significant effects in descending order of their effect size: HeadNPRelRole, HeadNPMatRole, RCLength, NLType, and HeadNPAnimacy.

Section: 1. Introduction

In English, relative clauses ( rc ) follow head noun phrases ( np ) to restrict and modify them. In contrast, rc s in Chinese precede head np s due to a lack of relative pronouns. They are connected by ‘DE’ as the signalling word. Therefore, noun modifiers in Chinese precede head np s and rc s and other modifiers have word order variation, which differ in various contexts. Determiner phrases ( dp ) studied in this paper are composed of structures including ‘demonstrative + classifier’, ‘numeral + classifier’ and other quantifiers. Examples are zhè gè (‘this’), jǐ zhāng (‘several’) and yī xiē (‘some’). dp s can be used as the modifiers of head np s, and can indicate the referent and the quantity. Examples are: zhè fēng xìn (‘this letter’) and zhè běn shū (‘this book’).
According to Zhang (2006), when an rc and a dp modify the head np together, two types of nominal constructions can be classified by the order of the rc and dp : the outer modifier nominal ( omn ) and the inner modifier nominal ( imn ). The former has an rc as an outer modifier, namely, the structure of the [ rc - dp -head np ]. The latter is the inverse ordering of two modifiers: [ dp - rc -head np ] with an rc as an inner modifier. The two constructions can be used interchangeably in some contexts such as Examples 1a and 1b. However, according to Zhang (2006), in Examples 2a and 2b, both are acceptable, and they are more inclined to use the former. This alternation may be affected by semantic, morphosyntactic, and producer-related factors. It is particularly complex for Chinese as foreign language ( cfl ) learners. Therefore, we aim to explore the underlying factors influencing cfl learners’ omn / imn alternation and whether they have multiple interactions. ( 1 ) a. [刚来的] 这个 学生 [ rc ] + dp + head np [Ø gāng lái de] zhè gè xué shēng Just now arrive DE this-CL student [‘This student who arrived just now.’] ( ) b. 这个 [刚来的] 学生 dp + [ rc ] + head np zhè gè [Ø gāng lái de] xué shēng this-CL just now arrive DE student [‘This student who arrived just now.’] ( 2 ) a. 来了 三个 [戴眼镜的] 学生 dp + [ rc ]+ head np Lái-le sān gè [Ø dài yǎn jìng de] xué shēng arrive-PERF three-CL wear eyeglasses DE student [‘Three students who wear glasses have arrived.’] ( ) b. 来了[戴眼镜的] 三个 学生 [ rc ]+ dp + head np Lái le [Ø dài yǎn jìng de] sān gè xué shēng arrive-PERF wear eyeglasses DE three-CL student [‘Three students who wear glasses have arrived.’]

Section: 2. Previous research on the influencing factors

The factors by previous studies that are related to omn / imn alternation can be divided into intra-textual and extra-textual factors.
Intra-textual factors include many semantic and morphosyntactic factors. Semantic factors mainly contain head np s’ animacy and arguments in previous studies. Ming and Chen (2010) studied the effect of animacy on head np s in native Chinese. They found that animate and concrete inanimate head np s favour imn , while abstract animate head np s favour omn , see Examples 3 and 4. Li (2013) found that in Chinese interlanguage, abstract animate np s also prefer imn . In corpus analysis, the subject is animate and the object is inanimate. Wu and Lü (2016) indicated that if two arguments’ animacy pattern is not as common as that in corpus analysis, the DPs’ accessibility will decrease. This makes their preceding tendency weak. Furthermore, Sheng (2018) discovered that the arguments’ animacy has an effect on alternation. Patterns with a higher frequency include the inanimate head np and the animate-embedded np in rc s. These and others like it will increase the rate of omn , as compared with a less frequent pattern. This is since both np s are animate.
Head np s’ grammatical roles in matrix clauses and rc s are often discussed regarding morphosyntactic factors. In the matrix clause, Pu (2008) , Wu (2009) , and Li (2013) determined its influence on imn / omn alternation. However, the concrete preference remains to be discussed. Wu (2011) observed that imn never appears in object-extracted clauses, when head np s serve other grammatical roles in matrix clauses. This is except for subjects and objects. Concerning head np s in rc s’ grammatical role, most studies found that DPs tend to precede the subjective clause and follow the objective clause ( Tang, 2007 ; Pu, 2008 ; Wu, 2009 ; Ming and Chen, 2010 ; Sheng and Wu, 2013 ; Wu, 2011 ; Wu and Sheng, 2014 ; and Wu and Lü, 2017 ). According to Xu (2008), Li (2013) and Zhang (2018), a dp tends to precede the objective clause. In Sheng and Wu (2018) , the corpus method and the online behavioural experiment demonstrated different trends. The corpus study complied with the former, namely, DPs tend to precede the subjective clause and follow the objective clause, and the online behavioural experiment with the latter, which indicates that a dp precedes the objective clause. ( 3 ) 桌上留着朋友的一个留言，上面抄录着我们都十分喜欢的一首小诗。 Zhuōshàng liú-zhe péngyǒu-de yī gè liúyán, shàngmiàn chāolù-zhe [wǒmēn shífēn xǐhuān de] yī-shǒu xiǎoshī. table above leave-DUR friend-DE one-CL message above, record-DUR we very like DE one-CL poem [‘On the table was a note from a friend. There was a poem on it which both of us liked very much.’]
The omn / imn alternation depends on producer-related factors, including the producers’ native languages. As mentioned, Li (2013) found that Chinese learners with English backgrounds have a tendency to produce imn in a subjective rc . However, no tendency was found for omn in an objective rc . This is different from native language speakers. This indicates that one’s language background may also be an impacting factor. Participants with English, Korean, and Japanese as their native languages were also studied by Wu and Sheng (2014) . According to Wu and Lü (2016) and Lü and Wu (2017) , learners with various backgrounds show different patterns of omn / imn alternation. They found that Korean and Japanese learners behave more native-like than English learners. This indicates that the native language type influences the omn / imn alternation.
In addition, some potential factors require further study. Accessibility is related to language processing, which affects imn / omn alternation. Zhang (2018) used accessibility theory to explain the DPs’ distribution. Moreover, other factors affecting accessibility include: the length of head np s and rc s, number of head np s’ modifiers, distance between the head np s and the relativised np s, and whether the head np s are necessary arguments. The head np s’ lengths and rc s are studied in this paper.
Moreover, more studies should be conducted in interlanguage, 2 with subjects from different language backgrounds. The transfer of classifier use from native languages has already been tested ( Wu and Sheng, 2014 ; Wu and Lü, 2016 ; and Lü and Wu, 2017 ). However, the native language types are limited, and the classification is unclear. Gil’s (2013) typological investigation of classifiers in languages divided them into three categories: obligatory, optional, and absent. These can be a reference for native language classification.
Lastly, language proficiency may be a potential factor influencing the order choice. The more proficient in Chinese the learners are, the more native-like they will behave. In this study, we aim to address the following two questions: ( 1 ) What factors influence cfl learners’ omn / imn alternation? Do they have multiple interactions? ( 2 ) What are the differences in omn / imn alternation in Chinese interlanguage and native Chinese?

Section: 3. Data

The data were extracted from the Global Corpus of Learner Chinese ( Cui and Zhang, 2011 ). This is a Chinese learner corpus composed of data that originates from spoken, written, and video collections of learners from various native language backgrounds. We first retrieved the sentences containing the rc marker ‘DE’. Thereafter, we manually screened out the examples with rc s and DPs. In accordance with Li (2013) , this study’s rc should meet the following standards: it must contain: ( 1 ) the signalling word ‘DE’, ( 2 ) a gap, 3 and ( 3 ) a verb phrase. The following cases were excluded: adjective phrases (e.g., a happy holiday ), the structure of a location (e.g., people at home/school) and subject-predicate sentences (e.g., students with very good grades). Eight hundred lines of concordance were selected from the corpus after manual filtering.
The annotation process was conducted by two linguistic researchers. More than 90 percent correspondence was reached. A set of predictors influencing omn / imn alternation identified in the literature were annotated in morphological, syntactic, semantic, and extra-textual aspects, as follows: Predictor variables: • HeadNPanimacy: Animacy of head np s. • HeadNPLength: Length of head np s in a number of Chinese characters. • HeadNPMatRole: The grammatical roles of the head np s in matrix clauses. • HeadNPRelRole: The grammatical roles of the head np s in relative clauses. • RCLength: The length of rc s in the number of Chinese characters. • NLType: Types of learners’ native languages. • CHProficiency: ChineseProficiency. Response variable: • Construction: omn / imn .
The annotation scheme used in this research draws on the factors identified by Ming and Chen (2010) in their study of omn / imn alternation. HeadNPAnimacy is composed of animate (hn), concrete inanimate (cn), and abstract inanimate (an) [object noun]. HeadNPMatRole is distinguished as subjects(s), objects (o), and others(x). It has also been established by Ming and Chen (2010) . These three levels are adopted in HeadNPRelRole. Three types of NLType are identified as: ( 1 ) Optional (op), ( 2 ) Obligatory (ob), and ( 3 ) Absent (ab). This is according to whether DPs exist or can be optionally omitted. HeadNPLength and RCLength were both measured in the number of Chinese characters. CHProficiency was examined by the hsk test level passed by learners. Construction includes omn and imn . The annotation scheme is summarised in Table 1 .
In this study, we used the conditional inference trees and random forest models to explore the multiple interactions among the significant predictors, and their relative importance. As alternatives to multiple regression, conditional inference trees and random forests are non-parametric tree-structure models, which can address complex interactions, non-linearity, and correlated predictors ( Paquot and Gries, 2020 : 611).
A conditional inference trees model is based on binary recursive partitioning using the Ctree function in R language ( R Development Core Team, 2022 ), which involves the following procedure: First, it screens out the significant predictors. Thereafter, it divides the dataset into two subsets. This is according to the conditions of the predictor’s binary splits, which has the strongest significance, as in Figure 1 . If the predictor is binary or categorical, the conditions on splits will be specific levels thereof. If the predictor is quantitative, the conditions will be a range of values that are divided by the node. This procedure is repeated until no further significant variables can be determined. A conditional inference trees model has the advantage of visualising a complex interaction among the significant predictors. A random forest can be grown from many conditional trees, which are created by randomly sampling the data’s subsets on a large scale. Therefore, it is more likely to be valid and accurate than conditional inference trees. Random forests can rank the predictors according to their impact by their increasing order.

Section: 4. Results

First, a conditional inference trees model is composed of eight predictors and one response variable, with the following code:
After executing the above code, a plot (construction.ctree) was used to obtain the model’s statistical results. As shown in Figure 1 , the model reflects the variables that have significant effects on the omn / imn alternation. These include: RCLength, HeadNPLength, HeadNPMatRole, and HeadNPRelRole. According to the conditional inference trees’ results, the overall model has a good discriminatory power with a C-statistic of 0.74. Through the confusion matrix, the model classification accuracy was 81.4 percent. This is better than the baseline accuracy of 80.4 percent. Therefore, the conditional inference trees model can correctly classify 81.4 percent of the dataset’s omn / imn alternations according to the variables’ characteristics.
The left side of the conditional inference trees model is analysed first. The first split at the top (Node 1) divides the data by HeadNPRelRole into two branches: subject and others. The left branch (Node 2) with objects’ grammatical roles and others is split by HeadNPMatRole into two branches. This is the same as that of Node 1. The left branch (Node 3) divides whether the rc s’ length is longer than five characters. These cases may be explained as follows: When the head np is not a subject in rc , the omn / imn alternation depends on HeadNPMatRole (Node 2). If the head np is a subject in the matrix clause, omn makes up a larger proportion (Node 6), as in Example 4. Node 6 contains fifty-two observations. If the head np is not a subject in the matrix clause, the imn has a higher percentage (Nodes 4 and 5). The number of observations contained in Node 4 and Node 5 were 158 and 1, respectively. In this case, the longer the rc , the larger the proportion of the omn , as per Example 5. The shorter the rc , the greater the proportion of imn , as per Example 6. ( 4 ) 比如在电视上最近常常播放的一个广告，解释得非常好。 Bǐrú zaìdiànshìshàng zuìjìn chángcháng bōfàng de yígè guǎnggào, jiěshì de fēicháng hǎo. For example, on TV, often recently show DE an-CL advertisements explain DE very well [‘For example, the advertisement that is often recently shown on TV explains it very well.’] ( 5 ) 问别人有没有吃饭是一种打招呼的方式。 Wèn biérén yǒuméiyǒu chīfàn shìyìzhǒng dǎzhāohu de fāng shì. Ask others whether they have meal is a-CL greeting DE way [‘A way of greeting others is to ask whether they have had a meal or not.’] ( 6 ) 因为再发现一些学汉语时会遇到的问题, 能找到解决问题的好方法，会更好地学习。 Yīnwéi zàifāxiàn yìxiē xuéhàny ǔ shí huìyùdàode wèntí hé tāde yuányīn, néng zh ǎ odào ji ě jué wèntí de h ǎ of ā ngf ǎ , huì gèngh ǎ o de xuéxí . Because again finding some learning Chinese time will meet DE problems will find soLüe problems, DE good methods will better DE learn [‘When encountering problems in the process of learning Chinese, good methods to soLüe them will be found. This will contribute to one’s learning.’] Thereafter, the right side of Figure 1 was focussed on. The closest branch is at Node 7. The observations are classified into two branches by the rc ’s length. On the branch where the rc ’s length is more than six characters, there is a split on HeadNPMatRole (Node 9). This is based on whether the head np is a subject or not. The right branch is divided into two branches according to the head np ’s length (Node 11). This is based on whether it is over one character or not.
Apart from the above graphic information’s analysis, there are the following situations: When the head np is a subject, the alternation depends on the rc ’s length. In the branch where the rc is less than six characters, imn has a much stronger tendency than omn (Node 8). This is as per Example 7. Node 8 contains 335 observations in total. If the rc ’s length is longer than six characters, as in Example 8, the omn / imn alternation depends on HeadNPMatRole. When HeadNPMatRole is not a subject (Node 10), imn is a larger proportion of the whole. This is as per Example 9. The number of observations at this node was 151. If HeadNPMatRole is a subject, the omn / imn alternation depends on HeadNPLength. (Node 11). When HeadNPLength is one character, omn is favoured (Node 12), as in Example 10. When it is more than one character, the imn is preferred (Node 13), as in Example 11. Nodes 12 and 13 contain few observation samples: 12 and 11, respectively. ( 7 ) 广告可以帮人们决解就业问题，可以帮那些找工作的人。 Guǎnggào kěyǐ bāng rénmen jiějué jiùyè wèntí, kěyǐ bāng nàxiē zhǎogōng zuò de rén. Advertisements can help people soLüe employment issues can help the job-seekers [‘Advertisements may be conducive to soLüing employment issues for job-seekers.’] ( 8 ) 我从一个不会设计自己的未来的人，变成了一个有理想， 有目标，充满责任感的人。 Wǒ cóng yígè búhuì shèjì zìjǐ de wèilái derén, biànchéngle yígè yǒu lǐxiǎng, yǒu mùbiāo, chōngmǎn zérèn gǎn de rén. I from a-CL is not able to plan my future individual become-ASP a have dream have an objective that has a sense of responsibility for DE individuals. [‘I was unable to plan my future. However, I have now become someone who has a dream, an objective, and a sense of responsibility.’] ( 9 ) 有在地铁站工作的一个女人。 Yǒu zài dìtiězhàn gōngzuò de yígè nǚrén There is at subway station work DE a-CL woman [‘There is a woman who works at the subway station.’] ( 10 ) 对我影响最大的一个人，就是我妈妈。 Duì w ǒ y ǐ ng xi ǎ ng zuìdà de yígè rén , jiùshì w ǒ m ā m ā. To me influence the biggest one-CL person that is my mother [‘The person who has the most influence on me is my mother.’] ( 11 ) 人们喜欢把现代化比作宏伟的大厦， 那么这座凝聚着高度精神文明和物质文明的大厦应立在怎样的环境之中。 Rénmen x ǐ hu ā n b ǎ xiàndàihuà b ǐ zuò hóngwěi de dàshà , nàme zhèzuò níngjùzhe gāodù jīngshénwénmíng hé wùzhìwénmíng de dàshà yīng lìzài zěnyàng de huánjìng zhizhōng. People like to take modernisation compare as magnificent DE mansion, then this-CL have-DUR rich spiritual civilisation and material civilisation mansion should erect in what kind DE environment [‘People like comparing modernisation to a magnificent mansion. They then wonder about the type of environment that should be created in this mansion, which has a rich spiritual and material civilisation.’]
A random forest model was also generated with the following code: rf<cforest(Construction∼HeadNPAnimacy+HeadNPLength+HeadNPMatRole+HeadNPRelRole+RCLength+NLType+CHProficiency,data=construction,controls =cforest_unbiased (ntree=1000, mtry = 3)). a<-varimp (rf,conditional=TRUE) dotchart (sort(a),main= ‘conditional importance of variables’) After executing the code above, the variables’ conditional importance could be visualised in Figure 2 .
The random forest model classification accuracy was 81.3 percent. This was higher than the baseline classification accuracy of 77.3 by 4 percent. The C statistic was 0.88. The classification accuracy’s calculation and interpretation method of the random forest model are consistent with that of the conditional inference trees model. The random forest model is composed of many conditional inference trees, which are randomly generated. Therefore, the specific values may be slightly different each time. However, the overall factor ranking remains the same. The predictors’ ranking instead of their absolute values of importance, is most important. It is generally recognised that a bottom predictor’s absolute minimum value is a cut-off point between important and unimportant predictors. These are separated by the red line in Figure 2 . It is indicated that HeadNPRelRole is the most important variable in predicting omn / imn alternation. Thereafter, the predictors are HeadNPMatRole, RCLength, NLType, and HeadNPAnimacy in decreasing order of importance. CHProfiency and HeadNPLength are unimportant and will not be analysed further.
The top three predictors: HeadNPRelRole, HeadNPMatRole, and RCLength are also included in the conditional inference trees model. As Benedikt Szmrecsanyi et al . (2016) mentioned, conditional inference trees are subject to a high degree of variability. This is as each split in the tree depends on the splits that precede it. This makes it difficult to generalise the unseen data. Thus, it fails to notice highly predictive effects. Conversely, the predictors’ importance obtained in a conditional random forest is more reliable. It is also based on the predictor variables’ conditional permutation over many trees ( Paquot et al ., 2019 ). This is indicated by the considerable increase of the random forest model’s classification accuracy (C=0.88) over the conditional inference trees model (C=0.74).
Unlike the logistic regression model, the random forest model does not return a regression’s statistics. This includes coefficients to indicate the specific level’s effect and direction. It only includes the predictor’s importance. Therefore, partial dependence plots are used with the following code to visualise the relationships between the different levels and response variables. library (pdp) pdp_circle <- partial (rf, ‘name of the predictor’,prob = TRUE) plot Partial(pdp_circle, main = ‘name of the predictor’)
As shown in Figure 3 , the x -axis represents different levels of each predictor. The y-axis represents the omn ’s predicted probability. It is indicated that omn is preferred for an abstract inanimate HeadNP as a subject in a matrix clause. It is also preferred as an object in a relative clause. For this native language type, the omn ’s predicted probability is highest when the classifiers are obligatory. An increase in the rc ’s length also contributes to the omn ’s proportion.

Section: 5. Discussion

Regarding HeadNPRelRole, when the head np is a subject, as in Example 11, the imn is preferred by cfl learners. This is consistent with previous studies on Chinese interlanguage ( Li, 2013 ; Lü and Wu, 2017 ; Wu and Sheng, 2014 ; Wu and Lü, 2016) . It is also consistent with native Chinese studies ( Ming and Chen, 2010 ; Pu, 2008 ; Sheng and Wu, 2013 ; Tang, 2007 ; Wu, 2009 ; Wu, 2011 ). However, when the head np is an object in the clause, as in Example 12, cfl learners still tend to choose imn . This is different from previous native Chinese studies, where omn is more common. For previous studies on Chinese interlanguage, this study’s conclusions are consistent with learners whose native language is English ( Li, 2013 ; Wu and Sheng, 2014 ), rather than Japanese and Korean ( Lü and Wu, 2017 ; Wu and Lü, 2016 ). The reasons are mentioned in the following explanation for the NLType predictor: the effect of the three levels on the proportion change of omn gradually decreases in the order of the object, other roles, and subject. This trend is consistent with Ming and Chen (2010) . ( 12 ) 我觉得理想的伴侣是一个理解支持你的人。 Wǒ juéde lǐxiǎng de bànlǚ shì yīgè lǐjiě zhīchí nǐ de rén. I think ideal DE partner is a-CL understand support you DE person [‘I think that an ideal partner is a person who understands and supports you.’] ( 13 ) 每个外国人来到越南时第一件想了解的事 Měigè wàiguórén láidào yuènaán shí dìyījiàn xiǎng liǎojiě de shì Every foreigner come to Vietnam the first-CL want know DE thing [‘This is the first thing that every foreigner who comes to Vietnam wants to learn about.’] ( 14 ) 他是我第一个交往的人。 Tā shì wǒ dì yīgèjiāo wǎng de rén. He is I the first-CL get in a relationship DE person [‘He is I, the first-CL person with whom I have gotten into a relationship with.’] When HeadNPMatRole is a subject, as in Example 13, cfl learners tend to use imn in all grammatical roles. However, the proportion of omn will decrease when it is not a subject. In particular, if it is an object, as in Example 15, the omn will be the least compared to the case of other roles, as in Example 12. This is similar to previous studies of both Chinese interlanguage ( Li, 2013 ) and native Chinese studies ( Sheng and Wu, 2013 ). Li’s (2013) rationale is that rc embeds in the matrix sentence and interrupts its parsing process. This increases the cognitive load, and makes it more complex to process. The preceding dp makes the object of the verb in the matrix’s clause appear in advance. It also avoids processing interruption to some extent. It may help the speaker to construct and process the subsequent relative clauses more quickly. ( 15 ) 这种源自古代的问话方式没有发生变化。 Zhèzhǒng yuánzì gǔdài de wènhuà fāngshì méiyǒu fāshēng biànhuà . This-CL derive from ancient times DE questioning technique have not change [‘This questioning technique, which is derived from ancient times, has not changed.’] ( 16 ) 我会像胡主席一样选择一个对自己合适的方式学习。 Wǒ huì xiàng húzhǔxí yīyàng xuǎnzé yīgè duì zìjǐ héshì de fāngshì xuéxí . I will like Hu president same choose a-CL to myself suitable method study [‘Like President Hu, I will choose a study method that is suitable for myself.’] It is noted that the longer the RCLength, the greater the omn ’s proportion. Tang (2007) noted that the principle of ‘earliest direct component’ can be used to effectively discuss the distance between the demonstrative component and the head np . This can be calculated by the ratio of the ‘direct component’ to the ‘indirect component’. The larger the value, the more easily the brain processes it. According to Hawkins’ (1994) calculation method, the ratio of omn ’s maximum ‘direct component’ to ‘indirect component’ is higher than that of imn . When the rc ’s length increases, the ratio of imn ’s maximum ‘direct component’ to ‘indirect component’ will decrease. This will make it difficult for the brain to process. In this case, the omn was more inclined to be selected.
According to the predictor NLType, imn is favoured by learners of all native language types. For learners who did not have classifiers in their native language, the rate of imn was the highest. It is intermediate when the classifiers are optional and the lowest when the classifiers are obligatory. English is a language without classifiers, while Japanese and Chinese are languages wherein classifiers are obligatory ( Gil, 2013 ). Therefore, learners whose language is English may have more difficulty learning and using classifiers than the other two types. Owing to their limited cognitive resources, they tend to choose classifiers that are easier to extract first to alleviate speech generation while the other two types of learners tend to show the same trends as native speakers ( Wu, 2014 ).
Concerning HeadHPAnimacy, cfl learners tend to use imn when the headNP is abstract inanimate. This is consistent with a study on Chinese interlanguage ( Li, 2013 ). It however, contradicts a study on native Chinese ( Ming and Chen, 2010 ). The trend noted by Ming and Chen (2010) is that when the headNP is abstract inanimate, the omn is favoured by cfl learners, as in Example 13. This study’s results support those of Li (2013) and Ming and Chen (2010) : imn is preferred when the headNP is animate and concrete inanimate, as in Examples 14 and 17. A trend corresponding with Ming and Chen (2010) found that the proportion of omn continues to decrease. It regresses from animate to concrete inanimate, and finally to abstract inanimate samples. However, in Li (2013) , the proportion of omn is lowest when HeadHPAnimacy is concrete inanimate. The difference may be due to the insufficiency of observations with the level of concrete inanimate in Li (2013) . Li (2013) only had six cases. The result may thus be unreliable. As Ming and Chen (2010) explain, it coincides with the principle of cognitive salience. Here, animate HeadNP is more salient than concrete animate HeadNP. Furthermore, abstract inanimate HeadNP has the least cognitive salience. ( 17 ) 这是一家供应快餐的餐馆。 Zhèshì yījiā gōngyìng kuài cān de cān guǎn . This is a-CL sell fast food DE restaurant [‘This is a restaurant that sells fast food.’] The above analysis depicts that cfl learners have a strong preference for imn rather than omn for all significant predictors. Native Chinese speakers produce more omn than imn under the effects of certain predictors. Therefore, the distribution pattern of the omn / imn Chinese interlanguage is quite distinct from that of native Chinese in previous studies. This pronounced preference may result from the approach of choosing syntactic structures that ease the task of creating sentences in language production ( Ferreira and Dell, 2000 ). According to Hawkins’ (1983) Heaviness Serialisation Principle, a dp is shorter than an rc . It also tends to be placed ahead, so it is easier to produce a dp first to alleviate the pressure to create sentences. Producing omn / imn structures is more difficult for cfl learners, as they exhibit a marked tendency to select imn . More importantly, the variation trend of omn / imn alternation in Chinese interlanguage under different predictor levels is almost consistent with that of native Chinese.

Section: 6. Conclusion

In this study, we investigated the significant factors regulating imn / omn alternation in Chinese interlanguage. Multivariate methods were adopted to analyse the data collected from the Global Corpus of Learner Chinese. This included conditional inference trees and random forests. The results showed the predictors’ significant effects in the descending order of effect size: HeadNPRelRole, HeadNPMatRole, RCLength, NLType, and HeadNPAnimacy. As compared with native Chinese, the omn / imn ’s distribution pattern in Chinese interlanguage exposes a larger difference with marked imn preference. However, the variation trend corresponded with the predictors’ levels.
This study can be improved by increasing the number of concordances. This can be implemented by combining other Chinese interlanguage corpora. More factors can also be considered. Due to the corpus’ limitations, this study did not contain the influence of discourse. It is recommended that follow-up research study discourse-related predictors such as discourse salience of Head np , discourse functions of relative clauses to make the results more elaborate.

Section: Acknowledgments

This research is supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities concerning the project of ‘The Ordering of Relative Clauses and Determiner Phrases in Chinese Interlanguage: A Multifactorial Study’ (grant ref. 2021JX016) by Beijing Foreign Studies University, China.
