Title: Transmission from vaccinated individuals in a large SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant outbreak


Abstract: Summary

An outbreak of over 1,000 COVID-19 cases in Provincetown, Massachusetts (MA), in July 2021—the first large outbreak mostly in vaccinated individuals in the US—prompted a comprehensive public health response, motivating changes to national masking recommendations and raising questions about infection and transmission among vaccinated individuals. To address these questions, we combined viral genomic and epidemiological data from 467 individuals, including 40% of outbreak-associated cases. The Delta variant accounted for 99% of cases in this dataset; it was introduced from at least 40 sources, but 83% of cases derived from a single source, likely through transmission across multiple settings over a short time rather than a single event. Genomic and epidemiological data supported multiple transmissions of Delta from and between fully vaccinated individuals. However, despite its magnitude, the outbreak had limited onward impact in MA and the US overall, likely due to high vaccination rates and a robust public health response.

Section: Introduction

On July 10th, 2021, the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (MADPH) received reports of an increase in COVID-19 cases among people who resided in or had recently visited Provincetown, a tourist town on Cape Cod, MA. Provincetown had attracted thousands of visitors, many of whom reported attending multiple large public and private gatherings—often indoors and unmasked, in accordance with public health guidance at the time—starting with the 4th of July weekend and throughout the following week. COVID-19 incidence in the area rose quickly during the subsequent two-week period, from 0 cases in the 14 days before July 3rd to a peak of 456 cases per 100,000 persons per day during July 11th–24th.
Notably, 74% of the reported cases were fully vaccinated individuals, of whom 79% were symptomatic ( Brown et al., 2021 2. Brown, C.M. ∙ Vostok, J. ∙ Johnson, H. ... Outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections, associated with large public gatherings—Barnstable County, Massachusetts, July 2021 Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 2021; 70 :1059-1062 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ). As of July 1st, estimated COVID-19 full vaccination coverage among the eligible population was 68% in Barnstable County (where Provincetown is located) and 67% across MA ( Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 2021 17. Massachusetts Department of Public Health Weekly Covid-19 vaccination report 2021 https://www.mass.gov/doc/weekly-covid-19-vaccination-report-july-1-2021 Google Scholar ). This was the first large, well-characterized outbreak of COVID-19 in a highly vaccinated population in the US and contributed to the CDC’s decision to reinstate their indoor mask recommendation for vaccinated individuals ( CDC, 2021 4. CDC Interim public health recommendations for fully vaccinated people 2021 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/fully-vaccinated-guidance.html Google Scholar ).
The rapid increase in cases despite high vaccination rates prompted state and local public health departments to launch a comprehensive outbreak response ( Brown et al., 2021 2. Brown, C.M. ∙ Vostok, J. ∙ Johnson, H. ... Outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections, associated with large public gatherings—Barnstable County, Massachusetts, July 2021 Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 2021; 70 :1059-1062 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ), including SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing to characterize the viruses driving the outbreak and to support contact tracing efforts. Here, we describe the genomic epidemiology of this outbreak, including evidence for frequent SARS-CoV-2 Delta transmission from and between fully vaccinated individuals.

Section: Results

We sequenced SARS-CoV-2 genomes from residual diagnostic specimens collected between July 9th and August 2nd in the Provincetown area as part of outbreak-associated and enhanced community surveillance testing (STAR Methods). We produced high-quality SARS-CoV-2 genomes (unambiguous length ≥24,000 nt and successful gene annotation) from 467 unique individuals. Genomes were well distributed over the time period of the outbreak ( Figure 1 A), and their numbers closely mirrored the epidemic curve ( Brown et al., 2021 2. Brown, C.M. ∙ Vostok, J. ∙ Johnson, H. ... Outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections, associated with large public gatherings—Barnstable County, Massachusetts, July 2021 Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 2021; 70 :1059-1062 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ; Gharpure et al., 2022 11. Gharpure, R. ∙ Sami, S. ∙ Vostok, J. ... Multistate outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including vaccine breakthrough infections, associated with large public gatherings, United States Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2022; 28 :35-43 Crossref Scopus (17) PubMed Google Scholar ), with the densest coverage occurring early on when the outbreak was still growing (reproductive number (R t ) > 1) ( Figure 1 B). Of these 467 individuals, 439 were primary outbreak-associated cases, representing 40% of the 1,098 known primary outbreak cases ( Figure 1 C). The remaining cases were secondary cases that had an epidemiologically confirmed link to a primary case. Of the 467 individuals, 346 were MA residents, and the remaining 121 were out-of-state residents.
The individuals providing specimens for sequencing were predominantly male (80%), with a median age of 43 years, and 84% were vaccinated, broadly consistent with the outbreak as a whole ( Brown et al., 2021 2. Brown, C.M. ∙ Vostok, J. ∙ Johnson, H. ... Outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections, associated with large public gatherings—Barnstable County, Massachusetts, July 2021 Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 2021; 70 :1059-1062 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ; Gharpure et al., 2022 11. Gharpure, R. ∙ Sami, S. ∙ Vostok, J. ... Multistate outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including vaccine breakthrough infections, associated with large public gatherings, United States Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2022; 28 :35-43 Crossref Scopus (17) PubMed Google Scholar ). Among the vaccinated individuals, 48% (203) received BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech), 37% (155) received mRNA-1273 (Moderna), and 14% (58) received Ad26.CoV2.S (Janssen) vaccine products. Consistent with previous reports ( Chia et al., 2021 5. Chia, P.Y. ∙ Xiang Ong, S.W. ∙ Chiew, C.J. ... Virological and serological kinetics of SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant vaccine-breakthrough infections: a multi-center cohort study. Clinical Microbiology and Infection 2021 Published online November 23, 2021 Crossref Google Scholar ; Riemersma et al., 2021 21. Riemersma, K.K. ∙ Grogan, B.E. ∙ Kita-Yarbro, A. ... Shedding of infectious SARS-CoV-2 despite vaccination medRxiv. 2021; Crossref Scopus (0) Google Scholar ), diagnostic cycle threshold (Ct) values, an approximation of viral load, were similar between vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals and between symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, although there were few of the latter because testing focused on symptomatic cases ( Figure S1 A). The average time since completion of the primary vaccination series was 111 days. Ct values decreased slightly with increasing time since vaccination, but the trend was not statistically significant ( Figure 1 D), in line with observations from other cohorts ( Singanayagam et al., 2021 23. Singanayagam, A. ∙ Hakki, S. ∙ Dunning, J. ... Community transmission and viral load kinetics of the SARS-CoV-2 delta (B.1.617.2) variant in vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals in the UK: a prospective, longitudinal, cohort study Lancet Infect. Dis. Published online October. 2021; 29 :2021 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (457) Google Scholar ). Ct values also decreased slightly with increasing age in vaccinated individuals, although not significantly. Unvaccinated individuals were, on average, younger than vaccinated individuals ( Figure S1 B).
Genome sequencing confirmed that the Provincetown outbreak was driven by the Delta lineage: 99% (462/467) of the genomes were Delta, with the remainder being Gamma ( Figure 2 A). Of the Delta genomes, 84% (394/467) were from the lineage AY.25, a lineage then circulating throughout the US but rarely observed outside North America. The outbreak occurred during a broader rise of the Delta lineage in MA: first detected in MA on March 28th, Delta’s prevalence increased sharply in the weeks preceding the July 4th weekend, from 16% of sequenced SARS-CoV-2 genomes on June 15th to 77% at the start of our sampling period on July 9th, reaching 97% by the end of our sampling period on August 3rd ( Figure S2 A).
We found no evidence of genetic differences of known functional consequence between outbreak-associated and other publicly available Delta genomes or between outbreak-associated genomes from vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals. The Delta genomes in this dataset did not have novel consensus-level variants in the spike protein, nor did they have an increased frequency of any amino acid change of known or suspected functional impact ( Figure S2 B) ( Harvey et al., 2021 13. Harvey, W.T., Carabelli, A.M., Jackson, B., Gupta, R.K., Thomson, E.C., Harrison, E.M., Ludden, C., Reeve, R., Rambaut, A., COVID-19 Genomics UK (COG-UK) Consortium, et al. (2021). SARS-CoV-2 variants, spike mutations and immune escape. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 409–424. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-021-00573-0 . Google Scholar ; Li et al., 2020 15. Li, Q. ∙ Wu, J. ∙ Nie, J. ... The impact of mutations in SARS-CoV-2 spike on viral infectivity and antigenicity Cell. 2020; 182 :1284-1294.e9 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1084) PubMed Google Scholar ). While there was little overlap in the intrahost single-nucleotide variants (iSNVs) identified in the vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals, the number of iSNVs was not significantly different between the groups, suggesting little difference in viral genetic diversity with vaccination ( Figures S3 A and S3B).
To characterize the transmission dynamics of the Provincetown outbreak, we constructed a maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree of outbreak-associated SARS-CoV-2 genomes. We included 6,372 additional SARS-CoV-2 genomes sub-selected from publicly available data, enriched for genomes that were genetically, geographically, or temporally relevant (STAR Methods), to enable inference of introductions into and onward spread from the outbreak. Based on this tree, we estimated the number of introductions into Provincetown during the outbreak period, counting a branch as an introduction when an ancestral node on the branch was inferred not to be a part of the outbreak with confidence ≥80%. Using this method, we identified ≥40 distinct introductions, suggesting that the Delta variant was introduced into this population from many sources.
Six of these ≥40 introductions led to clusters (three or more cases) of varying sizes, of which one cluster—comprising 83% (387/467) of outbreak-associated genomes—dominated the outbreak ( Figure 2 A). The remaining five clusters each accounted for <4% of primary outbreak-associated cases, and all other introductions were associated with a single case each ( Figures 2 A and S4 A). The dominant cluster is defined by three nucleotide mutations, C8752T (ORF1ab N2829K), C20451T (ORF1ab N6729), and A26759G (M G79), all with no known functional significance. The dominant cluster had an estimated time of most recent common ancestor (tMRCA) of June 18th, 2021 (June 12th–June 24th, 2021). The earliest reported genomes within the dominant cluster were from other US states, suggesting that this lineage likely emerged outside MA and was introduced into MA just prior to amplification by the outbreak.
A striking feature of the dominant cluster was the presence of 158 identical consensus genomes (41% of outbreak-associated genomes in the cluster) at the root of the cluster. This pattern—many identical viral genomes within a short time—usually indicates rapid spread from a single individual and is, therefore, a signature of superspreading. In context, this finding suggests that the majority of individuals in this outbreak were infected in Provincetown itself. The public health investigation of the outbreak, however, revealed no evidence that a single exposure site was widely shared among cases. Instead, the genomic and epidemiological data taken together suggest that superspreading of the same viral sequence occurred at multiple locations. This is consistent with several scenarios, including one individual infecting others at multiple locations or several individuals with the same virus, from either a common source or serial infection, transmitting independently. While the initial introduction and early transmission pattern cannot be precisely resolved, the shape of the phylogeny suggests that overdispersion, in which a few individuals are responsible for most transmission events ( Endo et al., 2020 10. Endo, A., Centre for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases COVID-19 Working Group ∙ Abbott, S. ... Estimating the overdispersion in COVID-19 transmission using outbreak sizes outside China Wellcome Open Res. 2020; 5 :67 Crossref Scopus (112) PubMed Google Scholar ), continues to play an important role in the COVID-19 pandemic in a landscape dominated by more transmissible variants ( Earnest et al., 2021 8. Earnest, R. ∙ Uddin, R. ∙ Matluk, N. ... Comparative transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 variants Delta and Alpha in New England, USA. medRxiv 2021 Published online October 7, 2021 Crossref Google Scholar ).
We investigated the extent to which cases descending from the outbreak contributed to the subsequent increase in cases, largely driven by the Delta variant, in MA and across the US. Approximately half of the >1,000 outbreak-associated individuals reported residency in MA, with the remainder visiting from 20 other US states ( Gharpure et al., 2022 11. Gharpure, R. ∙ Sami, S. ∙ Vostok, J. ... Multistate outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including vaccine breakthrough infections, associated with large public gatherings, United States Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2022; 28 :35-43 Crossref Scopus (17) PubMed Google Scholar ), raising the possibility that the outbreak led to widely dispersed secondary transmission. We first looked for the three-mutation genomic signature of the dominant outbreak cluster in viral genomes collected after the outbreak, as part of ongoing state-wide SARS-CoV-2 genomic surveillance in MA (STAR Methods). We found that this signature accounted for a modest and decreasing fraction of Delta infections sequenced in MA over the following weeks, peaking at 9% of all Delta genomes on July 16th and declining to 4% by August 30th ( Figure 2 B). The smaller outbreak clusters also had a negligible impact on onward spread within the state ( Figure S4 B).
To quantify the impact of the outbreak more widely in the US, we estimated upper and lower bounds on the spread of the dominant cluster by searching for its descendants in national surveillance data. We estimated an upper bound by identifying all non-MA genomes descended from branches of the dominant cluster with an inferred ancestral origin in MA. Because these genomes could include viruses circulating independently of the Provincetown outbreak, we also estimated a lower bound based on one sub-lineage of the dominant cluster that likely emerged during the outbreak. This sub-lineage was defined by a mutation (T4959C) that first appeared as an iSNV in two individuals from the outbreak (at 39% and 41% frequencies) and had a tMRCA of July 2nd, 2021 (June 24th–July 7th, 2021), near the start of the outbreak, and was not detected outside of MA until July 13th; we assume, therefore, that all members of the sub-lineage derived from the outbreak. Based on these two approaches, we infer that the outbreak led to between 44 and 328 sequenced cases in surveillance data from between 18 and 37 states, collected during the period between July 10th and September 13th, 2021 ( Figure 2 C). Among the 37 states, New York, California, and Georgia contained the largest number of descendant cases, each representing approximately 10% of the 328 sequenced cases. The upper bound of 328 sequenced cases represents less than 0.08% of the >400,000 Delta genomes sequenced in the same period. Additionally, the outbreak only comprised between 0.01% and 0.048% of sequenced Delta genomes in each exported state ( Figure 2 C). These findings suggest that, while the outbreak led to some onward transmission, it made at most a modest contribution to later Delta cases within MA and a minimal contribution to cases elsewhere in the US.
We next investigated the contribution of vaccinated individuals to transmission in the outbreak, using both public health contact tracing and viral genomic data. Viral genomic data can add resolution to contact tracing by providing an orthogonal measure of the connectivity between cases based on the genetic distance between viruses from infected individuals ( Wohl et al., 2016 28. Wohl, S. ∙ Schaffner, S.F. ∙ Sabeti, P.C. Genomic analysis of viral outbreaks Annu. Rev. Virol. 2016; 3 :173-195 Crossref Scopus (37) PubMed Google Scholar ). While conventional contact tracing had limited ability to identify direct transmission events in this outbreak, which spanned multiple locations over several days with many possible contacts at each location, extensive efforts did identify 19 transmission links among primary outbreak-associated cases. These 19 links originated from 17 putative index cases, 16 of whom were vaccinated. Additionally, a cluster of 19 other fully vaccinated cases in a close-contact, residential setting, not otherwise associated with the outbreak, were linked to a single putative outbreak-associated index case. Genomic data were available from both the index and recipient cases for 22 of these 38 putative links identified by contact tracing, linked to four index cases ( Figure 3 A). Based on the phylogeny, the genomic data were consistent in every instance with the transmission events inferred by contact tracing. The phylogeny also supported that all cases in the close-contact cluster stemmed, probably via direct transmission, from a single introduction, consistent with the single index case suggested by contact tracing ( Figure S5 B) and underscoring the potential for extensive transmission between vaccinated individuals in prolonged close-contact settings.
Given the limitations of conventional contact tracing in this outbreak, we applied two empirical methods to infer transmission links based on genomic data (STAR Methods). Using only consensus genomes and temporal information to reconstruct a transmission tree, we identified an additional 54 well-supported links, of which 38 involved vaccinated index cases ( Figure 3 B). However, consensus-level genome data were also limited in their ability to infer transmission links, in this case, because the low viral diversity in the outbreak often made it difficult to identify direct connections within a cluster. To address this, we applied a second, complementary method, using sub-consensus genome diversity (iSNVs) to identify putative index cases within clusters. This approach can suggest the direction of transmission when several cases collected close in time have identical consensus genomes; variants typically start as iSNVs and become consensus alleles in secondary cases ( McCrone and Lauring, 2018 18. McCrone, J.T. ∙ Lauring, A.S. Genetic bottlenecks in intraspecies virus transmission Curr. Opin. Virol. 2018; 28 :20-25 Crossref Scopus (77) PubMed Google Scholar ; Sobel Leonard et al., 2017 24. Sobel Leonard, A. ∙ Weissman, D.B. ∙ Greenbaum, B. ... Transmission bottleneck size estimation from pathogen deep-sequencing data, with an application to human influenza A virus J. Virol. 2017; 91 e00171–17 Crossref Scopus (80) PubMed Google Scholar ). Using iSNVs, we identified a further 51 putative transmission links, 44 of which have a vaccinated index case ( Figure 3 B). In total, genomic data suggested 105 transmission links that were not detected through initial contact tracing.
Further epidemiological investigation provided information about 18 of the transmission links identified from genomic data ( Figure 3 C), including shared household, workplace, or hospitality settings, which supported the genomic inference. All 18 of these epidemiologically supported contacts had been identified by initial contact tracing efforts but were not classified as high-confidence because of the stringency of the epidemiological definition of a high-confidence link. Six of the 18 confirmed links were classified as involving known contacts and 12 as involving plausible contacts (e.g., living in the same building). In four of the six known contact links and nine of the 12 plausible contact links, the putative index case was vaccinated. Most of these predicted links involved a single secondary case; however, one putative index case was linked to nine secondary cases based on genomic data (six of the nine being vaccinated individuals). One of these nine secondary cases was identified as a known contact, the index having reportedly visited the restaurant where the contact was employed ( Figure 3 C), raising the possibility of more extensive but unknown transmission from this vaccinated individual. Contact tracing could neither confirm nor refute the remaining links identified by genomic inference. This could be due to the complex epidemiology of the outbreak, the inevitable incompleteness of contact tracing data, or limitations of the genomic inference.
Due to the small number of unvaccinated cases in our dataset, we were unable to meaningfully compare rates of secondary transmission by vaccination status; we were also not able to meaningfully compare rates of secondary transmission by time since vaccination ( Figure S5 C). Our observations are consistent with a recent study from the United Kingdom ( Singanayagam et al., 2021 23. Singanayagam, A. ∙ Hakki, S. ∙ Dunning, J. ... Community transmission and viral load kinetics of the SARS-CoV-2 delta (B.1.617.2) variant in vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals in the UK: a prospective, longitudinal, cohort study Lancet Infect. Dis. Published online October. 2021; 29 :2021 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (457) Google Scholar ), which observed transmission from vaccinated household contacts. We did note that among vaccinated individuals, there were no identified asymptomatic index cases in this analysis, suggesting a lower risk of transmission from asymptomatic individuals, but the large uncertainty on the relative risk (95% confidence interval: 0–99% risk of transmission from an asymptomatic vaccinated versus symptomatic vaccinated individual) and possible biases in this observational dataset make drawing conclusions difficult. However, despite the complexities of the epidemiology, difficulty of contact tracing, and low viral genetic diversity in this outbreak, genomic and epidemiological data combined provide strong support for 22 transmissions from vaccinated individuals and suggestive evidence of a further nine, while genomic data alone provide suggestive evidence for an additional 69. These data suggest that, despite high antibody responses observed for vaccinated individuals from this outbreak following breakthrough infection ( Collier et al., 2021 6. Collier, A.-R.Y. ∙ Brown, C.M. ∙ Mcmahan, K. ... Immune responses in fully vaccinated individuals following breakthrough infection with the SARS-CoV-2 delta variant in Provincetown, Massachusetts. medRxiv 2021 Published online October 20, 2021 Crossref Google Scholar ), transmission to and from vaccinated individuals is common in some settings.

Section: Discussion

The outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 in Provincetown during and after the July 4th weekend was the first large outbreak of the Delta variant in a highly vaccinated population in the US. The robust public health response permitted extensive epidemiological and genomic characterization of the outbreak, the structure of transmission within it, and the role of vaccinated individuals, and offers generalizable insights for containing future outbreaks of Delta and other highly transmissible lineages of SARS-CoV-2.
The Provincetown outbreak raised public health concerns and attracted international attention, primarily due to the prevalence of symptomatic breakthrough infections and the potential occurrence of transmission from vaccinated individuals. Consistent with other recent reports ( Chia et al., 2021 5. Chia, P.Y. ∙ Xiang Ong, S.W. ∙ Chiew, C.J. ... Virological and serological kinetics of SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant vaccine-breakthrough infections: a multi-center cohort study. Clinical Microbiology and Infection 2021 Published online November 23, 2021 Crossref Google Scholar ; Riemersma et al., 2021 21. Riemersma, K.K. ∙ Grogan, B.E. ∙ Kita-Yarbro, A. ... Shedding of infectious SARS-CoV-2 despite vaccination medRxiv. 2021; Crossref Scopus (0) Google Scholar ), breakthrough infections with Delta, while often symptomatic and with moderate to high viral loads, were typically mild. Confidently assigning transmission links between individuals was unusually challenging—conventional contact tracing was difficult because of the many locations with dense potential contacts involved, while genomic inference of transmission was hindered by the low overall genetic diversity and large fraction of identical genomes. Nonetheless, using viral genomic data to identify and prioritize plausible connections between cases, followed by more detailed epidemiological investigation, identified several likely instances of transmission between fully vaccinated individuals. Furthermore, genomic data suggested many additional links that were not captured by contact tracing due to the complexity of the outbreak or the conservative epidemiological definition of close contact, providing a richer picture of the underlying dynamics of the transmission in this outbreak and possibly serving as a model for future investigations. To this end, further improvements to transmission inference tools would be helpful in adding additional resolution to densely sampled large outbreaks.
The size of the Provincetown outbreak—over one thousand cases—and its rapid early growth demonstrate that in densely crowded events and indoor conditions, the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant can cause a large outbreak even in a highly vaccinated population. However, the Provincetown outbreak did not contribute substantially to the increase in Delta cases in MA or elsewhere in the US. The high rates of vaccination and the swift public health response ( Brown et al., 2021 2. Brown, C.M. ∙ Vostok, J. ∙ Johnson, H. ... Outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections, associated with large public gatherings—Barnstable County, Massachusetts, July 2021 Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 2021; 70 :1059-1062 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ), which included deployment of mobile testing, a local indoor masking mandate, and an extensive outreach campaign, likely contributed to the short duration and restricted impact of the outbreak. Additionally, the active engagement of the affected community in the epidemiological response, possibly influenced by historical public health outreach in the gay community, may have helped mitigate the impact of the outbreak ( Marks, 2021 16. Marks, A. What Provincetown’s gay community can teach us about containing Covid 2021 https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-features/covid-delta-variant-provincetowns-gay-community-1214665 Google Scholar ). The rapid decline and limited impact of the outbreak suggest that while Delta-driven outbreaks are not eliminated by high vaccination rates, they can be controlled with well-understood public health measures.
The dataset used in this study consisted of samples from individuals who chose to be tested for SARS-CoV-2 during and after the outbreak; it is possible that willingness to be tested was not uniform with respect to the categories considered in the study, in particular with respect to vaccination status. More generally, the outbreak was incompletely sampled, and the viral population involved had low genetic diversity, which meant that our ability to comprehensively infer individual transmission links was limited. We had limited epidemiological data, including vaccination status, from cases with residence outside of MA, which reduced our power to identify transmission links from and between vaccinated individuals. Inferences about sources of introductions into and onward transmission from the outbreak were limited by local testing and sequencing rates, which vary substantially across the US.

Section: STAR★Methods

REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Biological sample Anterior Nares swabs Massachusetts Department of Public Health & regional testing facilities N/A Critical commercial assays Thermo Fisher MagMAX Viral RNA Isolation kit Thermo Fisher Cat #AM1939 TaqPath,1Step RTqPCR MtrMix Thermo Fisher Cat #A15300 CDC 2019-Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Real-Time RT-PCR Diagnostic Panel CDC Cat #2019-nCoVEUA-01 NEBNext ARTIC SARS-CoV-2 FS Library Prep Kit New England BioLabs Cat #E7658L NovaSeq 6000 SP Reagent Kit v1.5 (300 cycles) Illumina Cat #20028400 NovaSeq XP 2-Lane Kit v1.5 Illumina Cat #20043130 MagNA Pure LC Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit Roche Cat #03038505001 SuperScript IV reverse transcriptase Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat #18090200 Random Primer Mix New England BioLabs Cat #S1330S AMPure XP Beckman Coulter Cat #A63881 Q5 Hot Start High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix New England BioLabs Cat #M0494S Illumina DNA Prep Illumina Cat #20018705 IDT for Illumina DNA/RNA UD Indexes Set A-D Illumina Cat #20027213-16 MiSeq V2 300 cycle kit Illumina Cat #MS-102-2002 Deposited data RNA sequencing data NCBI SRA BioProject: PRJNA715749, PRJNA686883 GISAID consensus genomes GISAID See Table S1 GenBank consensus genomes NCBI GenBank BioProject: PRJNA715749, PRJNA686883 Oligonucleotides ARTIC Network V3 SARS-CoV-2 primers ARTIC Network https://github.com/artic-network/artic-ncov2019/tree/master/primer_schemes/nCoV-2019/V3 Software and algorithms LoFreq version 2.1.5 Wilm et al., 2012 27. Wilm, A. ∙ Aw, P.P.K. ∙ Bertrand, D. ... LoFreq: a sequence-quality aware, ultra-sensitive variant caller for uncovering cell-population heterogeneity from high-throughput sequencing datasets Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40 :11189-11201 Crossref Scopus (823) PubMed Google Scholar https://csb5.github.io/lofreq/ viral-ngs 2.1.28 Broad Institute https://dockstore.org/workflows/github.com/broadinstitute/viral-pipelines/sarscov2_illumina_full:master Nextstrain v3.0.3 Hadfield et al., 2018 12. Hadfield, J. ∙ Megill, C. ∙ Bell, S.M. ... Nextstrain: real-time tracking of pathogen evolution Bioinformatics. 2018; 34 :4121-4123 Crossref Scopus (1781) PubMed Google Scholar https://dockstore.org/workflows/github.com/broadinstitute/viral-pipelines/sarscov2_nextstrain_aligned_input:master FastTree version 2.1.11 Price et al., 2009 19. Price, M.N. ∙ Dehal, P.S. ∙ Arkin, A.P. FastTree: computing large minimum evolution trees with profiles instead of a distance matrix Mol. Biol. Evol. 2009; 26 :1641-1650 Crossref Scopus (3380) PubMed Google Scholar and 2010 20. Price, M.N. ∙ Dehal, P.S. ∙ Arkin, A.P. FastTree 2--approximately maximum-likelihood trees for large alignments PLOS One. 2010; 5 , e9490 Crossref Scopus (8655) PubMed Google Scholar http://www.microbesonline.org/fasttree/ baltic GitHub https://github.com/evogytis/baltic EpiEstim v4.0.1 Cori et al., 2013 7. Cori, A. ∙ Ferguson, N.M. ∙ Fraser, C. ... A new framework and software to estimate time-varying reproduction numbers during epidemics Am. J. Epidemiol. 2013; 178 :1505-1512 Crossref Scopus (836) PubMed Google Scholar https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/EpiEstim/index.html outbreaker2 (version 1.1.2) Campbell et al., 2018 3. Campbell, F. ∙ Didelot, X. ∙ Fitzjohn, R. ... outbreaker2: a modular platform for outbreak reconstruction BMC Bioinformatics. 2018; 19 :363 Crossref Scopus (48) PubMed Google Scholar https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/outbreaker2/index.html Nextclade CLI version 1.3.0 Aksamentov et al., 2021 1. Aksamentov, I. ∙ Roemer, C. ∙ Hodcroft, E. ... Nextclade: clade assignment, mutation calling and quality control for viral genomes J. Open Source Softw. 2021; 6 :3773 Crossref Google Scholar https://github.com/nextstrain/nextclade Open table in a new tab
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Katherine J. Siddle ( kjsiddle@broadinstitute.org ).
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
The research project (Protocol #1603078) was reviewed and approved by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (MADPH) Institutional Review Board (IRB) and covered by a reliance agreement at the Broad Institute. Residual diagnostic specimens were sequenced under a waiver of consent from the MADPH IRB. An additional non-human subjects research and an exempt determination (EX-7080) were made by the Harvard Longwood Campus Institutional Review Board and the Broad Institute Office of Research Subject Protections, respectively, for the analysis of de-identified aggregate and publicly available data. Some study staff maintain dual affiliations with Mass General Brigham and the Broad Institute, but this research was conducted solely at the Broad Institute, Harvard University, and MADPH.
State and local authorities identified cases linked to the Provincetown outbreak using travel history and exposure data from the state COVID-19 surveillance system and follow-up case investigation. A primary outbreak-associated case was defined as receipt of a positive SARS-CoV-2 test result (nucleic acid amplification test or antigen test) ≤14 days after travel to or residence in Provincetown between July 3rd and July 17th, 2021. The majority of specimens in the present dataset were collected through mobile testing deployed in Provincetown by the MADPH following identification of the outbreak ( Brown et al., 2021 2. Brown, C.M. ∙ Vostok, J. ∙ Johnson, H. ... Outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough infections, associated with large public gatherings—Barnstable County, Massachusetts, July 2021 Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 2021; 70 :1059-1062 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ). Cases analyzed in this study ranged in age from 0 to 105 years old; 125 were female and 513 were male. Among cases with genome sequencing information, the age range was the same as for all patients and included 94 females and 373 males.
Cases that did not meet the above criteria as primary cases but were collected in Provincetown or had an epidemiologically confirmed link to a primary case (i.e., secondary cases) are collectively referred to here as “outbreak-associated.” COVID-19 vaccine breakthrough cases were defined on the basis of either i) documentation from the state immunization registry of completion of COVID-19 vaccination as recommended by the CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ≥14 days before specimen collection or ii) self-reported vaccination dose(s) indicating completion of COVID-19 vaccination ≥14 days before sample collection during follow-up case investigations. Individuals who had received at least one vaccine dose ≥1 day before sample collection but did not meet these criteria were defined as partially vaccinated.
We identified specimens for viral genome sequencing linked to the Provincetown outbreak based on the above criteria and which were submitted to either the Massachusetts State Public Health Laboratory (MASPHL) or the Broad Institute for testing, following confirmation by diagnostic RT-qPCR test.
For specimens submitted to the Broad Institute, total RNA was extracted from inactivated Anterior Nares (AN) swabs using the Thermo Fisher MagMAX Viral RNA Isolation kit and presence of virus was determined by an RT-qPCR assay detecting the N1 and N2 gene regions of the virus used under Emergency Use Authorization at the Broad Institute Clinical Research Sequencing Platform in a CLIA-compliant diagnostic laboratory. Positive controls across all RT-qPCR plates containing samples analyzed as part of this dataset were highly consistent (N1 gene mean Ct = 26.61, standard deviation = 0.59; N2 gene mean Ct = 28.01, standard deviation = 0.59), demonstrating minimal variation between batches. Ct values for the N1 gene were used to compare viral titers between individuals; samples for which the positive control target (human ribonuclease P gene) had a Ct>32 were excluded from analyses involving Ct values to avoid biasing towards high viral loads. Specimens with a positive (N1 and N2 detected) or inconclusive (only one of N1 or N2 detected) test result, regardless of diagnostic Ct value, were re-extracted from the source material. Illumina sequencing libraries were prepared using the NEBNext ARTIC v3 SARS-CoV-2 FS Library Prep Kit. Libraries were sequenced on Novaseq SP flowcells with 75-nucleotide paired-end reads. During library preparation, some volumes were adjusted from manufacturer recommendations to accommodate 384-well plate reactions and high-throughput automated processing.
For specimens determined to be positive for SARS-CoV-2 based on RT-qPCR at the MASPHL, total RNA was extracted using the Roche MagNA Pure Total Nucleic Acid Isolation kit. Following extraction, samples proceeded to cDNA synthesis, amplification using ARTIC v3 SARS-CoV-2 PCR primers, and library preparation with the Illumina DNA Prep kit including bead-based normalization of library concentration prior to library pooling. Libraries were sequenced on Illumina MiSeq with 2x150 paired-end reads.
For genomes generated at the Broad Institute, we conducted all analyses using viral-ngs 2.1.28 on the Terra platform (app.terra.bio). All of the workflows named below are publicly available via the Dockstore Tool Registry Service ( dockstore.org/organizations/BroadInstitute/collections/pgs ). Briefly, samples were demultiplexed, reads were filtered for known sequencing contaminants, and SARS-CoV-2 reads were assembled using a reference-based assembly approach with the SARS-CoV-2 isolate Wuhan-Hu-1 reference genome GenBank: NC_045512.2 ( sarscov2_illumina_full.wdl ). For genomes generated at the MASPHL, all analyses were executed on a local, on-premise, Linux compute machine at the MASPHL. We processed all raw read data using a reference-based consensus calling method with the same NC_045512.2 reference genome. The workflow is publicly available on GitHub ( github.com/AndrewLangvt/genomic_analyses/blob/main/workflows/wf_viral_refbased_assembly.wdl ). On both Broad Institute and MASPHL alignments, we used LoFreq version 2.1.5 to call intrahost single nucleotide variants (iSNVs) with default parameters (minimum read depth ≥10, strand bias <85%, and default iSNV quality scoring) ( Wilm et al., 2012 27. Wilm, A. ∙ Aw, P.P.K. ∙ Bertrand, D. ... LoFreq: a sequence-quality aware, ultra-sensitive variant caller for uncovering cell-population heterogeneity from high-throughput sequencing datasets Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40 :11189-11201 Crossref Scopus (823) PubMed Google Scholar ). Variants with frequency ≥3% and in positions with read depth ≥200 were used for downstream analysis.
Assembled genomes meeting the CDC criteria for submission to public repositories (unambiguous length ≥24,000 nt and successful gene annotation) were deposited in NCBI GenBank and GISAID ( Elbe and Buckland-Merrett, 2017 9. Elbe, S. ∙ Buckland-Merrett, G. Data, disease and diplomacy: GISAID’s innovative contribution to global health Glob. Chall. 2017; 1 :33-46 Crossref Scopus (1137) PubMed Google Scholar ) immediately upon completion. Raw reads for all samples (including those that did not produce a successful genome) were deposited in NCBI SRA. All NCBI data were deposited under BioProject: PRJNA715749 (Broad) or BioProject: PRJNA686883 (MASPHL) and have been tagged with the BioSample attribute purpose_of_sequencing set to a value of “Cluster/Outbreak investigation” for primary and secondary outbreak-associated cases identified by MADPH epidemiologists or “Targeted surveillance (non-random sampling)” for samples collected as part of enhanced surveillance efforts but where no primary or secondary link to the outbreak was known. In the main text, these groups are together referred to as outbreak-associated, as described in “Sample collection and case definitions.”
Where an individual produced multiple positive tests, we used for analysis the most complete genome that met the CDC criteria for submission to public data repositories; if two or more genomes were of the same length, we selected the genome from the earlier collection time. We confirmed that genomes generated from the same patient were generally concordant; in two cases, genomes obtained from the same individual differed by a single mutation and in one case, a pair of genomes from one individual differed by two mutations. These mutations did not impact phylogenetic assignment or other inferences and likely result from lower coverage for one of the samples.
Coverage of the spike gene was on average 90.11% across assembled genomes meeting the CDC criteria for submission to public repositories. Regions of missing coverage were consistent with ARTIC V3 primer regions reported to be absent in Delta genomes owing to mutations in the primer binding sites. To prevent these gaps from impacting interpretation of the data, these regions were masked from phylogenetic analysis (see below).
We constructed a maximum-likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree ( Sagulenko et al., 2018 22. Sagulenko, P. ∙ Puller, V. ∙ Neher, R.A. TreeTime: maximum-likelihood phylodynamic analysis Virus Evol. 2018; 4 :vex042 Crossref Scopus (537) PubMed Google Scholar ) with associated visualizations using a SARS-CoV-2-tailored Augur pipeline ( Huddleston et al., 2021 14. Huddleston, J. ∙ Hadfield, J. ∙ Sibley, T.R. ... Augur: a bioinformatics toolkit for phylogenetic analyses of human pathogens J. Open Source Softw. 2021; 6 :2906 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar ) ( sarscov2_nextstrain_aligned_input ), part of the Nextstrain project ( Hadfield et al., 2018 12. Hadfield, J. ∙ Megill, C. ∙ Bell, S.M. ... Nextstrain: real-time tracking of pathogen evolution Bioinformatics. 2018; 34 :4121-4123 Crossref Scopus (1781) PubMed Google Scholar ), adapted from github.com/nextstrain/ncov , with the entirety of ARTICv3 amplicons 64, 72, and 73 (Delta dropout regions) masked from tree construction.
We included contextual genomes from the GenBank database (downloaded October 1st, 2021) using two subsampling schemes to prioritize genomes genetically, geographically, and temporally close to outbreak-associated genomes. First, we used a focal weighted subsampling scheme (using the Nextstrain script priorities.py) to prioritize genomes genetically, geographically, and temporally close to our outbreak-associated genomes ( https://github.com/broadinstitute/nextstrain-builds/blob/main/builds/broad-usa-builds.yaml#L125 ). Second, we forced inclusion of a set of contextual genomes identified by phylogenetic proximity to the outbreak genomes by concatenating: a) a list of samples obtained by performing a sequence search in UCSC UShER ( Turakhia et al., 2021 26. Turakhia, Y. ∙ Thornlow, B. ∙ Hinrichs, A.S. ... Ultrafast Sample placement on Existing tRees (UShER) enables real-time phylogenetics for the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic Nat. Genet. 2021; 53 :809-816 Crossref Scopus (151) PubMed Google Scholar ) against the "GISAID, GenBank, COG and CNCB (3,960,091 genomes)" database on September 28th, 2021, with "Number of samples per subtree showing sample placement" set to 100, resulting in the identification of 3,970 proximal samples; and b) a list of samples obtained by constructing a phylogenetic tree using FastTree ( Price et al., 2009 19. Price, M.N. ∙ Dehal, P.S. ∙ Arkin, A.P. FastTree: computing large minimum evolution trees with profiles instead of a distance matrix Mol. Biol. Evol. 2009; 26 :1641-1650 Crossref Scopus (3380) PubMed Google Scholar and 2010 20. Price, M.N. ∙ Dehal, P.S. ∙ Arkin, A.P. FastTree 2--approximately maximum-likelihood trees for large alignments PLOS One. 2010; 5 , e9490 Crossref Scopus (8655) PubMed Google Scholar ) (version 2.1.11) on a multiple sequence alignment masked as described above (retrieved from GISAID August 20th, 2021) of a random sample of 194,716 Delta lineage viral sequences, using iterative tree refinement followed by a greedy depth-first search to identify outbreak-enriched clades (clades with >10% of total leaf nodes being outbreak samples). Concatenation of the above lists and outbreak-associated genomes followed by deduplication resulted in forced inclusion of 6,372 genomes.
We used the contextualized ML phylogeny to estimate the number of introductions that seeded the Provincetown outbreak and the number of exports descending from the outbreak. To do so, we assigned a binary trait to each genome in the phylogeny, outbreak-associated or not outbreak-associated, and used Nextstrain’s ancestral inference ( Hadfield et al., 2018 12. Hadfield, J. ∙ Megill, C. ∙ Bell, S.M. ... Nextstrain: real-time tracking of pathogen evolution Bioinformatics. 2018; 34 :4121-4123 Crossref Scopus (1781) PubMed Google Scholar ) to infer the state of that trait for each internal node in the tree. We then defined an introduction as a trait change in a tree branch from not outbreak-associated to outbreak-associated. More specifically, we used baltic ( https://github.com/evogytis/baltic ) to extract from the phylogeny all changes in state of internal nodes from not outbreak-associated to outbreak-associated with an inferred date of June 15th or later. We define an introduction when an ancestral node on the branch was inferred to be not outbreak-associated with confidence ≥80%. Each of these introductions, with the resulting cluster, was extracted from the ML tree and visualized using matplotlib.
We inferred the geographic ancestral origin of each internal node at the level of division (e.g., US State). We defined exports as changes in inferred geographic division starting from a branch inferred to be from MA. To find exports from the dominant cluster of the Provincetown outbreak, we traversed the tree from outbreak-associated tips to the earliest internal node with an inferred date on or after July 3rd. From that collection of nodes we traversed the tree towards later time points. We defined the upper bound on downstream exported transmissions as the number of nodes outside MA, and counted the number of descendant genomes outside MA.
To quantify the impact of the Provincetown outbreak on subsequent spread of Delta lineage viruses in MA and to identify novel or frequent mutations of functional consequence, we compared the frequency of mutations detected in outbreak-associated genomes to their frequency in publicly available data. We downloaded from GISAID ( Elbe and Buckland-Merrett, 2017 9. Elbe, S. ∙ Buckland-Merrett, G. Data, disease and diplomacy: GISAID’s innovative contribution to global health Glob. Chall. 2017; 1 :33-46 Crossref Scopus (1137) PubMed Google Scholar ) all MA Delta genomes with collection date between July 3rd and August 30th, 2021, and purpose of sequencing listed as “baseline surveillance.” All sequences were processed with Nextclade CLI version 1.3.0 ( Aksamentov et al., 2021 1. Aksamentov, I. ∙ Roemer, C. ∙ Hodcroft, E. ... Nextclade: clade assignment, mutation calling and quality control for viral genomes J. Open Source Softw. 2021; 6 :3773 Crossref Google Scholar ) and custom python code. We used nucleotide substitutions that define each of the five Delta clusters to count the number of publicly available sequences in each cluster and used the sample collection date to calculate a daily frequency of each cluster compared to all baseline surveillance Delta genomes.
We used a model based on the parametric_si method in the R package EpiEstim v4.0.1 ( Cori et al., 2013 7. Cori, A. ∙ Ferguson, N.M. ∙ Fraser, C. ... A new framework and software to estimate time-varying reproduction numbers during epidemics Am. J. Epidemiol. 2013; 178 :1505-1512 Crossref Scopus (836) PubMed Google Scholar ) to estimate the effective reproductive number ( R t ), the average number of secondary cases per infectious case at a given time, for the Provincetown outbreak using case counts of outbreak-associated MA cases with specimen collection dates from July 6th through July 31st, 2021. Our estimates assume that Delta has a serial interval of 2.3 days with a standard deviation of three days ( Zhang et al., 2021 29. Zhang, M., Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention Guangzhou, Guangdong, China, Xiao, J., Deng, A., Zhang, Y., Zhuang, Y., Hu, T., Li, J., Tu, H., Li, B., et al. (2021). Transmission dynamics of an outbreak of the COVID-19 delta variant B.1.617.2—Guangdong province, China, May–June 2021. China CDC Weekly 3, 584–586. https://doi.org/10.46234/ccdcw2021.148 . Google Scholar ); that the serial interval is the same for vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals; and that there are no negative serial intervals, where a contact becomes symptomatic before the index. R t is calculated using 𝑅 𝑡 = 𝑐 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) 𝑐 ⁡ ( 𝑡 − 𝜏 ) , where c ( t ) is the incidence at time and is the mean value of the serial interval.
We used the R package outbreaker2 (version 1.1.2) ( Campbell et al., 2018 3. Campbell, F. ∙ Didelot, X. ∙ Fitzjohn, R. ... outbreaker2: a modular platform for outbreak reconstruction BMC Bioinformatics. 2018; 19 :363 Crossref Scopus (48) PubMed Google Scholar ) to estimate the probability of direct transmission between each pair of individuals based on consensus genome sequences. Where symptom onset date was not available, we used the sample collection date. We supplied a Gamma distribution based on a previously described mean and standard deviation of the Delta (B.1.617.2)-specific generation interval and incubation period ( Zhang et al., 2021 29. Zhang, M., Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention Guangzhou, Guangdong, China, Xiao, J., Deng, A., Zhang, Y., Zhuang, Y., Hu, T., Li, J., Tu, H., Li, B., et al. (2021). Transmission dynamics of an outbreak of the COVID-19 delta variant B.1.617.2—Guangdong province, China, May–June 2021. China CDC Weekly 3, 584–586. https://doi.org/10.46234/ccdcw2021.148 . Google Scholar ). For the genomes where contact tracing information was available, we included a matrix of contact tracing data. We left all other input parameters as unknowns to be estimated by outbreaker2 and allowed for transmission events from individuals not included in the dataset. We ran the outbreaker2 Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm six times with 1,000,000 iterations each, discarding the first 10% as burn-in. After averaging the transmission probabilities across the six runs, we defined well-supported transmission events as those with mean probability >70%. We selected this method over other available tools due to its ability to incorporate both genomic and contact-tracing data into transmission predictions.
For the iSNV analysis of transmission links, we conservatively identified a putative transmission when 1) the detected iSNV frequency in the contact was ≥50%, 2) the index and contact consensus sequences only differed by one consensus-level change, 3) the contact appeared downstream of the index in a divergence phylogeny, and 4) the symptom onset date of the index was ≥2 days before that of the contact.
To assess differences in transmission rates between vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals, we counted individuals in the two categories who were index cases in well-supported transmissions and used those counts to calculate the relative risk of transmission. A large cluster of secondary cases associated with a known residential close-contact setting was excluded from the analysis. We estimated the relative risk and calculated confidence intervals by constructing via simulation the likelihood function for the observed number of transmissions from the two categories, based on the number of samples in each category, under a model with one free parameter, the relative risk of transmission. In the model, error in inferring the index case was accommodated by replacing the vaccination status of a fraction of true index cases with the status of a sample drawn randomly from the population; the probability of replacement was itself drawn from the distribution of estimated uncertainties in index case assignment. Four million iterations of the simulation yielded a maximum likelihood estimate of the relative risk and a 95% confidence interval (determined from a decrease in the likelihood of 1.92 logs). A similar procedure was used for symptomatic/asymptomatic transmission from vaccinated individuals, with 100,000 iterations of the simulation.
All statistical analyses were performed in R ( The R Core Team, 2017 25. The R Core Team R: A language and environment for statistical computing. www. r-project.org 2017 Google Scholar ) or python 3. For comparisons of Ct values or ages by vaccination status, vaccine brand, or presence or absence of symptoms we performed a two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test using the function ks.test implemented in the dgof package. For comparisons of Ct values by age or time since vaccination we generated R 2 and p-values using the lm and summary functions implemented in the stats package. All additional statistical details including sample numbers can be found in the respective figure legends. For comparisons of the number of iSNVs by vaccination status we performed an independent t-test using the statistics functions from the SciPy package. For estimations of transmission rates all statistical details can be found in the figure legend and the relevant methods detail section. No subsampling or randomization was performed for any statistical test and no samples were excluded except where explicitly stated in the method details.

Section: Acknowledgments

We thank Patricia Kludt and Meagan Burns from the Massachusetts Department of Public Health; Radhika Gharpure, Samira Sami, Rebecca T. Sabo, Noemi Hall, Anne Foreman, and Scott Laney from the CDC COVID-19 Response Team; the Barnstable County Department of Health and the Environment; the Community Tracing Collaborative; the Boston Public Health Commission; and all members of the local, regional, and national COVID-19 emergency response efforts. We also acknowledge all members of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and Broad Institute SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequencing and surveillance efforts. We gratefully acknowledge the authors from the originating laboratories responsible for obtaining the specimens and the submitting laboratories where genetic sequence data were generated and shared via the GISAID Initiative, on which this research is based on ( Table S1 ). This work was sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention COVID-19 baseline genomic surveillance contract sequencing (75D30121C10501 to Clinical Research Sequencing Platform, LLC), a CDC Broad Agency Announcement (75D30120C09605 to B.L.M.), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (U19AI110818 and U01 AI151812 to P.C.S.), the Rockefeller Foundation (2021HTH013 to B.L.M. and P.C.S.), and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (INV-002717 to B.L.M.), as well as support from the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation (J.E.L.), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Merck KGaA Future Insight Prize (P.C.S.), and the National Human Genome Research Institute (K99HG010669 to S.K.R.). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
Conceptualization, K.J.S., L.A.K., G.K.M., S.F.S., C.M.B., D.J.P., B.L.M., and P.C.S.; methodology, K.J.S., L.A.K., G.K.M., S.F.S., D.J.P., B.L.M., J.V., N.A.F., J.E.L., N.B., I.S., C.H.T., J.S.P., B.S., B.P.T., B.L., H.J., P.L.S., H.M.S., B.S.B., M.C.R., M.E.F., and W.P.H.; software, K.J.S., L.A.K., G.K.M., S.F.S., D.J.P., N.B., I.S., C.H.T., J.S.P., B.S., B.P.T., B.L., M.C.R., M.E.F., C.L., M. Doucette, A.S.L., J.C.M., K.V., and S. Chaluvady; formal analysis, K.J.S., L.A.K., G.K.M., S.F.S., I.S., C.H.T., J.S.P., B.S., B.P.T., B.L., C.L., A.S.L., J.V., H.J., P.L.S., H.M.S.; investigation, C.M.B., L.C.M., T.F., M. Doucette, S.B., J. Brown, E.B., J. Beauchamp, S. Clancy, S. Cofsky, L.G., J.H., R.H., J.V., H.J., P.L.S., H.M.S., S.H., S.A., G.C.A., S.T.D., S.D.S., J.L.G., K.S.M., F.L.R., Z.M.M., M.D.L., C.M.N., D.A., M.M., T.C., V.H., T.B.F., M. Dunn, and A.K.; resources, H.J., P.L.S., H.M.S., T.F., N.A.F., G.R.G., and S.S.; data curation, J.V., H.J., P.L.S., H.M.S., C.M.B., L.C.M., L.A.K., and A.S.L.; writing—original draft, C.M.B., L.A.K., K.J.S., G.K.M., S.F.S., C.L., D.J.P., N.B., B.L.M., P.C.S., and S.K.R.; writing—review and editing, L.A.K., K.J.S., G.K.M., S.F.S., D.J.P., and B.L.M.; supervision, K.J.S., D.J.P., B.L.M., C.M.B., P.C.S., S.K.R., L.C.M., T.F., N.A.F., G.R.G., S.S., K.V., B.S.B., W.P.H., M.A.U., S.E.E., K.L.L., C.B., A.P., N.J.L., and S.B.G.; project administration, N.A.F., B.S.B., G.L.G., K.C.D., M.E.V., L.M.A., M.C.C., M.T.D., S.E.A., H.M.R., G.V., E.B., A.S.L., T.F., S.H., and N.L.S.; funding acquisition, D.J.P., B.L.M., P.C.S., W.P.H., N.J.L., and S.B.G.
P.C.S. is a co-founder of, shareholder in, and scientific advisor to Sherlock Biosciences, as well as a board member of and shareholder in Danaher Corporation. J.E.L. has received consulting fees from Sherlock Biosciences. A.P. is a venture partner at Google Ventures. W.P.H. is a member of the scientific advisory board of Biobot. Other authors report no competing interests.
One or more of the authors of this paper self-identifies as an underrepresented ethnic minority in science. One or more of the authors of this paper self-identifies as a member of the LGBTQ+ community. One or more of the authors of this paper self-identifies as living with a disability. One or more of the authors of this paper received support from a program designed to increase minority representation in science.

Section: Supplemental information (1)

Spreadsheet (353.49 KB) Table S1. Acknowledgement table of GISAID data contributors of genome sequences used for phylogenetic tree reconstruction, related to Figure 2
