Title: The Carceral State: An American Story


Section: 

This article is part of a special theme on Kinship. For a list of other articles in these themes, see https://www.annualreviews.org/toc/anthro/51/1

Section: ABSTRACT

This article reviews key works in the anthropology of mass incarceration, generated by anthropologists and their interlocutors whose research is directed outside physical sites of imprisonment. My geographical focus is on the United States during the last decade's political and economic Zeitgeist, shaped by the manifestations and consequences of the carceral state and the prison industrial complex. My discussion is also guided by research invigorated by anthropology's decolonizing drive and growing concern about racism within and outside the academy. Along the way, and emphasized in the final section, I make the case that anthropology's abiding interest in kinship is a productive approach for configuring our understanding of the American carceral state and the racial landscapes of carcerality. The research reviewed shows how deeply carcerality is embedded in race, illuminating its destructiveness in Black and brown communities, yet also revealing the creation of regenerative spaces of kinship.

Section: INTRODUCTION

The anthropology, history, and sociology of incarceration have been well mapped in the pages of this journal ( Rhodes 2001 , Cunha 2014 ). Since then, the magnitude of what many observers today see as an American crisis has been illustrated by staggering statistics. In the United States, 1 in 31 people are under some form of correctional supervision ( Sassen 2014 , p. 65; Hinton 2016 ) in more than 6,700 institutions ( Steinmetz 2019 ), ranging from prisons, jails, and immigration detention centers to forensic hospitals and juvenile detention treatment facilities. Other supervisory methods include parole, probation, and monitoring by “e-carceration” ( Hattery & Smith 2021 ), including ankle bracelets, GPS technology ( Miller 2021 ), and algorithm-based software that surveils and predicts crimes and culprits ( Dressel & Farid 2018 , Dorsey & Diaz-Barriga 2020 ). Every year, between 500,000 and 700,000 people are decarcerated, or released from imprisonment into the population of almost 20 million Americans who already have felony records ( Byrd 2016 ; Miller 2021 , p. 8; Szalai 2021 ). One in three Americans have been arrested by age 23; by then, Black men's chances of arrest are almost 50% ( Painter 2020 ). Latinx youth are 28% more likely to be detained or committed to juvenile facilities than their white peers ( Rovner 2021 ). By 2019, there were 231,000 incarcerated women in the United States ( Kajstura 2019 ), the majority of whom are mothers ( Bertram & Sawyer 2021 ). By the early 2000s, more than 2,500 children had been sentenced to life imprisonment without parole ( Stevenson 2014 , p. 269). Seventy million people in the United States have criminal arrest histories ( Stevenson 2014 ). Almost half of Americans have family members who have been incarcerated ( Enns et al. 2019 ).
In this article, I review key publications in the anthropology of mass incarceration, with a focus on work generated by anthropologists and their interlocutors whose research is directed outside physical sites of imprisonment. I do not include the important and growing interdisciplinary literature on studies of life inside carceral facilities in the United States and around the globe ( Rhodes 2001 , Cunha 2014 , Dreisinger 2016 , Young-Alfaro 2017 , Fassin 2017 , Sharp 2022 ). My geographical focus here is the United States and its last decade's political and economic Zeitgeist, animated by the manifestations and consequences of the carceral state and the prison industrial complex. Although anthropology's decolonizing drive predates the last decade, invigorated by growing concerns about expressions of racism within and outside of the academy, the surge of excellent research that has followed guides my attention here. Along the way, and emphasized in the final section, I make the case that anthropology's abiding interest in kinship is a productive approach for configuring our understanding of the American carceral state and the racial landscapes of carcerality. The research reviewed here shows how deeply carcerality is embedded in race, illuminating its destructiveness in Black and brown communities, yet also revealing the creation of the regenerative spaces of kinship.

Section: STATES OF CONFINEMENT

Foundational research by Foucault (1977) , M. Davis (1995) , Wacquant (2000) , Rhodes (2001) , A.Y. Davis (2003) , Gilmore (2007) , and Alexander (2010) helped direct scholarly as well as popular attention to state systems of discipline and punishment. Much of it argued that human incarceration is a systemic problem cultivated by the combined forces of neoliberal racial capitalism, racism, class insecurity, and gender inequality ( Wacquant 2009 , Bourgois 2011 , Wang 2018 ). Carcerality's basic incarnations are the carceral state, or governmentality that relies on institutionalized means of punishment and surveillance (including mass incarceration), particularly of targeted populations, and the prison industrial complex. Coined by Mike Davis (1995 , p. 229) and defined by Bryan Stevenson (2014 , p. 260) as the “business interests that capitalize on prison construction” (A.Y. Davis 2003 , p. 84), the prison industrial complex helps explain why between 1990 and 2005 a new prison opened every 10 days. It emerged in the latter half of the last century from the consolidation of social welfare programs and crime control policies ( Hinton 2016 , Roberts 2019 ). This consolidation has led others to approach the prison primarily as a core political institution rather than an economic one ( Wacquant 2009 ; 2010c , p. 611).
Complementing the studies of life inside prisons and jails are studies of the experiences of local communities, targeted largely through race and class, which show these communities living daily with American carceral culture, bearing the brunt of the skewed ratio between opportunity, support, and punishment. As recently as 20 years ago, the prison abolition movement in the United States was not well known outside activist circles. Since then, the movement has gone mainstream. Key arguments reverberate in protests about criminalization, police brutality, and racial discrimination, particularly the anti-Black racism that these critiques expose. Together, they form a discourse of carcerality whose center-staging encourages greater attention to the “carceral turn,” or the “deployment of a new range of strategies of social control and coercion” that inform “punitive turns in both welfare and justice policy” ( Moran et al. 2018 , p. 666), across expanding arenas—activist, scholarly, and popular—of what Foucault (1977 , p. 298) envisioned as a “carceral archipelago.” Anthropological study of carcerality is necessarily, then, undertaken by virtue of carcerality's pervasiveness and anthropology's own abiding interests in social inequality. Moreover, anthropology's disciplinary decolonization, interrogating basic epistemological principles as well as modes of engagement with our subject matter and interlocutors, arguably is also an “anticarceral” move ( Doughty 2019 , p. 442) that reveals the ties that anthropological research has to carcerality—and the culture (the logic, the discourse) that carcerality produces and sustains.
Despite this wide terrain, and anthropology's own disciplinary breadth, anthropological research concerning carcerality remains outpaced by other disciplines, particularly sociology, criminology, and geography. Anthropologists who work on various aspects of carcerality have commented on this unevenness ( Green 1994 , Bourgois 2000 , Rhodes 2001 , Gusterson 2007 , Polanco 2015 , Fassin 2018 , J.T. Martin 2018 , Doughty 2019 , Speed 2019 ). Others note that growing numbers of anthropologists have begun to undertake analyses of the US criminal justice system, including investigating other disciplinary frames of reference ( Dewey 2021 ). Anthropological research in the United States is increasingly focusing on mass incarceration, policing, reentry (decarceration), and community struggles for justice. Arguably, it has already embarked on a “decarcerated anthropology” ( Doughty 2019 , p. 442) by way of other projects, notably the decolonizing work dedicated to a self-reflexive dismantling of Western anthropology's epistemologically confining “imperial and white supremacist logics” ( Thomas 2018 , p. 393) that obscure and misrecognize ( Harrison 1991 , Mullings 2005 , Burton 2015a , Allen & Jobson 2016 , Jobson 2020 , Gupta 2021 ).
This attention signals anthropology's call to embrace a radical humanism that abandons liberal suppositions so that the discipline no longer perpetuates the very things it critiques ( Allen & Jobson 2016 , Jobson 2020 ). Disciplinary decolonizing also understands the centrality of the concept of race and its social formations in the genesis and practice of anthropology ( Burton 2015a , Thomas 2018 , Shange 2019b ). These commitments are inspired by and build on earlier arguments for disciplinary self-critique and transformation ( Harrison 1991 , Trouillot 1991 , Mullings 2005 ). Calls for anthropologists to confront the extensiveness of structural racism in society and to commit to public outreach are integral to the study of carcerality, which necessarily trains attention on the extent to which structural racism is pervasively embedded within our social system ( Mullings 2005 ) and scrutinizes the “intensification of state repression in ghetto and barrio communities” ( Harrison 1991 , p. 2). Appeals for activist anthropology also work in the spirit of these interwoven efforts ( Harrison 1991 , 2021 ; Simmons 2015 ; Loperena 2016 ; Berry et al. 2017 ; Burns et al. 2020 ; Parikh & Kwon 2020 ). The last decade in particular has drawn renewed attention to the mirror image of disciplinary practice and social problems, trained on racial formations and citizenship, and their forms of hierarchy and discrimination in the United States.
The last 20 years in the United States have seen not only steady government policy commitments to mass incarceration as a key solution to social problems but also an increasing scrutiny and critique of mass incarceration on the part of scholars, journalists, community organizers, and the general public. In turn, this scrutiny has revealed the expansiveness of what carcerality involves, ranging from the war on drugs—and, as Hinton (2016) argues, the war on crime in general—to mass arrests, lengthened sentencing, increased power of prosecutors, militarization of the police, and imprisonment writ large as a practice of statecraft itself ( Rodriguez 2006 ). The last decade has seen increasing public awareness of the extent of injustices exercised specifically upon racially targeted and impoverished populations, such as policing measures, surveillance strategies, the judicial system, criminalization, and the pathologizing of “culture of poverty” communities. This period has witnessed the rise of the Black Lives Matter movement and its global as well as local reverberations, including scholarly and activist scrutiny of policing and police, who are “disproportionately on the front lines of recruiting for the prison industrial complex” ( Beliso-De Jesús 2019 , p. 144; see also Fassin 2013 , Bonilla & Rosa 2015 , Bornstein 2015 , Burton 2015b , Simmons 2015 , Camp & Heatherton 2016 , Smith 2016 , J.T. Martin 2018 ). It has also witnessed mounting calls for an abolitionist movement whose fulcrum is prison abolition and its diverse expressions and entailments ( Byrd 2016 , Sojoyner 2016 , Burns et al. 2020 ). Even more recently, particularly with reference to the police killings of individuals belonging to racially targeted populations, virtual webinars, panels, workshops, working groups, and special issues on anti-Black racism, policing, and mass incarceration have proliferated. These include publications and events hosted by the Association of Black Anthropologists and the American Anthropological Association, addressing the historically entrenched, skewed relationships among racism, violence, public safety, and law and order.
An anthropology of carcerality is not a cohesive field of inquiry, largely because anthropology is still building its research agendas and identifying foci concerning a social condition whose parameters remain diffuse. Nonetheless, attention to the systemic foundations of state-sponsored brutality linked to racism, policing, mass incarceration, and social and biological death clears a path.

Section: THE (UN)LIMITS OF CARCERALITY

Carcerality extends beyond prison studies, as shown in research on “peri-carceral” ( Cunha 2014 ) and “para-prison” ( Thompkins et al. 2010 ) spaces outside the physical perimeters of a facility. Carcerality might also be viewed as the “confining cells of identity” itself, notably racial identity—categories whose meanings and implications can limit those who inhabit them ( Mebane-Cruz 2015 , p. 240). Studies of what might be called the ground zero of carcerality—the brick-and-mortar institution—are an important focal point, but they also show the porousness of boundaries designating inside and outside ( Ellis 2021 ). For example, almost 5.5 million people flow through US correctional systems every year ( Schoenfeld 2018 , p. 4), a number that does not include the daily traffic of correctional officers, incarcerated people's regularized circulation through work furlough programs, decarcerated people in transitional living residences (L. Martin 2021 , Miller 2021 ), or the goods and services that make the prison industrial complex profitable—ranging from making eyeglasses and license plates to bomb squad dog training, farming crops, and taking catalog orders, as well as the modes of surveillance to which people, particularly the racially targeted, are subject ( Browne 2015 ). These factors all speak to the point that incarceration is an attempt to “invisibilize” the socially problematic, including “problem populations”—from denying them public assistance to locking them away ( Wacquant 2010b , p. 199).
These efforts incubate isolation, marginalization, and neglect among the incarcerated, but, ironically, they remain imperfect means of invisibilization because the punitive thrust of carcerality permeates all sectors of society and sustains the culture that it produces. The hypersurveillance central to carcerality thus works both with and against its invisibilizing intentions. On the one hand, hypersurveillance profiles populations and surrounds particular sectors, in the process increasing their visibility; on the other hand, hypersurveillance's capaciousness means that it is everywhere and anywhere, rendering it in a sense invisible. This apparent contradiction, or inconsistency, raises important questions about the literal and metaphoric meanings of incarceration, captivity, and penal systems. Much like with anthropology itself, it is difficult for analysts to think of a topic that is not relevant to carcerality. For a number of years, scholars and activists in the United States and elsewhere have been producing critical analyses looking beyond the walls of a penal institution at key manifestations of carceral culture. This capacious view of carcerality expands the scope of discussions about confinement beyond their “prison-centric impulse” ( Weegels et al. 2020 , p. 1).
Most anthropologists analyzing various aspects of carcerality today subscribe to an elemental premise about its emergence and purpose: the codependence of the state and its political economy, the pretense of maintaining social peace through carceral means, and the big business ($80 billion a year) of the US “punishment industry.” Economic conditions, such as those brought about by neoliberalism's deregulation of the low-wage labor market that moves welfare toward workfare and “prisonfare” ( Wacquant 2009 ; see also Gilmore 2007 , Wacquant 2010b ), increase the precariousness of subaltern populations, who are particularly subject to the effects of dwindling social and economic safeguards. A key way that political elites reaffirm state authority is through the expansion of police, courts, and incarceration among at-risk, restive populations, reflecting a “shift from the social to the penal wing of the state” ( Wacquant 2010b , p. 201). In contrast to the argument that Jim Crow technologies of population control have persevered ( Alexander 2010 ), other analysts argue that a new era, beginning in the mid-twentieth century with the “long War on Crime” in the United States ( Hinton 2016 ), as well as recent shifts in policy development ( Sojoyner 2016 ), produced a “penal populism” ( Lacey 2010 , p. 102) that pushed for the mass incarceration of entire sectors of the population, notably those in urban areas associated with the social unrest of the Civil Rights movement ( Wacquant 2009 , Lacey 2010 , Hinton 2016 ), or as a reserve army of labor ( Wacquant 2010a , Pearson 2021 ). Each successive “war”—on poverty, delinquency, drugs, crime, terror—created a historically new, post–Civil Rights era war that depended on the criminalization of urban social programs and the people who most needed them in order “to control and contain troublesome groups with patrol, surveillance, and penal strategies” ( Hinton 2016 , p. 25). Wacquant (2010a , p. 74) makes the point that these groups are targeted by class and place as well as race: The neoliberal revolution was fostered in part by the response to “ghetto riots,” which imposed “insecure labor as the normal horizon of work for the unskilled fractions of the postindustrial laboring class.” Therefore, Wacquant (2010a , p. 74) argues that what ensued has not been “ mass incarceration” but the “ hyper incarceration of (sub)proletarian African American men from the imploding ghetto” ( Lutz 2002 ).
Whether or not officially recognized as a domestic war of incarceration and genocide directed against racialized subaltern populations ( Burton 2021 ), this war at home can be viewed as another dimension of the militarism that, as Gusterson (2007 , p. 156) observed, is “integral to global society today,” in the forms of standing armies, paramilitaries, military contractors, stockpiled weaponry, swelling state surveillance programs, and popular culture's saturation with militarized imagery. The combination of these factors produces an encompassing condition of “captivity” ( Doughty 2019 ), which engenders particular forms of violence that underwrite the containments of social life lived under a “war on crime” economy. These include the expansive causes and consequences of inequalities in public health ( Crane & Pascoe 2021 , Rouse 2021 ); the military–industrial complex ( Lutz 2002 , Sudbury 2004 , Gusterson 2007 ); and fear and violence, and resilience in the face of fear and violence, as a way of life ( Green 1994 ; Scheper-Hughes & Bourgois 2004 ; Ralph 2014 , 2020 ; Carter 2019 ). The concept of carcerality as an analytical optic thus must be as inclusive as the condition of lived experience itself, drawing together what Fleetwood (2020 , p. 26) calls the “carceral logics that tether bodies to penal systems.” These logics, which belong to a carceral culture that transcends literal captivity, are driven by a moral imperative hinged on punitivity and individual accountability ( Clarke 2009 , Polanco 2015 , Fassin 2018 , Shammas 2019 , Burch 2021 ). As Fassin (2018 , p. 121) argues, the current moment, notably in the United States, has seen a historical shift from “an affective economy of the debt to a moral economy of punishment and from a logic of compensation for the damage caused to a rationale of retribution.” Focusing on the culpability of individuals and their moral responsibilities, moreover, exonerates the state's role in creating and perpetuating conditions that give rise to “criminal” acts. For example, almost two-thirds of incarcerated women are imprisoned for nonviolent crimes involving drugs or property. Upon release, this population is legally banned from public benefits and welfare, including access to housing and food stamps ( Stevenson 2014 ). There are many channels, before, during, and after incarceration, that keep the experience of carcerality alive.
Carcerality is capacious. Prison systems make up a “porous institution” ( Ellis 2021 ), and the prison industrial complex engenders a “state of mind” ( Thompkins 2010 ) that we think through ( Schliehe & Moran 2017 , p. 270). Both are present in and absent from our lives (A.Y. Davis 2003 , p. 15; Starzmann 2019 ). As Gilmore (2007 , p. 16) notes, households experiencing the impacts of incarceration “stretch from neighborhood to visiting room to courtroom, with a consequent thinning of financial and emotional resources.” Carcerality's branches are vast because they permeate so many aspects of life, both directly and indirectly, and because of the proliferation of services that are attached to human captivity on such an enormous scale. For these reasons, it is crucial to be clear about what the carceral encompasses, as well as the punitive characteristics that inform it, given that the military, nursing homes, schools, detention centers, migrant labor camps, extraordinary rendition centers, halfway houses, and gated communities are arguably all carceral ( Moran et al. 2018 , p. 675; Fleetwood 2020 ). Mass incarceration, or the physical imprisonment of significant percentages of a population, is “only one iteration in a spectrum of state-meted punishment” ( Polanco 2015 , p. 201). For example, carceral infrastructure is invading the noncarceral spaces of the built environment, such as public housing and hospitals. The ubiquity of carceral culture and governance may, albeit counterintuitively, make it at times difficult to register. Nonetheless, prisons are central to the functioning of our society; they produce “governability throughout the population, not just among those who have gone through the prison system” ( Buck 2021 , p. 619). The tilt over the last several years is approaching imprisonment as brick-and-mortar iterations, as molding statecraft, and as, metaphorically, good to think.

Section: RACIAL LANDSCAPES AND THE BORDERS OF CITIZENSHIP

Anthropology's “particularly toxic love match with white supremacy” ( Chin 2021 , p. 217) is impossible to refute, traceable in part to its history of scientific racism despite also being engaged in antiracist scholarship ( Mullings 2005 , Anderson 2019 ). Without correction of blind spots concerning white supremacy, anti-Blackness, the US carceral state, and grassroots self-representation, ethnographic authority's canonical certainties are jeopardized, and anthropology's approach to race, irrelevant (A.Y. Davis 1996 , Burton 2015a ). Working to correct these lacunae, scholars of carcerality continue to foreground the principle that US carcerality is necessarily a racial issue: It operates within racial landscapes populated by racialized bodies that are indelibly if differentially tied to a carceral geography imbued with ideologies of anti-Blackness and their corollaries—“enemies” identified by the “crimmigration” (migrant illegality) of racialized communities, notably residing along and traversing the US–Mexico border ( Gill et al. 2013 , Macías-Rojas 2016 ).
Jailing as punishment was an institution in the 13 colonies, but the nascent nation developed the penitentiary significantly to curtail Black freedom ( Gross 2018 , p. 1). From slave plantation surveillance to the “unfinished emancipation” of state terrorism, incarceration has always involved some expression of captivity ( Browne 2015 , p. 13). Working within these arenas, anthropologists also link the US criminal justice system and white supremacy to the international security state. That “gang member,” “juvenile delinquent,” and “terrorist” are synonymous ( Sojoyner 2021 , p. 668) is not coincidental but, rather, one manifestation of the war on terror in domestic arenas, notably the practice of police interrogation ( Ralph 2019 ). Drawing a parallel between the Guantanamo Bay detention camp and the experience of African Americans, particularly those subject to police torture, Ralph (2019 , p. 141) argues that detainees in both sites are disfranchised in defense of US militarism, a metastasizing ideology of law and order that disguises, and justifies, practices of state violence simultaneously national and international. This systemic anti-Black violence, notably police violence, maintains a Black-subjected necropolitics that traverses this hemisphere, reverberating its consequences throughout what Smith (2016 , p. 31) calls “affective communities of the dead.” These are sites where state terror produces violence including and beyond death, its effects echoing as “sequelae,” or the lingering “punishment of living death handed down to those who affectively surround the dead” (p. 31). “Sequelae” captures that death is not final for the living, who continue to experience its impacts. Moreover, sequelae are gendered, most acutely experienced, Smith argues, among Black mothers and, by extension, Black families (p. 40). Undermining family structures is a familiar strategy of oppression, from the American slavery era to today's unfinished emancipation.
Perhaps in a more attenuated relationship with death, what arguably might also be considered sequelae, or the lingering punishments of carceral violence, are sustained in racial landscapes and the animosities created through the regional disparities between rural, primarily white areas where prison construction is concentrated, and the majority urban, Black and Latinx populations imprisoned there. Morrell (2021) shows that upstate New York prisons are workplaces that reproduce racial tensions, as prison guards see their shared upstate hometowns, such as the one in which she worked, as the basis of “brotherhoods,” which reinforce their perceived difference from Black and brown people, incarcerated and not. Despite nonexistent evidence, panicked locals imagine the area's two penitentiaries as lodestones for prisoners’ families allegedly moving there from predominantly Black-populated parts of the state, not simply to be nearer loved ones but to balloon welfare rolls and commit crimes, construing Black Americans as “placeless, dependent, and criminal” ( Morrell 2018 , pp. 50, 51). Prisons thus reproduce racial hierarchies through the racial topography within which they are situated, and the racial identities that being incarcerated and associated with incarceration reinforce. Yet carcerality also complicates whiteness. Stigmatized, prison employment may also devalue whiteness, where the “psychological wage” of white supremacy is unevenly distributed between local whites who work as prison guards and local whites who interpret this labor as brutish, warping one's sense of humanity ( Morrell 2021 , p. 640).
In an equally complex context of what might be considered sequelae, Shange explores the afterlives of slavery in what she calls “progressive dystopias,” those racial landscapes where progressive reformist projects, including the San Francisco school that was her research site, are places of (limited) reparation and yet also reproduce the contradictions and hypocrisies of the progressive project. Shange (2019a ; 2019b , p. 15) uncovers the multifaceted textures of US racism and the “carceral progressivism” that forms the continuum space between ghetto and prison, where, for example, progressives decry the systemic racism of the penal system yet rely on law enforcement to preserve their vision of community. When it comes to who is disposable in the progressive dystopia, Shange (2019b , p. 4) powerfully argues that “Black flesh is always in excess” and “being unapologetically Black” is punished.
The racial landscapes through which carcerality travels are multilayered. But as these anthropologists demonstrate, state-sanctioned domestic terrorization, sequelae, and progressive dystopias are projected from unfinished emancipation: white supremacy's anti-Blackness and its foundational relationship to the carceral state and its industries. Borders and walls delineate and contain belonging, and cage un belonging. They do so partly according to population, defined as problematic depending on history and circumstance. Expulsions come in many forms; they are a kind of internal deportation that warehouses excess surplus labor and problematic populations ( Sassen 2014 , Middlemass 2017 ). When “inside” is defined in nation-state terms, “other” is another kind of alienation. It is not accidental that expanded border wall building and prison growth blossomed at the same time, the 1990s. As researchers note, like the division between prison and street, the border between being walled in and walled out is ambiguous. The characteristics of mass incarceration that shape the life of communities along both sides of the US border with Mexico—a border that arguably ends/begins in Central America—are extensions of US prisons, where high- and low-tech surveillance systems, lax enforcement and ambiguous awareness of constitutional rights, punishment-by-detention of “crimmigration,” and big business ventures [notably the private prison industry, which incarcerates more than 80% of detained immigrants ( Worth Rises 2021 )] expand the term “borderlands” from a place to a space of carcerality and blur the distinction between citizen and noncitizen and between resident and migrant ( Dorsey & Diaz-Barriga 2015 , 2020 ; Raschig 2017 ; Steinmetz et al. 2019 ; Diaz-Barriga & Dorsey 2020 ; McAtackney & McGuire 2020 ). The “border” is now “just about everywhere” ( Grandin 2019 , p. 268).
We learn from this research that citizenship is the ostensible fulcrum of US belonging yet it also divides (protects) those who belong from those who do not. Mass incarceration, Miller (2021 , p. 270) argues, “is about citizenship, not criminal behavior, and citizenship is about belonging.” The lived experience of citizenship is put to the test when the “illegal” and the “legal” are criminalized in comparable fashion, such as people held in Immigration and Customs Enforcement detention centers not because of charges of committing a crime but because they are potential deportees. Shange (2019b , pp. 3, 14) observes that the “lofty rhetoric of citizenship” is not “equitably applied across lines of racial and ethnic difference” and that “Blackness is a topography without a territory.” Territory is terrain that people move through. Addressing incarceration, Black populations, and the creation of the “criminal” through the legal concept of vagrancy, Tenorio (2021 , p. 66) argues that the justifications and methods employed to maintain state security are “based crucially in movement” and that the “policing of movement is racialized.” Tenorio's point that Black mobility outside white authority's rules of racial conduct is a prohibition reinforced by arrest or death (p. 70) offers the optic of movement as a vehicle of criminalization that is also important vis-à-vis other subject populations.
The historical violence of displacement and alienation is evident, for example, in US Latinx communities, where police violence often gets less attention than concerns about detaining and deporting migrants ( Raschig 2017 , p. 407). That criminalization leads to “criminal” as a racialized identity in African American neighborhoods thus also applies to the US–Mexico border region, where immigration-related criminal prosecutions and deportations are concentrated. A major consequence is the association of Mexican and other immigrants with illegality, criminality, and threats to national security ( Terrio 2015 , Gomberg-Muñoz 2016 , Macías-Rojas 2018 ). The construction of immigrants and border residents as “criminal” reflects the forms of carcerality historically directed toward African Americans, including mass incarceration. Recognizing this pattern, borderlands scholars draw a distinction between the permanence of stigmatized identities that allegedly define character and acts that are illegal but not inherent or permanent. From the 1990s onward, the logic of border control shifted from managing seasonal labor migration to policing domestic populations ( Macías-Rojas 2016 , 2018 ). “Criminal” is a presumed identity among Black and brown, migrant or resident, with or without experience with the legal system. Borders also present additional challenges of identity construction within racial landscapes. Once inside the United States, indigenous peoples are viewed by the state as nationals of their home country, erasing their specific indigeneity. As Speed (2019) argues, this disempowers their status as political subjects: They do not qualify as sovereign and thus lack federal government recognition, and they are re-enraced as immigrant criminals, enemies undeserving of justice. This violence is particularly critical among indigenous women.
Research on migrants, border life, and detainees reveals injuries among children and women as among the starkest. Incarceration in prisons and jails segregates by gender and age (minors, adults). Detention of immigrants may house women and children together, underscoring their victimization through images of children encaged and families separated. Nonetheless, victimization is not equal. Undocumented youth typically are distinguished between “good victims”—“Dreamers” whose parents brought them to the United States, “honorific Americans” by virtue of their cultural capital, English-language ability, and valorization of mainstream identity, which transcend alleged racial character—and children migrating alone or those in the United States who are quiet about living undocumented ( Terrio 2015 , pp. 3–4). As “undesirable subjects,” children in federal detention custody are treated as adults under the law, with responsibilities including securing legal representation and making other high-stakes decisions (pp. 13–14). For asylum seekers, “family” detention is misleading. These centers are facilities almost exclusively housing single mothers and their minor children; moreover, the deprivations to which they are subject reflect carceral facilities generally ( Routon 2021 , p. 317). These facilities are more aptly viewed as punitive processing centers for asylum seekers; it is telling that advocates providing care work refer to family detention facilities as “baby jail” (pp. 317, 319).
Black, Latinx, and indigenous communities are all examples of US territory and topography inequitably constituted and imagined, yet similarly denied. As the scholars cited in this section underscore, deprived or precarious citizenship exists in the interior and in the borderlands, as part of a carcerality that envelops and jeopardizes society as a whole.

Section: COMMUNITIES AND KINSHIPS

A major theme in the literature on critical reentry, which focuses on systemic inequality that links the state and individuals ( Wacquant 2010c , Middlemass & Smiley 2019 , L. Martin 2021 ), is that carcerality is a continuing condition after release from imprisonment. Recent anthropological research, with its critical, decolonizing, or abolitionist framing, points to the kinds of cultural environments and social challenges faced by individuals and communities especially subject to the conditions and ruptures that carcerality generates and sustains. In the words of Father Greg Boyle, founder of Homeboy Industries: no kinship, no peace; no kinship, no justice; no kinship, no equality ( Boyle 2021 ).
A renewed kinship-centered approach can carve out a flexible space for thinking anthropologically about the cultures of carcerality constituted by overlapping social fields that create and sustain incarceration's vast “common sense-ness” ( Wacquant 2009 , p. 162; Polanco 2015 , p. 202). Sahlins (2013 , p. 2) defines kinship broadly, as “mutuality of being” and “intersubjective belonging,” “people who are intrinsic to one another's existence.” Revisiting the concept of kinship ( Weston 1991 , Franklin & McKinnon 2000 , Strathern 2005 ) opens a way to explore how various ideas about relatedness help to explain the structures of experience—the intersubjective belonging—engendered by carcerality ( Gilmore 1999 , Carter 2019 , Burton 2021 , Richards-Calathes 2021 ) among the incarcerated and those with whom they are connected within and outside carceral facilities. Anthropology's kinship revisionists and those who study carcerality approach their inclusivity partly through kinship's bonds, which carry genealogically based, binding emotions. Genealogies are also histories of lived experience, as well as bio-genetic tracings.
Diverse paths lead to carcerality's kinships. In trans-American popular imagination, expendable populations constitute “public enemies” that must be both contained and profitable (A.Y. Davis 2000 , p. 73; Wacquant 2002a ). Approximately 90% of these “enemies” are men, but women are the fastest-growing sector of the prison population ( Steinmetz et al. 2019 , Sentencing Project 2020 ). Incarceration of women has major collateral consequences, notably their exclusion from public housing, food stamps, and other basic services, which in the last two decades has created “a new class of ‘untouchables’ in American society” ( Stevenson 2014 , p. 237; Sered 2019 ). Some scholars argue that Black women, particularly mothers, bear the brunt of anti-Black state violence (D.-A. Davis 2016 , Smith 2016 , Gross 2018 ). The extensive, combined impact of the carceral state, the prison industrial complex, and their enablers—the legal system, policing, and neoliberal racial capitalism—produces a carceral culture that creates an atmosphere in which everyone inside or outside of penal confinement is affected.
The strands of carceral culture are diffuse. Considering its multiple sites, scholars argue against conceptualizing strict boundaries between, for example, prison and street because their lived experience is “indistinct, overlapping, and inherently entangled” ( Weegels et al. 2020 , p. 3; see also Morrell 2021 ); the “deep kinship between ghetto and prison” is such that the ghetto itself “operates as an ethnoracial prison ” ( Wacquant 2002a , pp. 49, 51). At the same time, prison yards and courtrooms can be sites of activism and arenas of struggle as well as sites of data collection by staffers whose interpretations and logics percolate upward into seats of government ( Felber 2020 ). These overlaps come in the form of state politics of reproduction controlling the bodies of incarcerated women ( Sufrin 2019 ). Overlaps come in the violation of the community connectivity nourished in street corner culture by such policing policies as stop and frisk ( Haldipur 2018 ). Overlaps come in the complex network that connects police, prosecutors, judges, and politicians in the routine police torture of residents of particular neighborhoods, so pervasive that law enforcement–sponsored brutalization is an open secret ( Ralph 2020 ).
Finally, overlaps come in the “prisonized landscape” produced by social mechanisms of control embedded in architecture and urban planning ( Shabazz 2015 ) and in what Sojoyner (2016 , 2017 ) calls “enclosures” in his powerful critique of California's educational system. Sojoyner (2016 , p. xii) argues that “the most comprehensive manner in which to understand the relationships between schools and prisons is through the lens of enclosures.” Enclosures include the denigration of Black cultural traditions; the Western Christian church; the prison regime (which informs the workings of the US nation-state); an educational system that indoctrinates and crimps students and ultimately validates racial capitalism and the prison regime; the school-to-prison pipeline model, which emphasizes student misbehavior and teacher incompetence rather than the “structured dysfunctionality” of the “massive punishment apparatus”; and a state-based heteronormative masculinity model, with its concomitant silencing of violence against Black women (pp. xix–xx, 195).
Many researchers argue that reentry programs, undermined by state policies, are ineffective, simply an “extension of punitive containment” ( Wacquant 2010c , p. 605), in which decarcerated people themselves may also reproduce the blurred lines between prison and street, for example, in their self-narrated “conviction scripts,” recitations required in the pursuit of employment and housing ( Burch 2019 , 2021 ), and in the enduring habitus of prisonized “motor schemes and bodily automatisms” ( L. Martin 2018 , p. 672; see also Riggs 2015 ). These exist with different social and aesthetic choreographies, which “disrupt the inherited rhythms” of carcerality, where, for example, as Shange (2019a , p. 6) observes, “Black girls stay dancing in the face of state-sanctioned slow death” (see also Cox 2015 ).
There is a long history of scholarship that has portrayed enclosures pathologically: dysfunctional cultures doomed to repeat their failures, particularly within family and household. However, recent research on reentry and the expanding “prisoner reentry industry”—those branches of the state and private enterprise undertaking postprison supervision and creating “para-prisons” in the process ( Thompkins et al. 2010 , p. 429)—points to enclosure environments like neighborhoods that hem people in well before incarceration and confine them long afterward ( Garcia 2016 ; Sikand 2019 ; Miller 2021 , p. 8) in terms of violated kinships and deteriorations of “homeplace,” a place of self-recovery and community resistance ( hooks 2015 ). If “freedom is a place” ( Gilmore 2017 , p. 227; Morrell 2021 ), then where, Fleetwood (2020 , p. 256) asks, “is the body at home in the carceral archipelago?” What does the process of societal reentry into enclosure-predicated society entail, and what is the texture of the communities most affected by carceral power?
The relationships and networks that people forge under these circumstances are kinship formations, emerging from processes of reentry and the communities created, and returned to, as people live with and against carceral conditions. Scholarship on carcerality's kinships comprises both literal references to shared bio-genetic histories and capacious metaphoric attachments; they are, as Richards-Calathes (2021 , p. 54) expresses it, a “tangle of kinship fortified by blood but also, in moments, fused together through a punitive rupture” (see also Dewey et al. 2019 ). The inside/outside of institutionalized punishment represents a liminal space where carceral facilities, visiting rooms, reentry locations, letters, schools, money orders, pain, zip codes, and memories together constitute kinship ( Richards-Calathes 2021 , pp. 51, 55–56, 58). Captivity, punishment, and lineage are thus embedded within the categories of Black womanhood in the United States, making penal genealogy “feel like an inheritance” (p. 52). “Penaealogy,” Richards-Calathes's analytical term to capture the intrusion of carcerality into Black women's lineages, reveals the ways that punishment and lineage intersect generationally, making visible the crucial knowledge that kinship holds (p. 61). Kinships’ communities are also sustained by forms of critical knowledge, intergenerational ties, and care work that are shared among African American men, outside and inside imprisonment. Burton (2021 , p. 630) approaches traditions such as mentorship, letter writing, storytelling, radical collectivity, and teaching as “a kind of fathering: the labor of nurturing social life amid domestic war.” This labor amounts to collective, mundane rebellion against a domestic context of targeting for eradication the bonds of kinship broadly envisioned. Carcerality, then, can be viewed as “wild category” kinship that “all sorts of people do their best to domesticate” ( Haraway 2016 , p. 2), and where community formations reveal how people use relationality to rebuild as well as how they experience its disruptions.
Kinship may also be evoked metaphorically as spaces of regeneration created by those engaging in anticarcerality grassroots activism. These range from “love-politics” solidarity models ( Washington 2019 ) to cultural-political strategies of “social mothering” that challenge the legitimacy of the state ( Gilmore 1999 ) to, more broadly, the “fugitive archival practice” that draws from the rich lived experience of Black life in developing new forms of knowledge and community-informed “epistemologies of being” ( Sojoyner 2021 , p. 668) that are generated and shared in grassroots organizations and programs that oppose the dominant expression of state governance—carcerality's surveillance and brutality, working through such interlaced mechanisms as school, medical care, foster care, disciplinary records, and public assistance (p. 668).
As carceral archives, American cities are sites of violence and terror that result in death across neighborhoods significantly through criminalizing and incarcerating Black and brown youth. In New Orleans, for example, Black women who experience the violent rupture of relatedness through the deaths of their children, including by homicide, deal with the “kin pain” this causes through practices of restorative kinship, repairing familial, social, and spiritual bonds with the living and the deceased ( Carter 2019 , p. 20). Religious congregations are the sites of a “broad range of mothering activities” where women labor to sustain supportive relationships between themselves and those now in the afterlife as well as the living (pp. 189–90). In historically criminalized communities of color in Northern California, police brutality, including police-involved homicides, instigates “triggered activism” ( Raschig 2017 ). Social protest among Latinx residents ostracized from the rights-bearing domains of liberal politics, for example, includes their creation of such “fledgling politico-therapeutic spaces” as healing circles, notably formed and sustained by women committed to transformative healing and community engagement (pp. 404, 417). These collectives of mothers and others impacted by grievous loss from street or state violence demonstrate that grassroots activism comes in ways not necessarily conventionally recognizable: Contextual rather than pathological, brutality's triggers can raise consciousness and direct political dissent (p. 419).
Dreams as well as actions reveal the mundane rebellions of those under siege from systemic violence, as well as the interconnections between inner city and wider world, street and prison. Chicago's residents of violence-saturated neighborhoods, for example, more than half of whom are involved with the criminal justice system, experience injury, as Ralph (2014) shows, on a broad spectrum of both literal disability and existential condition. Their dreams of community improvement, largely basic desires for better employment and housing, are, simply in their existence and perpetuation, “renegade”: acts of defiance that sustain and energize in the face of the daily oppressions of environmental deterioration, law enforcement, and incarceration (pp. 8, 17). Injury can generate new goals and directions even in sites of its disabling consequences. Other sites are forged by deliberate refusal of inhabitants to recreate the hierarchical structures of their incarceration. The Spot, a formerly incarcerated–owned men's clothing store in New Jersey, is a space of “work without labor,” purposefully antithetical to the experience of prison, where labor is without meaningful work or communality ( Wacquant 2002a ; Pearson 2021 , pp. 171–72). As Pearson (2021 , p. 187) describes, this store is a consciously built cooperative site where people find “multiple ways to support themselves while building and deepening relationships with one another.” The stigma and structure of incarceration are rejected, and efforts are made toward recuperative care. This, too, might be considered a kind of fugitive archive, a community of kin and space of regeneration, a homeplace remade.

Section: CONCLUSION

Ninety years ago, Alexander Paterson (1932 , p. 10), penologist and His Majesty's Commissioner of Prisons for England and Wales (1922–1946), observed that prisons had “grown into the fabric” of every country so much that without them governments would jeopardize their “civilized” reputation. As the scholars discussed here argue, this fabric, this carceral culture, exceeds physical manifestations of confinement and guides the logic that organizes social life today.
Research on carcerality remains undertaken primarily by disciplines other than anthropology. In their acknowledgment of this fact, anthropologists have suggested possible reasons. For example, other academic disciplines have historically been involved with crime and punishment, reflecting the normalizing, classificatory agendas of nineteenth-century institutions ( Rhodes 2001 , p. 66); additionally, the influence of national security state priorities on anthropology's own disciplinary development has not engendered much attention to anthropologists’ relations with the state ( Gusterson 2007 , p. 156). Investigations of social inequality often emphasize theoretical abstraction or reflect societal bias at the expense of analyzing its lived experience among the disempowered ( Green 1994 , p. 228; Bourgois 2004 , p. 303; Polanco 2015 , p. 202); concomitantly, the affective dimensions of retribution among the empowered remain underexplored ( Fassin 2018 , p. 122). Finally, although anthropology's special strengths are its emphasis on culture and on ethnography, too often it offers cursory or utopian solutions and platitudes, from the perspective of those “tasked with the everyday work of law and policy implementation” ( Speed 2019 , p. 8; Dewey 2021 , pp. e158–59). Still, anthropology's contributions to carcerality have been significant, increasingly so in the last decade. Anthropologists draw attention to the vast facets of US carcerality in terms of the ways that nonbelonging is orchestrated through anti-Black and antibrown racism against citizens and through antiforeigner xenophobia, yet contested through self-regeneration practices within kinship communities. Criminalization and its confinements come in many forms. However, attention to relationships of unfreedom also reveals forms of consciousness that “resolve into liberated lifeways” ( Gilmore 2017 , pp. 227–28; see also Wacquant 2002b ). Subject matter expands or changes, as can disciplinary optics.
The “pessimism of the intellect” needs an “optimism of the will” ( Antonini 2019 ). This tension is evoked in anthropology's concerns about doing proper analytical (and activist) justice to the structurally disempowered and exploited without going so “dark” that the “good” in human social relations is obscured ( Robbins 2013 , Ortner 2016 , Cantero 2017 , Rodseth 2018 , Tamarkin 2018 , Waterston 2018 ). Terms like “captivity” or “enclosures” are particularly useful in underscoring the persistence of a condition without implying stasis: Carcerality is an ethos—of the common sense of racial capitalism, the mid-twentieth century shift in US domestic policy from fighting poverty to fighting crime, and the logics of expulsion. Anthropology's decolonization projects are key to the formation of analytical frameworks for the study of carcerality, and vice versa, in which abolitionist anthropology; radical humanism; anticarceral anthropology; and the study of kinships, race, anti-Blackness, and xenophobia dovetail, advancing anthropology's mission to empower studied populations and develop ways to integrate theoretical research with social activism.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

I am grateful to Jacqueline Nassy Brown and Bruce Grant for their comments on an earlier draft of this article, and to Marchita Primavera and Simon Schatzberg for their research assistance.

Section: literature cited

