Section: Abstract

The prehistory of the Aegean, Balkans, and Carpathian Basin has changed dramatically in the last two decades. This review covers five aspects of these changes: ( a ) the development of theoretical approaches, in which diversification from cultural archaeology has seen the spread of processual, postprocessual and later approaches; ( b ) the acquisition of data, with the key major development being the proliferation of large-scale infrastructure projects; ( c ) the synthesis of data, the most significant challenge being to make sense of the massive increase in paleo-environmental research, materials science, regional surveys, and site monographs; ( d ) thematic questions, whose very diversity underscores the discipline's growth in these regions; and ( e ) emergent trends, such as the creation of new forms of synthesis at the local, regional, and interregional scales, the theorizing and differentiation of new ways of relating people, places, plants, and animals and objects, and continuing diversification in the application of scientific techniques.

Section: Introduction

The last two decades of study in Southeast Europe have brought about the greatest transformation of the region's prehistory ever seen. Critical studies have built up a head of steam, an explosion of funding, application of a far wider range of archaeological scientific techniques, and a mass of new data from excavation and prospection.
Several terms in the title of this article require definition. “Neolithic” refers to a period when farming emerges in the study region, from ca. 6600/6500 BC onward in Greece but as late as 5000 BC in the Ukraine. The later stages, down to 3500 BC, include the Final Neolithic in Greece and the Chalcolithic/Copper Age/Eneolithic in the Balkans. Earlier extensions refer to the foraging–farming transition, which also entails a geographical extension eastward (to Anatolia). “Southeast Europe” covers the Aegean (A), the Balkans (B), and the Carpathian Basin and Eastern Europe (C), abbreviated as ABC. “Recent” trends refer to the current millennium.
The review comprises five sections: first, the development of theoretical approaches; second, the acquisition of data; third, the synthesis of data; fourth, thematic questions; and finally, emergent trends.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion, Conclusion

In terms of theoretical developments in the Balkans and the Carpathian Basin, there persists a bedrock of traditional culture history based on work by Kossinna and Childe ( Boyadzhiev & Terziiska-Ignatova 2011 ), which commands widespread support from most local practitioners and is rarely explicitly challenged. This underpinning of cultural archaeology involves a diversification of supporting evidence from ceramic typo-chronologies ( Ryzhov 2012 ) to lithics ( Kozłowski 2001 ) and even to ancient DNA (aDNA). However, Radivojević & Grujić (2018) recently confirmed the mapping of cultural groups based on pottery using a network analysis based on trace element data from the lead isotope analysis of copper objects. In Greece, the preoccupation with culture history has receded, even if its traces recur in the debate over the cultural origins of farming and sedentism as indigenous versus exogenous (whether ex oriente lux diffusionism or core–periphery theory) and their relationship with the development of farming in Europe, the Balkans, and the Near East ( Perlès 2001 ).
Since 2000, the processualization of Greek and Balkan prehistory, beginning in the 1970s in Greece and the mid-1980s in Hungary, has expanded locally and to other countries before its gradual loss of influence in recent years. Its main characteristics include an objective approach, with a predominance of methodology deriving from positivism, natural science, and statistics, and it has had an important impact on the quality of publications ( Chapman 2000b ). Three key areas for the testing of multidisciplinary scientific approaches using isotopic dietary studies and accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) dating have been the Mesolithic–Neolithic sequences in the Iron Gates ( Borić & Price 2013 ), the Franchthi Cave ( Perlès 2001 ), and the Theopetra Cave ( Kyparissi-Apostolika 2000 ) in Thessaly ( Figure 1 ). The dominant tendency of ABC processualists has been their reliance on a reflectionist approach, in which material remains are seen as a reflection of the social order ( Müller et al. 2016 ).
The shift to concepts of agency, practice, and other contemporary social theories in Greece in the last decade or so generated a promising literature through academic departments with a theoretical tradition (e.g., Thessaloniki and Rethymnon), large international projects involving the Greek Archaeological Service ( http://www.dikili-tash.gr/ ), or a younger generation of scholars ( Souvatzi 2008b ). Further north, only two centers of post-processual or interpretative archaeology have been consolidated into strong theoretical traditions: Ljubljana and, in the last decade, the transformation of the Eötvös Lórand University Institute of Archaeological Science from geographic information systems (GIS)-led research to innovative social theory ( Raczky 1997 ). As a result, scholars have proposed serious challenges to accepted approaches to settlement, subsistence, and social structure in recent years, leading to important new insights on tell settlement, open sites, social space, and ways of life ( Bailey et al. 2005 , Sarris et al. 2017 ); regional and interregional connections; and the relational approach to the ABC. Fletcher's insight that all paradigms continue to be used, sometimes in combination ( Fletcher 1989 ), remains true today and can lead to significant unevenness in publications.
The process of data acquisition has become unrecognizable since 2000. First, infrastructure projects have been undertaken at a hitherto undreamt-of scale in excavated areas, expanding the possibilities of exciting new intrasite spatial analyses ( Raczky 1997 , Toufexis 2017 ) in regions where settlements have always outnumbered mortuary sites.
Second, the massive increase in remote sensing, whether aerial photography ( Bertok & Gáti 2014 ), geophysical investigations ( Rassmann et al. 2014 ), or satellite imagery and LIDAR (light detection and ranging), has introduced a totally new awareness of the size, scale, and often complexity of sites in the landscape ( Müller et al. 2016 ). The most significant change has been the revelation that enclosure was not restricted to the northwest half of Neolithic Europe but was standard for many tells as well as dozens of flat settlements. The IGEAN (Innovative Geophysical Approaches for the Study of Early Agricultural Villages of Neolithic Thessaly) research project for eastern Thessaly and an ongoing photogrammetric project for western Thessaly have detected a great variety of new sites, including many enclosures and new site combinations such as a tell and a flat settlement component ( Kalayci et al. 2017 , Orengo et al. 2015 ).
The third development of a small number of large-scale, well-funded projects—some led by academics but many, in Greece, organized through the Greek Archaeological Service and its partnerships—has also made significant breakthroughs in the region, often with wider repercussions. In total, 23 different scientific approaches were integrated with relatively small-scale fieldwork at Ecsegfalva 23, Hungary ( Whittle 2007 ), with similar numbers of specialists in a much larger excavation at Dikili Tash, Greece ( http://www.dikili-tash.gr/ ). Fresh combinations of interdisciplinary methods have broken new ground at the tell of Koutroulou, Central Greece, with archaeological excavation and ethnoarchaeology ( Hamilakis et al. 2017 ) or the construction of an open-air eco-museum and a program for the conservation of the Lake of Kastoria at the lake settlement of Dispilio ( Hourmouziadis 2002 ).
The fourth source of new data stems from the expansion of archaeological science in the ABC region. We are approaching a genomic history of the Balkans, facilitated by rapid processing of aDNA samples ( Mathieson et al. 2018 ). A valuable by-product of major AMS dating projects is the production of isotopic dietary information ( Honch et al. 2013 ), now studied by the food reconstruction using isotopic transferred signals (FRUITS) method ( Fernandes et al. 2014 ). Strontium isotope and aDNA studies of mobility have contributed to new understandings of both the beginning and the end of the ABC Neolithic ( Borić & Price 2013 ). Lithic characterization studies have built on the success of the Budapest Lithoteka ( Biró et al. 2000 ), just as new ground stone tool studies in Greece have addressed social aspects of raw material selection and tool manufacture . Technical analyses of copper metallurgy have revealed that the Central Balkans was the earliest center in the world for copper smelting ( Radivojević & Rehren 2016 ), whereas technological analyses of pottery have shed new light on the number of production centers, exchange networks, and interregional diversification all over Greece ( Pentedeka 2017 ); in addition, a new surge of archaeobotanical and zooarchaeological studies reveal different ways in which humans and nature interact ( Koromila et al. 2017 ).
One of the most impressive projects—the Times Of Their Lives (or TOTL)—has involved the Bayesian modeling of hitherto unthinkable numbers of AMS dates (up to 250 for the Vinča tell) for key sites across Europe, including two Balkan tells and the Alsónyék complex ( Whittle 2018 ); the 14 C chronology for Dikili Tash is comparable, with more than 100 dates ( http://www.dikili-tash.gr/ ). The 14SEA Project has constructed a systematic online 14 C database for Southeast Europe, the Aegean, and Anatolia ( Reingruber & Thissen 2017 ), whereas The Human Face of Radiocarbon volume has reassessed chronology in Greece and Bulgaria between 5000 and 3000 BC ( Tsirtsoni 2016 ).
These developments have led to a cascade of new data on an immense scale, for which few prehistorians were prepared, as well as a corresponding need for new synthesis of all the new data.
Much of the new synthetic research has taken place at the site level, which is hardly surprising since any large-scale motorway excavation could generate one or two doctoral studies ( Raczky 2007 ). There has thus been a proliferation of the site monograph in an attempt to interpret the site record, whether from motorway research ( Horváth 2012 , Roodenberg et al. 2014 ) or from reanalysis of older excavations ( Petrescu-Dîmboviţa & Văleanu 2004 ). A summary of the impact of motorway rescue archaeology in Hungary presents the scale of the problem ( Raczky 2007 ).
Local studies at the valley/multicommunity scale have also increased in scale and frequency, the most informative of which integrates fieldwalking and excavation ( Gogâltan & Kovács 2009 ). The regional study—the bread-and-butter of European prehistory in the last century—has survived but more as a multiperiod production ( Mills & Mirea 2011 ) than as a detailed consideration of all aspects of a “cultural group” ( Diaconescu 2009 , Perlès 2001 ).
What has all but disappeared under the mountains of new data has been the single-author general synthesis. The first general synthesis of Balkan prehistory since 2000 ( Bailey 2000 , Chapman 2000a ) is in press ( Chapman 2020 ), while a multiauthor volume covered the East Balkans and Ukraine ( Anthony & Chi 2010 ). Two monographs on Neolithic Greece—one on the Early Neolithic ( Perlès 2001 ) , the other on households and communities throughout the Neolithic ( Souvatzi 2008b )—provide systematic integration and critical analysis for targeted themes. Two multiauthor conference volumes cover social space and ways of life in Neolithic Greece ( Sarris et al. 2017 ) and the transition between the Neolithic and Early Bronze Age around the Aegean, showing that the past and the present coexist in many ways with no gap or “missing millennium” ( Dietz et al. 2018 ).
Chapters covering ABC material appear in handbooks on periods/areas such as Neolithic Europe (chapters by Müller, Guilaine, Schier, Chapman, Gronenborn & Dolukhanov, Raczky, Papaconstantinou, Bogaard & Halstead, Bartosiewicz & Lillee, Mlekuž, Nanoglou, Chapman & Gaydarska, Heyd & Walker, Borić, and Whittle & Thomas in Fowler et al. 2015 ) or on themes such as gender (chapters by Marshall, Bailey, and Chapman & Palincaş in Bolger 2013 ) or figurines (chapters by Bánffy and Bailey in Insoll 2017 ).
Open-access digital publication makes huge quantities of data available. In the United Kingdom, the University of York Archaeological Data Service has led the way, with the recent opening of the Ukrainian Trypillia megasites archive ( Archaeol. Data Serv. York 2019 ), whose data are integrated into an open-access interpretative monograph ( Gaydarska 2020 ). Other online platforms focus on 14 C data ( Reingruber & Thissen 2017 ).
Theoretical developments and the increased scale of data acquisition have opened up both new approaches to perennial themes and new themes. After considering the three major cultural changes of the period—the origins of the Neolithic, the development of copper and gold metallurgy, and the earliest European urbanism in the Trypillia group—we take a multiscalar examination of foodways, persons, houses and the household, site organization, the mortuary zone, settlement patterns, and exchange networks.
The emergence of aDNA data has transformed our understanding of Neolithic origins in Southeast Europe. Comparison of a good sample of Eastern (e.g., Balkan) hunter-gatherer aDNA from the Iron Gates region with Anatolian material ( Mathieson et al. 2018 ) provides partial support for a migrationist model but rejects the indigenist model of agricultural origins ( Bánffy 2004 ). These results have been seized on by diffusionists who continue to ignore local forager practices ( Brami 2017 ). There is still strong evidence for the introduction of Childe's “Neolithic package,” implying a “Neolithic” way of life with a set of more than 20 novel personal skills in addition to traditional forager skills ( Chapman & Gaydarska 2011 ). The early farming model of small-scale, long-term residence with intensive usage of garden cultivation has become the new norm ( Bogaard & Halstead 2015 ), despite the isotopic dietary evidence for domesticated animals ranging far wider than the garden. In the Aegean, new approaches focus on intra- and extralocal networks, mobility, and connectivity between late seafaring forager-fishers and early seafaring fisher-farmers ( Reingruber 2018 ). However, ABC prehistorians have still not risen to the challenge to Neolithic origins posited by Robb (2013) : “The real problem is theoretical; we need to consider the transformative effects of human–material culture relationships and to relate humans, things, and environments at multiple scales” (p. 657).
The origins of copper metallurgy have long been a battleground between diffusionists and Europeanists, even after the discovery of copper mines at Rudna Glava ( Borić 2009 ), Ai Bunar, and the Medni Rid copper sources ( Kunze et al. 2018 ). The evidence for currently the earliest melting and smelting of copper in the world has been found through technical analysis at the Vinča site of Belovode, dated to 5000 BC ( Radivojević & Rehren 2016 ). Similar finds from sites such as Promachon-Topolnitsa require further technical analysis and AMS dating. These innovations spread through Greece and the Balkans, leading to the second phase of copper metallurgy. The current debate on this second phase concerns the cultural significance of copper, downplayed at copper-poor sites such as Okolište but highlighted at copper-rich sites such as Pietrele, although the implications of social hierarchy have been challenged ( Kienlin 2010 ).
The place of the origins of European goldworking can hardly be doubted: the Varna area, Western Pontic coast ( Ivanov 1991 ), now dated to 4600–4400 BC ( Higham et al. 2018 ). Recent fieldwork has identified sources of alluvial gold in Eastern Bulgaria ( Leusch et al. 2016 ), while technical analyses confirm the presence of gold casting, gold–copper alloying, and the inclusion of five different charges of gold in a single bead necklace ( Leusch et al. 2016 ).
The Trypillia megasites of Eastern Europe ( Müller et al. 2016 , Videiko 2013 ) have been excluded from the discourse on Eurasian urbanism, despite their early date (fourth millennium BC) and their extreme size (up to 320 ha)—as large as the earliest cities in the Near East and far earlier than Early Bronze Age towns in the Mediterranean and Late Iron Age oppida in temperate Europe. The only megasite with a complete geophysical plan is the 238-ha site of Nebelivka ( Gaydarska 2020 ), whose planning elements were assembled from earlier sites, including the 70-ha inner open area for assemblies. The traditional view of megasites as massive, permanent, year-round occupations of tens of thousands of inhabitants ( Müller et al. 2016 , Videiko 2013 ) has been challenged by recent evidence, not least the minimal evidence of human environmental impact from a pollen core close to the megasite ( Albert et al. 2020 ). These doubts led to the production of three models of smaller-scale, less permanent dwellings for Nebelivka ( Gaydarska 2020 ). Although their populations were smaller than previously modeled, the megasites were still far larger than any other coeval Trypillia settlement. Therefore, a relational approach ( Gaydarska 2016 ) indicates that megasites can be accorded urban status, not in the classic high-density sense (e.g., Rome) but rather in terms of low-density urbanism ( Fletcher 2009 ). A low-density definition would make the Trypillia megasites the earliest low-density urban centers in the world.
We follow Goody's (1982) division of foodways research into five stages: ( a ) procurement, which includes growing and tending, catching, and collecting; ( b ) allocation and storing; ( c , d ) cooking and eating; and ( e ) cleaning up.
Research into food procurement has benefited from the impact of big data, especially in the early farming period, showing the northerly narrowing of domestic plant preferences from Anatolia and Greece to the Linearbandkeramik (known as LBK) of Central Europe ( Colledge & Conolly 2007 ) and the regionally distinct preferences for cattle- or caprine-based husbandry ( Orton et al. 2016 ). Such general approaches are complemented by outstanding regional archaeozoological research, both individually ( Bartosiewicz 2007 ) and by large teams at the National Museum of History, Bucureşti ( Bălăşescu & Radu 2004 ), or the University of Thessaloniki's project on prehistoric cuisines from the Aegean to Central Europe ( http://plantcult.web.auth.gr/en/ ), complemented by new views on grinding tool morphology.
Recent exploration of human–animal relationships ( Koromila et al. 2017 ), land management systems ( Souvatzi 2013a ), and modes of nutrition ( Krauß et al. 2018 ) reveals the cultural, ritual, and ecological dimensions of subsistence practices as well as the regional variability of subsistence preferences across the ABC. Investigation of both intensification and extensification has shown the impact of settlement growth and nucleation on farming practices ( Bogaard et al. 2013 ). The regional variability in the use of dairy products has been clearly demonstrated ( Evershed et al. 2008 ), while further isotopic research has identified fourth-millennium transhumance between the Alföld and the Carpathians.
Research on allocation and storing, based on Gamble's (2007) “container revolution,” has stimulated the collection of household storage data and the theorization of the emergence of more autonomous households ( Russell 2012 ) or, conversely, collective storage at a suprahousehold or more communal level ( Souvatzi 2012 ).
Considerations of cooking and eating include the key issue of a Neolithic baking or boiling culture, with important studies on cooking facilities and pots ( Urem-Kotsou 2018 ). While everyday diet has been studied through FRUITS analysis ( Fernandes et al. 2014 ), showing the possible underrepresentation of plant food, the role of shared food consumption and commensality to reinforce social bonds at different social scales, including large-scale or ritual feasting, is increasingly approached through the integration of faunal, ceramic, and other material data ( Isaakidou & Halstead 2018 ). Remains of Neolithic “wine” have been found at Dikili Tash ( Valamoti et al. 2007 ).
The importance of the maintenance activity of cleaning up, especially in larger sites, has led to papers reflecting on the garbage crisis in prehistory ( Hardy-Smith & Edwards 2004 ), with an account of seasonal deposition at the midden complex 521 at Hârşova tell and a survey of Croatian plant remains showing significant intrasite depositional variation ( Chapman 2020 ).
We expect that the integration of all these five approaches to foodways will lead to enhanced understanding of the period. Attempts to integrate archaeology with wider food studies have already appeared in the ABC, emphasizing the cultural and social dimensions of food practices and advocating a combination of practice-oriented approaches with new scientific techniques ( Ivanova et al. 2018 ).
The wealth of objects in the ABC regions provides an unrivaled opportunity to study “personhood” ( Fowler 2016 ) and “persons,” especially striking cases such as the Old Lady of Tărtăria, the Stubline army and the body-house of Tumba Madžari ( Chapman 2020 ). Three forms of Balkan personhood have been defined: two in terms of figurines and their fragmentation and the third with grave goods ( Chapman & Gaydarska 2007 ). A refitting analysis of shell bracelets at Neolithic Dimini underlined the diversity of interhousehold links as a way of constituting personhood ( Chapman et al. 2011 ).
Greater awareness of the gendered life course derives from research on birthing ( Beausang 2005 ) and mortuary costumes ( Sofaer Derevenski 2000 ), while surprisingly early cases of tuberculosis have been identified ( Masson et al. 2015 ). Much traditional research on skills and crafts can be integrated into this approach, whether on pottery, the appearance of pottery kilns ( Korvin-Piotrovskiy et al. 2016 ), the regional diversity of figurine styles ( Hansen 2007 ), or object color and brilliance ( Chapman & Gaydarska 2007 ). Debates on the significance of warfare continue.
Representations of human and animal bodies and houses characterize the study region. Alongside traditional approaches are interpretations of the overall significance of figurines, their agency ( Bailey 2005 ), and the question of artistic ambiguity in the Iron Gates Mesolithic boulder art ( Borić 2005 ) or at farming sites such as Orlovo ( Chapman 2010b ). House models have also received new attention whether as ideal representations of real houses or as actively involved in domestic and collective rituals ( Toufexis & Skafida 1998 ).
The centrality of the house and the village community in the ABC provides a unique opportunity for the microscale study of social action, daily life, and the household as a dynamic social entity and its interaction with the broader society ( Souvatzi 2008b ).
The key issue of variability has prompted new studies on the widespread household variations in form (size, composition, and spatial dimension), organization, and expression of identity ( Souvatzi 2008a ). By contrast, architectural uniformity, whether structured settlement layouts or regular ordering of house interiors, suggests attempts to mediate collectively accepted principles of identity ( Souvatzi 2013b ), as in the standardized interiors of houses on Trypillia megasites ( Chernovol 2012 ).
Regarding the relationship between household and community in a given society, traditional models about increasing household autonomy and social differentiation over time, which relied on top-down perspectives and social evolutionary assumptions, have been challenged by new, bottom-up approaches, which reveal household interdependence, social balance and integration, cross-cutting networks of power rather than bounded hierarchies, and multifaceted and diverse local trajectories ( Souvatzi 2012 ). These new approaches have changed our understanding of the roles of houses/households in economic systems, modes of production, and division of labor, including the relationships among production, distribution, and consumption.
The theme of household–community relations has also been important for symbolism and ideology, whether in domestic architecture or in expressions of collective ritual and ceremony that suggest public spaces and buildings in Neolithic settlements (e.g., for suprahousehold gatherings, communal storage, ritual feasting, or some other community or intercommunity purpose). One of the best candidates for a public ritual building in the ABC is the Parţa temple ( Lazarovici et al. 2001 ). Similarly, regular spatial distribution of buildings much larger than domestic houses—termed assembly houses—structured several Trypillia megasites ( Gaydarska 2020 ). A recent Trypillia contribution to the continuing debate over the causes of deliberate house burning, whether ritual, arson, or accidental, came from experimental house building and house burning ( Johnston et al. 2019 ).
A recent trend is a view of houses as a unit of social structure that integrates and objectifies a number of antagonistic principles, following Lévi-Strauss's concept of “house societies” ( Borić 2008 ). An important new theme sees the household as a historical product (including household duration, histories, and continuity/change), in particular the materiality of the domestic, memory, identity, and agency ( Souvatzi et al. 2018a ).
The most neglected aspect of household studies is kinship, usually viewed through abstract concepts (e.g., “family,” “lineage,” “kin group,” “kindred”) or through the equation of house typologies with family typologies. One way forward is the combination of social science approaches with a practice-based methodology grounded in archaeological data ( Souvatzi 2017 ).
Advances in remote sensing have led to dramatic progress in site research, here discussed by site type. New studies on the implications of the distinction of settlement types into tells and flat sites investigate related social practices, cultural understandings, and ideological structures, including the role of kinship, modes of social cohesion, and perceptions of time and history ( Gheorghiu 2008 ). Work calculations demonstrate the communal effort required for tell construction ( Draşovean & Schier 2010 ). A big data analysis of tells seeks correlations between environments and tell usage over their entire distribution ( Rosenstock 2009 ), in contrast with finer-grained studies about the essence of living on tells ( Füzesi & Raczky 2018 ). We now have a better idea of the complexity of tells, often placed within larger, horizontal sites ( Parkinson et al. 2018 , Toufexis 2017 ).
Despite the increased recognition of enclosed sites, flat sites were common in every period, from the Neolithic ( Kotsakis 2005 ) and the Chalcolithic ( Chapman 2010b ), often situated among numerous contemporary tell sites from the Early Neolithic onward.
Complete geophysical plans of enclosed sites, often combined with tells, are now widespread in Thessaly, with a diversity of concentric ditches, often with opposing entrances and radial passages ( Kalayci et al. 2017 , Sarris et al. 2017 ). Apart from Dimini, Palioskala is one extensively excavated site with multiple stone-built concentric enclosures ( Toufexis 2016 ), while the five concentric ditches dug into solid rock at Makrychori remain unprecedented ( Toufexis 2017 ). The excavated triple-ditched enclosure at Yabulkovo ( Roodenberg et al. 2014 ) is the earliest yet discovered in the Balkan Early Neolithic. Special deposits characterize enclosures, notably at Central European rondels ( Schier 2015 ). Each of the completely excavated Northeast Bulgarian tells included complex entrances constraining access ( Merkyte & Albek 2012 ), while perimeter ditches were key features of some Trypillia megasites ( Gaydarska 2020 ). The most extensive investigation of enclosed sites, including several rondels, is the Pécs group in southwest Hungary ( Bertok & Gáti 2014 ). New interpretations of enclosures focus on the social dimensions, meanings, and implications of such large-scale, collective constructions ( Souvatzi 2008b , 2012 ; Toufexis 2017 ).
Pit sites have recently been recognized as a major site type, with differing views on the interpretation of ritualized deposition (cf. Chapman 2000a with Nikolov 2011 ).
Fieldwork has diversified to take into account the many types of extraction sites, including salt sources ( Weller et al. 2008 ), Szentgál radiolarite ( Biró & Regenye 2007 ), pre-Balkan flint ( Manolakakis 2005 ), and copper mines ( Borić 2009 ).
The special significance of caves was often attributed to their form and surroundings. Caves were an important feature of the Greek and Adriatic social landscapes, recently attracting revived attention as communal, interregional spaces for social interaction. The Drakaina Cave on the Ionian island of Cephalonia was a regional locus of special activity, ritual purposes, and gatherings ( Stratouli & Metaxas 2017 ), whereas the Alepotrypa Cave served as a burial ground for more than two millennia ( Papathanassopoulos 2011 ). Further north, the Verteba Cave is one of the rare places where Trypillia human remains have been found ( Ledogar et al. 2019 ), while a surprising find in the Peştera Ungurească, Cheile Turzii, was a Copper Age gold workshop ( Lazarovici & Lazarovici 2013 ).
Summaries of mortuary data have covered Greece ( Triantaphyllou 2008 ), the entire Balkans ( Borić 2015 ), and Romania ( Lazăr 2012 ). This research can be partitioned according to the completeness of the deposited remains.
The revised interpretation of disarticulated burials as representing part of a complex burial rite featured in two major studies: the Iron Gates Mesolithic and Neolithic ( Wallduck 2014 ); and the extraordinary accumulation of disarticulated bones at Alba Iulia-Lumea Noua, perhaps the largest such deposit in Europe ( Gligor 2009 ). The disarticulated human remains in Greek Neolithic settlements were often used to promote shared ideals and memories of, inter alia , community ancestors ( Triantaphyllou 2008 ).
Complete bodies, single or grouped, derived from settlements, whether in an unoccupied part of a tell such as Gomolava ( Borić 2009 ) or as large burial groups between clusters of houses, as at Alsónyék, which is currently the Neolithic site in Europe with the largest number of burials ( Bánffy 2016 ). The vast majority of such burials were single inhumations of a complete body in its own grave, with “deviant” burials rarely exceeding 10% per site ( Chapman 2010a ). Children predominated in isolated intramural burials in Greece.
The rare use of cemeteries begins in the late sixth millennium BC, with large groups such as Cernica ( Stratton et al. 2018 ) or Durankulak ( Todorova 2002 ) acting as central mortuary foci in a landscape of dispersed settlements (cf. final Neolithic cemeteries in Southern Greece) ( Smith 2017 ). Over the next two millennia BC, we observe far greater cemetery differentiation, whether by size ( Todorova 2002 ) or by wealth of grave offerings ( Ivanov 1991 , Leusch et al. 2016 ).
There is an inverse relationship between the size and the intensity of fieldwalking projects in the study region. The largest areas covered are the regional gazetteers known from Serbia and Romania; the largest of those are found in Ukraine ( Gaydarska 2020 ). The smallest projects are composed of intensive, systematic fieldwalking of a small area, with specific research goals, as in Bosnia ( Müller et al. 2013 ), Croatia ( Chapman et al. 1996 ), Hungary ( Chapman et al. 2010 , Parkinson et al. 2010 ), Romania ( Bailey et al. 2002 , Frînculeasa 2010 ), and Ukraine ( Gaydarska 2020 ). Middle-range projects often produce valuable, generalizable results, as in the Tundzha Regional Archaeology Project ( Ross et al. 2018 ), the Yantra Survey, and Maritsa Iztok Survey ( Gaydarska 2007 ), all in Bulgaria; the Danube Delta–Black Sea Survey in Romania ( Carozza et al. 2011 ); and the long-running Magyarország Régészeti Topográfiája (Archaeological Topography of Hungary) national project.
These projects provide a regional landscape context for site investigations and the study of exchange networks. Places persistently emerged as dominant sites in a two-level settlement hierarchy; the largest of these sites comprises the Trypillia megasites ( Gaydarska 2020 ). However, no evidence from the study region exists for a three-level settlement hierarchy. All the surveys reported on the nucleation–dispersion continuum. While most early farming sites show marked dispersion, the West Balkans showed greater nucleation between 5300 and 4500 BC, including the later tell-and-flat site complexes. With the exception of the Trypillia group, settlement dispersion was typical post-4500 BC, especially in the Cucuteni group whose settlements were as small as the coeval Trypillia sites were large.
Cooney & Grogan's (1999) characterization of the Neolithic as “local worlds linked by exotic elements” (p. 232) shows the significance of the exchange of often colorful and shiny objects ( Chapman & Gaydarska 2007 ) through networks at various spatial scales materialized by cultural links, object similarities ( Chapman 2010b ), and perhaps a ritualized script ( Merlini 2013 ). Exchange between foragers and the earliest farmers is well documented, especially for lithics but also for the Balkan-style pintadera found in a Swiss rock shelter ( Mauvilly & Boisaubert 2007 ). A fourth-millennium BC case shows Carpathian (Bodrogkeresztúr) pottery on a Baltic hunter-fisher settlement ( Czekaj-Zastawny et al. 2011 ).
Regional pottery exchange between cultural groups was nested within interregional exchange, found throughout the period, whether of obsidian, ground and polished stone, or copper. A minimum of ten ceramic ( Pentedeka 2017 ) and two major lithic ( Karimali 2009 ) exchange networks were active in Thessaly, with specialized “itinerant obsidian knappers” connecting all settlements ( Perlès 2001 ). The recognition of two Late Neolithic Carpathian exchange networks—an inner and an outer route—convincingly links a dozen different materials ( Kovács 2013 ).
Recent exchange research disabuses anyone thinking that European-wide networks characterize only the Bronze Age. The earliest such network featured the marine shell Spondylus gaederopus , collected in the Aegean and the Adriatic and exchanged throughout our study region and far northwest into the Paris Basin among LBK communities (5300 BC–4500 BC) ( Chapman & Gaydarska 2015 ). The specialized Spondylus ornament production center at Dimini must have enjoyed an important position in these networks ( Chapman et al. 2011 ).
The three achievements of Pétrequin and coworkers’ (2017) decade-long research concern the identification of the high-mountain sources of jadeite, the analytical linkage of Western European jadeite axes to specific sources, and the extension of the network to Southeast Europe, in high-status graves at Varna and Alsónyék, and as far east as Ukraine. This network can be even further extended to a Volga–Varna–Brittany network dated 4600–4400 BC ( Chapman 2013 ), including a pumice stone from either Lipari or Santorini found in a Northeast Bulgarian hoard.
The realization of the physiological importance of salt for both animals, especially with secondary products, and humans has led to an expansion of salt research in the ABC, generating discussion over the role of salt in the Neolithicization process ( Bánffy 2013 ). Currently, the earliest-known salt exploitation in the world occurred at Lunca, in Moldavia, in the sixth millennium BC ( Weller et al. 2008 ). Regions with major settlement but devoid of local salt sources include Thessaly, Thrace, Ukraine, and much of Hungary, confirming that salt was the bulkiest good exchanged interregionally from production foci such as Romania, Eastern Bulgaria, and Central Serbia from the Neolithic onward.
This review aims to demonstrate that those studying the Mesolithic, Neolithic, and Chalcolithic in the ABC zone have developed the capacity for self-reflection, and this work has led to major changes in interpretation in the twenty-first century by collecting and beginning to study vast new data sets, especially from infrastructural projects and through targeted, large-scale research projects. Yet the very success of untold quantities of data recovery has prevented the regional specialists from building new syntheses at any level, bar that of the single site. Thus, the key development in the next two decades will be the creation of new forms of synthesis at the local, regional, and interregional scales. The scale of the required syntheses, which necessarily cross national boundaries, pose intellectual, linguistic, and even political problems, which are exacerbated by the crises facing the European Union. Each of the four emerging trends will greatly facilitate the new syntheses:

Section: Acknowledgements

J.C. thanks Bisserka Gaydarska for help, support, and inspiration and Lauren Woodard for drawing Figure 1 . S.S. thanks J.C. for the invitation to contribute to this article.
