Section: Abstract

This article discusses historical and anthropological approaches to the life of social science. After presenting the thematic of social science concepts that figure as found object in cultural anthropology, this review briefly introduces the domain of history of social science (HSS). It then examines HSS studies that could enrich anthropological encounters with social science concepts, both methodologically and through the vivid social histories of relevant concepts, categories, and methods. I complement my review of these approaches in HSS with a discussion of anthropological studies of social science concepts. I review both the historical and the anthropological literature with the same key questions, focused on the analytical tools that each approach brings to the study of social science: what conditions of emergence of these social imaginaries are incorporated in the analyses, what contexts and processes relevant to their appropriation and travel are presented, and how these enquiries examine the effects on the worlds in which they circulate. In my conclusion, I point out how cultural anthropology can uniquely contribute to the domain of HSS.

Section: Introduction

Cultural anthropologists regularly encounter social scientific concepts, categories, and methods as found object in their fieldwork. Think of Martin's (2022) ethnography of the life of cognitive experimental psychology, Ferguson's (1999) work on modernity in Zambia, Pang's (2012) study of China's awkward embrace of creativity, or Tsing's (2005) encounters with globalization as a charismatic universal that needs to be unpacked. These studies show that the findings of social science “very often enter constitutively into the world they describe” ( Giddens 1984 , p. 20; Van Eekelen 2023 ). Traveling concepts from the social sciences—including those hailing from anthropology—can and do influence everyday understandings people have of themselves and the worlds they inhabit. What these more or less commonsensical concepts have in common is ( a ) they are imaginaries of social processes, ( b ) they often embody important shifts in thinking about the social and the political, ( c ) they have crossed boundaries (e.g., from academia to everyday life, from public policy to academia, from one discipline to another), and ( d ) their histories of emergence and circulation matter ( Van Eekelen 2023 ).
If the social sciences and its concepts have effects in the social world—if they not only emerge in particular conjunctures but also create new ones ( Strathern 1995 ; see also Martin 2022 )—it is imperative to figure out how particular conjurings of this knowledge might be studied. As cultural anthropologists enter worlds already touched by the orderings and histories of social science, neither ignoring nor dismissing (nor unreflectively absorbing) this formalized knowledge of culture and social life is a productive option. The methodological challenge when encountering these concepts in the field is that it is unclear whether one should bring out the theoretical toolbox (with its taxonomic shelving system for the cabinet of disciplinary theories) or whether another analytical frame is warranted when one is examining the reflexive uses of social science knowledge (see also Van Eekelen 2023 ). The question thus arises: how to engage these reflexive terms, terms that are often familiar, that have traveled, and that have an effect on how people experience themselves and their social worlds? What analytical tools can be used to study these fragments of expert discourse; what contexts may be salient for understanding their social and public iterations and shifts in meaning; and how can such bits of knowledge be analyzed alongside other, competing knowledge claims?
To address these questions, this review pairs the budding domain of history of social science (HSS) with a discussion of anthropological approaches to traveling social science concepts. Both historical and anthropological approaches offer ways of denaturalizing social science knowledge, and when combined they can productively tackle the past and present lives of social science concepts, their production and circulation, in academia and the worlds beyond. HSS studies showcase, for instance, how (anthropological) knowledge that has made society and social life knowable and legible has come about in encounters, not just with people under study but also with institutions (academic and nonacademic), funding opportunities, and (geo)political conditions. Studies of how concepts have circulated—e.g., how they have crossed disciplinary boundaries—are valuable for anthropologists who encounter them as reflexive objects in their various field settings and who wish to understand their effects. Anthropologists have, for their part, a way of cutting through the archive, of tracking a traveling concept—including its public and social lives in nonexpert settings—in a way that complements and enriches HSS. Taken together, the literature under review presents historical and anthropological studies of social inquiries that bring to light the conditions of their emergence, the contexts relevant for their appropriation and travel, and how these social imaginaries impacted the worlds in which they circulate.
This review examines histories and ethnographies of twentieth-century sociocultural studies that help us imagine social relations. 1 In what follows, I consider what anthropology stands to gain from social histories of twentieth-century social science, in particular those studies that illuminate the life of concepts, categories, and methods used in the social sciences. 2 Much of this literature cuts across disciplines, as concepts and methods tend to travel. I focus in particular on ( a ) histories of social science concepts, categories, and methods that exemplify the value of HSS studies for anthropologists; ( b ) interdisciplinary histories in which anthropology figures as one discipline entangled with others; and ( c ) particularly salient anthropological studies of concepts that illuminate what anthropology can contribute to the domain of HSS. This review considers what could be termed social science studies as a domain delineated by its encounters and engagements with traveling social science concepts, rather than by area, subfield, or theme.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion

The heterogeneous domain of HSS can be framed as a subfield of the more established history of science (HS) field—directed toward its sociocultural counterpart ( Porter & Ross 2003b , Isaac 2007 ). HSS also feeds on established disciplinary histories, is fortified by science and technology studies (STS) investigations of social knowledge in the making ( Camic et al. 2011 ), and stands to gain from anthropological approaches to how knowledge of the social is made and how it circulates.
The field of HS has transformed since the 1960s from a history of progress 3 and chronicler of transcendental truths to a study of social formations, in which scientific projects are taken to be crafted through material and social practices and are understood in time and place ( Porter & Ross 2003b , p. 5; see also Stocking 1965 , Franklin 1995 ). It took time for the social sciences to get a visible place in this field, marked, for instance, by the inauguration of the Forum for History of Human Science in the History of Science Society (in 1989) and the inclusion in 2003 of a seventh volume in the Cambridge History of Science dedicated to the social sciences ( Porter & Ross 2003a ). Both HS and HSS employ a variety of approaches, ranging from intellectual history, institutional history, and intellectual biographies to social histories of science. While HS and HSS tackle grand themes, such as whether (social) science is used to innovate or to legitimate existing power structures ( Isaac 2007 , Price 2012 ), and the fate and fortunes of academia in wider society ( Collini 2012 ), these issues are narrated through the specific histories under scrutiny. In the last two decades, the interdisciplinary domain of HSS has been coming into its own, as evidenced in a burgeoning set of monographs and edited volumes (e.g., Backhouse & Fontaine 2010 , 2014 ); special issues dedicated to the social sciences in, e.g., Isis ; the journals History of the Human Sciences , Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences , and Serendipities: Journal for the Sociology and History of the Social Sciences ; and the annual Society for the History of Recent Social Science (HISRESS) meetings. The domain is populated by a motley group of historians and social scientists, among them anthropologists.
While this review homes in on cross-disciplinary and social historical narratives in HSS, HSS itself also draws on and cannibalizes disciplinary histories. Part of a process of disciplinary self-definition, these disciplinary histories tend to link past and present ( Porter & Ross 2003b , p. 7; see also Stocking 1965 , Darnell 2011 ). The last history of anthropology review in the Annual Review of Anthropology was published 45 years ago ( Darnell 1977 ), although Pels's (1997) review of anthropology and colonialism, Faubion's (1993) review on history in anthropology, and Zeitlyn's (2012) review of anthropology in and of the archive do offer generative reflections on the theme. Disciplinary histories of anthropology are often mindful about the categories they espouse. Stocking observed anthropologists, for instance, but in so doing he was also a historian of science, with an ethnographic bent. His work spoke to the larger HS community (e.g., in his early metahistorical reflections; Stocking 1966 ), but he was also an anthropologists’ historian ( Darnell 1977 ). Kuklick (2014) recently contributed a historiography of anthropology to a collection of historiographies of the modern social sciences, studying the ways in which histories of anthropology have been constructed in textbooks and case studies. While situating Boasian anthropology itself ( Darnell 1998 ), Darnell (2001) also emphasizes the continuities in thought in the history of Americanist anthropology—how anyone trained in the United States nowadays is knowingly or unknowingly indebted to Boasian anthropology. Kuper (2010) provides a European counterpart on the institutional history of social anthropology. But intellectual and institutional histories, however reflexive, do not mitigate all disciplinary amnesia ( Steinmetz 2017 ). They tend to focus on ideas within a discipline and on institutions that embody a discipline and home in on central rather than peripheral figures in a discipline—although see, e.g., Handler's edited volumes in the History of Anthropology series on forgotten ancestors ( 2000 ) and significant others within anthropology ( 2004 ) and Larson's (2021) unearthing of the histories of hidden heroines in British anthropology.
In HSS, these disciplinary histories form elements of a larger, and interdisciplinary, domain of HSS studies, in which they are turned inside out. In so doing, HSS contributes to an opening up of disciplinary histories. HSS studies showcase how social science knowledge came about in encounters, not just with people under study but also with academic and nonacademic institutions, funding opportunities, and geopolitical processes. Flandreau's (2016 ; see also Stocking 1987 ) study of the interconnections between the world of finance and Victorian anthropology illustrates this inside-out approach. Entanglements with colonialism and the Cold War are unusually prominent. While the colonial entanglements of anthropology's history continue to haunt the discipline [ Asad 1973 , Clifford & Marcus 1986 , Hymes 1999 ( 1972 ), Pels & Salemink 1999 ], these social conditions shaped other social sciences as well. The edited volume Sociology and Empire ( Steinmetz 2013 ), for instance, provides a wide-ranging view on the colonial entanglements of sociology and on the ways in which sociologists’ work in the global south has been generative of social theory and sociological concepts. So, familiar concepts such as habitus and social field can be traced to colonial encounters in Algeria ( Goodman & Silverstein 2009 ; see also Pérez 2022 ). Hale (1995) , Herman (1995) and Capshew (1999) have documented the social history and public circulation of psychological knowledge. Lemberg (2018) and Martin-Nielsen (2010) turn language training and linguistics inside out and track them in the Cold War's various geopolitical contexts, where Lemberg (2018) interrogates how shifting technologies of language literacy education intersected with decolonization and development in the mid-twentieth century. Robic (2003) and Farish (2010) situate geography and the sorting out of geographic knowledge in social and political contexts. Likewise, Bennett (2015) discusses how creative writing programs in the United States need to be understood in the geopolitical situation of the Cold War. In a social history of futurology, finally, Andersson (2018) illuminates how senses of futurity were profoundly patterned by the Manhattan Project and the space race. Whether we see one or many futures, whether the future is predetermined or open ended, and whether the future is a preexisting object or something to be created through radical imagination also depend on the context within which these visions are generated.
HSS, in addition to sharing a kindred spirit with HS and finding its way into—and reworking—disciplinary histories, also stands to gain from the turn to practice that has been inaugurated in STS approaches to the social aspects of scientific inquiry. Most STS—and anthropology of science—is focused on knowledge-making practices and social worlds—the laboratory life—of the natural and life sciences. The edited volume Social Knowledge in the Making ( Camic et al. 2011 ) broke that spell by taking as its object social knowledge, specified as “descriptive information and analytical statements about the actions, behaviors, subjective states, and capacities of human beings and/or about the properties and processes of the aggregate or collective unities—the groups, networks, markets, organizations, and so on—where these human agents are situated” (p. 3). While not necessarily historically inclined or prominently analyzing the travel of knowledge between settings, the focus on everyday practices of making, evaluating, or using knowledge and the attention to the “relatively porous” locations of knowledge production (and the ways in which this nonenclosure is managed) offer a foundation for thinking about the laboratory life of social science. For an STS approach to the travel of scientific facts, some of them social scientific, see Howlett & Morgan's (2011) edited volume How Well Do Facts Travel? Gillespie (1991) , in contrast, provides an example of a historical laboratory life analysis of the political relations between workers-turned-experimental subjects, managers, and social scientists in the Hawthorne experiments at the Western Electric Company (see also Hsueh 2002 ). The sociomaterial concept of laboratory travels too, and not without consequences. While Lapp (1995) details how Puerto Rico was turned into a social laboratory, Cullather (2002) describes how the Tennessee Valley Project was copy-pasted, at least on paper, into Helmand Province in Afghanistan.
While HSS provides histories of the conditions of emergence and flourishing of social inquiry, some studies, such as Engineering Society ( Brückweh et al. 2012 ), also reflect on how these social imaginaries impacted the worlds in which they circulate, an area where anthropology can chime in (see Section 3). This edited volume on the scientization of the social (a term coined by Raphael 1996 , p. 166) studies the (indeterminate) effects of interventionalist social science expertise on society. Focused on social and psychological (welfare) policies and polling and marketing practices, it argues that, through testing, surveying, calculating, and counseling, social science partakes in the conceptualization of (social) problems, as well as in the scope of their solutions. This problem-framing, in turn, influences social relations and self-understanding (of a variety of social units). While Scott (2009) has convincingly argued that society can also refuse to be engineered, the social sciences are at least corralled to engineer the social. Governmentality studies provide another vein in the study of the effects of social science knowledge. These studies specify how the “exercise of power…is infused with knowledge about the nature of what is governed and what it means to govern” ( Eyal & Buchholz 2010 , p. 128). Eyal & Buchholz (2010) , in their examination of what they term a “sociology of interventions,” are interested in how expertise attains value as “public intervention” (p. 120; see also Carr's 2010 review on the anthropology of expertise). Just as often, however, social science travels without being so clearly identifiable either as expertise or as carrying the obvious capacity to intervene. It nevertheless might coshape how people think of themselves and the worlds they inhabit.
Finally, the domain of HSS engenders its own metahistorical conundrums of time, space, subject, and relational embeddedness, among other things. Periodizations, for instance, reveal as much as they hide, as is evidenced by the productive discussions around the salience and pitfalls of the category Cold War social science ( Isaac 2007 , Solovey & Cravens 2012 , Stephanson 2012 ). As Isaac (2007 , Isaac & Bell 2012 ) and others ( Engerman 2010 ) have argued, while Cold War history may simply refer to a period, the notion of the Cold War is too often taken to be a unified—and self-explanatory—context. Similarly, while World War II has had profound effects on the social sciences, to mark it as a rupture runs the danger of not seeing the continuities with prewar times ( Porter & Ross 2003b ). Spatially, there are grave challenges too. HSS is more often than not centered on the northern hemisphere. The Cambridge History of Science volume dedicated to the social sciences ( Porter & Ross 2003b ) showcases that, by providing space for particular trajectories in, e.g., India, Japan, Brazil, and China, there are national histories to be told that diverge from this limitation. But whereas different so-called national histories disassemble a unipolar narrative of progress, these histories are also deeply transnational and influenced by geopolitical forces ( Solovey & Daye 2021 ). A case in point is Kingsberg's (2019) monograph on several generations of human scientists in Japan whose work is shot through with the changing geopolitical context of Japan in the world. At its best, the question of what boundaries—of periods, geographies, institutions, individuals, disciplines, and topics—are to be drawn, and how they are investigated, is part of a productive conversation within HSS.
With interdisciplinary terrain to mull over, HSS offers a renewed look at the history of anthropology and kindred disciplines, foregrounding background processes such as domestic politics and geopolitics, funding conditions, military entanglements, Sputnik effects, corporate relations, applications in society, and institutional pressures and possibilities—formative processes, in other words, that are not always part of disciplinary histories and that cut across disciplinary boundaries.
HSS offers us a nuanced look into how social scientific knowledge production is coconstituted by its context, starting with its own contemporary categorizations. Porter & Ross (2003b) usefully disentangle some of the social and institutional histories that led to the uses of the terms behavioral science, human science, moral science, and social science (see also Pooley 2016 on the Ford Foundation's role in touting the notion of behavioral science). Similarly, while textbook narratives may elucidate the intellectual currents of the notion of the term applied (as in applied science, applied anthropology), Baba & Hill (2006) analyze the political and economic conditions, questions, and challenges that birthed this term in multiple locations. Applied science's relation to its other—basic or fundamental science—has also been subject to change. For instance, the National Science Foundation, in its early days, argued that one needed basic science to solve problems. From 1958 onward, applied and fundamental were increasingly treated as separate realms ( Crowther-Heyck 2006 , pp. 433–36).
Some of the most felicitous HSS showcase that seemingly ubiquitous metaconcepts that make the rounds in contemporary academia, like inter- and transdisciplinarity, internationalization, accountability, and third mission activities ( Shore & McLauchlan 2012 ), are grounded in specific histories. For instance, the efforts to establish international social science associations were promoted by UNESCO in the 1950s and were ironically modeled on existing American disciplinary associations ( Selcer 2009 ). 4 Likewise, Crowther-Heyck (2006) offers a vivid account of post–World War II expectations of interdisciplinarity, which carried the promise of disciplinary reintegration after decades of division in the United States. As a sign of the times, 250 new interdisciplinary social science research institutes were created between 1945 and 1965 ( Crowther-Heyck 2006 , p. 421). This interdisciplinary orientation and the concomitant problem orientation and team research were supported by the Office of Naval Research and facilitated by patronage patterns ( Crowther-Heyck 2006 , p. 421). While these interdisciplinary developments were followed by disciplinary specialization, a new term emerged in the 1970s. Faced with new worldwide problems, transdisciplinarity emerged in the context of The Limits to Growth report ( Meadows et al. 1972 ) and acquired renewed momentum thanks to the 1992 United Nations Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro ( Bernstein 2015 ).
Part of the condition of existence of the social sciences is the position of the scientist. In HSS's attention to the people in their social settings who craft social science, World War II often stands out in its long-lasting personnel effects. It fostered interdisciplinary problem-solving teams, a mode of research that continued after the war. At the same time, after the war, wartime agency workers went into academia, which contributed to the changing demographics of academia ( Turner & Turner 1990 ; 5 Steinmetz 2005 , p. 117). Shapin's (2008 ; see also Isaac 2007 , p. 727) twentieth-century history of the present position of the scientist in society recounts how postwar social scientists were scholars who worked in government positions, corporate positions, and military positions, as well as academic positions. As is quite usual in the history of natural sciences, he highlights the interrelations with commercial, military, and government interests. Moreover, he provocatively compares the unfreedom that emerges through the rise of grant writing pressures in academia with the freedom institutionalized in industrial laboratories, which were at times set up as institutional environments for harnessing uncertainty.
While often absent in the core of disciplinary histories, the military has played an outsize role in coshaping the social sciences. Buck (1985) recounts how social scientists garnered experience in working with the military during World War II. Rohde (2009 , 2013 ) details the various ways in which social scientists helped solve military problems in the early postwar years. Pierre Bourdieu's first fieldwork was commissioned by France's military operations in Algeria [the military decided against publishing the book ( Pérez 2022 )]. Martin-Nielsen (2010) highlights the inextricable linkages between linguistics and the military, and Light (2004) does the same for urban planning. Finally, Price (2003 , 2008 , 2016 ) has turned over many anthropological stones to track the military and security interests that are part and parcel of anthropology's history (see also Horowitz 1974 , Simpson 1998 , Solovey 2001 , Gusterson 2007 , González 2010 ). The question that arises from this wealth of studies is why these military relations are so easily forgotten or so easily imagined to be disentangled from social science's core activities and theories.
Another—and related—generative vein of social science's lives is written through histories of its funding. Funding influences research themes, concepts, and methods (see, e.g., Turner 1999 on the Rockefeller roots of the Social Science Research Council (SSRC); see also Stocking 1992 , Solovey 2020 ). It is implicated in our understanding of applied and basic research ( Baba & Hill 2006 , Price 2008 ). It cocreates geographies of knowledge (through area studies and language studies; see below). Its temporal structure, greatly shortened by the shift in the past half-century from block grants to project grants ( Geiger 1992 ), affects the types of questions social scientists get to ask (and not ask). 6 Funding influences the formation of disciplines and its relations with others; hyperspecialization or interdisciplinarity is also a response to political economies. At the same time, Turner (1999 , p. 218) points out that there are “large clumps of indeterminacy, randomness, or underdetermination between causes and consequences” of funding. Price (2003) likewise showcases how the effects of patronage are both generative—e.g., through enticing anthropologists to study certain themes and areas—and restrictive. Moreover, the objectives of funding bodies have often failed (see also Solovey 2001 ; Isaac 2007 , p. 731). It nevertheless seems worthwhile to consider funding as integral—and not external—to the HSS. Histories of floods of funding [GI Bill, the Sputnik-triggered National Defense Education Act (NDEA)], failed programs ( Solovey 2001 ), and defunding may provide the best perspective of funding's generative and restrictive effects ( Sapolsky 1990 ). Funding's trajectories are interesting too, as the phantom factors—to borrow Nader's (1997) phrase—of research such as institutions, geopolitics, the state, corporations, and the military often come into view through its prism.
Once social scientists are understood in their connections to organizations, colonial administrations, the state, market research, think tanks, and funding schemes, however, one concept—autonomy—usually rears its head. Can social science funded by a government or the military “maintain a fair measure of freedom and critical perspective in designing, conducting and interpreting research,” or is it by definition limited by policy objectives ( Solovey 2001 , p. 183)? Does state funding generate state science? Are patrons self-governing or also influenced by the zeitgeist? Or are patrons creating both the zeitgeist and the research that fits it? Crowther-Heyck (2006) argues that patrons mediate between “broader political context” and “intellectual programs of individuals” (p. 423). While social science has a long history of navigating between autonomy and being an instrument of power, HSS also needs to decompose and provincialize the universal of autonomy. As Price (2003) has shown for anthropology, the dichotomy of the totally controlling patron versus the autonomous academic appears to be an unnecessary trap, but one that haunts HSS studies nonetheless (see also Engerman 2010 ). Just as objectivity has been given careful attention from social scientists and historians of science ( Daston & Galison 2007 ), so should autonomy. Wolfe (2013) has made a start by provocatively suggesting that the idea of academia as removed from the nexus of science, funding, and the state is (also) a Cold War legacy of marking US science as being supposedly different from Soviet science (on Soviet science, see also Engerman 2009 ).
Each social science discipline has prescriptions and traditions for how to gather and interpret data. For some historians, like Lemov (2005 , 2015 ), methods are a found object. A rich vein in HSS looks at the conjunctures within which methods like fieldwork, focus groups, polls, surveys, and depth interviews were developed. These studies examine the underlying assumptions about people, their minds, their (ir)rationality, and their knowledge these methods body forth, as well as the data they produced, the categories they brought into the world, and the subsequent effect they have had in their usages, both by scientists and more popularly.
For anthropologists, histories of and reflections on fieldwork abound ( Clifford & Marcus 1986 , Hymes 1999 , Stocking 1983 ), and new ones are being written. For the first Soviet ethnographers, for instance, the practices of Enlightenment naturalists and travelers were foundational for their understanding of fieldwork ( Arzyutov & Kan 2017 ), and for Japanese ethnographers, rapidly changing political contexts shaped and altered the field and the ways of going about studying its people ( Kingsberg 2019 ). And new histories and anthropological studies are to be written about how fieldwork, ethnography, and participant observation are traveling beyond the bounds of anthropology (e.g., Platt 1983 on its travels to sociology). But other methods for understanding social processes, such as note-taking, life histories, and a variety of interview techniques, have fascinating social histories as well and intersect in part with practices of anthropologists. Among the relevant tools and technologies of knowing in the sciences of society, one finds, for instance, the practice of note-taking ( Herbert 1991 , Daston 2004 ). Life histories as self-conscious method were developed by Thomas and Florian Znaniecki to study poor populations in urban settings ( Mintz 1979 , Lemov 2015 7 ). Interview techniques as a mode of knowledge generation were not the exclusive domain of social science in the early twentieth century—neither are they now. As Bogardus (1924) observed, “The physician, the lawyer, the priest, the journalist, the detective, the social worker, the psychiatrist and the psychoanalyst make regular use of it” (p. 456, cited in Morris 2015 ). Depth interviews emerged in social research through two early-twentieth-century catalysts ( Lee 2011 ). On the one hand, the Hawthorne experiments fostered the psychodynamic interview, which drew on nonauthoritarian interviews and free association, introduced by Elton Mayo ( Gillespie 1991 ). And on the other hand, Carl Rogers was instrumental in trafficking nondirective interviewing from therapeutic settings into academic research ( Lee 2011 ). While depth interviews acquired traction in the face of concerns about the dominant role of the researcher, the focused interview revolved around yielding responses to communicative events (information or imagery). Lemov (2012) describes how the focused interview was first developed to get a handle on both GI attitudes toward the enemy and their motivation to fight. Professionalized by the one-way mirror setup, this technique—renamed focus group—then traveled into commerce (industry, advertising, and the movie industry). However different, both methods sought to access unstructured depths within: “Focus groups address the realm of the scarcely thought out, the inchoate, the shared but not spoken social reality between and among people—and then they alter these hard-to-talk-about things. Focus groups thus give a feeling of inevitability to the previously contingent. They are not just about representing a truth about reality. They change reality” ( Lemov 2012 , p. 45; see also Law 2004 , Lezaun 2007 ). The midcentury shift in the valorization of free association (brainstorming, focus groups, depth interviews) suggests that instinctive drives are no longer dangerous forces but are potentially interesting processes and that they may even offer material to foster new truths ( Van Eekelen 2017 ).
On the other end of the spectrum, whole populations were rendered intelligible. Igo (2007) and Kropp (2023) write incisively about not only ( a ) the ways in which new methodological devices of surveys and polling have been made but also ( b ) how they have effects in the social worlds in which they circulate. The rise of surveys and polls was aided by innovations in science that permitted new types of calculation (sampling), paired with strong interest from commerce and government (see also Yeo 2003 , Converse 2009 , Law 2009 ). But there were also cultural demands, indexed by concerns about modern industrial society and a desire to visualize the American nation ( Igo 2007 , p. 10) or Europe ( Kropp 2023 ) as a whole. The types of issues surveyed ranged from “[r]outine habits to social and political attitudes to the most intimate areas of personal experience” ( Igo 2007 , p. 11). These social scientific inquiries inaugurated statistical thinking in society—and citizen encounters with these social data provided ways of “seeing, perceiving and imagining” its human counterpart, the “average American” ( Porter 1995 , p. 18) or the European citizen. A qualitative British equivalent, also focused on getting a view on one's own society, was the Mass Observation of everyday life that took place from 1937 to 1949 ( Hubble 2006 ).
Besides depths of humans and seemingly whole or fragmented societies, there are also areas to think with. Szanton's (2004) edited volume on the deparochialization of US social science traces the origins, trajectories, agendas, and heterogeneity of different area studies fields. 8 In another volume on social science and empire, Wallerstein (1997) details the origins of area studies in and after World War II, when international political consideration called for the training of area specialists. 9 Lockman's (2016) history of the making of Middle East studies calls the periodization of these historizations of area studies into question by showcasing that Middle East studies came into its own in the 1920s, suggesting that other areas did not start from scratch after World War II either (see also Mitchell 2004 ). Area studies concentrated attention on intensive language study, field research, local histories, the testing of theory against observation, and the fostering of multidisciplinary exchanges between the humanities and social sciences ( Szanton 2004 , p. 5). The definition of areas was contingent on international political trajectories and US government agency interest and was at times therefore subject to change. Primarily funded by the Ford Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation, the Carnegie Endowment, and government funding (NDEA and later Title IV funding), area studies has been administered by the SSRC/ACLS joint area committees ( Szanton 2004 ). Area studies is also inextricably entwined with US government agencies [first the Office of Strategic Services, later the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)]. The CIA's influence and failures to influence social scientific research have been detailed by Solovey (2001) , Price (2016) , and Saunders (2000) , who discusses the ways in which culture became a diplomatic tool. At the same time, the pedagogical effects of training undergraduate and graduate students in area studies are undeniable ( Engerman 2015 ).
One material by-product of our socially embedded methodological practices is databases of social knowledge. Take the dual-use Human Relations Area Files (HRAF). In the 1950s, HRAF was funded for 85% by the US Army, US Navy, and US Air Force and was used for military purposes. As Price (2012) recounts, they were used by both anthropologists and the US military. He describes an attempt to draw on HRAF's taxonomies, categories, and organization for military publications, exemplifying efforts to align civilian and military knowledge. Both Tobin (1990) and Lemov (2015) have also taken on the HRAF and other databank initiatives that took off in earnest in the 1950s, although more from the angle of histories and materialities of data gathering. Lemov (2015) homes in on the varied techniques, devices, filing systems, encounters, and plasticities used in storage systems of social knowledge. In her monograph about one anthropological databank, she details the comprehensive sociocultural knowledge sought by combining findings from sociologists, psychologists, historians, and ethologists. Exemplifying a postwar inner-space race ( Lemov 2011 , p. 140), such researchers combined ethnographic observations with, e.g., projective tests, focus groups, Rorschach tests, and Thematic Apperception Tests in one anthropological archive. Lemov (2015) also tracks the shifting meanings and uses and cooptations of these data sets and the different ways in which the idea of total knowledge was pursued and realized.
HSS thus pays attention to the academic and nonacademic contact zones where social science concepts, methods, and knowledges came about and, to a lesser extent, to where these concepts, methods, and knowledges were taken up. One set of events that has gathered a great deal of attention in HSS is the interdisciplinary Macy conferences, retrospectively known as the cybernetics group. These events, packed with a heterogeneous set of natural and social scientists such as Wiener, Bateson, Mead, and Lazarsfeld, had unusually long and varied afterlives [one aftereffect was that Bateson provided Deleuze and Guattari with the idea of plateaus ( Halpern 2014 , p. 162)]. Heims's (1993) retrospective examination of these idea transfer gatherings situates the emergence of cybernetics in relation to the political climate of the 1950s (see also Dupuy 2009 ). Cybernetics drew on technology to make social processes thinkable. It proposed seemingly apolitical terms (feedback, communication, systems) to understand and simulate human thought, which reduced the social and political to the individual.
In line with the interdisciplinary spirit of the 1950s, a number of discipline-crossing books deal with both the Macy conferences and their aftermaths ( Turner 2006 , Erickson et al. 2013 , Halpern 2014 , Crowther-Heyck 2015 , Lemov 2015 , Kaiser & McCray 2016 , Lemon 2017 ). How Reason Almost Lost Its Mind is a uniquely coauthored monograph, which may be a generative academic tactic to tackle multidisciplined themes ( Erickson et al. 2013 ). This study showcases how a type of decontextualized knowledge—heuristically termed Cold War rationality—came about in deeply contextual settings. This analysis of the search for a purportedly pure rationality that could take the place of human reason (which was regarded as unstable in the face of Cold War crises, a nuclear standoff in particular) and Mirowski's (2002) Machine Dreams exemplify studies of social scientific knowledge that at first blush seem to rank high on the nonsocial spectrum. However, the wonderful insight that these studies of game theory ( Mirowski 2002 , Erickson 2015 ), operations research ( Mirowski 2002 ), and systems analysis ( Crowther-Heyck 2015 ) offer is that the very idea of nonhistorical and decontextualized social scientific models came about in a time and place that were anything if not historical. Similarly, in a genealogy of contemporary responsive environments (of knowledge harvesting technologies also configured as big data), Halpern (2014) details a reorganization of vision through the midcentury visualization of data—in patterns—and the concomitant reconceptualizations of the mind (and reason). Gleaning from histories of social and human sciences, design, and urban planning, she historicizes the process of the decontextualization of observation, where seeing, sensing, and perception become outsourced and are rebuilt and circulate in other contexts. In the end, this is a social history of how we have come to trust data—through management and analysis.
A final element in HSS to highlight is its histories of concepts, which showcase that social science concepts take work to cohere. They too complement studies of the more conventional histories of social science. In the life of concepts, existing disciplines, theoretical developments, institutions, or notable authors are present, but in a reshuffled and not-as-discrete form ( Van Eekelen 2023 ). HSS is yielding rather intriguing histories of all kinds of everyday concepts. Take the cybernetic and military origins of stress, a concept that was quickly picked up in post–World War II popular sources as a civilizational condition ( Hogness 1983 ). Or the military and industrial settings that fostered the concept of creativity ( Cohen-Cole 2014 , Van Eekelen 2017 ). Or the notion of imposter syndrome, which Simmons (2016) situates in a gendered and racialized history of achievement and modernization. Or Milam's (2019) history of the popularization of human aggression as the defining trait for what makes us human between 1966 and 1975. Or burnout. This term emerged in the 1970s as a concept in the helping professions in the Bay Area, where the social worker burned out helping others in countercultural free clinics. The term was given scientific credence through surveys, tests, and studies and, in the 1980s, proliferated far beyond the realm of social work to corporate environments where anyone working with people was prone to burnout. The shift in settings indexes a concomitant shift of caring for others to care of the self ( Hoffarth 2017 ). What these studies have in common is that, whereas the production of a social science concept—and social science more broadly—is often retrospectively imagined to have taken place in academia, in many cases, including the ones discussed here, they emerged first in nonacademic contexts. Moreover, while “scientification” is often a vital element in processes that contribute to the life of a social science concept, this process mattered not only for science itself but also for its invested parties, such as the military, industry, and government ( Van Eekelen 2023 ).
As historians of science are turning their gaze toward the social sciences, anthropologists of science have much to contribute. For what happens with knowledge of culture and social life after it leaves the laboratory? The employment and afterlife of concepts are an understudied aspect of the HSS domain and can be a perplexing sight for any sociologist or anthropologist who encounters them in their fieldwork ( Martin 1994 , Ferguson 1999 , Tsing 2005 ). While Mandler (2019) has offered methodological suggestions for an ethnographic turn in the history of human sciences, ethnographic methods are in their infancy in this field. In the remainder of this article, I outline what cultural anthropology can uniquely contribute to the domain of HSS. The most straightforward—and no less important—complementary fortes of anthropology vis-à-vis HSS are spatiotemporal. Whereas historians are trained to wait patiently until the dust settles, anthropologists can study histories of the present and the present ( Van Eekelen 2023 ). Anthropologists are, moreover, equipped to write nonchronological or multidirectional narratives. Spatially too, anthropologists can examine locations and local adaptations that are less familiar territory for many historians; they are trained to study unruly material that is not contained in one archive, institution, country, or “big man.” They have a way of cutting through the archive, of tracking a term while making use of both documents and sources that are not readily documented, such as oral histories, informal talk, and everyday practices. Moreover, an anthropologist may be more inclined to reflect on the process of documentation itself. What do bibliographies do for emerging social science concepts, for instance ( Van Eekelen 2017 )? This multisited and multisourced sensibility complements historians’ differently disciplined endeavors (see also Zeitlyn 2012 ).
While HSS denaturalizes social science concepts through historical inquiries of their making, ethnographies of social science concepts tend to include their public uptake and ramifications (e.g., Ferguson 1999 ). Fassin & Rechtman (2009) unearth, for instance, how the term trauma first emerged in the nineteenth century in the face of newfangled railway accidents. The term was subsequently fleshed out in academia (including military medicine), but other parties, such as the insurance industry, took a strong interest in the term as well. After situating the term's contradictory emergence in shifting material and social contexts, Fassin & Rechtman (2009) look at how this term works in different settings in the (recent) present and how shifts in perception of trauma have ramifications for the politics of reparation and proof. The point of these historical and ethnographic analyses is not only to denaturalize the term but also to generate questions that help analyze its manifestations in the present. Shore & Wright (2015) , for instance, in their revised study of accountability, delve quite deeply into the historical locations—starting with military education—where the tools and knowledge for accountability were produced, trafficked, consumed, and framed. This generates concept-specific questions to probe the ubiquitous uptake of the term in the present. Martin's (2022) historical and ethnographic study of cognitive psychology, meanwhile, illuminates how the idea of cognitive science and its experimental psychological subjects came about with the help of physicians, psychologists, and anthropologists while also tracking how these ideas manifest themselves in the present. She too uses the past to pry open the present, not only by complementing it with extensive ethnographic work on the sociality of psychological research—of social science in the making—but also by detecting how its concepts and practices are knotted in our everyday lives through user-friendly design and the workings of social media.
Even a concept like culture, arguably the contested property of cultural anthropology, can be usefully studied in its travels. 10 What are we to make of the travel and appropriation of the notion of culture and its concomitant anthropological theories in other disciplines and beyond academia? What analytical framework works when design schools embrace and transform ethnography, when culture is copyrighted, and when anthropological knowledge figures prominently in debates about nationalism? In other words, anthropological knowledge too has a life outside of the discipline and outside of academia—and as studies of the public life of anthropology have shown, it always has (see, e.g., Baba 2012 , Kingsberg 2019 , Weidman 2021 ). When such knowledge circulates in the worlds we study, a taxonomy of anthropological theory is not the only way to put these pieces of a mode of thought in place. Rather, we need to be able to investigate these concepts in the contexts in which they are mobilized and taken up. In a study of the objectification of (Quebec) nationalist ideology and the objectification in social science theory, Handler (1988) finds a way to detect the politics and public issues that are at play in the uptake and appropriations of a mode of thinking that produces culture as an object. He tracks how nationalistic definitions of culture have shifted—while being projected into a past as stable—and how social scientific knowledge was (deeply) involved in these processes, e.g., through its identification of culture and folklore (albeit variously drawn upon). Finally, Harding (2000 ; S.F. Harding, manuscript in preparation) recounts how, in the 1960s, anthropological studies, concepts, and theories ended up in public school curricula following post-Sputnik education reforms. Called Man, a Course of Study (MACOS), this educational program channeled mid-century anthropology. Deemed the most scientific social science, anthropology was mobilized to make humans more human (on MACOS, see also Dow 1991 ; Milam 2013 , 2019 ; Cohen-Cole 2014 , pp. 241–50). The curriculum introduced notions of life cycles, adaptation, social organization, communication, and field research and compared human and nonhuman species, looking in particular at what made humans uniquely human. Between 1970 and 1975, half a million students took the course, but as Harding (2022) discusses, both its design as well as the opposition that eventually led to its demise fostered reorderings of the categories of secular and religious that resonate to this day.

Section: Conclusion

The domain of HSS, according to Porter & Ross (2003b) , “invites reflection on the ways in which historians and social scientists are mutually implicated in each other's work” (p. 9). This is certainly the case for anthropologists and historians ( Darnell 2011 ). HSS shares common ground with anthropology in that it is based in particulars, in that worlds are folded in cases, and in that both body forth interpretive approaches. When we encounter social science concepts that hide the particularities of their emergence, their scientification, and their circulation, HSS can help us ground them by disclosing their contingent nature. Anthropologists have a proven eye for studying concepts, methods, and knowledges as they emerge and flourish between fields, between disciplines, and in both the academy and the world beyond.
HSS is not just relevant for fellow historians of social science. All social scientists benefit from HSS in that the language they speak is charged with historical connotations. As Steinmetz (2018) puts it, our vocabularies are infused with history: “An historical excavation of meaning allows us to better grasp the buried significations and connotations of our current scientific language” (see also Williams 1985 ). Our vocabularies are the result not only of earlier scientific battles, as intellectual historians might track it, but also of pluriform and extra-academic origins and peripatetic lives. Moreover, the language and practices of those that we study are also partially formed through social science. Concepts like creativity, modernity, culture, excellence, stress, trauma, sleep, religion, nation, and human capital have histories that are entwined with the social sciences, and they circulate well beyond the borders of academia. It is therefore imperative that we understand the histories of this lexicon, its traffic, and the ways in which they affect how people see themselves (see, e.g., Gluck & Tsing 2009 , Stade 2014 , Stoler et al. 2020 ).
This review then makes a case for the generative encounters that can take place if historical and anthropological analyses join forces to study the past and present lives of social science, its production and circulation, in academia and the worlds beyond ( Van Eekelen 2023 ). Social knowledge—including the disciplinary histories that are entangled in its formation—turns out to be shot through with connections to other times and places. HSS can help us see those potent linkages. HSS concepts decompose the present and can be usefully employed to generate questions that are tailor-made to query the life of concepts in their worldly settings ( Van Eekelen 2023 ). These questions can help us see the curious and conjunctural nature of the present. Then again, anthropologists and ethnographic methods are sorely needed to look at the ways in which fragments of these histories are currently coconstituting social lives, both in practice and in the ways in which social lives are imagined.

Section: Acknowledgements

The writing of this article was facilitated by an EUR fellowship and an NWO VENI research grant (275-69-003). Thanks to ARA ’s production team for both its patience and insightful edits. I thank my colleagues at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton with whom I worked on the history of social science, most notably Didier Fassin, George Steinmetz, Nicolas Langlitz, Jean Louis Fabiani, Kristopher Kropp, Agata Zysiak, Chitralekha, Amin Perez, Miriam Kingsberg, and Johan Heilbron. I would also like to thank Susan Harding, John Marlovits, Carel Smith, P.W. Zuidhof, Tak-Wing Ngo, and Jack Amariglio for sharing key insights and comments while this article was in the making.
