Section: Abstract

From the late 1990s, a wave of writing in anthropology took up the idiom of madness to orient a critical approach. However, anthropology's use of madness as critique reflects a longer conversation between psychiatry and anthropology. As madness is used to point to and connect other things—afflictions, therapeutics, medicine, politics, colonialism, religion, and, especially, trauma as a social condition—it is noteworthy not only for its breadth, but also because it is often applied to contexts in which it already has purchase as critique. Thus, madness in anthropology is a mirror onto the discipline's recursive engagements with psychiatry and the worlds to which both turn their attention.

Section: Introduction

In the 1980s, literary critic Shoshana Felman (1985) observed an “inflation in discourses of madness” in the humanities, asking “why is everyone today meddling in madness?” (p. 13). A similar question might be asked of anthropology from the late 1990s onward, when waves of writing turned to “madness” to signify a range of things: psychopathology and related afflictions, therapeutics, medicine, politics, colonialism, religion, and, especially, trauma. An effort to trace this literature as an “anthropology of madness” is vexed by the fact that there is, in a sense, no such thing. Madness is less an object of study for anthropology than a way of framing a conversation about diverse but connected things. In much of this literature, madness is used rhetorically to encapsulate a critical approach, shorthand for the connection between human suffering and social conditions. Madness's slippery ability to qualify both individual minds and the worlds they inhabit is crucial to its critical code, and psychopathology often serves as a point of contact tacitly and explicitly.
Many of the labels for what anthropologists study are similarly deictic, but madness is notable for not only its breadth but its doubling. Perhaps the most familiar genealogy for the use of madness as a term of critique involves madness's opposition to reason, incorporating both the critical historiography of Michel Foucault and the modern epistemes his work brought to light. In this idiom, madness is both critical of and a tool of power, often at the same time. It can be used against itself, splitting at the point where description diverges from analysis. However, there are other genealogies for anthropology's turn to madness, notably, even counterintuitively, in early twentieth-century work at the juncture of anthropology and colonial psychiatry; this work pursued psychopathology in specific and comparative terms, bringing to light connections between psychopathology and social conditions without exorcising the specter of race. Though this work was less concerned with metaphors of madness, it unfolded alongside grander rhetorical uses of the term, those that oriented both the colonial project and rejections of it. This tangle of genealogies—and their political stakes—highlights another aspect of madness in anthropology, the way its critical heft is often directed at contexts in which it already has purchase as critique. Madness in anthropology is thus an invitation to two conversations: one about the relationships between power and human experience, and another about the recursive quality of anthropological efforts.
This article considers both elements, first discussing the recent wave of writing on the areas to which madness most often points: psychiatry and related therapeutics, mental illness and mental health systems, and the social and political conditions that influence them. Second, it addresses the way such discussions illuminate circular encounters in anthropology, ethnographic attention to contexts in which familiar critical ideas already have life. These discussions are bridged by an overview of colonial psychiatry's history of comparative psychopathology. There are points of overlap, namely, the way that, at its best, a contemporary anthropology of madness attends to shared genealogies and makes sense of how madness is a mirror onto histories shared with the places to which we turn our gaze. In other instances, contemporary uses of madness may bring to light the dangers of overlooking such histories, matters with real-world implications. Labeling strategies have complex stakes; all involve the way ideas are extricated from the world and turned back upon it. The question is whether, and how, we signal those stakes.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion, Conclusion

The story of madness in contemporary anthropology considers how psychopathology is understood to connect to, bear the effects of, or comment on social and political conditions. It is also a story of the diverse ways that anthropology, in turning to institutions, states, and structural conditions, interrogates power by assigning disorder to sites of purported reason. The contemporary anthropology of madness at once departs from and draws critical potential from earlier approaches that consider madness to be a label assigned to practices that defy cultural norms ( Benedict 1934 ) and use the term as an occasional metaphor for theorizing ritual, religion, and social process. In the 1960s and 1970s, madness was occasionally invoked to describe divination, ecstasy, and religious experience. It represented the structural condition of being at once outside norms and the means of their instantiation ( Douglas 1966 , Turner 1967 ), shedding light on gender, ritual, power, and performative reversals ( Clarke 1973 , Reay 1977 , Herdt 1986 ), far more often than it signaled inquiries into insanity ( Edgerton 1966 ). By the 1970s, psychological anthropology, in dialogue with psychoanalytic and psychological theory, pursued normative self-processes, altered states of experience understood in Freudian terms to reveal culture as a symbolic process ( Obeyesekere 1981 ). Meanwhile, institutional structures of care were emerging as sites for theorizing power. The influential work of Erving Goffman (1973) informed sociologists and historians in framing the asylum as representative of power in the form of the “total institution,” while deinstitutionalization, and resulting social crises, drew the attention of social scientists. The founding of the journal Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry , in 1977, extended the concerns of psychological anthropology into the emerging field of medical anthropology, and psychopathology, understood socially, began to inform critical method. In 1981, Scheper-Hughes ’s Saints, Scholars, and Schizophrenics used psychological tools to draw connections between culture, social malaise, and mental illness, while Kleinman (1981 , 1988 ) observed that culture informs illness experience and, later, that illness can be an expression of social distress. Good & Good's (1981) call to see illness as laden with multiple interacting “meaning sets” and deconstructions of medical rationality ( Good 1994 ) explored the potential of meaning-centered cultural analysis to critique biomedical culture. As comparative studies of mental illness appeared ( Kleinman & Good 1985 , Bhattacharya 1986 ), Estroff's (1985) pathbreaking Making It Crazy brought ethnography to bear on the deinstitutionalized mental health care system. Showing mental health care to produce “craziness,” Making It Crazy took stock of overlapping frames of insanity, examining those idioms in situ, and attending to experiences under their sign as indexes of structural conditions, institutional practice, and medical ideology.
By the 1990s, madness was established as shorthand for critique as anthropology turned to violence and histories and structures of power. Influenced by postcolonial theories, subaltern studies, and the critical formulations of history and literary studies, as well as its own critical self-examination, this project figured madness as both idiom and object, the condensed ironies and effects of institutional reason. Significantly, the place of madness in this turn owes much to its central figuring in the work of Foucault, whose influence on anthropology at this juncture cannot be overstated. Temporalizing as “epistemic” the turn by which madness was divorced from reason, Foucault used the asylum and the madman to orient key concepts: biopolitical management, disciplinary power, and discourse, with psychiatry one of reason's disciplinary forms, a “moral tactic” productive of ways of being and knowing ( Foucault 1973 , p. 276; 1977 ; 1979 ; 2008 ). Condensing arguments about normalization as a mechanism of modern power, madness-as-critique increasingly meant madness-as-Foucauldian - critique, underscoring vernacular suggestions that “the system itself may be mad” ( Rhodes 2004 , p. 4) and thinning genealogies between contemporary inquiries and histories of scientific practice by directing the former critically toward the latter.
Foucauldian concepts of madness thus performed a rupture. At the same time, they created a conundrum for ethnography. Concepts of disciplinary power, governmentality, and subjectivization informed anthropological arguments about lives lived under the sign of psychiatry, even as those lives were perceptibly extensions of the forms of power Foucault documented. Those forms were expansive, allowing Foucault's concepts to transform anthropological projects into ones in which “emic” and “etic” no longer made sense. At the same time, the demands of ethnography insisted on the relevance of other lines of thinking, notably phenomenology (cf. Desjarlais & Throop 2011 , Ram & Houston 2015 ). If the wave of anthropological writing on madness signaled a conceptual break from ethnographies written prior to the wide-scale adoption of Foucault, it also exposed the artificiality of that break and potential “absurd[ity]” of applying Foucauldian theory, in a literal sense, to contemporary versions of the institutions—prisons, camps, asylums—on which it was built ( Rhodes 2004 , p. 15).
Whether absurd or historically consistent, this critical vocabulary connected diverse things: the body, medical practice, economies, and states. While ethnography continued to produce diverse perspectives, anthropological work with madness has fallen loosely into themes: madness as discourse, as a mode of being, and as a political condition. Some contributions to this conversation do not use the term madness but draw on related languages of critique, the extent of which reflects as much the expansiveness of modern forms of power as it does a shared academic vocabulary (or insularity). Likewise, it confirms that our work often involves interlocutors who are themselves agile with this critical grammar and the signs it reproduces.
Many who frame their work in such terms refer to madness's “open-ended” quality ( Reyes-Foster 2019 , p. 6) and closeness to human experience. Martin (2007) notes that while “mental illness” “has the benefit of grouping mental phenomena with physical phenomena,” the phrase “also robs the experience of being ‘mentally ill’ of its complex darkness,” a darkness that compels us toward understanding (p. xvii). Included in madness's multiple possibilities for signification is its rejection of the sanitizing effects of technical terms and the ability to call into question their putative neutrality. It is invoked to show that race and gender ideologies underlie diagnostic terms that categorize “human weight and complexity” ( Martin 2007 , p. xiii), highlight the political contexts that inform diagnoses ( Young 1997 ), denote the way concepts of valued personhood are replete with social anxieties about race and gender ( Metzl 2003 , 2009 ), and expose the contribution of racial and class ideologies to grave conditions in psychiatric care ( Reyes-Foster 2019 , p. 6). Madness may also be the best translation of local terms, incorporating aspects of social life excluded by technical languages, for example, ideas about domesticity ( Saris 1996 ), love, relationships, and religious experience ( Cohen 1998 , Pinto 2014 ). At the same time, the violence of rhetorics of “madness” may be highlighted, along with such rhetoric's role in incitements to violence ( Das 1995 ) and delineations of confinement ( Reyes-Foster 2019 , p. 7). People live under multiple signs, and idiomatic and technical terms serve social systems and influence how people feel , perform, and monitor their diagnoses [ Estroff 1985 ; see Young 1997 for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD); Pinto 2014 for paranoia; Martin 2007 for mania]. So, too, in places where diagnoses fail to stick, dense terms such as “craziness” may operate less as open categories than as libraries of texts with discrete, if never completely traceable, connections to each other ( Cohen 1998 ).
Much ethnographic writing on the experience of mental illness does not use madness to frame its orientation or objects of study, perhaps because its goals are to humanize, or bring near, those experiences, making madness's distancing qualities less useful. Work in which mental illness theorizes experience (and vice versa) often focuses on schizophrenia, using diagnostic terminology and emphasizing less schizophrenia's nonnormative aspects than its qualities as illness and capacity to signal “fundamental human processes” ( Jenkins 2004 , p. 29; 2015). Experience-oriented ethnographies of specific psychopathologies can be seen as informed by two, surprisingly compatible, orientations: first, turns in the 1990s toward phenomenology, experience, and “lifeworlds” (see above) and, second, often in collaboration with clinicians and epidemiologists, an orientation toward global mental health policy ( Desjarlais et al. 1995 , Hopper 2004 ). Through experience-near juxtaposition, studies of acute mental illness question the cross-cultural relevance of diagnostic criteria, noting that diverse experiences, especially of psychosis, challenge the application of “mental illness” to etiologies that “do not see madness in terms of the ‘mental’” ( Goddard 2011 , p. 1). Experiences of acute mental illness also suggest the limits of Western concepts of experience, including those used by anthropology ( Desjarlais 1997 ), invoking concepts of “soul” ( Davis 2012 , Nakamura 2013 , Pandolfo 2018 ), among other terms. Articulating ways of feeling with alienating social architectures ( Desjarlais 1997 ) and survival in the interstices of so-called normal life ( Lovell 1997 ), experience-oriented approaches often take up language and poetics to recuperate the personhood of the marginalized mentally ill. They extend efforts to bring aesthetics to concerns with experience to conditions of suffering ( Bibeau & Corin 1995 ) and ask how psychotic speech gives madness local meaning ( Wilce 2006 ), expresses religious goals ( Corin et al. 2004 ), and involves recognizable patterns such as “ragtiming” ( Desjarlais 1997 , p. 162).
Much of this work aims to be clinically useful ( Jenkins & Barrett 2004 , pp. 6, 21). Jenkins's work in US settings addresses experiences of trauma and conditions of precarity ( Jenkins 2015 ), highlighting family dynamics ( Jenkins 2004 , 2015 ) and emphasizing “expressed emotion,” a concept relevant for clinical practice and research ( Jenkins 1991 ). Corin, in collaboration with Thara and Padmavati, considers the way schizophrenia experience is mediated by language and religion ( Corin et al. 2004 ) and benefits from “positive withdrawal,” also a clinically useful concept ( Corin 1990 ). Many scholars call for medical recognition of a wider range of schizophrenia presentations, notably short, nonremitting forms, questioning the cross-cultural relevance of chronicity and effectively reshaping diagnostic criteria ( Barrett 2004 , Good & Subandi 2004 ). Edited volumes have been crucial for the development of this field as a whole, but especially for putting experience-oriented cultural comparison to clinical use. Edited volumes on depression, schizophrenia, and PTSD outline the limits of medical categories, propose new categories and directions for research, and suggest interventions ( Kleinman & Good 1985 , Jenkins & Barrett 2004 , Hinton & Good 2016 , Luhrmann & Marrow 2016 ).
Aligned with an emerging anthropology of violence, idioms of madness resounded loudly in anthropological writing at the turn of the twenty-first century as a way of signaling trauma. Understood as a social and historical condition, trauma underscored the emergence of “political subjectivity” ( Aretxaga 1997 ) and the shift from anthropological concerns with “self,” “person,” and “experience” to “subject” and “subjectivity,” from “culture” to “colonialism,” “power,” and “disorder,” explicitly theorized ( Good 2012a , b ; Biehl et al. 2007a ) and framed as a collective project ( Das et al. 2000 , 2001 ; Biehl et al. 2007a ; B.J. Good et al. 2008 ). Bringing together memory, experience, politics, and law ( Young 1997 ), the concept of trauma references human experience in the wake of interconnected forms of violence ( Das et al. 2000 , 2001 ), including structural violence ( Scheper-Hughes 1992 ; Farmer 2003 , 2004 ; Das 2015 ), social suffering ( Kleinman et al. 1997 ), postcolonial effects ( Comaroff & Comaroff 2006 , M.-J.D. Good et al. 2008) , historical trauma ( O'Nell 1996 , Gone 2013 ), imprisonment and policing ( Rhodes 2004 ), and political violence ( James 2010 , Segal 2016 , Varma 2020 ). (Beyond work focusing on mental health effects, this literature is too extensive to be included here.) Trauma at once allows for collaborations with clinical practice and interrogates psychiatry's disciplinary effects, especially its uses in migration, human rights infrastructures, and legal processes ( Pandolfi 2008 , Fassin & Rechtman 2009 , James 2010 , Fassin 2012 , Giordano 2014 ).
Foucault's paradigmatic concept of biopower informed the anthropology of violence by implicating medicine as complicit in wider systems of power, addressing the role of the clinic in sustaining conditions of violence (rather than emphasizing the narrowness of diagnostic scope) and reckoning with the limits of the term itself—the effects of the clinical, legal, and institutional mobilization of trauma. As a matrix of violences, biopower is a potent tool for mapping social and individual pathologies, especially as they come under the purview of the “psy” fields. These fields can thus be seen as techniques of power, managing persons by making experience legible to technical calculations that “penetrate” diverse domains of life ( Rose 1996 , p. 81). Biopolitics highlights the way therapeutics can be forms of governance, imposing moralizing goals that impute neoliberal personhood ( Davis 2012 , Zhang 2017 ) and pathologizing diverse ideas about kinship, care, and death ( Stevenson 2014 ). Underscoring critiques of therapeutic practice as “disordered” by its knowledge structures ( Luhrmann 2000 ), biopolitical formulations show the triage effects of medical, political, and economic structures working through intimate relations, the way “letting die” is a result of the management of life ( Foucault 1979 ). In “zones of social abandonment,” biopolitics operate through inattention as much as through surveillance, its rationalities creating spaces where people deemed no longer human might be left to die ( Biehl 2005 ). Connecting kinship, political economy, and medical systems, concepts of “abandonment” converge order and disorder with conditions of “social death” ( Das 1995 , 2007 ) by exposing the suffering resulting from cultural geographies ( Marrow & Luhrmann 2012 ), liberal ideals ( Stevenson 2014 ), and persistent ideologies associated with the asylum ( Reyes-Foster 2019 ).
Like “structural violence,” the term “zones” borrows language from economic policy and ironically shifts its meanings. Similarly, “neoliberal cultures” can be seen as violent and disordered ( Comaroff & Comaroff 2001 ), madness and reason can be connected to capitalism [itself rife with metaphors of madness ( Martin 2007 , Harvey 2018 )], and addiction can be understood as being generated through explicit marketing strategies of “entrapment” ( Schull 2012 , p. 26). Psychopharmaceuticals embody capitalist and biopolitical imperatives, extend systems of oppression, and depoliticize social suffering in the interest of managing life ( Oldani 2009 , Jenkins 2011 , Dumit 2012 ), converging with local understandings of kinship, body, and experience ( Pinto 2011 , Ecks 2014 ). Tracing not only the architectures but the edges of biopolitics, the important literature that addresses connections—in trauma—between economic, legal, medical, state, and corporate institutions can find the logical ends of biopolitical management in torture and other violences on “bare life” ( Agamben 1998 ) as well as in the ways that violence unfolds through vectors of difference and symbolically laden life. Notably, feminist theories have been seldom invoked in this turn, even in texts pertaining to women, in spite of the fact that feminist writing has long taken up similar themes, including trauma, economic dependency, and the body as a site of control.
Modernity is often at stake in discussions of social disorder and psychopathology. A slippery hermeneutic, it can involve the way traumas induced by modern institutions are entangled with local explanations invoking modernity's ills. Modernity figures in popular discourse as responsible for suicide ( Chua 2014 ), divorce and its mental health effects ( Pinto 2014 ), and senility ( Cohen 1998 ). Such discourses reinforce political goals, pile expectations on the young ( Chua 2014 ), and produce strategies of resistance legible as mental illness ( Marrow 2013 ) and a means of grappling with the “estrangements” of colonialism and capitalism ( Lattas 2010 , p. 197).
Madness, used as a sign of social disorder, is also served by psychoanalytic models (cf. Gammeltoft & Segal 2016 ). Less a tool for understanding psyches than a way of articulating social dynamics, psychoanalysis connects self-processes with strategies of power ( Aretxaga 1997 , 2008 ; Rahimi 2015 ). It brings together diverse-seeming vocabularies—religious, political, and therapeutic—showing religious practices, even those that are not overtly political, to contain liberatory ( Ewing 1997 ) and decolonizing possibilities ( Pandolfo 2018 ). At the same time, while psychoanalytic concepts, especially Lacanian ones, that emphasize subjectivization are useful as analytics, they are also part of contexts in which psychoanalysis may be integral to health structures and inform long-standing political imaginaries ( Lakoff 2005 , Pandolfo 2018 ).
While madness recurs as an orienting term in literature on violence and social experience, many ethnographies of psychiatry prefer language that is meaningful in the worlds they document: “mental illness,” “patient,” “client,” “person living under the sign of” a diagnosis, and other designations. A recent wave of work of this sort shows psy practices to be a diverse yet interlinked global practice, describing therapeutic sciences, theories, and practices, and the experiences of those who use them ( Nakamura 2013 , Zhang 2014 , Myers 2015 , Duncan 2018 , Matza 2018 ) and charting medical pluralism ( Halliburton 2009 , Lang 2018 ) in relation to depression ( Kitanaka 2012 , Lang 2018 ), addiction ( Carr 2010 , Schull 2012 , Raikhel 2016 ), suicide ( Chua 2014 ), and the ethical dilemmas of providing care ( Brodwin 2013 ). Moving beyond clinics into diverse therapeutic spaces, this work shows the gendered stakes of social intervention ( Duncan 2016 ) and the way some psy therapeutics demonstrate and also diverge from Foucauldian visions of them ( Kitanaka 2012 , Nakamura 2013 , Raikhel 2016 , Matza 2018 ), showing, for example, technologies of care to operate as “prostheses of the will” rather than as “technologies of the self” ( Raikhel 2016 , p. 16).
Several scholarly traditions have informed the recent turn to madness as a critical idiom. European literary traditions, before and during the age of the asylum, allowed madness to at once speak to and be divorced from reason and, by the early twentieth century, to call “civilization” into question ( Foucault 1973 , Thiher 1999 ). Reading anthropology's founding texts alongside the literary works that informed them shows early ethnography to be inlaid with tropes casting madness as an idiom for dislocation ( Clifford 1988 ), with anthropological enterprise itself a psychic wound ( Lévi-Strauss 1974 ). A tool of juxtaposition, madness tacitly undergirded claims about “primitive reason” that founded structuralism ( Lévi-Strauss 1966 ) and, in showing the limits of normative orders, informed cultural relativism ( Benedict 1934 ).
However, beyond grand theorizing, less luminary traditions—notably those embedded in the history of the colonial asylum—show a slightly different genealogy, one that, at the juncture of colonial medicine and anthropology, reveals connections between rhetorical practice and the conditions in which it emerges. In contrast to Sigmund Freud's theorizing of civilization, Emil Kraepelin's use of cultural comparison, and Bronisław Malinowski and Claude Lévi-Strauss's engagements with psychoanalysis, the workaday archive of colonial psychiatry shows that medicine and anthropology together slouched toward trauma as a political condition, shaping each other's terms through clinical research, often for colonial ends. Yet this archive also shows that in the moments when the concept of culture seems most tenuously substituted for race, while medicine labored for empire ( Comaroff & Comaroff 1992 ) it allowed tentative openings for critique, a gradually emerging map that connected psychopathology to historical conditions, rather than to either culture or race.
Colonial psychiatry's diverse settings shared a comparative project investigating culture and psychopathology ( Lucas & Barrett 1995 ). Rather than being unified around a singular concept of race, it involved diverse moves, theorizing differences in the frequency, presentation, and chronicity of psychiatric disorders. Often, blatantly biological concepts of race served political goals. Among many who saw race in biologized psyches, J.C. Carothers's notorious assertions of the violent, “frenzied” nature of schizophrenia in Africans, and his likening of healthy Africans to lobotomized Europeans, served colonial anxieties in Kenya prior to the Mau Mau Uprising by inserting metaphors of madness into diagnostic terminologies that had long been divorced from such idioms ( Carothers 1948 ; 1951 , p. 17). “Aggression” recurred as characteristic of schizophrenia in racialized groups ( van Loon 1927 ) and was explained in psychological terms—hostility directed outward by Africans, inward by Westerners ( Benedict & Jacks 1954 , p. 388). At the same time, notably for non-Western psychiatrists, biology had the ability to expose the effects of the dire conditions wrought by colonialism through diagnostic concepts such as “acute confusional insanity,” a condition brought on by “starvation and physical exhaustion” ( Dhunjibhoy 1930 , p. 256; cf. Govindaswamy 1970 ).
Whereas imaginations of “the primitive” supposed a constant that allowed for debates over modernity's influence ( Winston 1934 , Devereux 1940 ), a blank slate for psychological research that might emphasize either shared humanity ( Martin 2013 ) or racial difference ( Anderson 2014 ), colonial conditions—policies, institutions, migration, and wars—allowed for comparison: of forms of psychosis among Filipinos in Hawaiian hospitals ( Berne 1949 ), latah across ethnicities in Singaporean hospitals ( Yap 1952 ), hysteria among Indian and British soldiers in Indian military hospitals ( Abse 1950 , Williams 1951 ), and Melanesian “cargo cults” as effects of encounter ( Williams 1923 ). In such a landscape, methodological obstacles raised the possibility that medical institutions themselves might influence the expression of illness ( Tooth 1950 , p. 381). The concept of culture-bound conditions emerged from comparative psychiatric research ( Yap 1951 ), co-occurring with the argument that a unique form of insanity ( latah ) was shared in diverse settings “remote from centres of modern medicine” ( Yap 1952 , p. 516). Dismissing the idea of a primitive personality type, P.M. Yap, Medical Officer at the Hong Kong Mental Hospital, drew on studies of traumatic neurosis to attribute latah to the fact that groups at a “low level of technological development” had not “developed techniques to master their environment” and were thus more susceptible to “fright reactions” ( Yap 1952 , p. 533).
Indeed, many colonial psychiatrists were less concerned with “culture” than with “acculturation.” At once pointing to the effects of social change and asking the racialized question of whether people might be equipped to deal with it, they showed that acculturation's stakes for social analysis, like those of science generally, were conflicting. Acculturation might produce psychosis ( Beaglehole 1939 ) or diminish it ( Yap 1952 ), suggest personality traits expressed in social conflict ( Seligman 1929 ), or inform colonial questions about native “‘educability’” (cf. Vaughan 2007 , p. 8). Indigenous doctors, trained in European institutions, suggested that dementia praecox was most common in “Indian communities most highly advanced in Western civilization and culture” ( Dhunjibhoy 1930 , p. 255).
Whereas individual studies produced lasting racist stereotypes advancing white supremacy ( Metzl 2009 , Pringle 2019 ), in review articles, meta-comparisons permitted (albeit inadvertently) other maps to show through cartographies of race, culture, and “primitivity.” In their 1954 survey, Paul Benedict and Irving Jacks asked whether “major ‘functional’ psychoses” occurred among “primitive” people, and if so, if they differed from their appearance in the West. Observing that hospitalization rates increased with “detribalization and acculturation,” they suggested “western influence” might be “specifically held accountable” for psychoses, calling, as well, for recognition of a wider range of presentation, especially “acute, apparently psychotic, states” ( Benedict & Jacks 1954 , pp. 383, 386). They noted that all psychosis is complex and varied, even in the West, and, citing Melvin Spiro (1950) , suggested that “Western civilization” and “its equivalences,” especially if imposed through “occupation,” could increase “ manifest paranoid behavior” ( Benedict & Jacks 1954 , p. 387, emphasis in original).
While such review articles illustrated “the strange career of ‘race’…dressed up as culture” ( Vaughan 2007 , p. 11), they allowed geographically diverse observations to be read side by side, bringing to light less cultural difference than connected institutions and socioeconomic processes—hospitals, armies, economies, commodities, and populations in movement. With the potential to reveal the historical stakes of acculturation, meta-comparisons stopped at the cusp of shifting from the proximity of race and culture to that of race and racialization. Trauma neurosis made occasional appearances in this literature, offering a glimmer of the idea that insanity might be an effect of violent conditions, not a matter of culture, race, or primitive status.
If for psychiatrists, acculturation slowly raised the possibility that “civilization” might be pathogenic, for anthropologists, it was a proposition for social theory. In their 1935 “Memorandum for the Study of Acculturation,” Robert Redfield, Ralph Linton, and Melville Herskovits proposed a broad plan for future research ( Redfield et al. 1935 ). Influenced by Durkheimian concerns with social cohesion and the psychological effects of its absence, these authors suggested the negative effects of acculturation in individuated terms as being among many possible areas of research. Social theory, tending toward normative processes, meant that psychopathology slipped out of view in subsequent anthropological research, with studies emphasizing the creative dynamism of historical encounter ( Herskovits 1937 ; Spiro 1955 cited in Guarnaccia & Hausmann-Stabile 2016 ). However, in work connected to clinical practice, acculturation kept psychopathology in view (cf. Schwartz & Unger 2017 ), eventually shaping theories of immigrant health deterioration (Burnam 1987 ), depression and suicide in Indigenous populations (cf. Waldram 2004 for discussion of this conversation), and theories of culture loss as social suffering ( Kirmayer 1994 ).
Psychiatry was informed by both Redfield, Linton, & Herskovits's proposal and the work they tacitly critiqued: the “culture and personality” school. In Ruth Benedict's (1934) influential essay “Anthropology and the Abnormal,” insanity, a subset of “abnormality,” showed “reason” to be relative and “normality…culturally defined” (p. 66). Where Edward Sapir (1949) saw in psychotic language a challenge to culture (p. 513), Benedict rendered madness a matter of cultural constructs. In a vision of social change predicated on the need for societies to examine their own taken-for-granted norms ( Benedict 1934 , p. 73), she compared “other cultures’” acceptance of the hysteric and madman (and the homosexual, presaging Foucault) to “our” treatment of “abnormals,” suggesting that “norms,” synonymous with culture, involve systematic evaluations imposed on diverse individuals ( Benedict 1934 , p. 60), and “the good” merely “that which society has approved” (p. 74). While historians saw in American anthropology the ability to show that “psychopathological labeling” allowed “civilization” to reject what it deemed incomprehensible ( Ackerknecht 1943 , p. 33), psychiatry saw its own research failures. Benedict & Jacks cited mission doctor Donald Mackay:
We in Africa have not got a Normal for our basis, because we have never taken the trouble to study African Normality.…We have so far judged our mental cases on their departure from European Normal, if we have judged them at all. Or else we have judged them on their departure from a Normal which we do not know. Therefore our only psychiatry has been among the obviously lunatic.…( Mackay 1948 cited in Benedict & Jacks 1954 , p. 389)
(Re-)enter madness, retrieved from an unenlightened vocabulary, used less to throw shadows on the civilizing mission writ large than to show the failings of one piece of it: psychiatric research.
Important differences can be identified between madness mobilized for social theory and psychopathology examined in specific terms. Both generate social critique; neither fully absolves itself of racialized concepts of primitivity. The former hinged on abstracted oppositions to reason that drew meaning from notions of primitivity even as they came to critique the violence that the concept of the primitive wrought. The latter charted thorny questions of change and human variation, only gradually revealing the limits of the concept of primitivity by showing the historical ways that people under its sign could be understood as connected through violence.
Arriving at the cusp of Frantz Fanon's (1968) rejection of colonial psychiatry, why turn to the latter, with its tangle of colonial goals, racializing essentialism, and hesitant critique? Anthropology's twenty-first-century use of madness as critique may justly claim as its lineage Fanon's rejection of all that, his sense that colonialism was “a fertile purveyor for psychiatric hospitals” ( Fanon 1968 , p. 249) and his view that colonialism violently “depersonalizes” not only individuals but collectivities (p. 293). But Fanon's break, while vital, is not the only position to have shaped contemporary conversations. Nor do we stand on its terra nullis . Anthropology's history of coming to trauma shares a lineage with psychiatry in places we might not think, or want, to look, that is, in conversations at the periphery of the established (European) science of trauma and in the heart of colonial practice. As its eventual use of madness came to land on trauma (indeed challenging the depoliticizing effect of psychiatric theories of trauma), one branch of anthropology's history (shared with psychiatry) involved conversations that inched toward, rather than leapt at, the idea that social conditions might be pathogenic. This observation is not meant to absolve those histories of their contributions to a violent world order, nor is it intended to praise contemporary anthropology for initiating a radical break from the past. Rather, it notes knotted effects, critique in unexpected places, and, as discussed below, the potential for seemingly radical contemporary languages to be threaded with the histories they may disavow.
One trajectory of anthropology's use of madness involves a shift in the value of madness's opposition to reason, a shift from anodyne definitions of madness as countercultural to the sense, informed by Foucault and Fanon, of madness as commentary on social and political conditions. But other lineages, less heroic routes by which psychopathology can be connected to power, illustrate potentially forgotten stakes. In certain moments, contemporary anthropology has hubristically claimed to bring power to concepts of culture. But it was already there, even in “misdiagnosis” (cf. Farmer 1999 , p. 7), increasingly apparent in maps of psychopathology that dwelled on more than the juxtaposition with reason, grappling instead with time, change, and the limits of what a person, or people, might endure, a history of partial, weird, shape-shifting critique that seldom travels far from spaces where power is performed.
One of anthropology's most iconic, and benighted, scenes, Jean Rouch's [2014 (1955) ] cinéma verité short film, Les Maitres Fous (The Mad Masters), shows that madness in anthropology is an invitation to recursivity. A visceral portrayal of a hauka possession rite in Ghana, Les Maitres Fous demonstrated the layered analytics that happen under the sign of madness: diverse and mutually informing modes of power, critique, and representation. Originating in Niger in the early twentieth century, hauka—spirits of colonial figures that, in the bodies of everyday people, engage in ludic, transgressive, and abject behavior—have been variously understood by anthropologists as mocking and defying colonial powers ( Taussig 1993 ), summoning the power of whiteness ( Stoller 1995 ), and mimetically claiming “membership” in colonial society ( Ferguson 2002 , p. 555). Controversial for reproducing exoticizing, racist tropes of Africans as irrational and violent, tropes generated, in part, by colonial psychiatry, Rouch's film performed the discomfiting mutuality of racist power, cultural representation, and racialized critique. As Les Maitres Fous became integral to how hauka would be known and how anthropology would know itself, it offered madness as a distorting mirror, with anthropology among its reflections. In an ethnography of hauka, Stoller (1989) cites Wittgenstein's Tractatus : “One thinks that one is tracing the outline of the thing's nature…, and one is merely tracing round the frame through which we look at it” (p. ix).
Felman (1985) asked of literature and philosophy, “What…are the cultural implications of the very act of raising madness as a question?” (p. 16). Anthropology suggests a different question: How are cultures, including academic ones, implicated in the stakes of raising madness as a question? In the anthropology of madness, the containing frame implicates itself. It signals the way critical metaphors may be part of the realities to which they are applied. But it also shows that those metaphors contain multiple histories of roving ideas. This is true of tropes that play on the opposition of madness to reason, and it is the case with figurations that have little to do with reason. While the experiences to which madness points are wildly variable, the trope of madness is strangely acute, connected via institutions and discourses across multiple, mutually informing genealogies, a geography of entangled analytics—psychiatry, anthropology, and colonial and postcolonial thought—and their purchase on human experience. It allows us to see not only anthropology's historical complicities, but the circular nature of our practice, how we less often bring ideas to the world than extricate them from scenes in which they already have life.
Certain languages for describing the circular and social nature of ideas apply: Hacking's “interactive kinds” [technical “classifications” that shape how the people to whom classifications are applied “experience themselves” ( Hacking 1999 , p. 104)]; Bateson's “feedback” and “metalogues,” which show the formal potential of conversation about conversation ( Bateson 1972 ); and Irvine & Gal's “fractal recursivity” [the way meaningful oppositions can be multiplied and projected at new levels ( Irvine & Gal 2000 , p. 37)]. Such concepts show the way “truth [can be] as short-lived as the forms of social life from which they emerge” ( Skultans 2008 , p. 104), just as “local” categories can be established via scholarly and interventionist pathways, stabilized as cultural reality ( Cohen 2005 , Palmié 2013 ). The time of ideas may be brief social time, but their fractal expansions can be longer, stranger, and more roving than we expect. Key metaphors are a mirror (to layer metaphors) not only onto the history of concepts, but onto their purchase in the worlds to which they are applied. For anthropologists, what would it mean to keep this aspect of our work in view, to treat our critical metaphors differently? Among our goals we might include documenting these traces, accounting for the divergent lives of what we imagine to be our concepts as we enter worlds already made over by them. In its best instances, the anthropology of madness does just such accounting. This is especially true of the fractally replicating conversation between anthropology and psychiatry, the way it shows the tenacity of colonial (and precolonial) structures, with all their unexpected alignments and stakes, as well as openings for reconfiguration.
But critical metaphors also have risks. They can show the world to be a multiverse of ideas, parallel universes born of shared languages, forms, and techniques, but they can also reject this quality. In less nuanced moments, biopolitics-focused critiques that use madness, or similar metaphors, take a totalizing view of psychiatry's place in the world, assuming an unbroken line of connection between older European models and contemporary global psychiatry, posing the latter as cultural imperialism ( Watters 2011 ) and neocolonial oppression, and projecting those who engage it as inevitably “psychiatrized” ( Mills 2014 , p. 11). While psychiatry's biopolitical effects are not to be underestimated, dogmatically deployed categories damper long and diverse histories that include moments of critique, dehistoricizing psychiatry's role in imagining cultural difference and erasing the contributions of non-Western psychiatrists. A tenet of critical medical anthropology holds that biomedicine occludes the social dimensions of illness. But rigorous work on global psy shows that psychodynamic, psychosocial, pharmaceutical, and neurobiological therapeutics can be deeply committed to treating persons understood to be social and to making sense of social aspects of distress; indeed, they show the concept of the “social” to be richly varied.
This is a matter not just of better understanding, but of the real, potentially sweeping, effects that our work can have on people. Changes in psychiatric practice have emerged from anthropological work, notably from comparative work highlighting the limitations of psychiatric models and introducing new categories and recommendations for practice. Interestingly, few collections of this sort are framed as concerned with madness. Those that are may highlight the dangers of using madness to gloss diverse experiences and frame models for clinical change. Such efforts, oriented toward cultural comparison, may not allow for madness's deictic histories to be legible in contemporary practices. In one example, while Luhrmann & Marrow's (2016) collection of schizophrenia cases ( Our Most Troubling Madness ) includes ethnographically compelling person-centered accounts, the Introduction's rhetorical use of madness (described within a European lineage) to affectively amplify schizophrenia's impact can be seen as undervaluing schizophrenia's diverse historical instantiations as “madness.” Such pasts can be legible in contemporary experience and reproduced in clinical recommendations invoking culture. For example, as I have argued elsewhere, colonial and postcolonial histories of marriage law informed psychiatric categories and gave gendered stakes to family mediations of medical knowledge in South Asia, impacting women's movement through, and involuntary confinement in, clinical settings. Our Most Troubling Madness contains sophisticated accounts of the gendered ways domestic and clinical processes converge in South Asia ( Marrow 2016 ). However, histories in which madness is a long-standing gendered construct whose conditions have included withholding clinical information from women patients are not easily accommodated by efforts to translate such accounts into general statements about the “positive outcomes” of nondisclosing diagnosis, a clinical recommendation likely to be influential. As Lovell writes, “[T]he cultural, macrosocial, and microsocial underpinnings of severe psychiatric conditions cannot so easily be separated from psychiatric knowledge” ( Lovell 2007 , p. 315). Nor can they be easily separated from historical conditions, to which the concept of madness might be either a point of entry or a means of forgetting. When the transformation of clinical practice is a goal, the stakes of our scholarship are high.
Uses of madness that tap the word's open-ended power without also tracing its varied local careers may rely on the visceral impact of its relationship to reason, imputing such binaries (and their implications) in places where madness has long meant a wealth of things and critiques are already multiple and well-established. Thus, scholarly commitments to medical terminologies and health care lingo should be seen as no more “colonized,” and advocacy languages no more decolonized, than open-seeming metaphors are inherently redemptive. Culturally oriented comparative work is no more or less aligned with biopower than is madness beholden to its colonial histories of power or critique. All require attention to the extrications by which terms are pulled out of universes and to the stakes of building new universes under their sign.
Emphasizing only certain histories, starkly posed critiques may reproduce cartographies of “‘race’…dressed up as culture” ( Vaughan 2007 , p. 11) or, at the very least, overlook the most fascinating parts of the story of madness in anthropology, namely, the recursive effects of intertwined histories of ideas: in a Lacanian psychiatric ward in Argentina ( Lakoff 2005 ); in Greek clinics, where democracy and liberal personhood are local history ( Davis 2012 ); in Morocco, where Islamic healing may be juxtaposed with “western” biomedicine yet informed by centuries of shared paradigms ( Pandolfo 2018 ); in Indonesian concepts of amok at once created through colonial practice, deemed cultural knowledge, and used as political critique ( Good & Subandi 2004 ); in West African hospitals, where transcultural psychiatry was first an agent of decolonization and then rejected as doctors’ decolonizing efforts embraced neurobiology ( Kilroy-Marac 2019 ); among Mexican clinicians who deploy seemingly progressive concepts of culture to the detriment of their patients ( Duncan 2016 ); in private clinics in India, where clinicians refer to social abandonment to justify holding women in involuntary commitment ( Pinto 2014 ); and in practices of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)—and psychiatry in general—in all the places where “shock therapy” is a political and economic idiom ( Han 2012 , Matza 2018 , Varma 2020 ).
As illustrated in Les Maitres Fous , the anthropology of madness is a mirror onto itself, or rather madness is a mirror held up to anthropology. It should inspire us to ask how our critical theories stabilize a past while claiming to describe the present, all the while informing the future. This article is a call to attend to this aspect of our work as we witness worlds gone awry, lest we imagine that there is an anthropology of madness, as opposed to a long dialogue between anthropology and the world in which madness is currency. The possibility of a decolonized anthropology may be at stake.

Section: Acknowledgements

The author is grateful for valuable suggestions and comments from Tatiana Chudakova, Maura Finkelstein, Ashawari Chaudhuri, and an anonymous reviewer and for insightful discussions of texts and themes raised in this article by the students in the course: Culture, Psychiatry, and the Politics of Madness.
