Section: Abstract

Archaeoprimatology explores how humans and nonhuman primates coexisted in the past. This discipline has profound roots in texts of early scholars. Archaeoprimatological research examines the liminality between humans, apes, monkeys, and prosimians deep in time before the rise of the Anthropocene. By exploring the beginning of the relationship between modern Homo sapiens and primates, which possibly dates to approximately 100,000 BCE, I survey the evidence, ranging from portable objects and 2D surfaces with primatomorphic depictions to primate remains at archaeological sites worldwide. For example, an overview of ancient frescoes and mosaics with primate representations reveals that the vast majority of them were rendered in locations where primates were not part of the local fauna. An extensive review of primates in the zooarchaeological record shows as a global pattern that traded primates were usually young individuals and frugivorous/omnivorous species. Local primates yielded at sites of regions they naturally inhabited were mostly hunted. Thus, examining past patterns of the human–nonhuman primate interface provides insight into major questions about human niche construction and primate conservation today.

Section: Introduction

Just a few years ago, the term archaeoprimatology was initially developed ( Urbani 2013 ). 1 Archaeoprimatology is an “integrative interdisciplinary area that links archeology and primatology,…encompass[ing] the study of the relationship between humans and nonhuman primates of the past that seeks to understand the interaction with, representation, social construction, evocation, use, circulation, and perception of nonhuman primates by ancient societies” ( Urbani 2013 , p. 66). Although archaeoprimatological research is deeply rooted in time, during the last decade significant advances have appeared in the scholarly literature ( Figure 1 ; see the reference annotations in the Literature Cited). These advances include the use of novel techniques for recovering remains of nonhuman primates (hereafter referred to as primates) ( Rivera-Pérez et al. 2015 ), the identification of a new primate species at an archaeological site ( Turvey et al. 2018 ), the solution of old inquiries on the origin of traded monkeys in the past ( Dominy et al. 2020 ), and broader comparative studies of primatomorphic motifs in a given region of the world ( Greenlaw 2011 ).
The use of the prefix archaeo , as in other biological fields (e.g., archaeoichthyology or archaeomalacology), serves to examine past interactions of humans and other living organisms and also to explore their disciplinary foundational bases ( Urbani 2013 ). Archaeoprimatology not only examines the past interface of human and primates but also explores the roots of primatological history. Urbani (2013) suggested that in order to pursue this goal, archaeoprimatological research must integrate material culture with primatomorphic depictions, such as 2D pictorial surfaces (e.g., rock art panels, mosaics, textiles, and frescoes) or portable objects (e.g., figurines and glyptic representations), and primate biological remains recovered at archaeological sites. Biological remains, for instance, might have multiple meanings and uses, including food sources and skeletal elements with symbolic values (e.g., Ingicco et al. 2020 , Urbani & Rodríguez 2021 , Urbani et al. 2022c and chapters therein).
Archaeoprimatology should not be confused with primate archaeology, which explores the record of material evidence made and deposited by primates such as chimpanzees and capuchins (i.e., Haslam et al. 2009 , 2017 ). Neither should it be confused with the use of behavioral and morphological attributes of primates to explain the depictions of humans or human body parts in past anthropomorphic figurines (e.g., Samson & Waller 2010 , Snijdelaar 2018 ). On the contrary, archaeoprimatology is the study of the interconnections of humans with monkeys, apes , and prosimians during the period of time that predates modernity ( Urbani 2013 ). This period of time coincides with the age before the emergence of the Anthropocene . By studying these interconnections, archaeoprimatological research provides a solid framework for the future conservation of current primate populations ( Urbani 2013 , Turvey et al. 2018 ) that are at serious risk of extinction ( Estrada et al. 2017 ).
In this review, I explore this multifaceted subdiscipline beginning with its origins and concluding with the present. Therefore, I ( a ) survey the literature on primatomorphic depictions and zooarchaeological remains of haplorhines and strepsirhines , ( b ) analyze recurrent topics that characterize archaeoprimatological studies, ( c ) examine patterns of universals and particularities of the archaeoprimatological evidence in the zooarchaeological record of different regions of the world, ( d ) present elements of current ethnoprimatological investigations that can be used to understand the past interface of all members of the order Primates , and ( e ) propose ideas about future lines of archaeoprimatological research.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion

The earliest archaeoprimatological references are found in Greek and Roman sources. The Greek historian Herodotus (484–425 BCE) wrote in the Μελπομένη ( Melpomene ) of his Ἱστορίαι ( Historiae ) that, “On them border the Gyzantians; in whose country a vast deal of honey is made by bees; very much more, however, by the skill of men. The people all paint themselves red, and eat monkeys, whereof there is inexhaustible store in the hills” ( Herodotus 1862 , book 4, section 195, lines 1–5). A few centuries later, the Greek geographer Diodorus Siculus (ca. 90–30 BCE) informed on what was observed during the campaigns of Agathocles of Syracuse in Carthage. There, “apes [cf. Barbary macaques, sensu Veracini 2020 ] lived in the same houses as the men, being regarded among them as gods, just as the dogs are among the Egyptians, and from the provisions laid up in the storerooms the beasts took their food without hindrance whenever they wished. Parents usually gave their children names taken from the apes, just as we do from the gods” ( Siculus 1954 , book 20, section 58, lines 14–19). Crossing the millennium, the Roman rhetorician Claudius Aelianus (ca. AD 175–235) indicated in his opus magnum De Natura Animalium that “[u]nder the Ptolemies the Egyptians taught baboons their letters, how to dance, how to play the flute and the harp. And a baboon would demand money for these accomplishments, and would put what was given him into a bag which he carried attached to his person, just like professional beggars” ( Aelian 1958 , book 6, section 10, lines 1–6). These references highlight the ways monkeys were perceived by past societies of northern Africa. They also stand among the first written documents that disseminate information on the use of primates and the cultural views about them.
“Luna Cynocephalo visum exhilaratģ, adimitģ, sunt & conjugibus mutua fata bonis” (the moon delightfully seen by the dog-headed, they are a couple for the mutual good fate) appeared in 1595 in a book written by the German erudite Joachim Camerarius (1595 , p. 84) (1500–1574). A xylography of a baboon worshipping the moon accompanied the text ( Figure 1 a ). This was a primary image that presented an original example of the translatability of an adored baboon from ancient Egypt to Renaissance Europe through the lens of European scholars.
During the reign of King William III of England, the physician Edward Tyson (1651–1708) wrote his classic book on chimpanzee anatomy. Tyson explored ancient records of primates to place this ape in nature. In doing so, he wrote three concluding chapters, “A Philological Essay Concerning the Cynocephali of the Ancients,” “Of the Satyrs of the Ancients,” and “Of the Sphinges of the Ancients,” in which past polymaths are amply cited. The first chapter referred to the cultural origins of baboons in early written sources. In the second chapter Tyson (1699 , pp. 45–46; italics in the original) wrote, “I do not doubt but make it plainly appear, that there were such Animals in Africa which the ancients called Satyrs . And tho’ they sometimes called them Men , and for the most part worshipped them as Gods , yet I shall shew, that they were only a sort of Monkeys , and likewise Evince, that the Orang-Outang was not this sort of Monkey or Satyr of the Ancients.” In the last chapter, Tyson (1699) suggested that sphinges are likely earlier representations of apes and monkeys (see also Jolly & Ucko 1969 ). These overlooked chapters of Tysonian thoughts are a starting benchmark for what later would become the field of archaeoprimatology, as they explore how primates might have been socially constructed by past peoples.
Two centuries later, the German ethnologist Konrad T. Preuss (1869–1938) made a further step toward archaeoprimatology as he combined information on the mythological record of Mesoamerican people and platyrrhines embedded in codices and explored the material culture of Mayan and Aztec/Mexica societies ( Preuss 1901 ) (e.g., Figure 1 b ). Before WWII, the classical scholar William C. McDermott (1907–1982) published the first study that was fully devoted to the depiction of primates in the past ( Figure 1 c ) after completing his doctoral dissertation on this topic ( McDermott 1934 ). He focused on primatomorphic representations in the Mediterranean region, the Levant, and Egypt. McDermott (1938) explored how primates were obtained as pets and perceived as cultural subjects, particularly as omens and as animals imitating people. However, the primatologist Adolph Schultz (1939) and physical anthropologist Montague F. Ashley-Montagu (1940) suggested that McDermott perpetuated the identification of apes in the literature when referring to ancient primates in general.
A decade passed, and a work that served as a major reference in archaeoprimatology went out of press: Apes and Ape Lore in the Middle Ages and Renaissance ( Janson 1952 ). In that volume, the German-American art historian Horst W. Janson (1913–1982), father of primatologist Charles H. Janson, produced a Pithecopaedia . This impressive study was the intersection of written sources and the materiality of primates in Europe and contiguous regions. H.W. Janson acknowledged that his work was an evocation about what was known about primates before the writings of the British naturalist Charles Darwin (1809–1882). In a similar tone, the primatologist Baron Solomon (Solly) Zuckerman (1904–1993) produced a study that encompassed historical and archaeological references about primates. In this posthumous numbered and limited book edition directed by his wife, Zuckerman (1998) presented a personal catalogue raisonné—in his own words—of primates in Egypt, India, Italy, and Greece (e.g., Figure 1 d ).
From the Louvre, the French Egyptologist Jeanne Marie Thérèse Vandier d'Abbadie (1899–1977) published a trio of articles that explored the patterns and variabilities of depictions of catarrhines in ancient Egypt (∼3100–∼1100 BCE). For example, she highlighted that in the region squatting baboon figurines were first made by a circum-Mediterranean civilization ( Figure 1 e ). The baboons were depicted in multiple roles, such as pets on Egyptian ships and carved papionin statuettes of Thoth, the Egyptian god of the moon ( Vandier d'Abbadie 1964 , 1965 , 1966 ). These papers were published by the mid-1960s, coincidentally before the entrance of the Baboon Catacomb at Saqqara was found in 1968 ( Goudsmit & Brandon-Jones 1999 ; C.P. Groves, unpublished manuscript). Almost at the same time, the Dutch orientalist Robert H. van Gulik (1967) produced a lesser known but relevant work on the early evocations about gibbons (see also Geissmann 2008 ). Van Gulik (1967) presented not only a synopsis of the material culture rendering gibbons but also an account of how these apes were perceived in China since 1500 BCE (this book included a particular supplement: a 45-rpm, 7-inch vinyl record!).
When observed in perspective, these pioneering scholars explored the past relationships between humans and primates in Europe or how ancient primates from elsewhere were observed through a European lens (e.g., Morris & Morris 1966 ). Over time, the whole circum-Mediterranean region, especially Egypt, became a focus of interest that was extensively examined archaeoprimatologically. Archaeological research boomed in the 1970s and 1980s ( Trigger 1989 ), and during that same time, primatology also followed a similarly expansive path ( Sussman 2017 , Urbani 2017 ). Then, research and publications that intertwined archaeology and primatology started to cross both disciplines more widely ( Figure 1 f ).
Two decades ago, Sponsel (1997 , p. 152) indicated that in “the Old World, human predation on nonhuman primates has an enormous antiquity extending back to the australopithecines in Africa and the pithecanthropines in Asia.” In presenting this contention, Sponsel (1997) referred to the research of Shipman and collaborators. Shipman et al. (1981) reported that hominins butchered giant geladas approximately 400,000–700,000 years ago at the Kenyan Acheulean site of Olorgesailie. Most of the remains were facial and postcranial limb parts of young individuals of Theropithecus oswaldi. Shipman et al. (1981 , p. 264) suggested that possibly it was a practice made by “few bands… [or represented] evidence of a seasonal or ceremonial event.” This case study stands out as an early example of the confirmed interface between hominins and primates. Also in Kenya, at the Early Stone Age site of FxJj43 in the Koobi Fora sedimentary outcrop, Stern (2005 , p. 41) reported evidence of the formation of Pleistocene archaeological localities with associated material culture and zooarchaeological remains that may serve “to [understand] any attempt to reconstruct the behavior of early African Homo erectus (or indeed, any other debris-generating human ancestor).” In this 1.5 Mya deposit, primate, carnivore, and catfish bones have been recovered from the underlying tuffaceous sandy mudstone, which likewise contained stone artifacts ( Stern 2014 ).
On the same continent, the possibly earliest recorded evidence of Homo sapiens interacting with primates occurred at two coastal and speleological sites near Cape Town, South Africa. Steele & Klein (2013) and Badenhorst et al. (2016) reported that Middle Stone Age people at those sites probably hunted chacma baboons between 109,000 and 100,000 BCE. However, the presence of primate elements is so low at these sites that the baboons were conceivably consumed by predators such as leopards and not by humans ( Badenhorst 2022 ). Moving into western Europe, Rosendahl et al. (2011) recorded that Neanderthals and macaques co-occurred at the Würmian site of Hunas (Germany). Furthermore, using a modeling approach, Elton & O'Regan (2014) concluded that human predation on macaques was one of the factors influencing the extinction of these primates on the European continent during the Late Pleistocene. Thus far, data suggest that the coexistence between hominins and primates is long, but the interactions with modern Homo sapiens became better documented.
In this section, investigations into when, where, and how humans and primates interacted during the Pleistocene-Holocene reveal patterns of interconnections in regions where primates occurred and where they were not naturally present. Primates were socially and culturally constructed differently by humans in various places, while imageries of primates were exchanged across long distances. Thus, there is both ample evidence of primate depictions in ancient material culture and biological evidence of primates in the global zooarchaeological record.
Of the 30 entries listed in Supplemental Table 1 , 25 (83%) world locations contain primatomorphic mosaics and frescoes presenting depictions of allochthonous primates. The remaining 17% are monkeys rendered at Indian sites close to areas with primate populations. As observed in Supplemental Table 1 , allochthonous primates such as baboons, macaques, and vervets are particularly represented in the circum-Mediterranean region (see the next section for a possible ecophysiological explanation). Except for the Byzantine and Roman sites with mosaics (23%), the rest of the primatomorphic depictions were rendered with the fresco technique ( Supplemental Table 1 ). Although in Teotihuacan primates are depicted in a mural and on a floor in neighborhoods associated with Mayan residents ( Urbani et al. 2022b ), in the remaining locations with frescoes (96%, 22/23), the depictions occurred on walls and were observable at eye level and therefore were likely intentionally painted to be readily noticed by the viewers. Among these depictions, baboons painted in Egyptian tombs are particularly common (e.g., Supplemental Figure 1 a ). These monkeys had symbolic value as divine subjects, which in Egyptian burial chambers represented protection and regeneration ( Pio 2018 ). Baboons were also motifs on rock art panels in Algeria and Libya ( Masseti & Bruner 2009 , q.v. Brentjes 1965 ), and Hanuman langurs were reproduced in frescoes and rock paintings on the Indian subcontinent ( Supplemental Table 1 ) (sc. Keul 2002 ). Outside Egypt, in the circum-Mediterranean region, most of these 2D primate depictions are present in Roman Europe ( Supplemental Table 1 ). Further north, apes were represented in a Buddhist monastery of the Mongolian steppe ( Supplemental Figure 1 b ). In northern China, possibly the first known fresco of a golden snub-nosed monkey close to a person clearly shows an intimate interaction by the earliest half of the first millennium AD ( Chang et al. 1989 ; see also Zhao et al. 2018 ) ( Supplemental Figure 1 c ).
The world's largest representation of a primate, a spider monkey with a long and curled tail, is a Nazca geoglyph in Peru (e.g., Reiche 1968 , Cormier & Urbani 2008 ) ( Supplemental Figure 1 d ). In the Mediterranean world, during the half-millennium BCE and early CE, Etruscans and Romans on the Italian peninsula depicted baboons and tied-up macaques ( Supplemental Table 1 ). Romans also rendered the Moroccan mosaics of Volubilis that included a vervet ( Supplemental Figure 1 e ), and three centuries later in Constantinople the Byzantines made a mosaic of a macaque. East of the Bosphorus, in the Levant, during the caliphate of Al-Walid ibn Abd al-Málik (ca. AD 674–715) in present-day Jordan, an allochthonous hamadryas baboon was painted in the context of local and exotic fauna ( Masseti 2015 ; for an overview about primates in the Islamic tradition, see Kruk 1995 , Cook 1999 ). An unusual example of the appearance of the primate motif is a crouched monkey on a medieval stove-tile recovered in the Baltic city of Tallinn ( Gaimster & Russow 2011 ). These dissimilar cases support the fact that circulated primate imageries around the globe were highly valued as visual and cultural commodities in the past.
The major production of portable objects depicting primates is concentrated in two regions. Both are in desert habitats and far from natural populations of primates. The representation of primates is widespread in northern coastal Peru in the Moche society (AD 100–800) (e.g., Bussmann & Sharon 2009 ). Even in lesser-known Peruvian ceramic traditions, such as the Casma culture (AD 900–1450), the primatomorphic motif is recurrent, providing insight into the primate trade or exchange of their imagery ( Gamboa 2020 ). Additionally, the material culture of the oldest civilization of the Americas, the Caral-Supe of central Peru, shows monkey-like silhouettes carved in flutes made of Peruvian pelican bones in an urban complex dated 2500 BCE ( Shady-Solís et al. 2000 ). In Egypt ( Supplemental Figure 2 b ), portable objects depicting baboons made by craft makers are abundant and are part of the major set of primate depictions elaborated in the past by a single society across centuries (B. Urbani, unpublished data) ( Figure 1 e ). Baboons serve as intersectional subjects or mediators for humans. They were worshiped and served as devotional scribes ( Allon 2013 ) or as aides for picking fruit ( Deputte & Anderson 2009 ). Egyptian figurines reached distant regions such as the Levant and the island of Ibiza, located in the western Mediterranean Sea ( Dothan & Regev 2011 ).
Akrotiri is an archaeological site located on the Greek island of Santorini. There, and in Knossos (Crete), Minoans painted frescoes of blue baboons ( Supplemental Figure 1 f ). However, in one large room of an Akrotirian building, other primates were also rendered. Different morphological and behavioral attributes, as well as cultural features, led two research teams to suggest, almost at the same time, that these same monkeys are either (Indian) langurs ( Pareja et al. 2020a , b ) or (African) vervets ( Urbani & Youlatos 2020a,b ). This case stands out as an example of the promising lines of archaeoprimatological research to understand the past interconnections between humans and primates. Minoan monkeys are the first-ever depictions of primates by a European civilization. Although well known for over a century, Minoan monkeys still provide inspiration for novel analyses. Further readings on this academic debate include Pareja et al. (2020a , b ), Urbani & Youlatos (2020a , b , 2022 ), and Binnberg et al. (2021) . The content of these articles reached a large audience. Media attention includes news releases by Archaeology-AIA , CNN , Daily Mail , Fox , Heritage Daily , IFLScience , New Scientist , Smithsonian Magazine , and The Times , among others. This coverage highlights how archaeoprimatological research receives special interest by the general public.
The Mycenaeans, a Bronze Age civilization of present-day Greece, received baboon figurines from Egypt made during the Eighteenth Dynasty ( Cline 1991 ) (in the Aegean region: see the sidebar titled The Other Akrotirian Monkeys: Langurs or Vervets?). Also during the Bronze Age, baboons and a macaque from Susa (Iran) are among the oldest 3D representations of monkeys produced by a Near Eastern civilization ( Urbani & Youlatos 2021 ). In this case, the ancient city of Susa is located in the middle of the natural range of both primate genera ( Urbani & Youlatos 2021 ; see also Dunham 1985 ). Yet as a remarkable archaeoprimatological particularity, primatomorphic depictions of apes or ape remains at archaeological sites are virtually lacking ( Supplemental Tables 1 and 2 ; but see Harrison 1998 , Piper & Rabett 2009 , Minist. Inf. Commun. Cult. 2015 , Frère et al. 2018 , Turvey et al. 2018 , Urbani & Youlatos 2020c ).
Archaeological sites with primate remains are found in many regions of the world ( Supplemental Table 2 ). Some of these areas can be grouped into 10 global hotspots, or regional concentrations of confirmed physical interactions between humans and primates, based on the recurrence of bioarchaeological remains of primates (see Supplemental Figure 2 ). These hotspots are the Mayan region (hotspot 1), southern Caribbean region (hotspot 2), Paraná wetlands of Brazil (hotspot 3), England (hotspot 4), Egypt (hotspot 5), South Africa (hotspot 6), Madagascar (hotspot 7), Sri Lanka (hotspot 8), Southeast Asia (hotspot 9), and Japan (hotspot 10) (see the criteria for establishing the hotspots at the bottom of Supplemental Table 2 ). Apart from the Maya civilization, with primates yielded at inland sites, all hotspots are located in insular and coastal areas (hotspots 2, 4, and 6–10) or in wetlands/riverine regions (hotspots 3 and 5). Of these non-Mayan hotspots, aside from the Roman/Medieval England continuum and its macaques and the monkeys of Egypt, primates were naturally living near the archaeological sites where they were found. At these hotspots, the evidence of primates as hunted prey varies from very few remains [<1% of the number of identified specimens at South African sites: Badenhorst 2022 (if baboons were not preyed upon by carnivores)] to being top targeted prey of whole faunal assemblages at Southeast Asian locations (e.g., Niah Caves, Malaysia: Medway 1958 , Harrison 1996 , Piper & Rabett 2009 ). Except for the speleological sites of Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, there is a lack of records from the equatorial regions of the world; that is, primate remains have not been recovered in lowland regions along the equator, as they were likely processed in forested areas or at hard-to-find long-abandoned sites. Additionally, bones can be highly degraded in tropical soils (for an ample discussion on the taphonomy at archaeological sites of tropical regions, see Stahl 1995 ).
The concentration of some hotspots at coastal or island sites may be due in part to resource richness. Nowak & Coles (2019 , pp. 52–53) reported that primates living near the coast forage in regions with “nutrient-rich food resources [that] may represent areas of safety with continuous food supply.” In addition, cultural particularities might have influenced the uses of primates in these areas. For example, in the southern Caribbean region, peoples of Arawakan and Cariban linguistic stock living at coastal, near-coastal, and island sites seemed to have originated from Orinocan societies with close relationships to primates ( Urbani & Rodríguez 2021 ). Similarly, in the Paraná wetlands of Brazil, past indigenous societies of Amazonian origin were closely related to a highly biodiverse environment ( Acosta et al. 2019 ) where primates were predominant arboreal mammals. At the African hotspots, the sites of South Africa are located near the coast, and earlier human populations consumed a range of animals, including primates, as food ( Badenhorst 2022 ). In Madagascar, giant sloth lemurs might have been relatively easy targets for island hunters ( Pérez et al. 2003 , 2005 ). In Egypt, primates were transported from the interior of Africa to coastal and delta ports along the Nile River and the Mediterranean and Red Seas. The Egyptians established a long human–primate interface during the pre-Dynastic, Dynastic, and Ptolemaic periods (Vandier d'Abbadie 1964 , 1965 , 1966 ; Goudsmit & Brandon-Jones 1999 , 2000 ; Dominy et al. 2020 ).
In Asia, not only were primates preferred prey in Sri Lanka (hotspot 8) but their postcranial elements were highly valued for making hunting tools ( Langley et al. 2020 ) (see the sidebar titled Ancient Sri Lanka and the Hunted Primates). As at the previous hotspot, in Southeast Asia (hotspot 9), cave occupants might have had high encounter rates with forest monkeys, as observed today in the region where the Sarawakian caves of Niah are located ( Piper & Rabett 2009 ) (see the sidebar titled The World's Largest Hotspot: Prehistoric Primates in Southeast Asian Caves). At this hotspot, Harrison and colleagues ( Harrison 2000 , Harrison et al. 2006 ) also suggested that, at Niah Caves, orangutan bones are particularly common in the zooarchaeological record. These remains eventually reflect past hunters who specialized in hunting this ape. This pattern “may account, at least in part, for the absence of orang-utans in the local environs of Niah today” ( Harrison et al. 2006 , p. 347). Following this contention, the authors additionally formulated that past hunting of orangutans was one of the factors that likely led to the extinction of this primate in Java, meridional China, and mainland Southeast Asia. By contrast, Ingicco et al. (2020) suggested that the relatively high abundance of leaf monkeys in Javanese cave deposits seems to suggest that primate populations coped with local hunting activities without severe declines. Excavations conducted at a cave campsite used by Orang Asli hunter-gatherers of the Thai rainforest suggested that monkeys and lar gibbons were not only preferred targets but also arboreal mammals that sustainably overcame traditional hunting practices for over a century ( Hongo & Auetrakulvit 2011 ). This ethnozooarchaeological study appeared to support the findings of Ingicco et al. (2020) . Japan (hotspot 10) presents 181 prehistoric, mostly shell middens with macaque remains ( Nishioka et al. 2022 ). This association pattern might be explained by the current communities of macaques, which are relatively common at coastal sites of Japan ( Tsuji & Kazahari 2019 ); so, they might have been commonly encountered by peoples of the Jomon period (∼14,000–4000 BCE). There, female Japanese macaques in the zooarchaeological record were larger in terms of body size than modern females, a reduction that occurred since the last glacial period ( Anezaki et al. 2006 ).
Wedage et al. (2020) reported that during the early Holocene of Sri Lanka monkeys were present as preferred animals at the archaeological sites of the Kitulgala Beli-Lena Caves. Wedage et al. (2019) also reported the prevalence of adult primates as primary targets in the faunal assemblage of the Fa-Hien Lena Cave. At the latter site, Langley et al. (2020) reported the use of cercopithecid canines as awls, points, and knives and a postcranial bone as a peg. Additionally, Wedage et al. (2020) calculated that one-third of the cercopithecid specimens exhibited evidence of burning. At both sites, carcasses were taphonomically found in a way that indicated they were brought into and entirely processed in the caves. These sites yielded the oldest evidence that primates were hunted in Asia (between ∼48,000–45,000 and 12,260–4000 BCE). Nahallage et al. (2010) and Huffman et al. (2022) examined the remains of Semnopithecus priam , S. vetulus , and Macaca sinica at the site of Sigiriya Potana. The authors found evidence of burning in some primate bones. Roberts et al. (2015) suggested that the three Sri Lankan primate species overlap the distribution of microlithic tradition sites. Therefore, they proposed that specialized lithic elements might have been produced to obtain arboreal vertebrates such as primates.
At the remaining hotspots, the Mayans had close relationships with primates as devotional mediators (see the section titled Archaeoprimatology Meets the Present). In England, Barbary macaques were likely kept as a military signum or as pets among legionaries posted at the northern border of the Roman Empire. The latter practice continued during the immediate Medieval period of England.
Primate remains are ubiquitous in cave deposits, mostly on islands and in coastal areas, of Southeast Asia. These sites encompass the largest archaeoprimatological hotspot, between Vietnam and Java, dated during the Pleistocene-Holocene (∼12,000–∼4000 BCE). The range of primate prey includes orangutans, gibbons, macaques, leaf monkeys, and lorises ( Supplemental Table 2 ). Different particularities of the human–primate interface appeared at this hotspot. At Braholo Cave, as well as Niah and Song Terus Caves, the primate remains lack feet and hands, implying that they were transported to the sites without these body parts ( Amano et al. 2016 ). Referring to Sarawakian Punan Vuhang ethnography, Amano et al. indicated that the removal of those body parts might have facilitated transportation. Alternatively, at the Hang Boi site in Vietnam, intact primates were processed ( Rabett et al. 2011 ). At Niah Caves in Sarawak, Malaysia ( Supplemental Figure 2 c ), adult primate individuals represented over one-quarter of all vertebrates collected ( Piper & Rabett 2009 ). Ingicco and colleagues ( Ingicco 2012 , Ingicco et al. 2020 ) reported not only that primates in Indonesia were hunted but also that East Javan langur facial parts used for funerary rituals were interred with humans. These findings suggest that this region has yielded and will continue to yield further exciting archaeoprimatological discoveries (e.g., Harrisson 1958 , Ingicco et al. 2020 ).
When allochthonous primates (20 taxa) are discriminated on the basis of their diets, 40% are frugivores, 45% omnivores, and only 15% folivores ( Supplemental Table 2 ). When the sample is revised by the number of archaeological sites with allochthonous primates, 58% (28/48) of entries yield frugivorous primates, 29% show omnivorous primates, three sites (6%) have both omnivorous and frugivorous monkeys (Saqqara, Tuna el-Gebel, and Dendera), and the remaining 6% have folivorous monkeys. The previous data support the contention that past peoples knew of these dietary patterns and transported frugivorous/omnivorous primates that would be able to cope with nutritional and physiological constraints, constraints that would unlikely be overcome by folivorous primates. Fuentes (2012) offered an ethnoprimatological explanation that might be applied in this case. Monkeys such as macaques and baboons were more likely to live with humans because their simpler digestive system and so-called generalist foraging behavior allowed them to manage anthropic foods or human food remains ( Fuentes 2012 ). Two unusual examples illustrate the previous statement and the fact that macaques survived long travels and successfully coped with dietary constraints. The first example is a Barbary macaque from northern Africa found at the pre-Tartar site of Ryurik Gorodishche in northern Russia ( Brisbane et al. 2007 ); the second example is a rhesus macaque from central Asia or the Indus River Valley buried at the Iranian Bronze Age site of Shahr‐i Sokhta ( Minniti & Sajjadi 2019 ).
In the case of folivorous primates, there are remains in Laang Spean Cave in northwestern Cambodia, where “the identification of douc[s] ( Pygathrix sp.) from the Cercopithecidae family is very interesting as we have not found any evidence of this species outside of Laos or Vietnam” ( Frère et al. 2018 , p. 103). Currently, there are no doucs in that part of Cambodia, although the red-shanked douc and the black-shanked douc are found in northeastern Cambodia ( Mittermeier et al. 2012 ; see the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species in the Related Resources). In the past, possibly one or both douc species were present around the Laang Spean Cave, so they might not have been allochthonous primates at the time when these remains were deposited. In the remaining cases, howlers were traded from tropical lands. Muñoz-Ovalle (1983) described a pre-Incaic case of long-distance trading in which a young Amazonian howler monkey was found at a burial site of a child of possibly high status in the Chilean desert. The other case is a howler monkey from northern South America that was found on an island of the Venezuelan Caribbean dated a few years before the arrival of Europeans in the Americas ( Urbani et al. 2022a ) ( Supplemental Figure 2 a ). Even though howlers are listed as primarily folivorous, they can also rely on fruits ( Dias & Rangel-Negrín 2015 ). With the exception of the commented case reported by Frère et al. (2018) , highly folivorous monkeys, such as langurs and doucs, are lacking in the global zooarchaeological record as allochthonous primates.
Of 48 entries of locations with allochthonous primates ( Supplemental Table 2 ), only 24 provided information on the ages of the primates. From this subsample, 79% (19/24) of sites have young individuals (infant, juveniles, and subadults), and the remaining sites have adults (13%) or both adults and young animals (Saqqara and Tuna el-Gebel: 8%). When the reported role of the allochthonous primates was determined, it appears that primates were kept as pets (56%, or 27/48, of sites), served in ritual contexts (10%), and functioned as both pets and sacred animals (23%). Primates were consumed as food at the remaining sites (10%). This evidence indicates that to ensure the survival of allochthonous monkeys, or to have primates that will serve longer as animal companions, they were selected, transported, and kept as young animals. This information confirms that primates were valuable commodities and were traded from distant lands for leisure and symbolic functions.
When examining the global uses of primates in areas they naturally inhabited in the past ( Supplemental Table 2 ), 84% (46/55) of the entries refer to primates as sources of food. For only five entries (9%) primates had ritualistic value, and even fewer entries (4%) indicated primates as pets and sacred animals. Finally, 2% of entries listed primates as pets and sources of food, and another 2% of entries referred to primates as sacred animals and sources of food. Looking closely at the pattern of hunting primates, of 46 entries, only 11 (24%) included data on the age class of the primate prey. Sixty-four percent (7/11) of this subsample refers to adult individuals; the remaining are younger (juveniles/subadults). Thus, in principle, older and likely larger individuals were preferred as prey.
The patterns of the presence of primates in the zooarchaeological record deserve to be examined in detail. For instance, hunted primates were not only left in archaeological contexts in which food remains clearly prevailed but also deposited with evidence of processing. In Madagascar, there are remains of three extinct sloth lemur genera with cut marks ( Pérez et al. 2003 , 2005 ; Douglass et al. 2019 ; Godfrey et al. 2019 ). In the Neotropics, sites in Mexico show spider monkey remains with evidence of cut marks (Itzamkanac in the state of Campeche and Yaxuná in the state of Yucatán) ( Valadez 2014 ). In the Brazilian caatinga, there is evidence of not only butchering but also fire remnants made by hunter-gatherers ( Silva 2013 ). In some cases, primate skeletal remains were modified. In the Peruvian desert, around the second millennium BCE, a carved femur of a spider monkey was buried with a young human individual ( Reitz 2003 ). In Borneo, at Niah Caves, monkey bones were used as raw material for carving instruments ( Rabett & Piper 2012 ). At some sites, primate as prey is relatively low compared with other terrestrial vertebrate prey such as ungulates (e.g., Li et al. 2020 ). Plens (2010) indicated that in a midden in Brazil's Atlantic Forest dominated by amphibian remains, bones of howler monkeys stand as the second-most represented mammal after armadillos. Acosta et al. (2019) also reported the presence of primates as part of the zooarchaeological record of past Guarani horticulturists from the Atlantic Forest of Brazil. These authors found that no particular animal taxa were more common than others at these sites. In Mesoamerica, at Aguateca Grieta Chasm (Guatemala), Anderson (2009) found that contrary to other Mayan cave sites, peccaries were hunted more than other mammals such as deer and monkeys.
In Egypt, Goudsmit & Brandon-Jones (1999) found that vervets, olive baboons , and Barbary macaques are represented in the Baboon Catacomb of the Sacred Animal Necropolis of Saqqara. Here, of 169 buried primates, 86% were baboons, mostly males (2:1 sex ratio) ( Goudsmit & Brandon-Jones 1999 ). Goudsmit & Brandon-Jones (2000) found that most baboons were buried in the Upper Gallery of the catacomb, while Barbary macaques dominated in the Lower Gallery. According to the authors, this pattern might have reflected a shift in the trading pattern from Sudan at the beginning of the practice of burying baboons (∼400–200 BCE) to the western Mediterranean region, from where Phoenicians likely imported macaques through Alexandria (∼200–30 BCE) until the end of the Third Punic War and the destruction of Carthage (146 BCE). Records of wall scripts registered names for Saqqara's monkeys and information on the breeding of primates in Memphis ( Ray 2011 ). At the Egyptian site of Tuna el-Gebel, baboons were recovered below the temple of the god Thoth. At this site, Nerlich et al. (1993) reported that these monkeys showed evidence of malnutrition, fractures, and osteomyelitis, as well as vertebral/joint and skull deformities, likely due to physical mistreatment. The baboons placed in the subterranean passageways of Tuna el-Gebel ( Kessler & Nur el-Din 2005 ) and in the catacomb of Saqqara ( Goudsmit & Brandon-Jones 1999 , 2000 ) represent the world's largest burials of primates. In the Egyptian urban complex of Hierakonpolis, using dental microwear analysis, Merceron (2003) determined that Anubis baboons show evidence of mistreatment and tended to feed on abrasive and harder foods than wild baboons did. Fridman (2002) suggested that dissection of baboons by Egyptian priests might be observed as a pre-Galen origin of medical primatology.
The historical archaeological record also identifies primates in different regions of the world. For example, in the Neotropics, Jiménez (2011) recorded the case of a capuchin monkey found at a colonial site of La Habana (Cuba), outside of its current range. In Europe, van Wijngaarden-Bakker (1980) reported a cercopithecid in the Dutch city of Leiden in the fifteenth century. Two African medieval sites yielded primates as part of their zooarchaeological record, one in Senegal (West Africa) ( Dueppen & Gokee 2014 ) and another in Tanzania (East Africa) ( Prendergast et al. 2017 ). These findings demonstrate that primates were present at trading posts of trans-Sahelian routes and Zanzibarian maritime paths.
Different techniques have been used for examining primate remains in the zooarchaeological record. For example, Ottoni et al. (2019) studied the oral microbiome of mummified hamadryas baboons at Gabbanat el-Qurud (Egypt) by analyzing dental calculus. The authors determined that the baboons’ diet was not only omnivorous but also poor, likely due to their captive condition. Similarly, Armitage (1983) presented the first report of the presence of capuchin monkeys in the zooarchaeological record of seventeenth-century London. X-ray analysis showed osteoporosis, which seems to indicate precarious captive conditions. Osypińska & Osypiński (2017) reported the existence of juvenile baboons and vervets in a Roman pet cemetery dated from the first to the second century AD in the Egyptian port of Berenike on the Red Sea. Later, 3D scanning reidentified these remains as rhesus and bonnet macaques. This is the first evidence of Asian primates traded into Africa ( Osypinska et al. 2021 ).
In a pioneering study of DNA analysis for the archaeoprimatological record, Bailey et al. (1999) determined the existence of a Barbary macaque in Pompeii (Italy). More recently, Rivera-Pérez et al. (2015) , using metagenomic ancient DNA analysis, found evidence of marmoset retrovirus in human coprolites from pre-Hispanic localities on the island of Vieques (Puerto Rico). There are no marmoset species that naturally range in or near the circum-Caribbean region, so this simian foamy virus might likely be present in cebids or atelids from northern South America or Mesoamerica transported to and ingested at these sites ( Urbani et al. 2022a ). Dominy et al. (2015 , 2020) used strontium stable isotope analysis in baboon mummies from Egyptian tombs. With this technique, the authors determined that during the second millennium BCE, Egyptians imported this primate group from Punt (Eritrea, Djibouti, and Ethiopia) along the Red Sea. These examples highlight the relevance of applying diverse novel and analytical procedures for understanding the coexistence of humans and primates in the past.
As suggested by Urbani (2013) , even though the archaeoprimatological record is chronologically longer than the ethnoprimatological record, information from that longer period of time is still, paradoxically, limited. Archaeoprimatological studies can benefit by encompassing ethnoprimatological information as a proxy for understanding human–primate dynamics in the past. Conversely, a better picture of the current status of primates in the Anthropocene can be drawn by observing the archaeoprimatological record. Thus, by relating ecological timescales to evolutionary timescales, researchers can explore the ancient human–primate interface, present interconnections, and anticipate future scenarios. For example, using current ethnoprimatological evidence, Urbani (2005) suggested that past indigenous societies might have influenced the structure of primate communities and populations of the tropical Americas. This is proposed because humans are by far the primary predators of primates in the Neotropics ( Urbani 2005 ). For example, human hunters of Neotropical primates usually target female individuals and keep their offspring as pets, and spider monkeys , which have long interbirth intervals, are habitual prey, as they are considered more appetizing because of their frugivorous diet ( Cormier & Urbani 2008 , Urbani & Cormier 2015 ). Tutin & Oslisly (1995) suggested that the interconnections among chimpanzees, gorillas, and humans in the Paleotropics over a period of 58,000 years BCE likely modulated their current behavior after sharing the same landscape and resources in Gabon and central Africa. Rosas et al. (2021) compared in the same tropical region the mammalian community structure of the mainland rainforest of Equatorial Guinea with animal skeletal remains found in villages of the region. The authors suggest that, in general, both faunal assemblages match, having frugivorous mammals as preferred prey and most diagnostic biotic signals. Hence, primates occupied a predominant position as top-ranked arboreal mammal game. Rosas et al. (2021) proposed that these kinds of studies might serve as present-day models for understanding the paleoecological dynamics between humans and prey in past African forests. Recently, using a similar rationale, Ellwanger & Lambert (2018) indicated that primatology has been slow to bridge evolutionary and ecological timescales to understand niche construction or to understand human interactions in the context of their environment, particularly with other primates in the past. They further suggest that ethnographic interviews should inquire about past scenarios of human–primate coexistence.
Apart from recalling memories of past interconnections between humans and primates, as suggested by Ellwanger & Lambert (2018) , other approaches can also be productive. In this sense, for instance, as revealed by Connors (2004) , classical Greeks rhetorically employed the term monkey to refer to the notion of imitation. This examination reveals how this idea has prevailed over time, as it also spread to Romans and can be traced through the texts of ancient polymaths (see also Tompkins 1994 , Greenlaw 2011 , Vespa 2017 , Wolfson 2018 ). Similarly, by using an iconographic approach, Langdon (1990) examined the development of the so-called simian motifs as visual texts in different periods of ancient Greece (viz. Mackowiak 2012 ) ( Figure 1 d ).
Zhang (2015) used linguistic techniques such as discourse and text analyses to explore how peoples from the pre-Shang to the Qing Chinese dynasties (1046 BCE–AD 1840) culturally constructed gibbons and macaques . The author examined earlier conceptions of morality in Chinese societies and how they were translated into notions of evilness and goodness through the use of these primates (for an analogous proposition in Japan, see Ohnuki-Tierney 1995 ). Similarly, but with a primate conservation approach, Zhao et al. (2018) used historical information and modeling tools to determine how snub-nosed monkeys became extinct in different regions of China during the last 2,000 years. This is an example of using past information about primates in current applied conservation. Recently, Urbani & Rodríguez (2021) found that early ethnohistorical sources with ethnoprimatological references suggested that, in the past, howlers from northern South America were food sources or had sacred meanings.
The semantic links between past primatomorphic representations and indigenous cosmologies are another line of research that links archaeoprimatology and ethnographical data. These links have been reviewed in Cormier & Urbani (2008) , Urbani & Cormier (2015) , and Urbani (2022) . Among them, for example, Karadimas (1999) indicated that the Andean pre-Hispanic Carchí-Capulí society of Ecuador and Colombia produced objects that resembled kinkajous and owl monkeys in trapezoid arrangements. Explaining such depictions and using an Amazonian Miraña myth, Karadimas (1999) argued that in the past those animals were likely depicted after an ethnoastronomical pattern of the Orion constellation as it was observed by the Miraña on the equator. Also, in Mesoamerica, researchers have not only identified primate taxa on Mayan vases by using phenotypic attributes but also linked them to Mayan mythological references of howlers and spider monkeys related to wisdom and scribal capabilities as recorded in ancient sacred texts such as the Popol Vuh ( Braakhuis 1987 ; Baker 1992 , 2013 ; Bruner & Cucina 2005 ; South 2005 ; Nájera-Coronado 2012 , 2013 , 2015 , 2017 ; Rice & South 2015 ). In sum, the combined approaches of ethnoprimatology and archaeoprimatology surpass the current time frame to encompass distant epochs and ultimately can be perceived as intertwined disciplines.

Section: Conclusion

On a rapidly changing planet, humans are active biocultural agents defining the past, present, and future of biodiversity. The procurement and transfer of primates centuries ago stand as examples of how humans interacted with this mammalian group before the rise of the Anthropocene. Not only were primates in direct contact with humans, they were also likely to have been behaviorally modulated by humans during an archaeoprimatological timescale that predates historical times. With this idea in mind, archaeoprimatology is a fertile field of research that addresses fundamental questions regarding the conservation of primate populations.
As suggested by Urbani (2013) , archaeoprimatological research explores the shared nexus between humans and primates in time and space to examine the ways such bonds persist, vary, change, or end. As a result, humans and primates impact each other and likely determine their own existences. From past to present, humans have culturally constructed primates and primates have depended on humans for their survival. Thus, advancing archaeoprimatology, as is the case for ethnoprimatology ( Fuentes 2012 , Leblan 2013 , Riley 2018 ; and Dore et al. 2017 , Urbani & Lizarralde 2020 , and chapters therein), will require multiple ontologies, critical views, and various intellectual perspectives. It should be based on solid descriptive, analytical, and integrative approaches. This path will be fecund as long as novel techniques are used for and new questions are asked about the longue durée interface between humans and primates (see Future Issues).

Section: Acknowledgements

I thank Karen B. Strier for her kind invitation to participate in this volume and her insightful comments. M. Magdalena Antczak, Andrzej T. Antczak, Paul A. Garber, Marilyn A. Norconk, and Dionisios Youlatos provided constructive comments that greatly improved this article. I thank Jennifer Mann for her support during the preparation of this manuscript, Savitha Viswanathan for preparing Figure 1 and providing the base of the map of Supplemental Figure 2 , and Cleo X. Ray for her copyediting. The personnel of the libraries of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Harvard University helped with reference searching. The anonymous people at the Metropolitan Museum of Art of New York, the Biodiversity Heritage Library, Google Books and Google Earth, and the creators/photographers of Wikimedia Commons made possible the scholarly open-access use of their collections and images. I thank Martin Allemann, Douglas Brandon-Jones, Natalia Ceballos-Mago, Mario DiBitteti, Charles H. Janson, Lucas Jason, Martín M. Kowalewski, Guido Lassau, and David S. Reese for their cooperation, and I also thank Shaw Badenhorst, Michael A. Huffman, Yuichiro Nishioka, Alberico Nogueira de Queiroz, and Alexandra van de Geer for sharing their unpublished manuscripts. Nathaniel J. Dominy granted me permission to use his image, and Segundo Jiménez-García helped prepare the photographs used in Figure 1 and Supplemental Figure 2 . I thank the personnel at Tiwanaku (Bolivia), Knossos (Greece) and the Erdene Zuu Monastery (Mongolia) for their hospitality. D. Youlatos and D.S. Reese pointed me to the information about the ancient Greek and Roman sources and to the cases of the Temple of Isis and the alleged monkey of the tophet of Motya, respectively. Additionally, A. van de Geer told me about SouthIndianPaintings.art and D. Brandon-Jones shared the pioneering and unpublished archaeoprimatological report Primate Remains from Saqqara written in 1972 by our late colleague Colin P. Groves (1942–2017). I appreciate the lessons of my former anthropology professors and mentors when I completed my undergraduate studies concentrated in archaeology at the Universidad Central de Venezuela and the Venezuelan Institute for Scientific Research, and later during the doctoral period focused on primatology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. To Ana María and Lucía, thank you for your patience, inspiration, and love.
