Title: Co-option of Neutrophil Fates by Tissue Environments


Abstract: Summary

Classically considered short-lived and purely defensive leukocytes, neutrophils are unique in their fast and moldable response to stimulation. This plastic behavior may underlie variable and even antagonistic functions during inflammation or cancer, yet the full spectrum of neutrophil properties as they enter healthy tissues remains unexplored. Using a new model to track neutrophil fates, we found short but variable lifetimes across multiple tissues. Through analysis of the receptor, transcriptional, and chromatin accessibility landscapes, we identify varying neutrophil states and assign non-canonical functions, including vascular repair and hematopoietic homeostasis. Accordingly, depletion of neutrophils compromised angiogenesis during early age, genotoxic injury, and viral infection, and impaired hematopoietic recovery after irradiation. Neutrophils acquired these properties in target tissues, a process that, in the lungs, occurred in CXCL12-rich areas and relied on CXCR4. Our results reveal that tissues co-opt neutrophils en route for elimination to induce programs that support their physiological demands.

Section: Introduction

A fundamental property of myeloid leukocytes is their remarkable transcriptional and functional plasticity in response to environmental signals ( Natoli and Ostuni, 2019 49. Natoli, G. ∙ Ostuni, R. Adaptation and memory in immune responses Nat Immunol. 2019; 20 :783-792 Crossref Scopus (108) PubMed Google Scholar ). This plastic behavior has been demonstrated under both pathological conditions, as well as in the steady state, in which it manifests by the acquisition of phenotypic and transcriptional profiles that are unique to the tissue of residence ( Lavin et al., 2015 38. Lavin, Y. ∙ Mortha, A. ∙ Rahman, A. ... Regulation of macrophage development and function in peripheral tissues Nat Rev Immunol. 2015; 15 :731-744 Crossref Scopus (455) PubMed Google Scholar ; Wynn et al., 2013 70. Wynn, T.A. ∙ Chawla, A. ∙ Pollard, J.W. Macrophage biology in development, homeostasis and disease Nature. 2013; 496 :445-455 Crossref Scopus (3383) PubMed Google Scholar ). These tissue-associated features have been almost exclusively studied for macrophages, a population of cells that acquire similar tissue-tailored properties regardless of dissemination during embryonic and adult life, which indicated dominant roles for tissue-derived signals in harnessing the plasticity of precursor cells (erythro-myeloid progenitors or monocytes, respectively) to promote tissue-specific properties ( Ginhoux and Guilliams, 2016 23. Ginhoux, F. ∙ Guilliams, M. Tissue-Resident Macrophage Ontogeny and Homeostasis Immunity. 2016; 44 :439-449 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1176) PubMed Google Scholar ). Illustrative of the relevance of this myeloid program, macrophages in the lungs, intestine, and spleen, for example, adopt features that are needed for surfactant clearance, immune tolerance, and iron recycling, respectively ( Lavin et al., 2015 38. Lavin, Y. ∙ Mortha, A. ∙ Rahman, A. ... Regulation of macrophage development and function in peripheral tissues Nat Rev Immunol. 2015; 15 :731-744 Crossref Scopus (455) PubMed Google Scholar ). Because macrophages occupy tissues for extended periods of time, or even the full organismal lifetime, acquisition of tissue-specific functions are generally believed to demand long residence times.
Despite a shared myeloid origin, the possibility that neutrophils (the most abundant myeloid leukocytes) adopt tissue-restricted properties has remained unexplored. This knowledge gap is in large part caused by the belief that the neutrophil’s short life in the circulation ( Hidalgo et al., 2019 30. Hidalgo, A. ∙ Chilvers, E.R. ∙ Summers, C. ... The Neutrophil Life Cycle Trends Immunol. 2019; 40 :584-597 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (257) PubMed Google Scholar ) and reduced transcriptional activity preclude genetic adaptation to tissue environments ( Silvestre-Roig et al., 2016 62. Silvestre-Roig, C. ∙ Hidalgo, A. ∙ Soehnlein, O. Neutrophil heterogeneity: implications for homeostasis and pathogenesis Blood. 2016; 127 :2173-2181 Crossref Scopus (324) PubMed Google Scholar ). Existing evidence has shown, however, that cancer can instruct different transcriptional profiles, resulting in functions that can either promote or counteract tumoral growth and metastasis ( Coffelt et al., 2016 15. Coffelt, S.B. ∙ Wellenstein, M.D. ∙ de Visser, K.E. Neutrophils in cancer: neutral no more Nat Rev Cancer. 2016; 16 :431-446 Crossref Scopus (1235) PubMed Google Scholar ). Similar heterogeneous behavior has been reported in the context of stroke, myocardial infarction, autoimmune disease, and infections ( Cuartero et al., 2013 17. Cuartero, M.I. ∙ Ballesteros, I. ∙ Moraga, A. ... N2 neutrophils, novel players in brain inflammation after stroke: modulation by the PPARγ agonist rosiglitazone Stroke. 2013; 44 :3498-3508 Crossref Scopus (283) PubMed Google Scholar ; Gupta and Kaplan, 2016 27. Gupta, S. ∙ Kaplan, M.J. The role of neutrophils and NETosis in autoimmune and renal diseases Nat Rev Nephrol. 2016; 12 :402-413 Crossref Scopus (332) PubMed Google Scholar ; Ma et al., 2016 43. Ma, Y. ∙ Yabluchanskiy, A. ∙ Iyer, R.P. ... Temporal neutrophil polarization following myocardial infarction Cardiovasc Res. 2016; 110 :51-61 Crossref Scopus (253) PubMed Google Scholar ; Tsuda et al., 2004 68. Tsuda, Y. ∙ Takahashi, H. ∙ Kobayashi, M. ... Three different neutrophil subsets exhibited in mice with different susceptibilities to infection by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus Immunity. 2004; 21 :215-226 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (351) PubMed Google Scholar ). Thus, we deemed it possible that bona fide neutrophil subsets existed also in healthy tissues, that they adopted properties tailored to the needs of those tissues, and that they fulfilled important, non-immune tasks for organismal physiology.
Here, we examined the diversification of neutrophil properties in tissues. We found that the lifetime of neutrophils in multiple tissues extends at least as long as their time in circulation, thus providing time for adaptation to local environments, which we demonstrate by protein, transcript, and epigenetic profiling. These analyses allowed us to identify non-canonical functions for neutrophils and to show that, in the lung, tissue-specific programming demands chemokine-guided positioning in instructing niches. Our findings demonstrate that, despite limited residence times in tissues, neutrophils can tailor their properties to support organ homeostasis.

Section: Results

The half-life of neutrophils in the murine circulation has been estimated to be about 12 h ( Pillay et al., 2010 54. Pillay, J. ∙ den Braber, I. ∙ Vrisekoop, N. ... In vivo labeling with 2H2O reveals a human neutrophil lifespan of 5.4 days Blood. 2010; 116 :625-627 Crossref Scopus (629) PubMed Google Scholar ), but it remains unknown in tissues. To determine the lifetimes in peripheral tissues, we first used a model of parabiosis in which neutrophils derived from the partner mice were quantified after separation of the parabiotic partners (thereby interrupting the supply of partner-derived cells), and their lifetimes estimated by the disappearance kinetics from each tissue ( Figures 1 A and S1 A). With the exception of the bone marrow (BM), we found rapid decline in all tissues with plateaus reached as early as day 1 in lung and spleen and by day 4 in blood and liver ( Figure 1 A). Although inflammatory artifacts induced by surgical separation could have extended the life of neutrophils in some tissues ( Summers et al., 2010 66. Summers, C. ∙ Rankin, S.M. ∙ Condliffe, A.M. ... Neutrophil kinetics in health and disease Trends Immunol. 2010; 31 :318-324 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (823) PubMed Google Scholar ), this result suggested lifetimes of 1 day or less for most tissues.
To gain a more accurate resolution of neutrophil lifetimes in tissues, and to avoid surgery-induced inflammation, we generated a mouse model that allowed tracking individual waves of neutrophils. We inserted a tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase (Cre ERT ) in the Ly6g locus, a gene highly specific for neutrophils ( Figure S1 B; Hasenberg et al., 2015 29. Hasenberg, A. ∙ Hasenberg, M. ∙ Männ, L. ... Catchup: a mouse model for imaging-based tracking and modulation of neutrophil granulocytes Nat Methods. 2015; 12 :445-452 Crossref Scopus (177) PubMed Google Scholar ), and crossed the knockin mice with the Rosa26-LSL-tdTomato reporter line (hereafter iLy6G tdTom ) to allow controlled induction of the tdTomato fluorescent protein in neutrophils ( Figure 1 B). This model allowed us to track synchronous waves of neutrophils released from the BM after a single dose of tamoxifen ( Figures S1 B–S1D) and to measure the kinetics of appearance and disappearance of neutrophils in individual tissues after inducing recombination. The earliest peak of recombined tdTomato + neutrophils was seen at day 2 in the BM, as expected, by active granulopoiesis in this organ, and 1 day later in all other tissues tested, including blood, liver, lung, spleen, intestine, and skin ( Figure 1 B). By focusing on the disappearance rates starting from the peak of tdTomato + neutrophils in each tissue, we put forward a mathematical model capturing the kinetics of labeled post-mitotic neutrophils ( Figure S1 E). In our model, we considered that neutrophils originated from the BM and seeded the rest of the tissues. We found variable half-lives depending on the tissue, with the shortest times in liver (8.71 h) and the longest in skin (18.4 h), whereas the blood yielded values of ∼10 h, which were comparable to those obtained using isotopic labeling ( Figure 1 B; Pillay et al., 2010 54. Pillay, J. ∙ den Braber, I. ∙ Vrisekoop, N. ... In vivo labeling with 2H2O reveals a human neutrophil lifespan of 5.4 days Blood. 2010; 116 :625-627 Crossref Scopus (629) PubMed Google Scholar ). We did not consider the values in the BM (20.2 h) because they reflect both maturation and egress of neutrophils into blood, rather than just elimination of those that infiltrate the marrow from blood. These results indicated that neutrophils are not immediately eliminated when they enter tissues, but remain there for periods that can extend even longer than 1 day (when considering mean lifespans, ranging from 28 to 61 h; see STAR Methods and Figure S1 E).
Because certain tissue-resident myeloid cell types, including macrophages and mast cells, can originate from embryo-derived precursors ( Gomez Perdiguero et al., 2015 24. Gomez Perdiguero, E. ∙ Klapproth, K. ∙ Schulz, C. ... Tissue-resident macrophages originate from yolk-sac-derived erythro-myeloid progenitors Nature. 2015; 518 :547-551 Crossref Scopus (1635) PubMed Google Scholar ; Hoeffel et al., 2015 31. Hoeffel, G. ∙ Chen, J. ∙ Lavin, Y. ... C-Myb(+) erythro-myeloid progenitor-derived fetal monocytes give rise to adult tissue-resident macrophages Immunity. 2015; 42 :665-678 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (819) PubMed Google Scholar ; Li et al., 2018 41. Li, Z. ∙ Liu, S. ∙ Xu, J. ... Adult Connective Tissue-Resident Mast Cells Originate from Late Erythro-Myeloid Progenitors Immunity. 2018; 49 :640-653.e5 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (136) PubMed Google Scholar ), we additionally used our fate-mapping model to ask whether embryonic Ly6G + precursors could give rise to long-lived neutrophils in tissues. To this end, we treated iLy6G tdTom mice with tamoxifen at E15.5 (a time at which fetal liver progenitors are already present; McGrath et al., 2015 47. McGrath, K.E. ∙ Frame, J.M. ∙ Fegan, K.H. ... Distinct Sources of Hematopoietic Progenitors Emerge before HSCs and Provide Functional Blood Cells in the Mammalian Embryo Cell Rep. 2015; 11 :1892-1904 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (292) PubMed Google Scholar ) and followed the presence of labeled neutrophils in several tissues at postnatal days 1 (P1) and 7 (P7). While tdTomato + neutrophils were detectable in most tissues at low but reproducible levels at P1, we failed to find labeled cells at P7 ( Figure 1 C), suggesting that neutrophils detected in postnatal tissues are derived from definitive medullary hematopoiesis. We could confirm this observation by fate mapping at E8.5 using the Csfr1 MeriCreMer mouse model (data not shown; Gomez Perdiguero et al., 2015 24. Gomez Perdiguero, E. ∙ Klapproth, K. ∙ Schulz, C. ... Tissue-resident macrophages originate from yolk-sac-derived erythro-myeloid progenitors Nature. 2015; 518 :547-551 Crossref Scopus (1635) PubMed Google Scholar ).
Because our estimates revealed residence times in the range of tens of hours in tissues, with successive waves infiltrating every circadian cycle ( Casanova-Acebes et al., 2018 13. Casanova-Acebes, M. ∙ Nicolás-Ávila, J.A. ∙ Li, J.L. ... Neutrophils instruct homeostatic and pathological states in naive tissues J Exp Med. 2018; 215 :2778-2795 Crossref Scopus (200) PubMed Google Scholar ), we predicted that neutrophils might acquire distinct properties in each tissue. To examine this possibility, we first determined receptor expression by simultaneous labeling with 39 antibodies followed by mass cytometric and dimensionality reduction analyses ( Figures S2 A and S2B). We focused on several leukocyte subsets to allow comparison of expression profiles in the BM, blood, spleen, lung, intestine, and skin. Using the t-distributed stochastic linear embedding (tSNE) reduction algorithm, we generated a bidimensional plot that contained neutrophils identified as CD11b + Ly6G + , as well as various populations of macrophages (F4/80 + CD11b + , SiglecF + CD11C + , and CX3CR1 + MHC-II + Ly6C − for various tissues, the lung or the intestine, respectively), CD115 + CD11b + monocytes, CD19 + B cells, and CD49d + NK1.1 + NK cells ( Figures 2 A and S2 C) that distributed in 36 clusters ( Figure S2 C). We found that, among all leukocytes, macrophages displayed the largest variability with discrete clusters that almost completely overlapped with individual tissues ( Figure 2 B), as expected from the divergent properties of these cells in organs ( Wynn et al., 2013 70. Wynn, T.A. ∙ Chawla, A. ∙ Pollard, J.W. Macrophage biology in development, homeostasis and disease Nature. 2013; 496 :445-455 Crossref Scopus (3383) PubMed Google Scholar ). Importantly, neutrophils also displayed cluster-to-tissue distributions ( Figure 2 C) to a higher extent than monocytes and B and NK cells ( Figure S2 D). Indeed, we found distinct clusters for blood, lung, and BM neutrophils, whereas intestinal and skin neutrophils clustered together and the spleen overlapped with the marrow and the lung ( Figures 2 D and S2 B). Thus, within the limitations of our preset marker panel, these data revealed marked phenotypic heterogeneity of neutrophils across tissues in the steady state.
To extend these findings and to confirm them at the transcriptional level, we profiled neutrophils from tissues by single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). As in the mass cytometric analysis, we intentionally processed a mix of leukocytes, since we noted that isolated neutrophils performed worse in the single-cell platform (see STAR Methods for the criteria for neutrophil annotation, and Figure S2 E). We could not obtain sufficient neutrophils for analysis from the intestine or skin, and therefore focused on the other four tissues (BM, spleen, blood, and lungs). Of 7,490 neutrophils sequenced in our dataset, 6,800 were from the BM, whereas only 380, 264, and 147 were from the spleen, blood, and lungs, respectively, likely reflecting the strong drop in transcript levels as neutrophils mature and leave the marrow ( Hoogendijk et al., 2019 32. Hoogendijk, A.J. ∙ Pourfarzad, F. ∙ Aarts, C.E.M. ... Dynamic Transcriptome-Proteome Correlation Networks Reveal Human Myeloid Differentiation and Neutrophil-Specific Programming Cell Rep. 2019; 29 :2505-2519.e4 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (61) PubMed Google Scholar ). Unbiased analysis of the neutrophil dataset identified five clusters ( Figure S2 F), of which clusters 0, 1, and 2 were enriched in neutrophils from the BM and spleen, whereas clusters 3 and 4 were enriched in neutrophils from blood and lungs, respectively ( Figures 2 E, S2 F, and S2G). Differentially expressed genes across clusters evidenced a transcriptional program associated with neutrophil maturation in the BM and spleen, as shown by the presence in cluster 0 of genes associated with S or G2/M phases of the cycle, including mki67 and Cdk1 , as well as transcripts associated with the synthesis of primary granules such as Mpo , Elane , or Ctsg . Cluster 0 also included regulators of proliferation or early granulocytic differentiation, such as Ms4a3 ( Liu et al., 2019 42. Liu, Z. ∙ Gu, Y. ∙ Chakarov, S. ... Fate Mapping via Ms4a3-Expression History Traces Monocyte-Derived Cells Cell. 2019; 178 :1509-1525.e19 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (347) PubMed Google Scholar ) and Cebpe ( Evrard et al., 2018 20. Evrard, M. ∙ Kwok, I.W.H. ∙ Chong, S.Z. ... Developmental Analysis of Bone Marrow Neutrophils Reveals Populations Specialized in Expansion, Trafficking, and Effector Functions Immunity. 2018; 48 :364-379.e8 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (413) PubMed Google Scholar ), altogether suggesting that this cluster identified cells at the promyelocytic stage in BM and spleen ( Figures 2 F and S2 F–S2I; Table S1 ; Grassi et al., 2018 26. Grassi, L. ∙ Pourfarzad, F. ∙ Ullrich, S. ... Dynamics of Transcription Regulation in Human Bone Marrow Myeloid Differentiation to Mature Blood Neutrophils Cell Rep. 2018; 24 :2784-2794 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (86) PubMed Google Scholar ). Consistent with the maturational changes across clusters, the gene signature of immature granulocyte-macrophage progenitors (GMPs) projected in cluster 0, while the more committed proNeu and preNeu signatures ( Evrard et al., 2018 20. Evrard, M. ∙ Kwok, I.W.H. ∙ Chong, S.Z. ... Developmental Analysis of Bone Marrow Neutrophils Reveals Populations Specialized in Expansion, Trafficking, and Effector Functions Immunity. 2018; 48 :364-379.e8 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (413) PubMed Google Scholar ; Kwok et al., 2020 36. Kwok, I. ∙ Becht, E. ∙ Xia, Y. ... Combinatorial Single-Cell Analyses of Granulocyte-Monocyte Progenitor Heterogeneity Reveals an Early Uni-potent Neutrophil Progenitor Immunity. 2020; 53 :303-318.e5 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (138) PubMed Google Scholar ) appeared in the transition from cluster 0 to 1 ( Figures S2 J–S2L). In contrast to cluster 0, clusters 1–4 were predominantly post-mitotic, with clusters 1 and 2 enriched in the expression of genes encoding for secondary granule proteins ( Ltf , Chil3 , or Mmp8 ) and maturation-associated genes such as Cxcr2 ( Evrard et al., 2018 20. Evrard, M. ∙ Kwok, I.W.H. ∙ Chong, S.Z. ... Developmental Analysis of Bone Marrow Neutrophils Reveals Populations Specialized in Expansion, Trafficking, and Effector Functions Immunity. 2018; 48 :364-379.e8 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (413) PubMed Google Scholar ). Most of these genes, with the exception of Cxcr2 , disappeared in clusters associated with the lung and blood ( Figures 2 F and S2 G–S2I; Table S1 ). A similar behavior was observed for Cebpe , a transcription factor indispensable for secondary and tertiary granule formation ( Bartels et al., 2015 4. Bartels, M. ∙ Govers, A.M. ∙ Fleskens, V. ... Acetylation of C/EBPε is a prerequisite for terminal neutrophil differentiation Blood. 2015; 125 :1782-1792 Crossref Scopus (30) PubMed Google Scholar ). Finally, upregulation of genes associated with mature neutrophils and immune defense such as Ccl5 , Cxcr2 , and Il1b were predominantly expressed in clusters 3 and 4 ( Figure 2 F). The transcriptional profile of lung neutrophils reinforced the expression of blood-associated transcripts such as Il1b or Ptgs2 and further acquired the expression of new genes such as Vegfa and Tnfaip3 ( Figures 2 F and S2 I). A diffusion map of the neutrophil single-cell transcriptomes also supported a continuous cell-state transition from the BM and spleen to the blood, and finally to the lung ( Figure S2 M).
To further explore neutrophil heterogeneity and gain depth in our transcriptomics analyses, we next performed bulk RNA-seq of neutrophils isolated from various tissues, including BM, blood, spleen, lung, intestine, and skin. Although the abundance and distribution of neutrophils was unique for each of these tissues in the steady state ( Figures S3 A–S3C; Casanova-Acebes et al., 2018 13. Casanova-Acebes, M. ∙ Nicolás-Ávila, J.A. ∙ Li, J.L. ... Neutrophils instruct homeostatic and pathological states in naive tissues J Exp Med. 2018; 215 :2778-2795 Crossref Scopus (200) PubMed Google Scholar ), we could obtain enough cells from all tissues except for the liver, in which the quality of the RNA extracted from neutrophils was consistently poor (data not shown). To refine our analyses, we used a parabiosis system that enabled purification of neutrophils that had entered the tissues of the partner mouse, thereby allowing us to exclude those generated locally, particularly in granulopoietic organs such as the BM and spleen ( Figure 3 A). Consistent with the single-cell analyses and despite normal granulocytic morphologies, we identified distinct transcriptional profiles in each tissue ( Figure 3 A; Table S2 ). An UpSet plot revealed poor transcriptional interactions between tissues, with the highest number of transcripts shared between the lung and intestine and the highest expression of unique differentially expressed genes found in the skin and the intestine ( Figure 3 B). Of note, control experiments in which neutrophils from the different tissues were exposed to the same isolation method resulted in similar preferential expression of signature genes as those obtained in the RNA-seq analyses ( Figure S3 D). Likewise, inhibition of de novo transcription of lung neutrophils throughout the isolation procedure did not prevent the preferential expression of signature transcripts relative to blood (data not shown), indicating that tissue processing and cell isolation did not introduce artifacts in our analyses. Interestingly, we found that the tissue-specific transcriptional signatures involved ∼1% to 6.5% of the neutrophil transcriptome, a range that was within that of tissue-resident macrophages (1.3%–3%, as estimated from Lavin et al., 2014 37. Lavin, Y. ∙ Winter, D. ∙ Blecher-Gonen, R. ... Tissue-resident macrophage enhancer landscapes are shaped by the local microenvironment Cell. 2014; 159 :1312-1326 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1535) PubMed Google Scholar ).
We found good correlation between gene expression in tissues from the single-cell and bulk sequencing analyses, as the top differentially expressed genes were found in both datasets, including genes of granule proteins in the BM, Ifitm genes in blood, and Il1b in lung ( Figures 3 A and S2 H). Projection of the bulk tissue profiles onto the scRNA-seq dataset confirmed consistent profiles, with clusters associated to the BM, blood, and lung showing enrichment in single cells from the corresponding tissues ( Figure 3 C). In contrast, the bulk signatures from the intestine and skin did not identify cells sequenced from the other tissues, nor did the spleen, as expected from this organ being largely embedded within the BM cluster and lacking a distinct signature ( Figure 2 E). Altogether, these data indicated that neutrophils acquire transcriptional properties associated with the tissues that they infiltrate in the steady state.
Although our findings revealed tissue-restricted profiles at the level of protein or gene expression, they did not demonstrate stable modifications in the neutrophil genome. To explore if this was the case, we assessed regions of chromatin accessibility in neutrophils isolated from the BM, blood, spleen, and lungs by ATAC sequencing (ATAC-seq). Principal-component analysis of the accessible regions revealed marked diversity associated with the tissue of origin ( Figure 3 D). The biggest differences were apparent in the transition from BM or spleen into blood, in agreement with previous observations ( Grassi et al., 2018 26. Grassi, L. ∙ Pourfarzad, F. ∙ Ullrich, S. ... Dynamics of Transcription Regulation in Human Bone Marrow Myeloid Differentiation to Mature Blood Neutrophils Cell Rep. 2018; 24 :2784-2794 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (86) PubMed Google Scholar ). However, changes in accessible chromatin were also prominent when comparing blood and lung ( Figure 3 E), suggesting chromatin modifications also in the transition from the circulation into tissues. k-means clustering of differentially open regions identified four clusters, with similar patterns at key neutrophil gene loci such as S100a8 and S100a9 across tissues ( Figures 3 F and S3 E). Clusters 1 and 3 were associated with chromatin regions that changed their accessibility in lung neutrophils (C1, down; C3, up). Cluster 2 contained regions that gained accessibility in blood neutrophils, whereas cluster 4 was enriched in regions found in splenic neutrophils. Importantly, the affected regions within each cluster involved genes that had been detected in our bulk sequencing analyses (compare Figures 3 A and 3F) and, in particular, cluster 3 included open chromatin regions that projected well over the lung cluster in our single-cell dataset ( Figure 3 G). Examination of motif enrichment across clusters identified general myeloid regulators such as PU.1 in cluster 1 that was, however, present in all clusters. In contrast, more restricted transcription factors like JunB were only enriched in cluster 3 ( Figure S3 F). Finally, we found that changes in chromatin and transcriptome impinged on the expression of the identified genes at the protein level; for example, expression of CD74 and CR2 was elevated in splenic neutrophils, and CD14 and IL1b were higher in neutrophils from the lungs ( Figures 3 H and 3I).
Altogether, these data identified remarkable heterogeneity on neutrophils under steady-state conditions at the chromatin, RNA, and protein levels. They also implied that neutrophil diversity is not only the consequence of medullary maturation, as their phenotypic and transcriptional diversity was further tuned when neutrophils entered peripheral tissues.
Whereas macrophage diversity is likely the consequence of long-term residence in tissues and extended exposure to local cues ( Gosselin et al., 2014 25. Gosselin, D. ∙ Link, V.M. ∙ Romanoski, C.E. ... Environment drives selection and function of enhancers controlling tissue-specific macrophage identities Cell. 2014; 159 :1327-1340 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (953) PubMed Google Scholar ; Lavin et al., 2014 37. Lavin, Y. ∙ Winter, D. ∙ Blecher-Gonen, R. ... Tissue-resident macrophage enhancer landscapes are shaped by the local microenvironment Cell. 2014; 159 :1312-1326 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1535) PubMed Google Scholar ), this was unlikely to be the cause of neutrophil diversification in tissues given their short lifespans ( Figure 1 ). To examine the potential source of neutrophil specification, we first queried if the transcriptional patterns in tissues were already present in circulating cells, as this would imply remote pre-specification and deterministic homing to target tissues as proposed, for example, in the context of lung adenocarcinoma ( Engblom et al., 2017 19. Engblom, C. ∙ Pfirschke, C. ∙ Zilionis, R. ... Osteoblasts remotely supply lung tumors with cancer-promoting SiglecF high neutrophils Science. 2017; 358 Crossref Scopus (267) PubMed Google Scholar ). To this end, we projected the signatures of each tissue onto the single-cell transcriptome of blood neutrophils. As expected, the blood signature was strongest among all tested tissues (BM, blood, spleen, lung, intestine, and skin; Figure 4 A). In contrast, no distinct individual cells from blood displayed signatures from spleen, lung, intestine, or skin neutrophils. Only a separate cluster of blood cells scored high for the BM signature ( Figure 4 A), but these likely represented newly marrow-released neutrophils as they expressed high levels of granule-related genes that are characteristic of granulocytic precursors ( Figure S4 A).
In our bulk sequencing analysis of differentially expressed genes, we noticed that the lung, intestine, and skin were transcriptionally more diverse, yet more similar with each other when compared with those from BM, blood, and spleen ( Figure S4 B). This raised the possibility that the transcriptional properties of these barrier tissues might be influenced by the commensal microbiota to which they are naturally exposed. We therefore assessed the transcriptional signature in germ-free mice of neutrophils from the blood, spleen, and lung, as representative tissues from the two groups ( Figure 4 B), since we found that germ-free mice were virtually devoid of neutrophils in the intestine and skin (data not shown). We found that the lack of microbiota had virtually no impact on the transcriptome of lung or splenic neutrophils ( Figure 4 B), and only moderate changes (667 differentially expressed genes) were found in blood neutrophils from control versus germ-free mice ( Figures 4 B and S4 C; Table S3 ). Thus, the microbiota affects neutrophils in blood, but not their specification in the tested tissues, including the lung and spleen.
Given the lack of evidence for neutrophil programming in the circulation, we asked whether their signatures were imprinted when the cells reached each tissue, regardless of their origin. To this end, we first used a model of parabiosis and compared the phenotype of host-derived cells with that of partner-derived cells in the BM, blood, spleen, and lung through multi-parametric mass cytometry. The parabiosis strategy was necessary to discriminate neutrophils reaching the tissue from the circulation (partner derived) from those residing or generated in the tissue (host derived). Projection of host and partner cells in a tSNE space revealed that neutrophils acquired the same tissue-specific profile independent of their host or circulating origin ( Figure 4 C). The tissue-specific patterns became further evident when comparing the distribution of the cells into the different clusters defined by their cytometric profile in each tissue ( Figures 4 D and S4 D), suggesting that specification of neutrophil signatures occurred in tissues.
To further confirm this possibility, we next performed transfer experiments in which BM neutrophils were injected into the lung or the spleen, thus bypassing the circulatory stage and allowing us to examine the phenotypic conversion of neutrophils exposed to a new environment. Of note, despite the artificial routes of administration, we found that neutrophils transferred to the spleen localized in the red pulp, near endogenous splenic neutrophils, and that a fraction of intratracheally administered neutrophils migrated to the lung parenchyma, near host-derived neutrophils (data not shown). Thus, in neutrophils recovered 16 h after transfer, we analyzed the cytometric profile of a small collection of markers previously found to vary across tissues, namely Ly6C, CD11b, CXCR2, and CD74. We found that, after only several hours in the tissues, BM neutrophils acquired the marker profile characteristic of neutrophils naturally residing in each tissue; for example, neutrophils transferred to the spleen were most similar to splenic neutrophils based on these markers, while those transferred to the lungs were closest to pulmonary neutrophils ( Figure 4 E). Time-dependent analyses of changes at the protein level revealed rapid (3 h) upregulation of CXCR2, Il1b, and CD11b after neutrophil transfer, whereas changes in CR2, CD74, and CD14 levels were only evident after 16 h ( Figure S4 E). We obtained similar results for the transcriptional signature of BM neutrophils transferred to lungs ( Figures 4 F and S4 F); the cells rapidly lost the expression of BM-associated genes (e.g., Cebpe or Ltf ; see Figure S4 G) and gained the expression of lung-associated genes (such as Ptgs2 or Il1b ), but not blood-type genes ( Ifitm3 ; Figures 4 F and S4 F). Importantly, acquisition of this lung-type profile was specific because transfer of BM neutrophils into the peritoneum resulted in loss of the BM signature without gain of a lung profile ( Figure S4 H).
Finally, we asked whether the signature instructed by the lung, as a prototypical tissue, was dominant or not over pathological states. We took advantage of an existing scRNA-seq dataset of lung neutrophils in the presence of adenocarcinoma ( Zilionis et al., 2019 73. Zilionis, R. ∙ Engblom, C. ∙ Pfirschke, C. ... Single-Cell Transcriptomics of Human and Mouse Lung Cancers Reveals Conserved Myeloid Populations across Individuals and Species Immunity. 2019; 50 :1317-1334.e10 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (810) PubMed Google Scholar ), in which we could identify two populations of neutrophils in healthy versus tumor-bearing lungs ( Figure S4 I). Projection of our tissue signatures onto this dataset was, as expected, stronger for pulmonary neutrophils ( Figure S4 J); however, it was unable to discriminate tumor-free versus tumor-associated neutrophils, even if the tumoral group presented evidence of what appeared to be a more immature state, based on the expression of granule-related genes ( Figure S4 K). This finding suggested that, at least in this particular pathological scenario, the tissue (lung) imprints the neutrophil profile even in the presence of a pathological perturbation (adenocarcinoma). All combined, these data supported a model whereby neutrophil reprogramming occurs rapidly (within the scope of their lifetime in tissues, as defined in Figure 1 ) once the cells enter the tissues.
The diversity of phenotype and transcriptome in each tissue suggested that, like macrophages, neutrophils may acquire functions that are distinct and tailored to the demands of each tissue. To gain insights into these potential functions, we performed in silico analyses of the transcriptional signatures found in our bulk RNA-seq dataset ( Figure 3 A; Table S4 ). We found that pathways classically ascribed to neutrophils, such as those related to cell migration and immune responses, were only dominant in hematopoietic organs, especially BM and blood ( Figure 5 A). This observation was important because these two tissues have been the source of most studies examining neutrophil function. Homeostasis of leukocytes was also a prominent pathway of neutrophils from blood and BM, while B cell homeostasis was largely restricted to neutrophils of the spleen. The prediction in the spleen was supported by the expression of factors that promote lymphocyte activation and proliferation ( Figure S5 A) and was in good agreement with previous reports ( Puga et al., 2011 56. Puga, I. ∙ Cols, M. ∙ Barra, C.M. ... B cell-helper neutrophils stimulate the diversification and production of immunoglobulin in the marginal zone of the spleen Nat Immunol. 2011; 13 :170-180 Crossref Scopus (582) PubMed Google Scholar ).
To validate these predicted functional pathways, we used a model of neutrophil depletion mediated by conditional expression of the diphtheria toxin (DT) receptor under the human MRP8 promoter ( Passegué et al., 2004 53. Passegué, E. ∙ Wagner, E.F. ∙ Weissman, I.L. JunB deficiency leads to a myeloproliferative disorder arising from hematopoietic stem cells Cell. 2004; 119 :431-443 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (342) PubMed Google Scholar ) and induced by DT treatment ( MRP8 CRE ; Rosa26 iDTR ; Figure S5 B). Repeated DT injection for up to 1 week profoundly reduced neutrophil counts in BM, blood, and spleen, but did not deplete any other leukocyte populations in the steady state or cause infection ( Figures S5 C and S5D). Importantly, however, depletion of neutrophils after sub-lethal irradiation caused strong impairment in the recovery of most hematopoietic lineages, including eosinophils, monocytes, B and T lymphocytes, NK cells, and macrophages as detected in the blood, BM, or spleen ( Figure S5 D). This correlated with exacerbated spleen atrophy ( Figure S5 E) and loss of lymphoid areas in the marrow and spleen after irradiation ( Figure S5 F), altogether suggesting that neutrophils support hematopoietic recovery following genotoxic injury.
In contrast to hematological organs, pathway analyses of neutrophils in the lung, intestine, and skin did not assign hematopoietic-supportive properties, but instead uncovered other non-canonical functions ( Figure 5 A). Specifically, regulation of vascular and axonal growth were strongly associated with the transcriptional signature of neutrophils from the lung and intestine, and epithelial growth by neutrophils from the skin ( Figure 5 A). We focused our attention on the lung, because we obtained consistent results from the single-cell and bulk analyses (including chromatin accessibility) and because pulmonary neutrophils could be purified in high numbers for additional analysis. Consistent with the predicted angiogenic signature, we found genes involved in vascular growth and repair (including Apelin , Adamts , or Vegfa ) that were significantly higher expressed in the lung in our bulk sequencing, and some of those genes were, as expected, also detectable in intestinal neutrophils ( Figures 5 B and S5 G; Table S2 ). Examination of an angiogenic score (see STAR Methods and Table S5 ) against our single-cell dataset revealed that, among all leukocyte subsets, only neutrophils displayed such lung-specific profiles ( Figure 5 C), suggesting that this was not a general effect of the lung environment but rather an exclusive property of neutrophils in this organ. Even in our single-cell dataset, in which low-expressed transcripts are typically undetected, we could find differential expression of several genes involved in vascular repair ( Figure 5 D). Of note, we also found CD49d + neutrophils, which have been previously assigned proangiogenic properties in the context of hypoxia ( Massena et al., 2015 46. Massena, S. ∙ Christoffersson, G. ∙ Vågesjö, E. ... Identification and characterization of VEGF-A-responsive neutrophils expressing CD49d, VEGFR1, and CXCR4 in mice and humans Blood. 2015; 126 :2016-2026 Crossref Scopus (171) PubMed Google Scholar ) in the lungs, but not in the intestine, indicating only partial overlap with our population ( Figure S5 H).
We next assessed the contribution of neutrophils to pulmonary vascularization in the inducible neutropenia mouse model. We did not find vascular anomalies in the lungs of adult mice after 7 days of neutrophil depletion, either by histology ( Figure S5 I) or when assessing endothelial proliferation ( Figure 5 E). We considered, however, alternative contexts that demand enhanced angiogenesis, such as organismal growth at young age, or after genotoxic injury induced by irradiation. In these contexts, depletion of neutrophils resulted in complete loss of proliferative capacity of endothelial cells ( Figure 5 E). We found a similar pro-angiogenic effect in the intestine of young mice ( Figure 5 F), but not in the spleen or BM ( Figure S5 J), as predicted by the pathway analysis. Finally, because the distribution of neutrophils in the adult intestine has been shown to be largely restricted to areas around isolated lymphoid follicles (ILFs; Figure S5 K; Casanova-Acebes et al., 2018 13. Casanova-Acebes, M. ∙ Nicolás-Ávila, J.A. ∙ Li, J.L. ... Neutrophils instruct homeostatic and pathological states in naive tissues J Exp Med. 2018; 215 :2778-2795 Crossref Scopus (200) PubMed Google Scholar ), we examined whether vascularization of these particular regions of the gut might be affected by neutropenia. Indeed, while the general architecture of the gut was not affected by neutrophil depletion ( Figure S5 L), we found significant loss of vessels inside the ILFs, but not in the surrounding submucosal area ( Figure 5 G). Altogether, these results indicated that neutrophils support homeostatic and stress-induced angiogenesis in tissues (lung and intestine) that instruct this particular transcriptional program.
We finally sought to understand the mechanisms that drive reprogramming of neutrophils in tissues. We focused on lung neutrophils as they featured a distinct, consistent profile in all our analyses. We used a screening approach in which we analyzed the transcriptional profile of lung neutrophils (composed of 37 genes, of which 8 are shown in Figure 6 A) and those from blood for reference, using Nanostring technology. We first used function-blocking antibodies against TGF-b or GM-CSF, as these cytokines have been involved in neutrophils programming toward pro- and anti-tumoral functions, respectively ( Engblom et al., 2017 19. Engblom, C. ∙ Pfirschke, C. ∙ Zilionis, R. ... Osteoblasts remotely supply lung tumors with cancer-promoting SiglecF high neutrophils Science. 2017; 358 Crossref Scopus (267) PubMed Google Scholar ; Sagiv et al., 2015 59. Sagiv, J.Y. ∙ Michaeli, J. ∙ Assi, S. ... Phenotypic diversity and plasticity in circulating neutrophil subpopulations in cancer Cell Rep. 2015; 10 :562-573 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (587) PubMed Google Scholar ; Singhal et al., 2016 63. Singhal, S. ∙ Bhojnagarwala, P.S. ∙ O’Brien, S. ... Origin and Role of a Subset of Tumor-Associated Neutrophils with Antigen-Presenting Cell Features in Early-Stage Human Lung Cancer Cancer Cell. 2016; 30 :120-135 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (310) PubMed Google Scholar ); however, none of the treatments altered the acquisition of the pulmonary signature ( Figure 6 A). We also profiled mice in which neutrophils lacked Bmal1, a master clock regulator involved in neutrophil infiltration of tissues ( Adrover et al., 2019 1. Adrover, J.M. ∙ Del Fresno, C. ∙ Crainiciuc, G. ... A Neutrophil Timer Coordinates Immune Defense and Vascular Protection Immunity. 2019; 50 :390-402.e10 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (239) PubMed Google Scholar ), and Nr4a1, an orphan nuclear receptor required for monocyte differentiation ( Hanna et al., 2011 28. Hanna, R.N. ∙ Carlin, L.M. ∙ Hubbeling, H.G. ... The transcription factor NR4A1 (Nur77) controls bone marrow differentiation and the survival of Ly6C- monocytes Nat Immunol. 2011; 12 :778-785 Crossref Scopus (485) PubMed Google Scholar ) that we found consistently represented in the transcriptional and chromatin accessibility profiles of lung neutrophils ( Figures 3 F and S2 H). Absence of Bmal1 caused a small reduction in the expression of signature genes, but this was very variable ( Figure 6 A) and could not be reproduced by bulk RNA-seq (data not shown). Deletion of Nr4a1 , in turn, partially affected the expression of only two of the analyzed genes ( Il1b and Ptgs2 ; Figures 6 A and S6 A) but did not affect the vascular response in the lungs after irradiation ( Figure S6 B), indicating minor or redundant roles for this factor in the specification of neutrophils in the lung.
We finally tested mice with neutrophil-specific deletion of Cxcr4 ( MRP8 CRE ; CXCR4 fl/fl referred herein as CXCR4 DN ), as the CXCL12-CXCR4 axis has been involved in the retention of neutrophils in lungs ( Devi et al., 2013 18. Devi, S. ∙ Wang, Y. ∙ Chew, W.K. ... Neutrophil mobilization via plerixafor-mediated CXCR4 inhibition arises from lung demargination and blockade of neutrophil homing to the bone marrow J Exp Med. 2013; 210 :2321-2336 Crossref Scopus (177) PubMed Google Scholar ). Notably, the Nanostring analyses revealed that neutrophils lacking this receptor completely lost the pulmonary signature while maintaining a normal profile for neutrophils in blood ( Figures 6 A and 6B). Confocal imaging of lungs from Cxcl12 reporter mice, which marks cells expressing the ligand for CXCR4 with GFP, revealed patchy expression of CXCL12 that was largely restricted to larger vessels ( Figures 6 C and S6 C). We found that neutrophils localized proximally to these CXCL12+ vessels in the lung, often establishing contacts with endothelial cells at the tip of the GFP clusters ( Figure 6 C, inset), suggesting that these might represent areas of neutrophil reprogramming. Interestingly, intratracheally delivered neutrophils also localized near CXCL12+ vessels ( Figure S6 D), suggesting general tropism of neutrophils toward these areas.
We next analyzed these mice under conditions that induced vascular proliferation. Consistent with the findings in mice depleted of neutrophils, CXCR4 DN mice displayed blunted proliferation after irradiation ( Figure 6 D) despite elevated neutrophil numbers in lungs (data not shown). Interestingly, these mice also recapitulated the vascular aplasia in intestinal ILFs seen in neutropenic mice ( Figures 6 E and S6 E). Because the lung is a common target of viral infections and neutrophils have been proposed to perform immune-patrolling functions in this organ ( Yipp et al., 2017 71. Yipp, B.G. ∙ Kim, J.H. ∙ Lima, R. ... The Lung is a Host Defense Niche for Immediate Neutrophil-Mediated Vascular Protection Sci Immunol. 2017; 2 Crossref Scopus (142) PubMed Google Scholar ), we next subjected the mice and their controls (Cre NEG ; CXCR4 fl/fl ) to infection with low doses of the influenza A virus. Despite no difference in survival rates, these mice presented significant loss of pulmonary vascularization 14 days post-infection ( Figures S6 F and S6G), indicating additional roles for lung neutrophils in vascular repair after an infection.
Overall, our data suggested that neutrophils followed CXCL12/CXCR4 cues to reach areas of reprogramming in the lung. Consistent with this possibility, intravital imaging revealed multiple defects in the migration of CXCR4-deficient neutrophils within the lungs ( Figures 6 F and S6 H; Video S1 ) and reduced accumulation in this organ when adjusted to their numbers in blood ( Figure 6 G). The migratory defects seen in CXCR4 mutant mice were confirmed by tracking individual lung neutrophils in wild-type mice before and after exposure to a CXCR4 antagonist (AMD3100; data not shown). To unambiguously assess if the defective specification of CXCR4-deficient neutrophils was caused by a disrupted ability to “find” instructing CXCL12+ niches, we transferred marrow neutrophils directly into lung intratracheally and then assessed their transcriptional profile compared with non-transferred BM cells, or with pulmonary neutrophils from the host. We found that, under these conditions, the transferred CXCR4 DN neutrophils gained normal expression of hallmark pulmonary genes ( Ptgs2 , Il1b , and Nr4a1 ; Figure 6 H), thus indicating that CXCR4 signaling is dispensable for transcriptional specification, but is needed to guide neutrophils to sites of reprogramming. We conclude that, at least in the particular case of the lungs, tissue-derived signals guide neutrophils to specific areas where they acquire their distinct phenotypic and functional properties.
eyJraWQiOiI4ZjUxYWNhY2IzYjhiNjNlNzFlYmIzYWFmYTU5NmZmYyIsImFsZyI6IlJTMjU2In0.eyJzdWIiOiIwNmNiOTQ5OGYzN2EwODkyNTMyMjczMTk2ZjhkYjlhNiIsImtpZCI6IjhmNTFhY2FjYjNiOGI2M2U3MWViYjNhYWZhNTk2ZmZjIiwiZXhwIjoxNzQ5NjA5OTI4fQ.MbvqXIElx64iMBFlAn_EWVON_bK4_hvyKTUErkLU8IV0feNTKc918rZxBdENZaB4lNpHmFRiK-0ah2sKyHXungQ5RpB9nfYvh6eHjS1QGWTwLXWEFoHHQVJVEaB8JUwIaBtHcIsK7b2h4ffG2DFTTi7KsiljIG3Vstes_M9foEkJZGTkMiakISqTKSqQlTntH_aDhdnhwFpfXEb45BQ0tCPTNrnsT2-MhV5zj3kxHXq5KaM21oTDmmc2hObso3ubkBvJv2MqwUyiRpPSII8gJDragPxmtgA9793A_mLFm3LoWT3mN0v5YaKrKR-EhV0oW1UterXRJjTXKazxW1Jduw Video (11.72 MB) Video S1. Intravascular Crawling of Wild-ype and CXCR4 DN Ly6G + Neutrophils (Gray) in the Lung Capillaries by Intravital Imaging, Related to Figure 6

Section: Discussion

The realization that macrophages adapt to tissue environments represented a milestone toward better appreciation of the physiological, non-immune roles of the innate immune system ( Gosselin et al., 2014 25. Gosselin, D. ∙ Link, V.M. ∙ Romanoski, C.E. ... Environment drives selection and function of enhancers controlling tissue-specific macrophage identities Cell. 2014; 159 :1327-1340 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (953) PubMed Google Scholar ; Lavin et al., 2014 37. Lavin, Y. ∙ Winter, D. ∙ Blecher-Gonen, R. ... Tissue-resident macrophage enhancer landscapes are shaped by the local microenvironment Cell. 2014; 159 :1312-1326 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1535) PubMed Google Scholar ). Indeed, the remarkable adaptation of these cells has been instrumental in defining the function of myeloid cells, as they specialize in supporting basal tissue functions, adaptation to stress, and even underlying pathological states ( Keren-Shaul et al., 2017 34. Keren-Shaul, H. ∙ Spinrad, A. ∙ Weiner, A. ... A Unique Microglia Type Associated with Restricting Development of Alzheimer’s Disease Cell. 2017; 169 :1276-1290.e17 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (2877) PubMed Google Scholar ; Mass et al., 2017 45. Mass, E. ∙ Jacome-Galarza, C.E. ∙ Blank, T. ... A somatic mutation in erythro-myeloid progenitors causes neurodegenerative disease Nature. 2017; 549 :389-393 Crossref Scopus (141) PubMed Google Scholar ). Notably, however, macrophages are not the only or even more numerous myeloid cells found in tissues in the steady state, as we and others have reported the presence of neutrophils in virtually every analyzed tissue ( Becher et al., 2014 5. Becher, B. ∙ Schlitzer, A. ∙ Chen, J. ... High-dimensional analysis of the murine myeloid cell system Nat Immunol. 2014; 15 :1181-1189 Crossref Scopus (289) PubMed Google Scholar ; Casanova-Acebes et al., 2018 13. Casanova-Acebes, M. ∙ Nicolás-Ávila, J.A. ∙ Li, J.L. ... Neutrophils instruct homeostatic and pathological states in naive tissues J Exp Med. 2018; 215 :2778-2795 Crossref Scopus (200) PubMed Google Scholar ). Here, we show that neutrophils are not immediately eliminated as they enter naive tissues, but remain there for periods than can extend for even longer than one day, and acquire remarkable heterogeneity at the chromatin, RNA, and receptor levels. We find that this tissue-driven adaptation occurs rapidly in the new environment, possibly in dedicated microanatomical niches as illustrated in the lungs, where they gain distinct phenotypic and functional properties, including support of vascular homeostasis and hematopoietic recovery. Our study therefore expands the concept of myeloid plasticity, a concept so far only explored in detail for macrophages, by demonstrating remarkable neutrophil adaptability to different environments, thereby unveiling a biological property of neutrophils with important implications in innate immunity and tissue physiology.
A historical limitation when studying the homeostatic features of neutrophils has been their low numbers in the majority of tissues ( Casanova-Acebes et al., 2018 13. Casanova-Acebes, M. ∙ Nicolás-Ávila, J.A. ∙ Li, J.L. ... Neutrophils instruct homeostatic and pathological states in naive tissues J Exp Med. 2018; 215 :2778-2795 Crossref Scopus (200) PubMed Google Scholar ), the inability to expand or maintain them in culture, and their reduced transcriptional activity ( Silvestre-Roig et al., 2016 62. Silvestre-Roig, C. ∙ Hidalgo, A. ∙ Soehnlein, O. Neutrophil heterogeneity: implications for homeostasis and pathogenesis Blood. 2016; 127 :2173-2181 Crossref Scopus (324) PubMed Google Scholar ), all of which may explain the lack of systematic exploration of their diversity in naive organs. Consequently, a shortcoming of our study is that we restricted our in-depth analyses to neutrophil-rich tissues, including the BM, blood, spleen, and lung, and additionally performed bulk transcriptomic characterization of neutrophils from the intestine and the skin. In these tissues, we focused our efforts on defining the acquisition of a distinct receptor repertoire and transcriptome profiles, and on showing that the rapid changes in these properties once they enter tissues are matched by stable epigenetic modifications.
The consistent results obtained from complementary assays (bulk and scRNA-seq and mass cytometry) provided independent confirmation of the specific signatures of neutrophils in each tissue. Combination of bulk sequencing and mass cytometry with parabiosis, in turn, suggested that these signatures were acquired as neutrophils infiltrated the tissues from the bloodstream, an issue of particular relevance for tissues in which neutrophils are produced (i.e., BM and spleen). In this regard, we note that myeloid progenitors crossing between parabiotic partners could potentially generate noise in this model; however, we have found that crossed hematopoiesis represents less than 5% and should have a minor influence in the overall profiling of the cells.
As our transcriptomic analyses predicted distinct functional properties for each examined tissue, we performed functional validation of these functions in the lungs and intestine, as neutrophils from this organ featured signatures that consistently suggested a role in angiogenesis. A remarkable finding was that the predicted transcriptional features of tissue neutrophils appeared to generally support housekeeping functions of the tissue from which they were extracted, such as hematopoietic homeostasis in the marrow or epithelial growth in the skin, which will need further validation. Another unexpected finding was that the migratory and immune functions classically ascribed to neutrophils were largely enriched in the blood and BM, the source for virtually every functional study on neutrophils to date. We therefore expect that analyses of neutrophils in other tissues will uncover new functions for organ homeostasis, a notion that we assimilate to the division of tasks between monocytes for immune-surveillance and resident macrophages for the support of organ homeostasis ( Ginhoux and Guilliams, 2016 23. Ginhoux, F. ∙ Guilliams, M. Tissue-Resident Macrophage Ontogeny and Homeostasis Immunity. 2016; 44 :439-449 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1176) PubMed Google Scholar ; Wynn et al., 2013 70. Wynn, T.A. ∙ Chawla, A. ∙ Pollard, J.W. Macrophage biology in development, homeostasis and disease Nature. 2013; 496 :445-455 Crossref Scopus (3383) PubMed Google Scholar ).
A relevant, distinctive feature of neutrophils, when compared with other tissue-resident immune populations, is their short lifespan. Estimation of neutrophil lifetimes in mice and humans has been restricted to the BM and blood, in part due to the general perception that entry into tissues implies rapid elimination ( Hidalgo et al., 2019 30. Hidalgo, A. ∙ Chilvers, E.R. ∙ Summers, C. ... The Neutrophil Life Cycle Trends Immunol. 2019; 40 :584-597 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (257) PubMed Google Scholar ). We show, however, that their lifetimes in tissues equal or even exceed those in blood, a finding that suggested that, while transient, it was plausible for neutrophils to acquire new properties and functions within tissues. Their short lifespan is also relevant in light of the periodic (i.e., circadian) production and clearance of neutrophils into tissues ( Casanova-Acebes et al., 2018 13. Casanova-Acebes, M. ∙ Nicolás-Ávila, J.A. ∙ Li, J.L. ... Neutrophils instruct homeostatic and pathological states in naive tissues J Exp Med. 2018; 215 :2778-2795 Crossref Scopus (200) PubMed Google Scholar ), a property of neutrophils that suggests that their influence in tissues may follow circadian patterns. In other words, it is conceivable that neutrophils specialize in instructing temporal cues for tissue physiology, as illustrated in the BM, where infiltrating neutrophils induce the circadian release of hematopoietic stem cells to the circulation ( Casanova-Acebes et al., 2013 12. Casanova-Acebes, M. ∙ Pitaval, C. ∙ Weiss, L.A. ... Rhythmic modulation of the hematopoietic niche through neutrophil clearance Cell. 2013; 153 :1025-1035 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (527) PubMed Google Scholar ). Therefore, a logical extension of our studies will be to explore the circadian properties of tissues that are under the control of neutrophils. In addition to these circadian considerations, the generation and use of the iLy6G tdTom mice to track neutrophil lifetimes should prove useful to estimate how pathological states, aging, or additional tissue environments affect the lifetime of neutrophils. This is of particular interest, given the prominent pathogenic roles of these cells in the context of vascular inflammation and cancer ( Nicolás-Ávila et al., 2017 51. Nicolás-Ávila, J.A. ∙ Adrover, J.M. ∙ Hidalgo, A. Neutrophils in Homeostasis, Immunity, and Cancer Immunity. 2017; 46 :15-28 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (314) PubMed Google Scholar ).
An outstanding question is how neutrophils acquire their tissue-associated properties. For macrophages, this has been shown to be the result of the coordination between master regulators like PU.1 and different transcription factors to elicit transcriptional programs in a tissue-specific manner ( Lavin et al., 2017 39. Lavin, Y. ∙ Kobayashi, S. ∙ Leader, A. ... Innate Immune Landscape in Early Lung Adenocarcinoma by Paired Single-Cell Analyses Cell. 2017; 169 :750-765.17 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (855) PubMed Google Scholar ; Natoli and Ostuni, 2019 49. Natoli, G. ∙ Ostuni, R. Adaptation and memory in immune responses Nat Immunol. 2019; 20 :783-792 Crossref Scopus (108) PubMed Google Scholar ). It is possible that neutrophils resort to similar regulatory networks that are ultimately activated by local cues to enable regional gene transcription ( Ng et al., 2019 50. Ng, L.G. ∙ Ostuni, R. ∙ Hidalgo, A. Heterogeneity of neutrophils Nat Rev Immunol. 2019; 19 :255-265 Crossref Scopus (382) PubMed Google Scholar ), as hinted from our ATAC-seq analyses. In this regard, the reduced lifespan of neutrophils should not represent a limitation, given that monocytes (or even macrophages) have also been shown to be rapidly reprogrammed, when niches become available, to acquire transcriptional features of resident macrophages ( Bonnardel et al., 2019 6. Bonnardel, J. ∙ T’Jonck, W. ∙ Gaublomme, D. ... Stellate Cells, Hepatocytes, and Endothelial Cells Imprint the Kupffer Cell Identity on Monocytes Colonizing the Liver Macrophage Niche Immunity. 2019; 51 :638-654.e9 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (351) PubMed Google Scholar ). Interestingly, in the case of lung neutrophils, we find specific areas enriched in the chemokine CXCL12 and dependence on its receptor, CXCR4, that suggest the existence of similar instructing regions, or niches, where neutrophils receive the signals needed for reprogramming. This phenomenon may be important to define the number of neutrophils that can populate a given tissue, and their correct migration to areas where they can receive local signals, as illustrated by the distinct distribution of intestinal neutrophils around ILFs. Whether other bona fide niches for neutrophils exist in other organs, if tissue-to-tissue differences exist, or how this can be altered in pathological states, represents important goals for future studies.
Finally, we identify neutrophils with angiogenic properties in the lung and intestine. Similar pro-vascularizing features have been reported in the context of ischemia and hypoxia, liver injury, and irradiation ( Bowers et al., 2018 7. Bowers, E. ∙ Slaughter, A. ∙ Frenette, P.S. ... Granulocyte-derived TNFα promotes vascular and hematopoietic regeneration in the bone marrow Nat Med. 2018; 24 :95-102 Crossref Scopus (73) PubMed Google Scholar ; Christoffersson et al., 2012 14. Christoffersson, G. ∙ Vågesjö, E. ∙ Vandooren, J. ... VEGF-A recruits a proangiogenic MMP-9-delivering neutrophil subset that induces angiogenesis in transplanted hypoxic tissue Blood. 2012; 120 :4653-4662 Crossref Scopus (275) PubMed Google Scholar ; Wang et al., 2017 69. Wang, J. ∙ Hossain, M. ∙ Thanabalasuriar, A. ... Visualizing the function and fate of neutrophils in sterile injury and repair Science. 2017; 358 :111-116 Crossref Scopus (355) PubMed Google Scholar ) and are believed to facilitate vascular repair through secretion of cytokines or metalloproteases, or by phagocytosis of cellular debris. An intriguing possibility is that these angiogenic neutrophils may be recruited from preexisting populations in these tissues. Studies aimed at identifying and specifically disrupting the pathways involved in the angiogenic programming will be needed to solve this question, and will be relevant to identify new therapeutic targets in pathological angiogenesis.
In summary, the appreciation that adaptation to tissues is a general property of myeloid leukocytes (at least macrophages and neutrophils, but possibly other subsets as well; Cohen et al., 2018 16. Cohen, M. ∙ Giladi, A. ∙ Gorki, A.D. ... Lung Single-Cell Signaling Interaction Map Reveals Basophil Role in Macrophage Imprinting. Cell. 2018; 175 :1031-1044.e18 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (279) PubMed Google Scholar ; Gentek et al., 2018 22. Gentek, R. ∙ Ghigo, C. ∙ Hoeffel, G. ... Hemogenic Endothelial Fate Mapping Reveals Dual Developmental Origin of Mast Cells Immunity. 2018; 48 :1160-1171.e5 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (208) PubMed Google Scholar ) reinforces the concept of innate immunity as a bona fide functional component of tissues. This notion should incite exploration of the mechanisms that mediate myeloid adaptation to tissues, as they may be important for diagnosis and therapies of diseases that involve alterations of the innate immune system.

Section: STAR★Methods

REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies Anti-Mouse CD3e Percp/Cy5.5 (Clone 17A2) BioLegend RRID: AB_1595597 Anti-F4/80-PE.Cy7 (clone BM8) eBioscience RRID: AB_469653 Ly6G-Dylight 650 (Clone 1A8) BioXcell (conjugated in-house) RRID: AB_1107721 Ly6G-FITC (Clone 1A8) eBioscience RRID: AB_2572532 CD45-PerCP-Cy5.5 (Clone 30-F11) Biolegend RRID: AB_893344 CD11b-PE (Clone M1/70) Tonbo Biosciences RRID: AB_2621746 CD11b-FITC (Clone M1/70) BD RRID: AB_394774 Anti-CD11b-Bv510 (Clone M1/70) Biolegend RRID: AB_2561390 CXCR2-PerCP-Cy5.5 (Clone SA044G4) Biolegend RRID: AB_2565695 CXCR4-APC (Clone 2B11) eBioscience RRID: AB_10670877 Anti-IL1B-APC (Clone NJTEN3) eBioscience RRID: AB_10670739 Ly6C-FITC (Clone HK1.4) Biolegend RRID: AB_1186134 Anti-Mouse/Rat Ki-67 eFluor 660 (Clone SolA15) eBioscienece RRID: AB_2574235 Anti-Mouse CD49b (pan-NK cells) PE (clone HMa2) BD RRID: AB_397108 Anti-CD45-PerCP.Cy5.5 (clone 30-F11) Biolegend RRID: AB_893340 Anti-Mouse CD45R-BV220 APC-Cy7 (clone B220) BD RRID: AB_394335 Anti-CD45.1-PerCP.Cy5.5 (Clone A20) TonboBioscience RRID: AB_2621893 anti-mouse CD144 (VE-cadherin) APC Biolegend RRID: AB_10679039 Anti-Mouse NK1.1 AF488 (Clone Pk136) Biolegend RRID: AB_313392 Chicken Anti-GFP (polyclonal) Thermo Fisher RRID: AB_2534023 Anti-Mouse S100-A9 (Clone 2B10) Abcam RRID: AB_10862594 Rabbit monoclonal anti-ERG (Clone EPR3864) Abcam RRID: AB_2630401 Anti-Mouse CD74 AF647 (Clone: in1/CD74) BioLegend RRID: AB_2632608 Anti-Mouse CR1/2 (Clone:7E/9) Biolegend RRID: AB_940403 Anti-Mouse CD49d-APC (Clone R1-2) Biolegend RRID: AB_2565776 Anti-Mouse CD115 (c-fms) PE eBioscience RRID: AB_465809 Anti-Mouse CD117 (c-Kit) PE-Cy7 (Clone 2B8) eBioscience RRID: AB_469644 Anti-CD31 PE-Cy7 (Clone: 390) eBioscience RRID: AB_2716949 F4/80 antibody (Clone:A3-1) Abcam RRID: AB_1140040 CD45R/B220 antibody BD RRID: AB_396673 CD31 antibody Abcam RRID: AB_726362 Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains WT Charles River C57BL/6 Mrp8 CRE Passegué et al., 2004 53. Passegué, E. ∙ Wagner, E.F. ∙ Weissman, I.L. JunB deficiency leads to a myeloproliferative disorder arising from hematopoietic stem cells Cell. 2004; 119 :431-443 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (342) PubMed Google Scholar B6.Cg-Tg(S100A8-cre,-EGFP)1Ilw Cxcr4 fl/fl Nie et al., 2004 52. Nie, Y. ∙ Waite, J. ∙ Brewer, F. ... The role of CXCR4 in maintaining peripheral B cell compartments and humoral immunity J Exp Med. 2004; 200 :1145-1156 Crossref Scopus (302) PubMed Google Scholar B6.129P2-Cxcr4 tm2Yzo Mrp8 CRE ; Cxcr4 fl/fl (Cxcr4 ΔN ) This paper N/A Nr4a1 f/f Sekiya et al., 2013 61. Sekiya, T. ∙ Kashiwagi, I. ∙ Yoshida, R. ... Nr4a receptors are essential for thymic regulatory T cell development and immune homeostasis Nat Immunol. 2013; 14 :230-237 Crossref Scopus (244) PubMed Google Scholar Nr4a1tm1a(EUCOMM)Wtsi Mrp8 CRE ; Nr4a1 f/f ( Nr4a1 ΔN ) This paper N/A Arntl fl/fl Janich et al., 2011 33. Janich, P. ∙ Pascual, G. ∙ Merlos-Suárez, A. ... The circadian molecular clock creates epidermal stem cell heterogeneity Nature. 2011; 480 :209-214 Crossref Scopus (257) PubMed Google Scholar B6.129S4(Cg)-Arntl tm1Weit Mrp8 CRE ; Arntl fl/fl ( Arntl ΔN ) This paper N/A Cxcl12 GFP Ara et al., 2003 3. Ara, T. ∙ Itoi, M. ∙ Kawabata, K. ... A Role of CXC Chemokine Ligand 12/Stromal Cell-Derived Factor-1/Pre-B Cell Growth Stimulating Factor and Its Receptor CXCR4 in Fetal and Adult T Cell Development in Vivo J Immunol. 2003; 4649-4655 Crossref Scopus (156) PubMed Google Scholar Cxcl12tm2Tng Lyz2 GFP Faust et al., 2000 21. Faust, N. ∙ Varas, F. ∙ Kelly, L.M. ... Insertion of enhanced green fluorescent protein into the lysozyme gene creates mice with green fluorescent granulocytes and macrophages Blood. 2000; 719-726 Crossref PubMed Google Scholar B6.129P-Lyz2 tm1(EGFP)1.1Graf/Mmmh Rosa26 tdTomato Madisen et al., 2010 44. Madisen, L. ∙ Zwingman, T.A. ∙ Sunkin, S.M. ... A robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole mouse brain Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13 :133-140 Crossref Scopus (4610) PubMed Google Scholar B6.Cg-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm14(CAG-tdTomato)Hze/J Rosa26 DTR Buch et al., 2005 9. Buch, T. ∙ Heppner, F.L. ∙ Tertilt, C. ... A Cre-inducible diphtheria toxin receptor mediates cell lineage ablation after toxin administration Nat Methods. 2005; 2 :419-426 Crossref Scopus (670) PubMed Google Scholar C57BL/6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(HBEGF)Awai/J Ly6g CRE Hasenberg et al., 2015 29. Hasenberg, A. ∙ Hasenberg, M. ∙ Männ, L. ... Catchup: a mouse model for imaging-based tracking and modulation of neutrophil granulocytes Nat Methods. 2015; 12 :445-452 Crossref Scopus (177) PubMed Google Scholar N/A Ly6g CREERT2 This paper N/A Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins Diphteria Toxin Calbiochem CAT# 322326 Tamoxifen Sigma CAT# T5648 Oligonucleotides Primers for qPCR, see method details This paper N/A Critical commercial Assays nCounter XT Elements XT-ELE-048-P1TS Nanostring® 041121000004 Counter Master Kit NAA-AKIT-012 Nanostring® 041100052-K Software and Algorithms ImageJ NIH Schindelin J. et al., 2015 Imaris Bitplane RRID: SCR_007370 Genesis TÜ Graz RRID: SCR_015775 Prism Graphpad RRID: SCR_002798 Flowjo vX Treestar RRID: SCR_008520 Cutadapt NBIS https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/ RSEM PMID https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21816040/ http://deweylab.github.io/RSEM/ R The R Foundation https://www.r-project.org/ Limma PMID https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25605792/ https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html Seurat PMID https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29608179/ https://satijalab.org/seurat/ kallisto PMID https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27043002/ https://pachterlab.github.io/kallisto/ sleuth PMID https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28581496/ https://pachterlab.github.io/sleuth/ Open table in a new tab
Further information on materials, datasets, and protocols should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Andres Hidalgo ( ahidalgo@cnic.es ).
This study generated the Ly6G CRERT2 mouse line, which is available from our laboratory through standard Material Transfer Agreement (MTA).
All the omics data is available as a super-series in GEO under the accession number GSE143255 . The individual accession numbers are as follows: Tissue leukocyte cells scRNaseq data: GSE142754. Tissue neutrophils bulk RNaseq data from parabiosis: GSE141745. Germ free and SPF tissue neutrophils bulk RNaseq data: GSE142432. Tissue neutrophils ATACseq data: GSE141285.
All experiments were performed on 6–12-wk-old C57BL/6 male and female mice. Chow and water were available ad libitum . The following knock-in or transgenic mice were used: Cxcr4 flox/flox ( Nie et al., 2004 52. Nie, Y. ∙ Waite, J. ∙ Brewer, F. ... The role of CXCR4 in maintaining peripheral B cell compartments and humoral immunity J Exp Med. 2004; 200 :1145-1156 Crossref Scopus (302) PubMed Google Scholar ), hMRP8 CRE ( Passegué et al., 2004 53. Passegué, E. ∙ Wagner, E.F. ∙ Weissman, I.L. JunB deficiency leads to a myeloproliferative disorder arising from hematopoietic stem cells Cell. 2004; 119 :431-443 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (342) PubMed Google Scholar ), Cxcl12 GFP ( Sugiyama et al., 2006 65. Sugiyama, T. ∙ Kohara, H. ∙ Noda, M. ... Maintenance of the hematopoietic stem cell pool by CXCL12-CXCR4 chemokine signaling in bone marrow stromal cell niches Immunity. 2006; 25 :977-988 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (1849) PubMed Google Scholar ), Rosa26 iDTR ( Buch et al., 2005 9. Buch, T. ∙ Heppner, F.L. ∙ Tertilt, C. ... A Cre-inducible diphtheria toxin receptor mediates cell lineage ablation after toxin administration Nat Methods. 2005; 2 :419-426 Crossref Scopus (670) PubMed Google Scholar ), Ly6g CRE ; Rosa26 tdTomato ( Hasenberg et al., 2015 29. Hasenberg, A. ∙ Hasenberg, M. ∙ Männ, L. ... Catchup: a mouse model for imaging-based tracking and modulation of neutrophil granulocytes Nat Methods. 2015; 12 :445-452 Crossref Scopus (177) PubMed Google Scholar ). Mice with neutrophil-specific deficiency in CXCR4, Bmal1 or Nr4a1 were generated by crossing hMRP8 CRE with Cxcr4 flox/flox mice (Cxcr4 DN mice), Arntl flox/flox (Bmal1 DN mice), (kindly provided by S. Benitah; ( Janich et al., 2011 33. Janich, P. ∙ Pascual, G. ∙ Merlos-Suárez, A. ... The circadian molecular clock creates epidermal stem cell heterogeneity Nature. 2011; 480 :209-214 Crossref Scopus (257) PubMed Google Scholar )) or Nr4a1 flox/flox (Nr4a1 DN mice; floxed mice kindly provided by Gerhard Krönke). All mice were in the C57BL/6 background and were maintained on a 12 h light/12 h darkness schedule. Mice were housed in a specific pathogen–free facility at Fundación CNIC. Experiments exploring the effect of microbiota in neutrophil transcriptional profile were performed with mice housed in the Translational Animal Research Center (TARC) of the University Medical Center Mainz under specific-pathogen-free (SPF) or germ-free (GF) conditions in EU type II cages with two to five cage companions with standard autoclaved lab diet and water ad libitum , 22°C ± 2°C room temperature, and a 12-h light/dark cycle. All experimental procedures were approved by the local Animal Care and Ethics Committees.
Ly6G CreERT2 mice were generated at the Transgenesis and Pluripotent Cell Technology Units of CNIC. Briefly, a creERT2 fusion gene (a Cre recombinase fused to a human estrogen receptor ligand binding domain) followed by an SV40 polyadenylation signal, and a FRT-flanked neomycin resistance (neo) cassette was inserted into the exon 2 of the Ly6G gene by homologous recombination in ES cells ( Ly6G CreERT2 ). Flp-mediated recombination removed the FRT-flanked neo cassette and knock-in mice were then backcrossed onto a C57BL/6 background for 8 generations to eliminate off-target effects. Finally, to generate an inducible reporter to track neutrophils, Ly6G CREERT2 mice were crossed with Rosa26 Tdtomato mice ( Madisen et al., 2010 44. Madisen, L. ∙ Zwingman, T.A. ∙ Sunkin, S.M. ... A robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole mouse brain Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13 :133-140 Crossref Scopus (4610) PubMed Google Scholar ), resulting in the iLy6G tdTom mice used in our experiments. For colony genotyping, we used the following primer sequences: 5′-ACTAACCAGCTTCGACTTCCAAGG RV (Wt), 5′-TTGGGACGGTCGCTTTGGTAG- and 5′-GGAACCTTCAGCTTCGACCAATCA (Tg). Wild type band size: 315b.p. and transgenic band size: 648bp. Alternatively, the Cre-ERT2 insertion was confirmed by flow cytometry as shown in Figure S1 .
To induce neutropenia, 4 and 6-12 week-old male and female Mrp8 Cre iDTR mice were injected intraperitoneally with 10 μg/kg of diphtheria toxin (DT; Calbiochem) for 7 days. Injections were done every 2 day. An intraperitoneal injection of tamoxifen (4mg/mice) was performed to induce CRE recombinase activity in 6-12 week-old male iLy6G tdTom mice. Maximum pulse labeling efficiency was reached 3 days after tamoxifen administration in blood and in tissues, and affects 5%–10% of the overall neutrophil population. To explore the role of GM-CSF and TGFb in neutrophil tissue specification by Nanostring profiling, 6-12 week-old C57BL/6 male mice were treated i.v. with 100 mg of anti-GM-CSF (BE0259 BioxCell, MP1/22E9) or anti-TGFb (BE0057 BioxCell 1D/11) antibodies for 3 consecutive days before harvest. To study the role of neutrophils on endothelial cell proliferation and on leukocyte counts recovery, 6-12 week-old male and female mice received a 6Gy irradiation dose and measurements were made 7 days after irradiation.
We followed previously published procedures ( Casanova-Acebes et al., 2018 13. Casanova-Acebes, M. ∙ Nicolás-Ávila, J.A. ∙ Li, J.L. ... Neutrophils instruct homeostatic and pathological states in naive tissues J Exp Med. 2018; 215 :2778-2795 Crossref Scopus (200) PubMed Google Scholar ). Briefly, anesthetized 6 week-old male mice were shaved and matched incisions were made from the olecranon to the knee joint, then olecranon and knee were attached by a single suture from one mouse to the other, using 5-0 polypropylene, and the dorsal and ventral skins were stitched by continuous suture. Analyses were done 4 weeks after surgery.
To address the competitive advantage of wild type versus CXCR4 DN neutrophils in the lungs, we generated mixed bone marrow chimeras. Donor BM cells were harvested from CD45.1 or MRP8 CRE+ Cxcr4 f/f 6-12 week-old males by flushing the femur with PBS. Recipient wild-type C57BL/6 6-12 week-old male mice were lethally irradiated (two 6Gy doses, 3 h apart) before receiving 1 million BM nucleated cells by intravenous injection. For mixed chimeras, equal numbers of experimental CD45.2 and wild-type CD45.1 BM cells were mixed before intravenous injection. Engraftment of recipient animals was assessed 8–10 weeks after transplantation by analysis of the percentage of mutant and CD45.1 leukocytes in blood by flow cytometry.
Blood was taken through cardiac puncture with 1ml syringe attached to a 26 g needle filled with 50mL of 0.5M EDTA. Samples were lysed in RBC lysis buffer (eBioscience) for 4min. For BM cells, mice femurs were flushed using a 23–gauge needle in PBS containing 2mM EDTA and 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and passed through a 70–mm nylon mesh sieve. Spleens were harvested and homogenized into single-cell suspensions using 70–mm nylon mesh sieves and syringe plungers. Lungs and ear skins (dorsal and ventral side separately) were harvested and cut dry into small pieces before digested in liberase TM (Roche) and DNase1 (Sigma) for 45min at 37þC. Lung and skins were then homogenized into single-cell suspensions using 70–mm nylon mesh sieves and syringe plungers. Colons were harvested and cleaned of fecal matter before cutting longitudinally. Colons were washed in cold PBS to remove fecal contents and then shaken once in 20ml of cold PBS in a falcon tube. Colons were then incubated in 100mM EDTA for 30 min at 37þC in shaking incubator (250rpm). Tubes were shaken once to remove epithelial cells. Colons were cut into pieces and digested in 6-well plates containing liberase TM and DNase1 for 30min at 37þC. Colons were then homogenized into single-cell suspensions using 70–mm nylon mesh sieves and syringe plungers.
Single cell suspensions from blood, bone marrow, spleen, lung, intestine and skin from 6-12 week-old male mice were subjected to CD45 MACSbeads positive selection (Miltenyi Biotech) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After selection, samples were plated in a 96-well round bottom plate at a density of 5 × 10 6 cells per well. Cells were stained for viability with 100mL of 50mM of cisplatin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 5 min at 4°C. Cells were then washed with staining buffer (4% FBS, 0.05% sodium azide, 2mM EDTA in PBS) and incubated with anti-CCR2-APC, anti-CD34-FITC, anti-CD115-PE and anti-Flt3-biotin in 50mL reaction volume for 90 min at 4°C. Red blood cells were lysed with RBS lysis buffer (eBioscience) and cells were washed with staining buffer. Cells were stained with 50mL of metal isotope-labeled surface antibodies on ice. After 30 min, cells were washed twice with staining buffer, once with PBS, and then fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA) (Electron Microscopy Sciences) in PBS at 4°C overnight. The next day, cells were pelleted and re-suspended in 200μL permeabilization buffer (Biolegend) and allowed to stand for 5 min on ice. Cells were then washed once with PBS and incubated with cellular barcodes on ice for 30 min. Subsequently, cells were washed once with perm buffer and in staining buffer for 10 min on ice. Cellular DNA was labeled at room temperature with 250nM iridium intercalator (Fluidigm) in 2% PFA/PBS. After 20 min, cells were washed twice with staining buffer.
Prior to acquisition, cells were washed twice with water before final re-suspension in water. Cells were pooled from all samples, enumerated, filtered and diluted to a final concentration of 0.6 × 10 6 cells/mL. Mass-tag barcoding was used so that all samples could be acquired simultaneously. EQ Four Element Calibration Beads (Fluidigm) were added to the pooled samples at a final concentration of 1% prior to acquisition. Samples were acquired on a CyTOF2 (Fluidigm) equipped with a Super Sampler fluidic system (Victorian Airship & Scientific Apparatus LLC) at an event rate of < 500 events per second. After mass cytometry acquisition, data were exported in flow-cytometry (FCS) format, normalized and events with parameters having zero values were randomized using a uniform distribution of values between minus-one and zero.
For subsets identification, FSC files were analyzed with version 1.10.4 of the “cytofkit” R package. Briefly, manual gating of CD11b + Ly6G + neutrophils, F4/80 + CD11b + , SiglecF + CD11C + and CX3CR1 + MHC-II + Ly6C - macrophages, CD115 + CD11b + monocytes, B220 + B cells and CD49d + NK1.1 + NK cells from two independent replicates was performed using Flowjo software (Flowjo, LLC). Gated populations were merged, exported and analyzed with Phenograph (Cytofkit R package) with the following settings: merge: ceil, transformation: cytofAsinh, cluster: RPhenograph, visualization: t-SNE. 2-dimensional t-SNE maps were visualized and colored according to their cluster ID, the expression of lineage markers, or their corresponding tissue of origin.
cDNA Droplet-based digital 3′ end scRNA-seq was performed on a Chromium Single-Cell Controller (10 × Genomics, Pleasanton, CA) using the Chromium Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kit v2 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, blood, bone marrow, spleen and lung CD45 + CD11b + leukocyte suspensions from 6-12 week-old C57BL/6 male mice were FACS sorted in an Aria II sorter (BD). Cells were partitioned in Gel Beads in Emulsion (GEMs) and lysed, followed by RNA barcoding, reverse transcription and PCR amplification (12–14 cycles). Sequencing-ready scRNA-seq were prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions, checked and quantified on TapeStation 2200 (Agilent Genomics, Santa Clara, CA) and Qubit 3.0 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) instruments. Sequencing was performed on a NextSeq 500 machine (Illumina, San Diego, CA) using the NextSeq 500/550 High Output v2 kit (75 cycles), at the Center for Omics Sciences at the IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele (COSR).
Reads for the single cell experiments were generated on NextSeq 500 (illumina) instrument following manufacturer recommendations. Fastq.gz files were generated from raw Illumina BCL files using 10X Genomics Cell Ranger version 2.1.1 with default parameters. The quality of sequencing reads was evaluated using FastQC v0.11.5 and MultiQC v1.5. Cell Ranger v2.1.1 was then used to align the sequencing reads to the mm10 mouse transcriptome and to quantify the expression of transcripts in each cell. UMI and cell barcodes were then filtered as described in ref. Only confidently mapped reads, non-PCR duplicates, with valid barcodes and UMIs were retained to compute a gene expression matrix containing the number of UMI for every cell and gene. All downstream analyses were implemented using R v3.6.1 and the package Seurat v3.1.1 ( Butler et al., 2018 11. Butler, A. ∙ Hoffman, P. ∙ Smibert, P. ... Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species Nat Biotechnol. 2018; 36 :411-420 Crossref Scopus (6218) PubMed Google Scholar ; Stuart et al., 2019 64. Stuart, T. ∙ Butler, A. ∙ Hoffman, P. ... Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data Cell. 2019; 177 :1888-1902.e21 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (7310) PubMed Google Scholar ). For each sample, cells expressing less than 300 unique genes and genes expressed in less than 3 cells were discarded. Raw counts were then merged (resulting in 15,636 genes per 27,939 cells) and normalized using the Seurat function SCTransform after removing cells having more than 4% mitochondrial genes. The input gene expression matrix for the normalization was composed by 15,636 genes and 26,271 cells. During the normalization, the confounding sources of variation i.e., the mitochondrial mapping percentage, the S and G2M scores and the difference between them were removed. Cell cycle scores were calculated using CellCycleScoring function. The number of variable features in the SCTransform function after ranking by residual variance was set to 1000. During the normalization, 819 genes were automatically removed because expressed in less than 3 cells independently from the overall counts leading to retain 14,817 total genes. Expression data were than scaled using ScaleData function regressing on S and G2M scores. Graph-based clustering: most variable genes across the merged dataset (i.e., the highly variable genes) were identified based on the highest standardized variance. The procedure is implemented in the FindVariableFeatures function with method = “vst.” A total number of 1000 genes was selected as top variable features and used to perform the PCA dimensionality reduction. A KNN graph based on the euclidean distance in the 50 PCs space was constructed using the FindNeighbors function.
Gene signatures for different cell type populations: Cells were classified according to gene signatures derived from published RNA-Seq analyses of myeloid cells. Briefly, we downloaded expression data from Immgen RNA-Seq dataset ( https://www.immgen.org/ ). For each cell type (Neutrophils, Dendritic cells, NK cells, T cells and B cells) we extracted genes being differential in all pairwise comparisons with other cell types using glmFit and glmLRT functions from edgeR R package as described above. For each comparison, genes were called significant at FDR < 1e -4 and the top 200 ranked for decreasing fold change were selected. The final gene signature defining each cell type was the intersection of the resulting 4 lists. As monocytes were not included in Immgen dataset, we downloaded monocytes data from ( Mildner et al., 2017 48. Mildner, A. ∙ Schonheit, J. ∙ Giladi, A. ... Genomic Characterization of Murine Monocytes Reveals C/EBPbeta Transcription Factor Dependence of Ly6C(-) Cells Immunity 46. 2017; 849-862.e7 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (196) PubMed Google Scholar ) and calculated DEGs with edgeR ( Robinson et al., 2010 58. Robinson, M.D. ∙ McCarthy, D.J. ∙ Smyth, G.K. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data Bioinformatics. 2010; 26 :139-140 Crossref Scopus (26704) PubMed Google Scholar ) as above. We retained the top 5 genes, ranked by decreasing fold change, defining classical and non-classical Monocytes. Macrophages included in Immgen dataset were from peritoneal cavity, hence we used signature defined in ( Lavin et al., 2017 39. Lavin, Y. ∙ Kobayashi, S. ∙ Leader, A. ... Innate Immune Landscape in Early Lung Adenocarcinoma by Paired Single-Cell Analyses Cell. 2017; 169 :750-765.17 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (855) PubMed Google Scholar ) for macrophages from spleen. Once classified, we isolated the cells classified as neutrophils and performed a new normalization, scaling and clustering with a resolution of 0.1, using the shared nearest neighbor (SNN) method implemented in Seurat, and also a new tSNE. We performed differential expression analysis based on both the obtained clusters and the tissues. We also downloaded and analyzed data from ( Zilionis et al., 2019 73. Zilionis, R. ∙ Engblom, C. ∙ Pfirschke, C. ... Single-Cell Transcriptomics of Human and Mouse Lung Cancers Reveals Conserved Myeloid Populations across Individuals and Species Immunity. 2019; 50 :1317-1334.e10 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (810) PubMed Google Scholar ). We isolated neutrophils from healthy and tumoral lung tissue. We processed the reads with the standard normalization pipeline from Seurat and performed a clustering with 0.5 resolution.
For all differential expression analyses, only the genes detected in a minimum percentage of 25% of the cells in either of the two populations were reported and the testing was limited to genes which showed, on average, at least 0.25-fold difference (log-scale) between the two groups of cells. The tissue scores for each cell in the single cell dataset were obtained from the tissue signatures from the bulk RNA-seq data.
To mark progenitor cells, we created a signature made of genes from four different studies. As these studies used different nomenclatures for their neutrophil progenitor populations, we chose genes associated with early stages in each. We selected the GMP, proNeu and preNeu genes from ( Evrard et al., 2018 20. Evrard, M. ∙ Kwok, I.W.H. ∙ Chong, S.Z. ... Developmental Analysis of Bone Marrow Neutrophils Reveals Populations Specialized in Expansion, Trafficking, and Effector Functions Immunity. 2018; 48 :364-379.e8 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (413) PubMed Google Scholar ; Kwok et al., 2020 36. Kwok, I. ∙ Becht, E. ∙ Xia, Y. ... Combinatorial Single-Cell Analyses of Granulocyte-Monocyte Progenitor Heterogeneity Reveals an Early Uni-potent Neutrophil Progenitor Immunity. 2020; 53 :303-318.e5 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (138) PubMed Google Scholar ); the Early and late-stage progenitor genes from ( Zhu et al., 2018 72. Zhu, Y.P. ∙ Padgett, L. ∙ Dinh, H.Q. ... Identification of an Early Unipotent Neutrophil Progenitor with Pro-tumoral Activity in Mouse and Human Bone Marrow Cell Rep. 2018; 24 :2329-2341.e8 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (148) PubMed Google Scholar ) and the Neu progenitor genes from ( Kim et al., 2017 35. Kim, M.H. ∙ Yang, D. ∙ Kim, M. ... A late-lineage murine neutrophil precursor population exhibits dynamic changes during demand-adapted granulopoiesis Sci Rep. 2017; 7 :39804 Crossref Scopus (57) PubMed Google Scholar ). For the pro-angiogenic score, we downloaded all the genes annotated under the “Angiogenesis” GO category keeping for the signature only those with experimental evidence or high throughput evidence and discarding the genes related to “negative regulation.” Gene are listed in Table S5 .
All the scores are calculated dividing the total amount of transcripts belonging to genes from a particular signature by the total transcripts of the cell and by the number of genes in the signature. The diffusion map was obtained with the Seurat suite with 1000 nearest neighbors.
Blood, lung and spleen neutrophils from 6-12 week-old C57BL/6 male mice were FACS sorted using CD45, CD11b, Ly6G and DAPI labeling. For the bone marrow, Ly6G + CXCR2 hi mature neutrophils were sorted. All sorted samples had with typical purities > 95%. Cell processing for ATAC-seq was performed as previously described ( Buenrostro et al., 2013 10. Buenrostro, J.D. ∙ Giresi, P.G. ∙ Zaba, L.C. ... Transposition of native chromatin for fast and sensitive epigenomic profiling of open chromatin, DNA-binding proteins and nucleosome position Nat Methods. 2013; 10 :1213-1218 Crossref Scopus (4008) PubMed Google Scholar ). Briefly, Samples were size selected using AMPure XP beads (Beckman-Coulter) to yield libraries ranging from 100 bp – 1000 bp Samples were quality checked for nucleosomal phasing and size distribution using DNA hi-sensitivity Bioanalyzer assay (Agilent). Quantification was performed with KAPA Library Quantification Kit (Illumina) and samples were pooled at an equimolar ratio and sequenced on a HiSeq2500 using 75 bp paired-end chemistry in Welcome Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford. Raw sequencing reads were trimmed with Cutadapt prior to mapping to the mm10 version of the mouse genome using Bowtie2 with the following parameters–local–X 2000. PCR duplicates were removed with PicardTools, additionally, reads mapping to chrM, with MAPQ < 10, and insert sizes > 150 bp were removed prior to peakcalling. Peaks were called with MACS2 with the following settings:–format BAMPE–nomodel–keep-dup all–mfold 5 50. Peaks found in at least 2 biological replicates were kept for further analysis and merged peakset consisting on all discovered peaks was used for differential accessibility testing. Reads were counted over the merged peakset using BedTools and tested using DESeq2. Significantly differentially accessible peaks were deemed as having adjusted p values < 0.05 (LRT test), and adjusted p values < 0.05, and fold change > 1.5 (Wald test). DeepTools was used to generate normalized BigWigs from all biological replicates, which were merged for visualization. De novo motif discovery was performed using Homer findMotifs.pl on the central 100 bp from all of the peaks in each cluster using a local background comprising the 100 bp flanking sequences of each peak and default settings. Motif scanning was conducted using Homer annotatePeaks.pl on 1 kb windows centered over ATAC peaks with a bin size of 5b.p. using discovered motifs.
Blood and tissue neutrophils from 10-12 week-old male mice set in parabiosis for 4 weeks were FACS sorted using CD45, CD11b, Ly6G and DAPI labeling, with typical purities > 95%. cDNA amplification from neutrophil RNA and generation of index-tagged sequencing libraries were carried out using the Ovation Single Cell RNA-Seq System (NuGEN Technologies, San Carlos CA). Libraries were quantified using the dsDNA HS assay with the Qubit fluorometer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, California). Average library size and size distribution were determined using a High Sensitivity DNA assay in an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara CA). Libraries were normalized to 10nM using Tris-Cl 10mM, pH8.5 with 0.1% Tween 20. Libraries were applied to an Illumina flow cell for cluster generation (True Seq SR Cluster Kit V2 cBot) and 61 nt long, single-end reads were generated on a Genome Analyzer IIx, using the TruSeq SBS Kit v5 (Illumina) and following the standard RNA sequencing protocol. Data from the germ-free experiment were paired end sequenced in the HiSeq2500 (Illumina). The RNA sequencing experiments were performed at the Genomics Unit at CNIC.
FastQ files for each sample were obtained using the CASAVA package (Illumina) to demultiplex reads according to adaptor indexes and to produce fastq files. Read quality was determined with the application FastQC v0.11.5 ( Schageman et al., 2013 60. Schageman, J. ∙ Zeringer, E. ∙ Li, M. ... The complete exosome workflow solution: from isolation to characterization of RNA cargo BioMed Res Int. 2013; 2013 :253957 Crossref Scopus (150) PubMed Google Scholar ) and MultiQC v1.5. For data analysis, sequencing adaptor contaminations were removed from reads using Cutadapt v1.7.1 and the resulting reads were mapped on the transcriptome (GRCm38 Ensembl gene-build 84, without miRNAs or pseudo-genes) and quantified using RSEM v1.2.20 ( Li and Dewey, 2011 40. Li, B. ∙ Dewey, C.N. RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with or without a reference genome BMC Bioinformatics. 2011; 12 :323 Crossref Scopus (13966) PubMed Google Scholar ) and kallisto v0.43.1 ( Bray et al., 2016 8. Bray, N.L. ∙ Pimentel, H. ∙ Melsted, P. ... Near-optimal probabilistic RNA-seq quantification Nat Biotechnol. 2016; 34 :525-527 Crossref Scopus (5202) PubMed Google Scholar ). Genes not detected in any of the samples were not considered for statistical analysis. The R package limma v3.32.2 ( Ritchie et al., 2015 57. Ritchie, M.E. ∙ Phipson, B. ∙ Wu, D. ... limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43 :e47 Crossref Scopus (21698) PubMed Google Scholar ) was used to normalize the estimated counts from RSEM and to test differential expression using limma’s moderated t test. The R package sleuth v0.3.0 ( Pimentel et al., 2017 55. Pimentel, H. ∙ Bray, N.L. ∙ Puente, S. ... Differential analysis of RNA-seq incorporating quantification uncertainty Nat Methods. 2017; 14 :687-690 Crossref Scopus (879) PubMed Google Scholar ) was used to normalize the pseudo-counts from kallisto and to perform the Likelihood Ratio Test across different tissues. Only genes with over 5 estimated TPMs in at least 47% of the samples were considered in sleuth. Raw and Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p values (FDR) were calculated for each of the tests. An adjusted p value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
The signature gens were obtained by performing several filtering steps. First, a contrast of each tissue against the rest was performed. Then, we selected the differentially expressed genes with a log2FC > 2 in the tissue. Finally, the remaining genes that were upregulated only in one of the tissues but not the rest were selected for the signature.
Total RNA was prepared with the RNA Extraction RNeasy Plus Mini-kit (QIAGEN) and RNA was reverse-transcribed with the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Applied Biosystems; Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Real-time quantitative PCR (SYBR-green, Applied Biosystems) assays were performed with an Applied Biosystems 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System sequencer detector. Expression was normalized to the expression of the 36b4 housekeeping gene. Primer sequences are as follow: 36b4 : F 5′-ACTGGTCTAGGACCCGAGAAG-, R 5′- TCCCACCTTGTCTCCAGTCT-; Ptgs2 : F 5′ -TGAGCAACTATTCCAAACCAGC-, R 5′- GCACGTAGTCTTCGATCACTATC-; Nr4a1 : F 5′- TTGAGTTCGGCAAGCCTACC-, R 5′- GTGTACCCGTCCATGAAGGTG-; Il1b : F 5′-AGTGAGGAGAATGACCTGTTC-, R 5′-CGAGATGCTGCTGTGAGATT-; Tnfaip3 : F 5′-GAACAGCGATCAGGCCAGG-, R 5′-GGACAGTTGGGTGTCTCACATT-; Cebpe : F 5 -’GCAGCCACTTGAGTTCT CAGG-, R 5′-GATGTAGGCGGAGAGGTCGAT-; Ltf : F 5′-TGAGGCCCTTGGACTCTGT-, R 5′-ACCCACTTTTCTCATCTCGTTC-; Ifitm3: 5′-TTCTGCTGCCTGGGCTTCATAG-, R 5′-ACCAAGGTGCTGATGTTCAGGC-; Cr2: F 5′-TTGCTGCCAAAGTATTCTTTTGC-, R 5′-TGGAGGTTTCTAAGCAGGTGATA-; Cd74 F 5′-AGATGCGGATGGCTACTCC-, R 5′-TCATGTTGCCGCCGTACTTGGTAAC-.
RNA was extracted from sorted neutrophils from the blood and lung from 6-12 week-old male mice using RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN) and stored at −80C. Samples were subjected to the NanoString nCounter gene expression assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol (NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA). For the analysis, a custom nCounter® assay for quantitative assessment of expression of 48 gene element was designed (See Table S5 ). Raw data were analyzed by nSolver software (NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA, USA) using standard settings and were normalized against the housekeeping genes.
Flow cytometry was performed at the Cellomics Unit of Fundación CNIC. Samples were acquired in a LSRII Fortessa or FACS Canto analyzer (BD Biosciences). Doublets and DAPI + cells were excluded from analyses using the FlowJo software (Flowjo LLC). To determine proliferation, cells were stained with anti-CD45 conjugated with PerCP/Cy5.5 and anti-CD31-PECy7 and then fixed and permeabilized using the Fix/Perm and Perm Buffers (eBiosciences) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were then stained for 30 min at 4°C with an anti-mouse and rat Ki67 antibody labeled with eFluor660 and analyzed by flow cytometry. The same procedure was performed to determine IL1b levels in tissue and circulating neutrophils. Truecount beads (BD) were used to estimate leukocyte counts after genotoxic damage on single cell suspensions from blood, bone marrow and spleen. Antibodies used are listed in the key resource table.
Intravital microscopy of the lung was performed as reported ( Adrover et al., 2020 2. Adrover, J.M. ∙ Aroca-Crevillén, A. ∙ Crainiciuc, G. ... Programmed ‘disarming’ of the neutrophil proteome reduces the magnitude of inflammation Nat Immunol. 2020; 21 :135-144 Crossref Scopus (176) PubMed Google Scholar ). Briefly, 6-12 week-old male mice were anesthetized and mechanically ventilated through the trachea using a small animal ventilator model 687 (Harvard Apparatus). Then, right lateral thoracotomy was applied, and the lung was positioned under the window of a custom-built fixation device. A mild vacuum was applied to hold the lung in position during microscopy. Mice were injected with AF647-conjugated Ly6G antibody to stain neutrophils. 4D imaging was performed for each mouse in 5 random fields inside the visualization window, using the VIVO system. Quantification of the kinetic parameters of intravascular crawling neutrophils was performed using automated cell tracking with Imaris (Bitplane AG, Switzerland).
4 or 6-12 week-old male and female mice were perfused with 20ml of saline through the left ventricle of the heart, and the lungs and colons were collected in cold PBS. For colon whole-mount, large intestine colons were excised and flushed with cold PBS and opened by the mesenteric border. Colons exposing the lumen upward were placed in HBSS with 5 mM EDTA in agitation for 30 min at 37°C. Epithelial cells were removed by several washes of the intestinal surface with HBSS/EDTA. Tissues were washed in cold PBS and fixed in PFA 4% at 4°C overnight. Fixed intestines and lungs were permeabilized in methanol gradients in PBS for 30 min (PBS > MetOH 50% > MetOH 80% > MetOH 100%) and then were rehydrated through descending methanol gradients in PBS (MetOH 80% > MetOH 50% > PBS). Rehydrated tissues were washed three times in PBS containing 0.5% Triton X-100 (PBST) and blocked overnight with PBST with 25% FBS at 4°C with shaking. Staining of neutrophils was performed with a biotinylated anti-Mrp14 antibody (clone 2B10, Abcam) or with biotinylated anti-MPO (R&D Systems) and vessels with an anti-CD31 (BD Biosciences) in 25% FBS-PBST 48 h at 4°C with shaking. GFP detection was performed using a chicken anti-GFP primary antibody (Invitrogen). Tissues were washed and incubated with secondary antibodies (goat anti-rat Alexa Fluor 568 and goat anti-Armenian hamster 647; and goat anti-chicken Alexa Fluor 488 Life Technologies) and DAPI in 25% FBS-PBST over night at 4C. 48 h after incubation tissues were washed for 24 h in washing buffer and were dehydrated in MetOH gradients in dH20 using glass containers for 30 min in each step (MetOH 50% > MetOH 70% > MetOH 90% > three times MetOH 100%). Finally, tissues were cleared for 30 min in MetOH with 50% benzyl alcohol, benzyl benzoate (BABB) and afterward in 100% BABB (1:2). In addition to BABB staining, lung whole mount immunostaining in CXCL12 GFP mice was performed using QUBIC ( Susaki et al., 2014 67. Susaki, E.A. ∙ Tainaka, K. ∙ Perrin, D. ... Whole-brain imaging with single-cell resolution using chemical cocktails and computational analysis Cell. 2014; 157 :726-739 Full Text Full Text (PDF) Scopus (932) PubMed Google Scholar ). Briefly, an anti-VE Cadherin-APC (Biolegend) and an anti-Ly6G-PE (Biolegend) were retroorbitally injected to CXCL12 GFP mice. 10 min after injection, mice were perfused with 20ml of PBS and lungs fixed for 4 h with 4% PFA. Lungs were then incubated at 37C for 3 days in QUBIC1 solution. Imaging of whole-mount was performed at the Microscopy & Dynamic Imaging Unit of the CNIC using a Zeiss 780 confocal microscopy system. Additionally, organs cleared to determine neutrophil distribution in tissues were imaged using the light sheet Ultramicroscope (LaVision BioTec GmbH, Bielefeld, Germany) in BABB with 2x/0.5 objective (with zoom factor of 2.0), using a white light supercontinuum laser. Analysis and 3D-redered reconstructions were performed with Imaris (Bitplane AG, Switzerland).
4 or 6-12 week-old male and female mice were sacrificed with CO 2 and perfused with a saline solution in order to collect the tissues into a 2% PFA solution. After 24 h in fixation solution at 4°C, samples were cryopreserved with a sucrose gradient. For immunofluorescence staining, tissues were frozen in OCT Compound (Tissue Tek) using dry ice, cut in 12mm sections in a cryostat (Leica CM1850), block with 5% of Normal Goat Serum (Vector) for 1 h at RT. To characterize the lung endothelium, tissues were stained with rabbit anti-ERG (Abcam) overnight followed by incubation with secondary goat-anti rabbit Alexa 546 antibody and DAPI. To identify neutrophil distribution, tissues were stained with anti-CD31 antibody (Abcam), followed by incubation with secondary goat-anti rabbit Alexa 488 or 647 antibody and DAPI. Endogenous tomato or GFP signal from Ly6G Ly6g CRE ; Rosa26 tdTomato or Lyz2 GFP mice was used to identify partner deriver or transferred neutrophils.
For immunohistochemical analysis on paraffin, sections were dehydrated and paraffin wax embedded. 4-micron sections were deparafinized and brought to TBS buffer. Antigen unmasking was performed using heat induced epitope retrieval (HIER) with Citrate buffer at pH6 (anti-B220, BD and anti-F4/80, Abcam) or Tris-EDTA buffer at pH9 (anti-CD31, Abcam). Endogenous peroxidase was blocked by incubation with H 2 O 2 for 5 min and endogenous antigens blocked with fetal bovine serum FBS) for anti-CD31 and anti-F4/80 or bovine serum albumin (BSA) for anti-B220 during 20 min to subsequently incubate with the primary antibodies. As secondary antibodies, we used a HRP-conjugated rabbit anti-rat antibody (Dako P045001) for anti-B220 and F4/80 and a HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit polymer (EnVision® K4003, Dako) for CD31. DAB (3,3′- diaminobenzidine) was used for visualization and nuclei were counterstained with Hematoxylin. For standard Hematoxylin and Eosin staining sample were rehydrated in decreased concentrations of ethanol, then 3 min in Harris Hematoxylin, 3 s in Acid Alcohol and 5 min in alcoholic eosin 5% solution, dehydrate again and mount with DPX. All the immunohistochemical procedures were performed using an automated autostainer (Autostainer Plus®, Dako). For image analysis the samples were digitalized with a scanner (NanoZoomer-2.0RS, Hamamatsu).
Cytologic examination of FACS-sorted neutrophils from 6-12 week-old male and female mice was performed on cytospin preparations stained with Giemsa (Sigma). Sections were examined with a FSX100 microscope (Olympus).
Influenza A virus strain A/PR8/34 (H1N1) stock suspension was diluted, and 60 PFU were administered intra-nasally to isoflurane-anesthetized 8-12 week-old male mice in 50 μl of PBS. Mouse weight was monitored daily after infection and mice that presented weight loss < 20% of their initial body weight were sacrificed and considered deceased.
TdTomato + cells from the bone marrow of Ly6G CRE+ Rosa26 TdTomato Catchup 8-12 week-old male mice were FACS sorted and resuspended in calcium- and magnesium-free PBS at a concentration of 2x10 4 cells/mL. One million (1 × 10 6 ) cells were injected intratracheally, intrasplenic or intraperitoneally to CD45.1 8-12 week-old male mice in 50μl of sterile PBS. 18 h later, mice were sacrificed and lungs, spleen and peritoneal suspensions were prepared for FACS sorting. For RT-PCR analysis, 50.000 CD45.2 + CD11b + Ly6G + Tdtomato + or CD45.1 + CD11b + Ly6G + Tdtomato NEG cells were sorted, pelleted and resuspended in 350 mL of RLT lysis buffer (Quiagen) for RNA extraction.
To determine neutrophil half-lives and mean lifespans in tissues we used the normalized to maximum percentage of tdTomato + neutrophils (n Tom ) observed in blood and tissues during 1-7 days ( t j ) after tamoxifen injection in adult iLy6G tdTom reporter mice. In the present context, half-lives represent the time required for neutrophils to reduce their numbers to half of their values with respect to a reference time defined below. Moreover, mean lifespans account for the most long-lived 10 percent of a given cohort of neutrophils. To find the half-lives 𝑡 ( 𝑖 ) 1 / 2 in a tissue 𝑖 , we calculated the mean lifetimes 𝜏 𝑖 and then applied the relation 𝑡 ( 𝑖 ) 1 / 2 = l o g ⁡ ( 2 ) ⁢ 𝜏 𝑖 .
A first estimation of the mean lifetimes was performed by resorting to the survival function 𝑠 𝑖 ⁡ ( 𝑎 ) for a cohort of pulse-labeled neutrophils after tamoxifen administration. Here, 𝑠 𝑖 ⁡ ( 𝑎 ) provides the proportion of the initial cohort of tdTomato + neutrophils in tissue 𝑖 that are still alive when their age is 𝑎 ≥ 0 . It is a monotonically non-increasing function satisfying 𝑠 𝑖 ⁡ ( 𝑎 0 ) = 1 , with 𝑎 0 denoting an initial reference age, and 𝑠 𝑖 ⁡ ( 𝑎 m a x ) = 0 for a sufficiently long age 𝑎 m a x . The corresponding mean lifetimes in all the sampled tissues can be computed via the integral (i.e., the area under 𝑠 𝑖 ⁡ ( 𝑎 ) ) 𝜏 𝑖 = 𝑎 m a x ∫ 𝑎 0 𝑠 𝑖 ⁡ ( 𝑎 ) 𝑑 𝑎 .
We set our initial reference age 𝑎 0 = 2 days in the case of bone marrow and 𝑎 0 = 3 days in all other tissues (i.e., when the normalized to maximum percentage of tdTomato + neutrophils reached 100%), both after tamoxifen injection. Moreover, 𝑎 m a x = 7 days which was the last day of tissue sample collection. The survival functions for each of the tissues were constructed via cubic spline interpolation of the datasets from 𝑎 0 up to 𝑎 m a x . From the obtained mean lifetimes, the corresponding half-lives that resulted were: Bone marrow (22.9 h), blood (12.2 h), spleen (12.8 h), lung (11.3 h), liver (12.1 h), intestine (13.0 h), and skin (21.0 h).
As a second method to estimate half-lives and to further calculate the 95% confidence intervals displayed in Figure S1 E, we put forward a simple mathematical model comprising unlabeled and labeled neutrophils in each compartment (tissue). Our goal was to obtain closed-form formulas for the kinetics of the labeled neutrophil subpopulations suitable, at a later computational stage, for nonlinear regression analyses. To this end, let 𝑈 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) and 𝐿 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) denote the number of unlabeled and labeled post-mitotic neutrophils in the bone marrow (BM) at time 𝑡 ≥ 0 , respectively. The ordinary differential equations (ODEs) governing the kinetics of these two subpopulations are 𝑑 ⁢ 𝑈 𝑑 ⁢ 𝑡 = 𝜑 – 𝑟 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) ⁢ 𝑈 − 𝑈 𝜏 B M , 𝑑 ⁢ 𝐿 𝑑 ⁢ 𝑡 = 𝑟 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) ⁢ 𝑈 − 𝐿 𝜏 B M , where 𝜑 represents the net flux of post-mitotic neutrophils, 𝑟 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) is the labeling efficiency rate (i.e., the fraction of those neutrophils that become labeled per unit time) and 𝜏 B M is the neutrophil mean lifetime in BM. For simplicity, we ignored the fact that 𝜑 may exhibit circadian oscillations and thus was assumed to be constant. In addition, we neglected possible repopulation from labeled neutrophils coming from the blood or other tissues into the BM. Thus, the total neutrophil population 𝑈 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) + 𝐿 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) = 𝑁 was regarded as constant under homeostatic conditions. The above ODE system can be solved exactly in terms of quadratures once the initial conditions are specified (i.e, 𝑈 ⁡ ( 0 ) = 𝑁 and 𝐿 ⁡ ( 0 ) = 0 ).
In our experiments the labeling efficiency rate 𝑟 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) peaked 32 h after tamoxifen injection and had a localized time profile with a full width at half maximum of about 21 h. Thus, once 𝑟 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) becomes sufficiently small, the temporal dependence of 𝐿 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) ∝ 𝑒 − 𝑡 / 𝜏 B M .
We next considered the kinetics of the labeled neutrophils originating from the BM and subsequently released into the circulation and other tissues. Let 𝐿 𝑖 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) denote the corresponding number of labeled neutrophil subpopulation in compartment 𝑖 at time 𝑡 ≥ 0 . The ODEs governing the kinetics of these subpopulations are 𝑑 ⁢ 𝐿 i 𝑑 ⁢ 𝑡 = 𝜑 𝑖 ⁢ 𝐿 𝑁 − 𝐿 i 𝜏 i , where 𝜑 𝑖 represents the net flux of neutrophils into tissue compartment 𝑖 , weighted by the labeled fraction coming from the BM, whereas 𝜏 𝑖 is the neutrophil mean lifetime in that same tissue compartment. The above ODEs can also be solved exactly in terms of quadratures by using the BM solution 𝐿 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) together with the initial conditions 𝐿 𝑖 ⁡ ( 0 ) = 0 . Notice that once 𝐿 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) starts to decrease (after day two) then, approximately, 𝐿 𝑖 ⁡ ( 𝑡 ) ∝ 𝑒 − 𝑡 / 𝜏 𝑖 .
To compute the fate mappings of CD11b + Ly6G + tdTomato + neutrophils in BM and tissues of iLy6Gtd Tom mice displayed in Figure 1 B, nonlinear regressions of decaying exponential functions 1 0 0 ⁢ 𝑒 − ( 𝑡 − 2 ) / 𝜏 B M and 1 0 0 ⁢ 𝑒 − ( 𝑡 − 3 ) / 𝜏 𝑖 were performed using the MATLAB™ (R2019b) Statistics and Machine Learning toolbox command fitnlm . The datasets that were fitted corresponded to 2-7 days for BM and 3-7 days for blood and the other tissues, respectively. Mean lifetimes 𝜏 B M and 𝜏 𝑖 were estimated together with their respective confidence intervals (confidence levels at 95%) and p values. From these, the half-lifetimes 𝑡 ( B M ) 1 / 2 in BM and 𝑡 ( 𝑖 ) 1 / 2 in other tissues, as well as the confidence intervals, were found using the relations 𝑡 ( B M ) 1 / 2 = l o g ⁡ ( 2 ) ⁢ 𝜏 B M and 𝑡 ( 𝑖 ) 1 / 2 = l o g ⁡ ( 2 ) ⁢ 𝜏 𝑖 . The values are displayed in Figure 1 B and Fig.S1E.
Finally, to estimate the mean lifespans of tdTomato + labeled post-mitotic neutrophils in tissues we considered the 10% of those that were the most long-lived. Let 𝑡 ( B M ) 1 0 % and 𝑡 ( 𝑖 ) 1 0 % denote the corresponding mean lifespans in BM and tissue 𝑖 , respectively. Using the above decaying exponential functions 1 0 0 ⁢ 𝑒 − ( 𝑡 − 2 ) / 𝜏 B M and 1 0 0 ⁢ 𝑒 − ( 𝑡 − 3 ) / 𝜏 𝑖 , together with the obtained mean lifetimes, we computed the mean lifespans as 𝑡 ( B M ) 1 0 % = l o g ⁡ ( 1 0 ) ⁢ 𝜏 B M and 𝑡 ( 𝑖 ) 1 0 % = l o g ⁡ ( 1 0 ) ⁢ 𝜏 𝑖 . Their values, together with their corresponding confidence intervals (confidence levels at 95%), are shown in Fig.S1E.
Data from experiments are represented as mean values ± SEM. All parameters analyzed followed normal distribution as tested by D’Agostino-Pearson test unless indicated in the figure legend. Unpaired two-tailed t test was used when 2 groups were compared, and comparison of more than two datasets was done using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Turkey’s post-test or two-way ANOVA. Log-rank analysis was used for Kaplan-Meier survival curves. Statistical analysis were performed using GraphPad software. Statistics on the RNA sequencing and ATAC sequencing are indicated in the analysis section. A p value below 0.05 was considered statistically significant; non-significant differences (n.s.) are indicated accordingly, and P values ≤0.05 were considered statistically significant ( ∗ ). P values P ≤ 0.01 ( ∗∗ ) and P ≤ 0.001 ( ∗∗∗ ), as well as nonsignificant differences (n.s.), are indicated accordingly.

Section: Acknowledgments

We thank all members of our laboratories and R. Benedito for discussion and insightful ideas; the Pluripotent Cell Technology and Transgenesis units at CNIC for the generation of mice; E. Prieto, J.M. Ligos, M. Vitón, and R. Nieto for help with sorting and cytometric analyses; L. Cabezuela, E. Santos, R. Mota, and the animal facility at CNIC for animal husbandry, animal procedures, and histology; V. Labrador, E. Arza, and the Microscopy Unit at CNIC for help with microscopy; J. Winterhalter for help with embryo studies; and Alicia Garcia-Culebras and Marta Dueñas from the Instituto de Investigación 12 de Octubre for their help with the Nanostring platform. This study was supported by Intramural grants from the Severo Ochoa program (IGP-SO), a grant from Fundació la Marató de TV3 (120/C/2015-20153032), grant SAF2015-65607-R from Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (MICINN) with co-funding by Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER), RTI2018-095497-B-I00 from MICINN, HR17_00527 from Fundación La Caixa, and Transatlantic Network of Excellence (TNE-18CVD04) from the Leducq Foundation to A.H. I.B. is supported by fellowship MSCA-IF-EF-748381 and EMBO short-term fellowship 8261. A.R.-P. is supported by a fellowship (BES-2016-076635) and J.A.N.-A. by fellowship SVP-2014-068595 from MICINN. R.O. is supported by ERC starting grant 759532, Italian Telethon Foundation SR-Tiget grant award F04, Italian MoH grant GR-201602362156, AIRC MFAG 20247, Cariplo Foundation grant 2015-0990, and the EU Infect-ERA 126. C.S. is supported by the SFB 1123, project A07, as well as by the DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research) and the BMBF (German Ministry of Education and Research) grant 81Z0600204. L.G.N. is supported by SIgN core funding from A ∗ STAR. The CNIC is supported by the MICINN and the Pro-CNIC Foundation and is a Severo Ochoa Center of Excellence (MICINN award SEV-2015-0505). G.F.-C. is supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (grant PID2019-110895RB-100) and Junta de Comunidades de Castilla-La Mancha (grant SBPLY/19/180501/000211). C.R. received funding from the Boehinger Ingelheim Foundation (consortium grant “Novel and Neglected Cardiovascular Risk Factors”) and German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF 01EO1503) and is a Fellow of the Gutenberg Research College (GFK) at the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz.
I.B., A.R.-P., M.G., I.K., G.F.-C., S.G.-H., T.E.K., E.v.G., J.A.N.-A., T.V., A.M., J.L.L., J.M.A, A.A.-C., J.A.Q., S.M.-S., F.M., and S.A. performed experiments and analyses. E.L., A.R.-P., T.E.K., A.B., and G.B. performed bioinformatics analyses. M.G., F.G., E.N.-V., A.D., C.R., C.S., L.G.N., and R.O. contributed essential reagents. I.B., I.A.U., O.S., L.G.N., R.O., and A.H. designed and supervised experiments. A.H. and I.B. wrote the manuscript, which was edited by all authors.
The authors declare no competing interests.

Section: Supplemental Information (5)

Download all Spreadsheet (316.26 KB) Table S1. Differentially Expressed Genes in Neutrophils from the Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Analysis, Related to Figure 2 Spreadsheet (2.85 MB) Table S2. Differentially Expressed Genes in Tissue Neutrophils from the Bulk RNA Sequencing Analysis and LRT Analysis of Differentially Accessible Peaks in Tissue Neutrophils from the ATAC Sequencing Analysis, Related to Figure 3 Spreadsheet (8.95 MB) Table S3. Differentially Expressed Genes in Neutrophils from Specific Pathogen-free (SPF) and Germ-free (GF) mice, Related to Figure 4 Spreadsheet (5.98 MB) Table S4. Differentially Expressed Gene Lists and Results from Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), Related to Figure 5 Spreadsheet (27.77 KB) Table S5. Angiogenic Gene List Used for the Angiogenic Score and Gene List Used for Nanostring Profiling, Related to Figures 5 and 6
