Section: Abstract

In this systematic review, we examine the literature from 2000 to 2020 to ascertain whether we can make strong conclusions about the relative benefit of adding informal care or formal care providers to the care mix among individuals receiving care in the home, specifically focusing on care recipient outcomes. We evaluate how informal care and formal care affect (or are associated with) health care use of care recipients, health care costs of care recipients, and health outcomes of care recipients. The literature to date suggests that informal care, either alone or in concert with formal care, delivers improvements in the health and well-being of older adults receiving care. The conclusions one can draw about the effects of formal care are less clear.

Section: Introduction

Long-term care (sometimes referred to as long-term services and supports in the literature) is important and growing. Approximately 40% of community-dwelling older adults need assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs) or instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) ( 5 ), and demographic trends point to increasing needs in the future. Assistance may be paid or unpaid and provided in the home, in the community, or in a residential setting.
There is a long-standing debate in the United States about how to best meet the growing demand for person-centered, high-quality long-term care. There has been a substantial shift in focus away from institutionalization in recent decades for two main reasons. First, patient advocates raised patient well-being concerns and the desire to provide care in the least restrictive setting possible, and laws supporting this desire followed [e.g., the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the subsequent U.S. Supreme Court ruling on Olmstead v. L.C. , one of the most important civil rights decisions for people with disabilities]. The Olmstead ruling held that people with disabilities have a qualified right to receive state-funded supports and services in the community rather than in institutions when the person's care team determines that community supports are appropriate, the person does not object to living in the community, and the provision of services in the community would be a reasonable accommodation when balanced with other similarly situated individuals with disabilities. Second, increased longevity and strained budgets have led policy makers to advocate for increased reliance on receiving care at home, instead of at nursing homes, where at least some of the care is provided by family ( 67 ) and friends and thus not part of either Medicare's or Medicaid's budget.
Informal care, or care provided, often without pay, by people who have a preexisting personal relationship with the care recipient, is viewed as an alternative to paid formal care, but research on informal care has focused predominantly on caregiver outcomes. Relying on informal care was historically a default policy option in the absence of systematic funding for formal care ( 119 ). Viewing informal care as the default may be increasingly untenable as the population ages and the number of potential caregivers relative to the number of care recipients declines. Furthermore, in growing recognition that informal care is not actually free when caregiver burden (increases in mental and physical health ailments) and reduced labor market participation are considered ( 6 , 10 , 14 , 31 , 32 , 34 , 54 , 55 , 57 , 63 , 65 , 69 , 85 , 93 – 98 , 101 , 103 , 109 , 115 , 116 ), policy makers have turned toward supporting informal caregivers in hopes of encouraging informal care provision and mitigating some of the negative consequences. Female caregivers in particular face wage penalties and an inability to return to work after a caregiving episode ( 109 ). In the United States, a handful of states provide modest tax credits for informal caregivers ( 39 , 82 ), 25 states allow Medicaid waiver beneficiaries to pay informal caregivers, and 8 states along with the District of Columbia have passed paid leave laws that cover working informal caregivers ( 121 ). And yet over 95% of informal caregivers receive no support at all. The Affordable Care Act has increased the need for informal caregivers to meet its provisions over the past 10 years; for example, its focus on care management, transitions of care, and shared decision making relies on informal caregivers to succeed. Thus, amid concerns that demand is increasing and supports are insufficient, advocates continue to press urgently for more public support of caregivers ( 49 ).
In contrast to the sizable literature on the direct and indirect costs of caregiver burden, we know surprisingly little about the benefits of informal care to the care recipients. Some information about the benefits may be inferred indirectly from studies of cost offsets between informal care and formal care. For example, one prominent study shows that informal care reduces home health care use and delays nursing home entry ( 111 ). Other studies echo the finding that informal care is a net substitute for nursing home care ( 21 , 53 , 76 , 112 ). Informal care also reduces Medicare costs ( 112 ), but other benefits to the care recipient are unknown.
Formal care, often called home health, is care that is paid for and provided by a trained individual or agency. Formal care is largely uninsured in the United States. In order for traditional Medicare to cover these benefits, the beneficiary must be homebound and need skilled services. A key distinction is that the Medicare home health benefit does not include personal care, or nonmedical home care services that are focused on ADLs. Despite these restrictions, 3 million people received Medicare home health benefits in 2018, often for postacute care ( 81 ). Recent work has shown that there are trade-offs between home health and nursing homes for beneficiaries that could either receive home health care services or go to a nursing home for their postacute care needs ( 118 ).
Medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor, does cover both medical and nonmedical home health care services (what we refer to throughout this review as formal care). The movement toward home-based care has been particularly effective within the Medicaid program, which spent over $95 billion on home- and community-based services in 2016 ( 40 ), surpassing its spending on nursing homes ( 88 ). However, most of the literature focusing on the effects of home- and community-based services compared outcomes to individuals in a nursing home setting. Several studies compared avoidable hospitalizations among users of home- and community-based services and among nursing home residents or among users of home- and community-based services who had transitioned out of nursing homes ( 52 , 122 , 123 ). Although these were not causal analyses, the results indicated that users of home- and community-based services (or formal care) were more prone to hospitalization than similar nursing home residents.
Changes in demographics, shifts in spending mix among public payers, and changes in insurance coverage have led to shifting provisions of home care. A recent study ( 110 ) reports that rates of formal care use among older adults with disabilities increased from 2004 to 2016 by 6 percentage points, such that in 2016, 36.9% received formal care in the home. Informal care grew over this time period, too, and remains the most common source of home care, with almost three-quarters of older adults with disabilities receiving informal care. Receiving only informal care stayed roughly stable (∼50%) during the time period, as did receiving only formal care (∼9%). Some 29% received both informal care and formal care in 2016, an increase of 5.4 percentage points, and the proportion of older adults with disabilities who received “no care” decreased by 4 percentage points to 12.9% ( 110 ).
In this systematic review, we assess the literature from 2000 to 2020 to ascertain whether we can make strong conclusions about the relative benefit of adding informal care or formal care to the service mix for older adults receiving care in the home, specifically focusing on care recipient outcomes. Other research has established that a single source of home care is better than no care for care recipients ( 105 ), that being able to choose the type of provider in the home benefits care recipients ( 79 ), that high distress and poor health of informal caregivers negatively affects care recipients ( 78 ), and that some informal care interventions benefit care recipients ( 99 , 113 , 114 ). However, we do not yet know how adding informal care in the presence of formal care, or vice versa, affects (or is associated with) care recipients. The outcomes of particular interest are health outcomes, health care use and costs, and overall well-being of care recipients. Further, we look for evidence of the impact of combining the two models of home care delivery.

Section: Literature Review

We conceptualize the effects of informal care and formal care using the model depicted in Figure 1 . The model is a derivation of the Andersen model ( 2 ), a representation of the causal process leading from predisposing, enabling, and need variables to individual care recipient outcomes. This model is tailored to the topic of this systematic review; hence, the outcomes under consideration fall into three categories: health outcomes (including physical and mental health), health care use and costs, and overall well-being. Health care use may further be split by potentially low-value or potentially high-value services; categories may include health care services and community-based services outside the home, such as respite or adult day health care, as well as facility-based long-term care such as nursing home use, skilled nursing home use (for rehabilitative, skilled care), and other inpatient rehabilitation services.
We argue that certain predisposing and need factors affect care recipient outcomes only indirectly, by first directly affecting the choice to use informal or formal care. For example, the number of children an individual has (a predisposing characteristic) directly affects the potential informal care supplied and then indirectly affects health outcomes. Similarly, the formal care options available to an individual have a direct impact on their choice of formal care services (e.g., certain types of rehabilitation care may not be available at home health agencies in rural areas) ( 23 ) and, through this choice, affect the individual's health and other health care. Because many of these variables have been empirically strong in predicting informal or formal care, there is a high likelihood that they will affect the choice between informal care and formal care.
Known in the economics literature as instruments to be used for instrumental variables estimation, these factors that affect treatment assignment but do not affect outcomes directly can be used to obtain an unbiased estimate of the treatment effect when unobserved factors (e.g., hypochondria, motivation, preferences, health literacy) also affect health outcomes. Importantly, there could be unobserved differences in health status, stage of disease, or severity of disease that make people need long-term care and influence the choice of the health care team, but that are also related to the health outcomes. In addition, preferences of older adults are difficult to observe but may drive the long-term-care service mix in the home, such as wanting to be bathed only by an informal caregiver (or, conversely, only by a formal care provider). If one does not account for such differences, the potential effectiveness of long-term care will be understated because sicker people will be more likely to obtain more long-term care and will also be more likely to spend more on care and have poor outcomes. This could spuriously make it look like long-term care is bad for health. If study designs and corresponding analytical approaches neglect to consider or account for bias inherent in the choice to use formal care, informal care, or a combination of the two (e.g., endogeneity bias), they will produce biased estimates of the relationship between these treatments of interest and our outcomes of interest (health outcomes, health care use and costs, and overall well-being). Such potentially biased approaches preclude causal inference and the ability to make strong policy recommendations from the findings.

Section: Methodology

We completed a comprehensive search to identify all literature that answers our study question on the effects of informal care versus formal care. Our search strategy contained three sections of inclusion terms: terms for formal care and terms for informal care and terms to identify aging populations. The comprehensive search strategy for PubMed is in Supplemental Table 1 ; this strategy had slight modifications specific to each respective database. We limited our search to original research studies published in English between January 2000 and March 2020, but did not include any geographic restrictions. We excluded terms such as prenatal , adolescent , hospice , and palliative that included populations and types of services that were outside the scope of our question. We omitted hospice- and palliative-focused studies because we wanted to focus on situations in which formal care and informal care were ongoing and occurring primarily among community-residing older adults (e.g., not due to care required at the end of life). We executed our search in the databases Embase, PubMed, Scopus, EconLit, CINAHL, and AgeLine and identified 3,520 unique articles for possible review.
Search results were imported into Covidence, a systematic review management software program, through which two authors reviewed all titles and abstracts for inclusion or exclusion on the basis of our research questions. A third author evaluated all conflicts and made final decisions for inclusion. Of all the studies identified through title and abstract review, 129 articles were identified for a full text review. The entire authorship team collaborated in conducting the full text review, and each excluded study was confirmed for exclusion by a minimum of two authors. Reasons for exclusion included wrong outcomes, wrong comparators, not original research, wrong patient population, and duplicate research. Ultimately, 65 studies were identified for inclusion in our analysis.
Using PICOTS (Patient Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcome, Timing, Setting) ( 3 , 42 , 57 ) and STROBE (STrengthening the Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemiology) ( 117 ) as guidelines, we developed a data extraction tool to begin the analysis. Our tool included fields for study design, population criteria, study population size, comparator variables, outcomes, results, limitations, and risk of bias. All authors participated in data extraction, and all extracted data were cross-checked by other authors. Any disagreements on the extracted data were discussed until the team reached a consensus.
Study designs were evaluated for rigor and the risk of bias. The risk of bias in this context is largely dependent on study designs that enable causal inference, so our evaluation reflected that emphasis. We classified each study's risk of bias into one of three broad categories: low risk of bias (randomized study or rigorous quasi-experimental design), medium risk of bias (regression analysis with a rich set of controls, propensity scores, or hierarchical modeling), or high risk of bias (descriptive comparisons with no or limited regression adjustment). We did not exclude any studies on the basis of weak study designs, as descriptive studies can be informative; however, we placed more weight on studies with more rigorous designs when drawing conclusions across studies.

Section: Results

We read the 65 included articles to assess methodology and findings. Table 1 presents a summary of the included 65 articles. Although qualitative studies were not explicitly excluded, none met our final inclusion criteria. Supplemental Table 2 presents an overview of all 65 articles.
The first finding of note is that the studies fell rather quickly into a few categories because of their sample design. Very few studies were composed of people with the full spectrum of care possibilities, ranging from receiving no care to receiving both types of care. Instead, about one-third of the studies start with a sample of individuals receiving formal care and assess the impact of also receiving informal care, or vice versa. We have categorized the rest of this review on the basis of the treatment and comparator groups in the studies: assessing outcomes of informal care compared with outcomes of formal care, assessing outcomes of informal care in the presence of formal care, assessing outcomes of formal care in the presence of informal care, and assessing the heterogeneity of the effects of care on the basis of care combinations.
There were numerous outcome variables that have been studied in this context, and they broadly fell into our three categories of interest: health outcomes, health care use and costs, and overall well-being. Within health outcomes, we did not limit what would qualify as a health outcome a priori, allowing a broad range. And whereas many studies did evaluate health outcomes that we expected to find on the basis of our understanding of the literature and the modified Andersen model domains (e.g., physical health, mental health and depression, death), other studies examined specific health status measures (e.g., cholesterol levels, fractures, falls). Still, a few studies assessed unmet care or health needs among the care recipient as their primary health outcome of interest. Health care use ranged from total length of stay of a hospital episode to rehospitalization or avoidable hospitalizations to receipt of care following a health services event (such as hospitalization). Nursing home entry, use, or timing was the most prevalent type of outcome studied. Health care costs were usually the care recipient's total costs of care over a set time period. Finally, within the well-being domain, quality of life and life satisfaction appeared, as well as less common domains such as safety in the home, satisfaction with care, and maltreatment or neglect of the care recipient.
The geographic spread of these studies suggests the high policy relevance of these questions to aging societies. While the United States dominates the literature with 46% of the total studies, we identified studies from Europe, Canada, Asia, and the Middle East (ranked roughly by frequency) and a few studies from Latin America and Australia.
Subgroup analysis was somewhat rare in these studies. Three studies examined differences by race or ethnicity. Seven studies examined differences by gender or stratified by gender. Although 26 studies included younger ages, very few examined differences by age group.
Most studies were deemed to have a high risk of bias in the study design. This is somewhat understandable in this setting—running randomized controlled trials, especially with respect to informal care, is difficult if not impossible. However, well-known quasi-experimental methods that have been developed to address the selection of the home care team in observational data were seldom employed to study this topic. We identified only one-fifth of the studies as having a low risk of bias (81.5% had medium or high risk of bias) and thus estimating a plausibly causal relationship between the sources of care and the outcomes of interest.
Our review revealed 33 studies in the category of studies that directly compared informal care receipt to formal care receipt based on our outcomes of interest. However, many of the studies hierarchized the definition of care provider: no care, informal care with no formal care, and formal care with or without informal care. Thus, we need to apply caution to the interpretation of the results both within and across studies.
Most of the studies in this category were cross-sectional in design, using regression models with varying degrees of sophistication in the methods. However, most did not account for the endogeneity risk; thus, confounding by health status and other factors is likely. A small proportion, just over 12% ( 24 , 64 , 70 , 92 ), used longitudinal data primarily to measure outcomes over a longer time period, not to address additional confounding.
A wealth of outcomes were studied in each outcome category ( Table 1 , column 2), with the most frequent outcome being health care use and costs ( 17 ), followed by health ( 14 ) and subjective well-being ( 8 ). Among health outcomes, depression was the most prevalent (5 studies; 9 , 16 , 37 , 89 , 108 ); among health care use, institutionalization was the most prevalent (7 studies; 4 , 22 , 70 , 77 , 86 , 92 , 120 ). Subjective well-being was the least prevalent of the categories of outcomes, and quality of life ( 19 , 75 ) and service satisfaction ( 12 , 19 ) were the most prevalent within the well-being category with two studies each. In general, very few studies looked at the same outcome.
Over one-third of this subset of studies examined health outcomes ( 14 ). Six of these studies found no difference between informal care and formal care on a variety of health outcomes: self-rated health ( 71 ), falls ( 61 ), psychiatric health ( 30 ), mental health ( 38 ), fractures ( 64 ), and mistreatment ( 87 ).
All five studies of depression found that informal care was associated with lower levels of depression compared with formal care. However, there were differences in the raw associations between the studies. Four of the five studies found that informal care provision was negatively associated with depression ( 9 , 16 , 37 , 108 ), with Pot et al. ( 89 ) alone finding no association. Three studies ( 16 , 89 , 108 ) found a positive association between formal care provision and depression outcomes, whereas Costa-Font et al. ( 37 ) found a negative association.
Informal care was associated with better health outcomes for cholesterol control ( 56 ) and unmet needs ( 12 ) compared with formal care. Formal care was associated with better outcomes for unmet needs ( 74 ) and adverse consequences due to unmet needs ( 43 ) compared with informal care. Potter ( 90 ) found that within informal care, nonspousal caregiving was associated with more unmet needs than spousal caregiving or formal caregiving.
Health care use outcomes were focused primarily on intensive or expensive outcomes: institutionalization (8 studies), hospitalization (3 studies), rehospitalization (2 studies), preventative hospitalizations (1 study), emergency room services (2 studies), health care use postoperatively (1 study), and formal care after hospitalization (1 study). Only a handful of studies examined less-intensive outcomes of health care use: medicine adherence (1 study), physician consults (1 study), and formal care use after hospitalization (1 study). Two studies looked at total health care costs across all settings of care.
However, despite the numerous studies ( 17 ), there is no consensus on how informal care and formal care impact health care use and costs. This is likely due, at least in part, to the prevalence of studies with weak designs and high risk of bias and to the variation in the types of formal care and populations studied. Some studies found that formal care was negatively associated with institutionalization ( 4 , 77 , 86 ) or worse health at the time of institutionalization ( 92 ), consistent with the idea of delayed institutionalization. Others found that formal care was positively associated with institutionalization ( 120 ) or had no association ( 70 ). One study found that more community services were positively associated with institutionalization and that hiring domestic help was negatively associated ( 22 ).
Formal care was negatively associated with hospitalizations in two studies ( 37 , 86 ), and one study found no difference between informal care and formal care ( 46 ). Unlike the findings for initial hospitalizations, three studies all found a positive association between formal care receipt and readmissions ( 24 , 83 , 84 ). After hospitalization, Mochari-Greenberger et al. ( 83 ) found that having a paid caregiver increased health care use, health care costs, and length of stay postoperatively compared with having an informal caregiver, and Noyes et al. ( 86 ) found that having informal care prior to a hospitalization was positively associated with receiving formal care after a hospitalization. The study findings are split on the relationship between care receipt and emergency room utilization ( 25 , 46 ).
Among less intensive health care use, García et al. ( 46 ) found no difference in physician consultations based on the type of home care provided, and Aggarwal et al. ( 3 ) found that individuals with paid caregivers are 40% less likely to be nonadherent to their medication than those with informal care providers.
Both Barczyk & Kredler ( 8 ) and Kehusmaa et al. ( 62 ) found that informal care receipt was associated with lower health care costs.
For the well-being-related outcomes, the outcomes break across studies. Carretero et al. ( 19 ) found that receiving formal care was better than not receiving it for quality of life and service satisfaction, and Bragstad et al. ( 15 ) concur that receiving formal care is better than informal care for managing well in the long term. Benjamin et al. ( 12 ) found the contrary; informal care was better than formal care for service satisfaction and safety. Liu et al. ( 75 ) found that nonresidential informal care was most strongly correlated with quality of life.
Barnay & Juin ( 9 ) used cross-sectional data from the 2008 French Disability and Health Survey to estimate the health production function of older persons aged 65 and above who reported difficulties performing at least one ADL or IADL without help. Informal care was the predominant mode of care delivery in France, although formal care was still more prevalent there than in the United States in 2016 ( 110 ). Informal care was measured as an indicator variable, while the formal care measure was the hours of care received. The authors used instrumental variables techniques to estimate the effect of the mode of care on two measures of depression. To instrument for informal care, they used child characteristics; to instrument for formal care, they used geographic variation in the proportion of individuals aged 75 and above who receive the personal autonomy allowance, a needs-based national program that covers part of the long-term-care expenses for individuals aged 60 and above who are documented by a clinician to need help with ADLs.
They found that receipt of informal care and receipt of formal care lead to independent and significantly better mental health. They also found that receiving informal care reduced the risk of depression by 42% (at the 10% level), off a base of 8% prevalence, and that a 1-unit increase in formal care hours improved the Mental Health Inventory 5 (MHI-5) by 1.8 points on the 0–100 scale (at the 5% level). The authors hypothesized that the different effects of informal care and formal care on the two mental health measures could be due to timing. Formal care would have an impact in the short term and meet immediate needs (the MHI-5 is measured over the prior month), and informal care would have an impact in the long term (as depression is measured over the prior year).
The limitation of Barnay & Juin's study is that they have only one year of data and thus cannot control for time-invariant individual heterogeneity. They do not include a separate interaction effect for the receipt of both informal care and formal care, which would have captured any unique complementary benefits of having both sources of care.
Costa-Font et al. ( 37 ) examined the impact of formal care and informal care on health care use in Spain. They exploited a 2007 reform proffering a universal entitlement to long-term care for all older adults. This expansion of the public subsidization of long-term-care services through the introduction of a new caregiving allowance, and the expansion of the access to publicly funded home health care services, removed the means-testing and regional variation that existed before. The authors used the information from Spanish respondents in the Survey of Health, Aging and Retirement in Europe (SHARE) survey from 2004 to 2013 and estimated a difference-in-differences model to determine the impact of care receipt on older adults in Spain. They used a control function approach (two-stage residual inclusion; 107 ) to deal with the potential endogeneity of the speed of enacting the new program or the type of support offered. For example, regions with higher socialist support had a lower propensity to award a caregiving allowance and were more likely to develop a network of formal care support. Costa-Font et al. found a significant impact of the new program on hospital utilization and, importantly, different effects between those receiving caregiving allowances and those receiving home health care compared with similar people before the reform. Specifically, among those receiving the caregiving allowances compared with similar beneficiaries in the pre-reform period, they found that the probability of a hospital admission decreased by 9.5 percentage points, a 0.8 point decline in the number of hospitalizations, and a 0.79 point shorter length of stay. For people receiving formal care relative to people receiving formal care prior to the reform, the probability of a hospital admission did not change; there was a 0.9 point decline in the number of hospital admissions and the length of stay in the hospital was shorter by 0.79 points.
Although their focus was on health care use, Costa-Font et al. ( 37 ) also tested the impact of home-based long-term-care use (formal care) on a variety of other outcome measures to test the potential channels. They found that the probability of visiting a general practitioner (GP) did not change, although the number of GP visits was 1.07 times fewer for both those receiving formal care and those receiving the caregiver allowance, which does not suggest much substitution between care providers. Depression and suicidal thoughts decreased in both the caregiving allowance and the formal care groups, as did the prevalence of living alone for those receiving a caregiving allowance (consistent with living alone being a requirement for eligibility for the caregiving allowance).
Overall, despite the wealth of studies in this category, the results remain quite mixed. The strongest finding was that informal care is associated with lower levels of depression compared with formal care. Results were mixed for other health outcomes, perhaps due to the heterogeneity of the type of informal care providers, as well as for health care use and overall well-being. The strongest study in this category found that both informal care and formal care lead to lower health care use, although there remains concern about the generalizability of that study.
The evidence base for the effects of informal care in the presence of formal care on care recipients is rich in looking at a broad range of outcomes using a variety of data sets ( Table 1 , column 3). Our review revealed 13 studies in this category, spanning populations in the United States, Canada, Europe, and Japan. However, the risk of bias in this body of work is high in that most studies (85%) did not address potential endogeneity or selection bias.
The studies that we classified as having weak study designs with a high risk of bias were mostly cross-sectional regression analyses that identified associations but could not tease out the direction of causality and could not address confounding due to omitted variables such as unmeasured aspects of health status. Some of the studies included a rich set of regression controls to minimize this risk, but the potential for some unmeasured confounding remained. Despite this caveat, results across these cross-sectional studies were fairly consistent in finding that informal care in the presence of formal care improved care recipient outcomes. In most cases, informal care was measured as a binary variable indicating the presence or absence of an informal caregiver.
Regarding health outcomes, informal care was associated with less functional dependence ( 28 , 104 ) and fewer depressive symptoms ( 29 ).
A chart review of home health care patients in three provinces in Canada provided the only negative result among these studies. Blais et al. ( 13 ) found that just over 4% of patients experienced adverse events, such as falls, infections, or bedsores, and that the actions of informal caregivers contributed to approximately 20% of those events. This finding raises the issue that informal caregivers often lack training and expertise relative to formal care providers. However, in this case, any differential in training between formal care providers and informal care providers did not lead to better outcomes. Formal care providers contributed to even more adverse events, approximately 46%.
Regarding health care use, any informal care was associated with a higher likelihood of receiving an influenza vaccination ( 68 ). One additional study found informal care to be associated with more outpatient visits ( 35 ), an ambiguous finding but one that could be interpreted positively if informal caregivers enable access and identify problems that lead to less low-value care in the future (such as potentially avoidable hospitalizations). A few of the association studies found no positive effect of informal care when examining hospital admissions among home care recipients ( 1 , 27 ), risk of institutionalization ( 44 ), and place of death ( 58 ).
Regarding overall well-being outcomes, informal care was associated with fewer indications of elder abuse ( 36 ) and a lower probability of death ( 106 ).
We found just one study of the effects of informal care in the presence of formal care that we rated as having a low risk of bias. Coe et al. ( 33 ) used instrumental variables methods to address the endogeneity of receipt of family-provided care, using secondary data from three states (New Jersey, Florida, and Arkansas) that took part in Medicaid's original Cash and Counseling Demonstration program with a randomized design. Although the purpose of the original experiment was to evaluate the program, randomization to the treatment was also predictive of receiving care from family members, induced by payment, in addition to formal services. Therefore, Coe et al. were able to use randomization to treatment as an instrument for receipt of family care. Multiple robustness checks were conducted to support the validity of the approach. They found that individuals with family involved in home-based care had better health outcomes. Specifically, care recipients with family involved were less likely to have several adverse health outcomes, such as infections, bedsores, or shortness of breath. They also found positive effects of receiving family care on reducing health care use, such as emergency room use and hospital care. These results combined suggest that the lower utilization could be due to better health outcomes. Although the study design was strong, the study suffered from other limitations, such as relatively old data (from the early 1990s) and a sample drawn from just three states in the United States.
If one assumes that care recipients who were sicker in unmeasured ways might be more likely to have informal care and also have worse outcomes, the findings from the association studies may be viewed as underestimates of the positive effects of informal care, supported by positive results from the one stronger study ( 33 ).
The evidence base for the effects of formal care in the presence of informal care on care recipients is generally sparse, inconsistent, and heterogeneous. Our review revealed 9 studies in this category, all quantitative, conducted mostly on populations in the United States and Europe, with one study from Taiwan ( Table 1 , column 4). The risk of bias in this body of work is high in that most studies did not address potential endogeneity or selection bias (78% assessed as medium or high bias). In addition, although the formal care interventions studied were often aimed at similar goals of reducing unmet needs and delaying institutionalization, the interventions themselves were heterogeneous, including several forms of case management, community care services such as adult day care, and therapies. This makes comparisons across studies difficult.
The studies that we classified as having weak study designs with a high risk of bias were mostly cross-sectional regression analyses that identified associations, not causal connections. Consequently, the studies exhibited clear reverse causality in many cases, whereby those receiving services had worse outcomes. Some of the studies included regression controls to minimize this risk, but the potential for some unmeasured confounding remains.
Studies found that paid caregivers were associated with more unmet needs of the care recipient ( 11 ). One study found null results—receipt of formal care was not predictive of depressive symptoms ( 50 ). And one study found positive results—receipt of community-based services was associated with better mental health ( 102 ).
Studies found that receipt of adult day services was associated with a higher probability of institutional placement ( 48 , 80 ). Although suffering from the same bias, another study found positive results: Receipt of in-home chore services was associated with delay of institutionalization ( 47 ).
Only one study examined a well-being outcome. It found that in Taiwan the use of a foreign, paid caregiver relative to an informal caregiver (specifically a family caregiver) was associated with better quality of life for the care recipient ( 26 ).
We found two studies of the effects of formal care in the presence of informal care that we rated as having a low risk of bias. Both studies use the gold standard of study design, the randomized controlled trial, which was rare among the 65 studies included.
Callahan et al. ( 18 ) conducted a randomized controlled trial among 180 community-dwelling older adults with Alzheimer's disease and their informal caregivers at one public health system in Indianapolis, Indiana. The treatment group received collaborative care for dementia plus in-home occupational therapy delivered in 24 sessions over 2 years, while the control group received only collaborative care. No effect of the treatment on the functional performance of the care recipients was found, contrary to expectations. Although the internal validity of the study was strong, the external validity may be limited, given the one-site study population and the narrowness of the occupational therapy intervention.
Eloniemi-Sulkava et al. ( 41 ) also conducted a randomized controlled trial of 100 older adults with dementia in Finland who had informal care providers. The treatment group received care coordination, advocacy, training, and monitoring services from a nurse case manager, while the control group received the usual services provided for geriatric patients in community care. The study found that the intervention led to a short-term delay in institutionalization, although the effect dissipated by the end of the 2-year follow-up period. Like the study by Callahan et al. ( 18 ), the internal validity of the study by Eloniemi-Sulkava et al. was strong, but the external validity was limited by the small and geographically narrow sample and the age of the study.
Ten studies in our review examined measuring the effect of informal care and formal care together explicitly ( Table 1 , column 5), and among those that did, most studies focused on health measures as outcomes. Only two studies had the same outcome ( 59 , 60 ); thus, it is hard to generalize on the basis of this review how the combination of informal care and formal care affects health more generally.
Combining both types of care was superior to either informal care or formal care alone for depression ( 20 ) and physical health ( 59 ). Informal care alone was superior for mortality ( 45 ). Formal care was superior for loneliness ( 72 ). No differences by caregiver type or combination for unmet needs ( 73 ) or mental health ( 59 ) were found. Ayalon ( 7 ) differentiated the effects by care provider type and found that live-in migrant formal care providers are less likely to be associated with neglect than live-out formal care providers.
One study examined health care use and costs, and the results were mixed across the outcomes examined ( 51 ). Combining both types of care was superior to either informal care or formal care alone for decreasing GP and doctor visits. Informal care alone was superior for decreasing hospitalizations. Formal care led to shorter hospital stays for individuals with and without informal care.
Combining both types of care was superior to either informal care or formal care alone for quality of life ( 59 , 60 ). Informal care alone was superior for life satisfaction ( 72 ). Formal care alone was superior for not dying in the hospital ( 66 ).
Gonçalves & Weaver ( 51 ) estimated the effect of formal care on health care use while accounting for the heterogeneity of the effect on the basis of the availability of informal care. They used an instrumental variables technique to address the endogeneity issue, exploiting the introduction of patient cost-sharing in formal care that was introduced in some cantons in Switzerland in 2011. Informal care availability was measured using a proxy, that is, through coresidence versus living alone. Focusing on individuals aged 20 and above who had a hospital stay of less than 180 days in the previous year in 19 German-speaking cantons, the authors used four repeated cross-sections from the Swiss health study before and after the cost-sharing was introduced. They found that formal care increased the likelihood of utilizing health care after introduction of cost-sharing in terms of GP visit, any doctor visit, and hospitalizations. However, conditional on hospitalization, the length of stay was shorter among those with formal care. This finding suggests that formal care encourages active engagement with the medical system and catches conditions earlier. These effects were strongest when there was informal care available. For those individuals without informal care, there was no effect on the likelihood of a doctor or GP visit. A 10% expansion in formal care hours per capita reduced doctor visits by 0.24 visits among individuals without available informal care ( p ≤ 0.05). Although Gonçalves & Weaver did not measure health outcomes directly, this interaction effect suggests that working as a team leads to better health outcomes on the basis of the engagement with low-value versus high-value care. Perhaps a formal care provider notices an issue and the informal care provider ensures that the follow-up visits occur (or vice versa).

Section: Discussion

Overall, despite the size and scope of the literature, the evidence base for whether the type of care provider affects the health outcomes, health care use and costs, and overall well-being of individuals living in their homes is weak. What evidence there is suggests that the presence of informal care provides health benefits to the care recipient, especially within the mental health domain. It was also generally found that having informal care providers was associated with lower care costs of the care recipient. This is due in part to the endogeneity problem and to the primarily unpaid nature of informal care, but it does appear to be causally linked as well when studies addressed endogeneity head-on.
The results suggest complementary benefits between the two types of care. The addition of informal care to formal care was generally associated with better outcomes, and the marginal effect of some formal care interventions was stronger when informal care was also in the home. More work could be done to inform how and why these team approaches are successful: Does a team approach help prevent caregiver burnout? Does having a trained individual (e.g., a formal care provider) help discover medical issues earlier? Does having an informal care provider help the care recipient follow medical instructions? These are all plausible relationships that additional quantitative and qualitative studies could help answer. We know from other research that formal care providers fulfill many roles outside the scope of their own completed training curriculum ( 91 ). In addition to functional support and tasks covered in their training and expected scope of practice, formal care providers reported spending time recognizing acute problems and symptom changes, managing emergencies, tracking medical appointments, and keeping family informed about the care recipient's situation. Their training did not cover such activities. Meanwhile, only approximately 7% of unpaid and informal caregivers of older adults received any training for their role ( 17 ). And yet, although one assumes that formal care providers such as home health aides are better trained than informal caregivers, little formal training, especially ongoing training, is required to become a home health aide. In total, among Medicare- and Medicaid-certified providers, home aides and hospice aides must have 75 h of training and pass a competency exam ( 100 ). Understanding the role of training in formal care and informal care quality and the care coordination (or lack thereof) between informal care and formal care providers could provide much needed context for their complementarities and the reason(s) for differing outcomes of care recipients by care source.
Unfortunately, there is no consensus around the associations or causal relationships between formal care and our outcomes of interest. This could be for a variety of reasons. First, this body of literature includes multiple measurement issues. Most studies measure only the presence or absence of informal care. Although this means that we cannot say much about the intensive margin of informal care, it does make the findings more comparable across studies. However, for formal care, most studies measure the hours of formal care and thus can examine both the intensive and the extensive margins. This seems to be an advantage but makes comparisons to informal care more difficult both within and across studies. Second, a wide variety of interventions fell under the term formal care. They range from case management to trained home health aides in the home, and from low-intensity care (e.g., one or two visits per week) to high-intensity care (e.g., 24/7 care or multiple daily visits). This heterogeneity in the treatment also makes comparisons across studies more difficult. Third, it was common for studies to hierarchize the definition of care provider: no care, informal care with no formal care, and formal care with or without informal care. This lack of specificity of the care team makes drawing inferences harder and the results more mixed because they are not making equal or similar comparisons between studies. At a minimum, studies of this topic need to include the number of providers and the ability to attribute the hours of informal care and formal care to each provider (or at least a total) in order to understand the intensity of treatment. This may mean investing in adding new questions to large national surveys, such as the Health and Retirement Study ( https://hrs.isr.umich.edu/ ) and its sister studies across the world, or expanding surveys designed like the National Health and Aging Trends Study ( https://www.nhats.org/ ) to international settings.
The plethora of outcomes, though interesting, also makes comparisons across studies more difficult. Studies could focus on including or developing person-centered outcomes in a few domains to help with drawing broader conclusions that are applicable in a policy setting as universal and important as long-term care. For example, including consistent subsets of the PROMIS (Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System) ( https://www.healthmeasures.net/explore-measurement-systems/promis ; 1, 123) battery of measures could be helpful for cross-study comparison. In addition, collecting the same measures on caregivers and care recipients could also facilitate comparisons within dyads (e.g., depressive symptoms or anxiety, self-rated health, function) ( 114 ). Finally, studies that examine only health care costs are difficult to assess in terms of welfare implications and subsequent policy recommendations. Lower utilization could be due to better health outcomes or to inattention. Some utilization is considered high value and other utilization is considered low value and to be avoided (e.g., potentially avoidable hospitalizations). Assessing across such domains could be helpful. Studies should more carefully examine both costs—to the individual, health care system, or society—and the health of the care recipient to ensure that the right conclusions can be drawn.
Most studies have weak designs, limiting the ability to draw causal connections. Future studies in this area should incorporate better study designs, including, if possible, large, multisite pragmatic randomized designs. Small, single-site trials still face the challenge of scalability, but combining randomized controlled trials with implementation science tools could enhance the ability to scale promising trial designs and hence have a better chance of improving the population health of care recipients. Studies that use administrative and claims data could at least incorporate longitudinal designs in order to move away from cross-sectional correlations and should consider more causal models such as instrumental variables and regression discontinuity designs.

Section: Conclusion

The literature to date suggests that informal care, either alone or in combination with formal care, delivers improvements in the health and well-being of older adults receiving care. The conclusions one can draw about the effects of formal care are less clear.
To date, the decisions on institutional and home-based formal care coverage in the United States have been based on the relative costs of these programs. At the individual level, using informal care or formal care is also likely driven, at least in part, by the perceived costs of each. Yet we still do not know the relative benefits, or the benefits of working in tandem, in order to make better decisions on the basis of cost–benefit trade-offs at the individual and national levels.
To assess the potential benefit from home health care policy, and help design an optimal home health policy that delivers the best outcomes for the patient and caregivers at minimal cost, researchers must conduct a rigorous evaluation of the outcomes of informal care relative to formal care or of the combination of the two. Given our results, it is important to determine how to best support informal care providers in order to minimize the cost and burden on them while they perform health-improving work. Training of both types of providers needs to be expanded and made more constant in order to increase provider competency and improve the quality of care provided. If it becomes clear that formal care confers better outcomes on care recipients than informal care does, then that, too, will be critically important and could help spur investment in public insurance coverage for formal care, which has yet to be achieved as a part of health care reform in the United States.

Section: Acknowledgements

We thank Frank Campbell and Sherry Morgan, librarians at the Penn Biomedical Library, for their assistance in developing and executing the search strategy. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from grant R01AG057501 awarded by the National Institutes of Health (N.B.C.).
