Section: Abstract

Humans are unique among apes and other primates in the musculoskeletal design of their lower back, pelvis, and lower limbs. Here, we describe the three-dimensional ground reaction forces and lower/hindlimb joint mechanics of human and bipedal chimpanzees walking over a full stride and test whether: 1) the estimated limb joint work and power during the stance phase, especially the single-support period, is lower in humans than bipedal chimpanzees, 2) the limb joint work and power required for limb swing is lower in humans than in bipedal chimpanzees, and 3) the estimated total mechanical power during walking, accounting for the storage of passive elastic strain energy in humans, is lower in humans than in bipedal chimpanzees. Humans and bipedal chimpanzees were compared at matched dimensionless and dimensional velocities. Our results indicate that humans walk with significantly less work and power output in the first double-support period and the single-support period of stance, but markedly exceed chimpanzees in the second double-support period (i.e., push-off). Humans generate less work and power in limb swing, although the species difference in limb swing power was not statistically significant. We estimated that total mechanical positive ‘muscle fiber’ work and power were 46.9% and 35.8% lower, respectively, in humans than in bipedal chimpanzees at matched dimensionless speeds. This is due in part to mechanisms for the storage and release of elastic energy at the ankle and hip in humans. Furthermore, these results indicate distinct ‘heel strike’ and ‘lateral balance’ mechanics in humans and bipedal chimpanzees and suggest a greater dissipation of mechanical energy through soft tissue deformations in humans. Together, our results document important differences between human and bipedal chimpanzee walking mechanics over a full stride, permitting a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanics and energetics of chimpanzee bipedalism and the evolution of hominin walking.

Section: Introduction, Literature Review

As humans, we are unique among apes and other primates in the musculoskeletal design of our lumbar column, pelvis, and lower limbs. In particular, we possess a mobile lower back, a short pelvis, and long lower limbs with short feet . This is distinct from the relatively immobile lumbar column, tall pelvis, and short hindlimbs with long feet characteristic of living African apes (e.g., Schultz, 1930 , 1961 ; Ward, 1993 ; Pilbeam and Lieberman, 2017 ). Our limb muscle masses are more proximally located and are made up of relatively short muscle fibers and long distal limb tendons as compared to African apes (e.g., Thorpe et al., 1999 ; O'Neill et al., 2013 , 2017 ). Among other capabilities, these traits are thought to facilitate humans walking with a stable pelvis on adducted, extended lower limbs ( O'Neill et al., 2015 ), using as much as 75% less energy per distance walked than a bipedal chimpanzee ( Rodman and McHenry, 1980 ; Sockol et al., 2007 ). Understanding when and where in a full stride lower/hind limb mechanics differ between human and bipedal chimpanzee walking is important for elucidating how our interspecific differences in musculoskeletal structure affect joint loading, muscle-tendon behavior, and the metabolic cost of walking.
Over a walking stride, humans generate a coordinated sequence of three-dimensional (3-D) moments and powers; with some exceptions, these moments and powers approach their minima (i.e., near zero) in the middle single-support period and then facilitate a burst in positive power during the second double-support period (i.e., push-off), which continues into limb swing. At the hip, in particular, there are substantial nonsagittal plane moments, work, and power over a stride (e.g., Eng and Winter, 1995 ), comprehensive measurements of which are needed for accurate determination of skeletal loading (e.g., Stansfield et al., 2003a , Stansfield et al., 2003b ), muscle-tendon force, and fascicle length change (e.g., Arnold and Delp, 2011 ). Across the limb, the instantaneous 3-D joint moments, work, and power reflect the net contributions from active muscle-tendon units and some other soft tissues at each joint throughout the full gait cycle. Although it is difficult to decompose the individual contributions of a mobile lower back, a short pelvis, and long lower limbs and short feet via joint-level analyses alone, these traits can be expected to act together to reduce the total mechanical work and power output of an erect human walking stride when compared with facultative bipeds, such as bipedal chimpanzees.
In addition to our skeletal structure, our more proximal limb segment masses and long, thin distal limb tendons can be expected to further reduce the total mechanical work and power output in a walking stride. It has long been hypothesized that more proximal lower limb-mass distribution reduces the moment of inertia, and therefore the mechanical power required for limb swing (e.g., Gray, 1968 ; Hildebrand, 1985 ), including in fossil hominins ( Jungers and Stern, 1988 ). Human limb mass perturbations provide some support for this view, demonstrating that a distal shift of the mass-specific moment of inertia increases the limb swing mechanical power and metabolic costs of walking ( Royer and Martin, 2005 ; Browning et al., 2007 ). Still, the magnitude of these perturbations is large, and the resulting changes in limb segment inertial properties can exceed the difference between humans and African apes or some Old World monkeys (e.g., Isler et al., 2006 ; Supplementary Online Material [SOM] Table S1 ).
Long, thin tendons, as well as other soft tissues (e.g., ligaments, aponeuroses), have a significant capacity for passive elastic strain and reducing the mechanical work and power required of muscle fibers (e.g., Alexander, 1988 ; Roberts, 2016 ). While often associated with bouncing gaits, the storage and release of elastic strain energy in human walking is now well established. Direct measurements of ankle plantar flexor muscle-tendon behavior have shown that the Achilles tendon is stretched during the single-support period and then recoils in the second double-support period, making a substantial contribution to positive ankle power at push-off (e.g., Fukunaga et al., 2001 ; Ishikawa et al., 2005 ). However, elastic mechanisms in human walking are not limited to the ankle. The hip joint produces a large component of the total limb mechanical work and power output in walking (e.g., Eng and Winter, 1995 ; Farris and Sawicki, 2012a ; Schache et al., 2015 ), and a portion of this is likely derived from nonmuscular tissues stretched during the single-support period, including hip joint ligaments, associated tissues, and aponeuroses (e.g., Whittington et al., 2008 ; Eng et al., 2015 ). Although there is extensive quantitative data on human walking, little comparative data exist that permit a direct assessment of whether these presumed musculoskeletal adaptations interact to reduce the total mechanical work and power output as compared with a biped that lacks this lower back, pelvis, and lower limb structure, such as bipedal chimpanzees. Indeed, the absence of comprehensive, speed-controlled comparisons has left the unique aspects of human walking mechanics still not well defined, despite their critical significance for interpreting skeletal trait evolution in hominins.
This is not to suggest that data on bipedal chimpanzee walking mechanics are unknown. A seminal series of laboratory-based studies provided the first quantitative comparison of human and bipedal chimpanzee walking mechanics in the 1970s and 1980s (i.e., Yamazaki et al., 1979 ; Okada, 1985 ; Yamazaki, 1985 ). These studies include important, initial insights into the ground reaction forces and joint moments of human and facultative bipedal walking in chimpanzees and other taxa; however, the experimental design (i.e., mismatched speeds, markerless joint kinematics), as well as the absence of variance metrics, permits only limited interspecific inferences. Indeed, forces and moments are velocity-dependent parameters (e.g., Farris and Sawicki, 2012a ; Schache et al., 2015 ), and, as such, interspecific comparisons will be sensitive to speed. More careful, speed-controlled comparisons of human and bipedal chimpanzee walking have examined two-dimensional (2-D) sagittal plane stance phase joint moments ( Sockol et al., 2007 ; see also; Pontzer et al., 2009 ), but exclude joint work and power as well as limb swing. Thus, a comprehensive characterization of the 3-D moments, work and power of human and bipedal chimpanzee walking over a full stride is still unavailable.
Here, we evaluate how human and bipedal chimpanzee musculoskeletal structure affects their 3-D moments, work, and power output. Specifically, we provide the first comprehensive description and direct, speed-controlled comparisons of stride-to-stride and intraspecific variation of human and bipedal chimpanzee ground reaction forces, as well as the lower/hind limb joint moment and power profiles of each species over a full walking stride. Based on their differences in musculoskeletal structure, we then test whether: 1) the estimated limb joint work and power during the stance phase, especially the single-support period, is lower in humans than in bipedal chimpanzees, 2) the limb joint work and power required for limb swing is lower in humans than in bipedal chimpanzees, and 3) the estimated total mechanical power during walking, accounting for the storage of passive elastic strain energy in humans, is lower in humans than in bipedal chimpanzees. For completeness, the 3-D mechanics of bipedal chimpanzees and humans were compared at matched dimensionless (i.e., relative-speed match) and dimensional (i.e., absolute-speed match) speeds. Matched dimensionless speed comparisons minimize the effects due to differences in body size or walking speed, while emphasizing those arising specifically from differences in musculoskeletal design between humans and chimpanzees. The dimensional comparison, in contrast, permits an assessment of how sensitive the interspecific differences in 3-D mechanics are to walking speed.

Section: Methodology

Three-dimensional kinematic and ground force data were collected for three humans ( Homo sapiens : age = 24.3 ± 2.3 years, mass = M b : 79.2 ± 6.2 kg) and three chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes : age = 5.5 ± 0.2 years, mass = M b : 26.5 ± 6.7 kg) during bipedal walking. All subjects were male. Bipedal chimpanzees walked across an 11 m rigid, level runway at self-selected speeds, following an animal trainer offering a food reward. Human data were then collected during walking along a 20 m rigid, level runway at speeds matching the chimpanzee data set in dimensionless (i.e., relative-speed match) and dimensional (i.e., absolute-speed match) forms ( Fig. 1 ; Table 1 ; SOM Table S2 ) using an instantaneous speed. Bipedal chimpanzees were trained for 1 h d −1 , 3–5 days wk −1 , for at least 6 months before the start of data collection. The University of Massachusetts Amherst Institutional Research Board and the Stony Brook University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all human (SPHHS-HSRC-13-36) and chimpanzee (2009-1731-FAR-USDA) experiments, respectively. Before data collection, the human subjects each provided written informed consent. Download: Download high-res image (262KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 1 . A full bipedal walking stride. A full stride includes both stance and swing phases. The stance phase is divided into the first double support (double support 1), single-support, and the second double-support (double support 2) periods. In the first double-support period, the right hindlimb is the leading limb, whereas in the second double-support period, the right hindlimb is the trailing limb. The green arrow shows the direction and relative magnitude of the resultant ground reaction force under each foot over a full stride. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) Table 1 . Spatiotemporal gait parameters in human and chimpanzee bipedal walking. Human data are matched to the chimpanzee data in dimensionless (i.e., relative-speed match) form (mean ± SD). Empty Cell v a (m s −1 ) v b Fr c Stance time (s) Swing time (s) Stride length (m) Stride frequency (Hz) Duty factor Humans 1.66 ± 0.06 0.56 ± 0.01 0.31 ± 0.02 0.64 ± 0.02 0.36 ± 0.04 1.69 ± 0.05 1.00 ± 0.05 0.64 ± 0.02 Chimpanzees 1.09 ± 0.10 0.56 ± 0.06 0.31 ± 0.06 0.45 ± 0.09 0.27 ± 0.03 0.78 ± 0.07 1.43 ± 0.23 0.62 ± 0.03 a Dimensional velocity. b Dimensionless velocity. c Froude number.
The procedures used for marker data collection and 3-D joint kinematic measurements in humans and chimpanzees have been detailed in O'Neill et al. (2015) . In brief, marker positions were recorded using synchronized high-speed video cameras . Marker data for the humans were collected using an eleven-camera system recording at 240 Hz (Qualisys, Inc.; Gothenburg), whereas chimpanzee data were collected using a four-camera system recording at 150 Hz (Xcitex, Inc., Woburn). The calibrated video recording volume for the humans was created using a wand-based nonlinear transformation approach, whereas the recording volume for the chimpanzees was established using direct linear transformation and a custom-built calibration frame. Marker locations were digitized using Qualisys Track Manager software v. 2.7 (Qualisys, Inc.; Gothenburg) for the humans and ProAnalyst software v. 1.0 (Xcitex, Inc., Woburn) for the chimpanzees.
Ground reaction forces were collected using floor-mounted force platforms set into the runway flush to its surface, within the calibrated video recording volume. Two force platforms (AMTI, Watertown) sampling at 2400 Hz were used to record individual limb forces from humans, whereas an array of four force platforms (AMTI, Watertown) sampling at 1500 Hz was used to collect individual limb forces in chimpanzees throughout a bipedal walking stride. Marker data and force platform data were collected using a manual trigger that started and stopped video and force platform recording simultaneously. The x -, y -, and z -force data were low pass filtered with a cut-off frequency set to 60 Hz, whereas the marker data were filtered at 4–6 Hz. The force data were then downsampled to 240 or 150 Hz to match the synchronous video data for each species using MATLAB v. R2015 (The Mathworks, Inc., Natick). The x -, y -, and z -data from each force platform were transformed into the marker global coordinate system using markers positioned on the corner of each platform during the calibration of the video recording volume, before the start of an experiment. This permitted spatial transformations between the global coordinate system and the local force plate coordinate systems.
Three-dimensional kinematics and ground force data were processed using generic musculoskeletal models of the pelvis and lower/hind limbs of an adult human ( Delp et al., 1990 ) and an adult chimpanzee ( O'Neill et al., 2013 ) scaled to the size of each subject using anatomical segment markers ( O'Neill et al., 2015 ). All models included skeletal geometry of the pelvis and lower/hind limbs relevant to determining 3-D mechanics of the hip, knee , and ankle (talocrural) joints.
An inverse kinematics algorithm was used to determine the 3-D coordinates of the scaled model of each subject of each species over the full gait cycle ( O'Neill et al., 2015 ). This was done through a least-squares minimization of the discrepancy between the experimentally determined marker positions and the corresponding marker positions on the scaled model, subject to constraints enforced by the anatomical models of the joints ( Lu and O'Connor, 1999 ; Delp et al., 2007 ). The 3-D kinematics and force data were combined with the scaled musculoskeletal model of each subject and used to calculate the net joint moments and mechanical power associated with the joint moments. Inverse dynamics combines rigid-segment linear and rotational motion, ground reaction forces, and limb segment inertial parameters to calculate net forces and moments at each joint. Detailed limb segment inertial parameters are provided for the adult human and adult chimpanzee models in the supplemental materials ( SOM Table S1 ). These generic parameters were scaled to the size of each subject based on subject-specific measurements of body mass and segment lengths.
The instantaneous joint powers were computed at the j th joint over both the stance and swing phase of walking as the dot product of the j th joint moment and joint angular velocity vectors. Because the joint angles and joint moments were both expressed in the anatomically relevant but nonorthogonal joint reference frames, the moment and angular velocity vectors were both transformed into a common orthogonal reference frame before computing the dot product. This transformation is especially critical when the segments forming a joint are not closely aligned with the global reference frame, as in the abducted, flexed-limb walking of bipedal chimpanzees ( O'Neill et al., 2015 ). The hip, knee, and ankle powers were then multiplied by two to represent the work done by both limbs over a full stride: (1) W j + = 2 · ∫ t 1 t 2 P j + d t (2) W j − = 2 · ∫ t 1 t 2 P j - d t
The positive and negative mechanical work of the j th joint was computed by integrating over the time duration t 1 to t 2 of a walking stride, where t 1 and t 2 are the start and end of the first double-support period (ds1), single-support period (ss), second double-support period (ds2) of the stance phase or the limb swing phase (sw). The total limb positive and negative work in the i th period or phase of a stride were calculated as the sum of the positive and negative work at each of the n joints ( n = 3 for each species): (3) W i + = ∑ j = 1 N W j + d t (4) W i − = ∑ j = 1 N W j − d t
Total positive and negative mechanical work for the complete stride ( W + tot , W - tot ) were calculated as the sum of the positive or negative work for the first double-support period ( W + ds1 ; W - ds1 ), single-support period ( W + ss ; W - ss ), second double-support period ( W + ds2 ; W - ds2 ), and limb swing ( W + sw ; W - sw ). The positive and negative work terms were subsequently divided by the stride time to determine the average power output ( P + i ; P - i ).
In human walking, passive elastic energy is stored at the ankle and hip joints during the single-support period and released in the second double-support period as well as, perhaps, in early limb swing (e.g., Fukunaga et al., 2001 ; Ishikawa et al., 2005 ; Whittington et al., 2008 ; Eng et al., 2015 ). The structures most responsible for this are the Achilles tendon at the ankle and the joint capsule ligaments and iliotibial tract at the hip. A similar mechanism is not expected at the knee joint because of the opposite phasing (i.e., positive power in single-support and negative power in the second double-support period) of the joint power during the late stance phase. We estimated that elastic energy was stored during the portion of the single-support period in which the relevant joint power curve was negative. We assumed that the elastic energy storage equaled the negative work, and that all of the elastic energy stored was supplied to the subsequent period of positive power generation. At both the dimensionless and dimensional walking speeds, the positive power generation occurred during the double-support period for the ankle, or the double-support period and early limb swing for the hip. As such, the net positive elastic work during the single-support period was estimated as: (5) W e l , j = 2 · ∫ t s s 1 t s s 2 P j - d t where W el, j is the elastic work absorbed at the j th joint ( a : ankle; h : hip) during the single-support period of the stance phase of a walking stride and used to generate positive elastic recoil . The positive elastic power output was computed by dividing the positive elastic work by stride time. Therefore, the total ‘muscle fiber’ work and power were the estimated positive elastic work at the ankle ( W el,a ) and hip ( W el,h ) subtracted from the total positive mechanical work ( W + tot ). The positive mechanical power attributable to ‘muscle fiber’ was computed by dividing the ‘muscle fiber’ work by stride time.
Four strides per subject were analyzed for the humans (H) and chimpanzees (C). All 3-D moment and power data were normalized to 101 points over one full stride, facilitating comparisons of multiple strides. This also permitted the mean ± standard deviation (SD) of the moment and power curves to be determined per species.
For the chimpanzees, walking speed was calculated as the average of the instantaneous forward velocity of four markers (i.e., 3 pelvis and 1 hip marker) over the full stride, whereas for humans, a marker placed over the sacrum was used. To account for differences in body size among subjects and species, analyses were performed with dimensionless variables, using the base units of body mass M b , gravitational acceleration g , and average lower/hind limb length L . Lower/hind limb length was measured as the average height of the greater trochanter marker from the ground during quiet standing for humans and during the middle of the single-support period for chimpanzees (H = 0.92 ± 0.05, C = 0.39 ± 0.02 m). Velocity ( v ) was made dimensionless by the divisor ( gL ) 0.5 and as the Froude number ( Fr = v 2 / gL ). Force was made dimensionless by the divisor M b g , moment and work by M b g L, and power by M b g 1.5 L 0.5 . In all cases, stance, swing, and stride duration were determined based on the ground reaction forces.
To compare the stride-to-stride, intraspecific, and interspecific variation of the ground reaction forces of our human and chimpanzee samples, the adjusted coefficient of multiple correlation (CMC) was used ( Kadaba et al., 1989 ; r 2 a ). The CMC represents the correlation of the ground reaction force among strides for each individual (i.e., stride-to-stride variation) or among the individuals (i.e., intraspecific variation). The balanced human and chimpanzee data sets permit a direct, interspecific comparison of CMCs computed using the species means.
To compute the difference in dimensionless work and power between humans and bipedal chimpanzees, the percent difference was calculated as |( s 1 – s 2 )|/[( s 1 + s 2 )/2] × 100, where s 1 (species 1) and s 2 (species 2) are the species mean work and power parameters. Because the sample was balanced, a two-level nested analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare work and power output in each period or phase of a walking stride (i.e., double-support 1, single-support, double-support 2, and limb swing; Fig. 1 ), as well as the total mechanical work and power output over a full stride, to test hypotheses 1–3. A two-level nested approach allowed repeated individual subject trials to be incorporated as random effects and was therefore preferred to an independent samples t-test based on subject means. Statistical significance was set at α = 0.05. The nested ANOVA was computed in R v. 4.0.2 using the base package for Mac OS ( R Development Core Team, 2020 ).
Owing to the small sample sizes for each species, omega-squared (ω 2 ) was also used to assess the effect size of the difference between chimpanzees and human comparisons outlined in hypotheses 1–3. Effect size descriptive thresholds were ω 2 ≤ 0.01 = ‘small,’ ω 2 ≤ 0.06 = ‘medium,’ and ω 2 ≤ 0.14 = ‘large’ ( Field, 2013 ). Effect size calculations were implemented in R v. 4.0.2 using the ‘effectsize’ package ( R Development Core Team, 2020 ).

Section: Results

The average walking speeds of humans and chimpanzees were 1.66 ± 0.06 and 1.09 ± 0.10 m s −1 , respectively. These correspond to similar dimensionless velocities ( v’ ; H = 0.56 ± 0.01, C = 0.56 ± 0.06) and Fr numbers (H = 0.31 ± 0.02, C = 0.31 ± 0.06) ( Table 1 ). These speeds are close to—but a bit faster than—the preferred overground speeds for human walking, and well below the expected walk-run transition speed for terrestrial mammals (i.e., v’ = 0.7; Fr = 0.5; Alexander, 1989 ; Kram et al., 1997 ).
Here, we describe the 3-D ground reaction forces, and lower/hind limb joint moment and power profiles of humans and bipedal chimpanzees walking over a full stride at matched dimensionless speeds. The limb-joint work and power in stance, swing, and over a full stride were determined to test hypotheses 1–3.
The ground reaction forces of humans and chimpanzees were different in both magnitude and pattern ( Fig. 2 ). The vertical force was monophasic in bipedal chimpanzees, lacking the second peak from the single-support period into the second double-support period that is characteristic of human walking. The bipedal chimpanzee's anterior-posterior force was distinct from humans, as it exhibited a smaller peak force in both posterior and anterior directions, whereas the mediolateral force was larger, most notably during the single-support period. Download: Download high-res image (671KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 2 . The vertical (A–B), anterior-posterior (C–D), and mediolateral (E–F) ground reaction forces over a walking step (mean ± SD) for the three chimpanzees (column 1) as well as chimpanzees (solid blue line) and humans (dashed black line) as groups (column 2). Each step begins at heel strike (i.e., foot touchdown) and ends at toe-off of the same foot. Broken vertical lines show the average step event times for the chimpanzees, representing contralateral limb toe-off (H = 21%, C = 23%) and the contralateral limb heel strike (H = 81%, C = 77%), which define the double-support and single-support periods of a step. H = humans; C = chimpanzees. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
The CMCs were smaller between strides than between individuals for both humans and bipedal chimpanzees ( Table 2 ). This indicates that there is more variation among humans and chimpanzees in ground reaction forces than there is within a given individual from one stride to the next. Among individuals, the mediolateral force was the most variable both in chimpanzees (r 2 a = 0.847 ± 0.012) and humans (r 2 a = 0.916 ± 0.038). Directly comparing the CMC values of human and chimpanzee samples indicates that, on average, chimpanzees are more variable in their ground reaction force stride-to-stride than humans at matched dimensionless speeds (H = r 2 a = 0.985, C = r 2 a = 0.922). Table 2 . Adjusted coefficient of multiple correlation (CMC) of ground reaction forces (F y , F x , and F z ). Empty Cell F y, vert F x, ant-post F z, med-lat Humans a 0.994 ± 0.003 0.996 ± 0.001 0.965 ± 0.017 Among humans b 0.958 ± 0.018 0.972 ± 0.007 0.916 ± 0.038 Chimpanzees a 0.972 ± 0.021 0.911 ± 0.054 0.884 ± 0.074 Among chimpanzees b 0.962 ± 0.016 0.883 ± 0.031 0.847 ± 0.012 Human data are matched to the chimpanzee data in dimensionless (i.e., relative-speed match) form (mean ± SD). CMC mean ± SD for 4 trials per subject, 3 subjects. The y, x, and z components of the ground reaction forces are vertical (vert), anterior-posterior (ant-post), and medial-lateral (med-lat), respectively. a Correlations between strides within subjects. b Correlations between subjects.
As expected, humans and chimpanzees were quite different in the magnitude and pattern of the limb joint moments over a full stride ( Fig. 3 ; Table 3 ). At the hip, chimpanzees exhibited the largest joint moments in hip flexion-extension, with peak hip extension moment occurring in the first double-support period and continuing throughout the single-support period of stance. Unlike humans, for whom the net flexion moment begins near midstance, the net flexion moment did not occur until the second-double support period in bipedal chimpanzee walking. Humans and chimpanzees were opposite in phase in the frontal plane, where chimpanzees exhibited a net hip adduction moment throughout stance that peaks in the second-double support period. Near the middle of the single-support period, the hip adduction-abduction moment approached zero in both taxa. Chimpanzees exhibited substantial hip rotational moments, with a large internal rotation moment throughout the single-support and second double-support periods. During limb swing, chimpanzees exceeded humans in the magnitude of internal and external rotational moments. Download: Download high-res image (456KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 3 . The hip flexion-extension moment (A), abduction-adduction moment (B), internal-external rotation (C), knee flexion-extension moment (D), and ankle plantar flexion-dorsiflexion moment (E) over a walking stride (mean ± SD) for humans (dashed black line) and chimpanzees (solid blue line). Moments are in dimensionless units. Each stride begins and ends at ipsilateral ‘heel strike’ (i.e., foot touchdown). All vertical lines show the average stride event times for the chimpanzees, which were similar among the species. The broken vertical lines represent contralateral limb toe-off (H = 13%, C = 14%) and contralateral limb ‘heel strike’ (H = 51%, C = 48%), which define the double-support and single-support periods of a stride; the solid vertical line represents ipsilateral toe-off (H = 63%, C = 62%), which defines the start of the swing phase. H = humans; C = chimpanzees. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) Table 3 . Peak joint moments in humans and bipedal chimpanzees at matched dimensionless speeds in dimensionless units. Human data are matched to the chimpanzee data in dimensionless (i.e., relative-speed match) form (mean ± SD). Empty Cell Hip Knee Ankle Flexion-extension Adduction-abduction Internal-external rotation Flexion-extension Plantar flexion-dorsiflexion Humans − 0.112 ± 0.006 (ext.) − 0.106 ± 0.019 (abd.) 0.025 ± 0.003 (int.) 0.102 ± 0.038 (ext.) − 0.196 ± 0.002 (plantar.) Chimpanzees − 0.274 ± 0.036 (ext.) 0.093 ± 0.029 (add.) − 0.047 ± 0.016 (ext.) 0.122 ± 0.024 (ext.) − 0.131 ± 0.037 (plantar.) The direction of the peak joint moment is given as flexion (flex.), extension (ext.), abduction (abd.), adduction (add.), internal rotation (int.), external rotation (ext.), plantar flexion (plantar.), or dorsiflexion (dorsi.).
Humans and chimpanzees both exhibited an initial knee flexion moment in the first double-support period, and then rapidly shifted to a large net extension moment at the start of the single-support period. Unlike humans, chimpanzees have a net knee extension moment throughout the single- and second double-support periods. The pattern and magnitude of knee flexion-extension moments in limb swing were similar for both species.
Chimpanzees exhibited a net ankle plantar flexion moment throughout the stance phase, including during the first double-support period. This differs from humans, who exhibited a net dorsiflexion moment in the first double-support period, likely associated with our distinct ‘heel strike.’ Although chimpanzees maintained a near-constant ankle plantar flexion moment throughout the remainder of stance, there was an increase in the magnitude of the net plantar flexion moment throughout the single and second double-support periods in humans, which peaked in the second-double support period. For both species, there was a small net dorsiflexion moment throughout limb swing, on average.
The magnitude, as well as pattern of joint powers, differed between humans and bipedal chimpanzees ( Fig. 4 ; Table 4 ). In both humans and chimpanzees, there was negative hip power in the first double-support period. In the single-support period, there was an initial period of hip energy generation followed by hip energy absorption in humans, whereas chimpanzee hips generated energy throughout this period. In the second double-support period, there was positive power in human hips, whereas there was negative power in chimpanzee hips. For humans, in the second double-support period, positive power continued into limb swing, ending with a small burst of energy absorption. Chimpanzees generated substantial positive hip power in the first half of limb swing, ending with a small burst of energy generation. Download: Download high-res image (337KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 4 . The 3-D hip power (A), knee power (B), and ankle power output (C) over a walking stride (mean ± SD) for humans (dashed black line) and chimpanzees (solid blue line). All vertical lines show the average stride event times for the chimpanzees, which were similar among the species. The broken vertical lines represent contralateral limb toe-off (H = 13%, C = 14%) and contralateral limb ‘heel strike’ (H = 51%, C = 48%), which define the double-support and single-support periods of a stride; the solid vertical line represents ipsilateral toe-off (H = 63%, C = 62%), which defines the start of the swing phase. Powers are in dimensionless units. H = humans; C = chimpanzees. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) Table 4 . Peak joint power in humans and bipedal chimpanzees at matched dimensionless speeds in dimensionless units. Human data are matched to the chimpanzee data in dimensionless (i.e., relative-speed match) form (mean ± SD). Empty Cell Hip power Knee power Ankle power + – + – + – Humans 0.071 ± 0.010 −0.031 ± 0.002 0.038 ± 0.004 −0.078 ± 0.005 0.145 ± 0.037 −0.034 ± 0.011 Chimpanzees 0.067 ± 0.016 −0.050 ± 0.016 0.083 ± 0.027 −0.076 ± 0.004 0.052 ± 0.014 −0.059 ± 0.018
At the knee joint, there was a substantial positive power peak in the first double-support period in both chimpanzees and humans, followed by a complex, cyclical pattern of energy absorption and generation through the single-support and second double-support periods. In the middle of the single-support period, chimpanzees had a small burst of energy generation, whereas humans were near zero power output. Throughout limb swing, there was substantial negative power at the knee in both species, especially in the second half of the swing phase.
The ankle joint in chimpanzees was characterized by energy absorption followed by energy generation over the stance phase. This is distinct from humans, where a small amount of energy absorption occurred in the first double-support period, followed by a period of negative power at the end of the single-support period and then substantial positive power output in the second double-support period. The peak dimensionless positive power in the second double-support period was almost three times greater in humans than chimpanzees at matched dimensionless walking speeds, on average ( Table 4 ). For both species, there was a relatively small amount of energy generation from the ankle throughout limb swing.
Humans generated less dimensionless positive mechanical work ( W + ds1 : F 1,18 = 21.38, p = 0.0099; ω 2 = 0.77) and power ( P + ds1 : F 1,18 = 12.67, p = 0.0236; ω 2 = 0.66) than chimpanzees during the first double-support. The same was true for the single-support period positive mechanical work ( W + ss : F 1,18 = 27.58, p = 0.0063; ω 2 = 0.82) and power ( P + ss : F 1,18 = 13.51, p = 0.0213; ω 2 = 0.68). In the second double-support period, humans generated much more positive mechanical work ( W + ds2 : F 1,18 = 38.15, p = 0.0035; ω 2 = 0.86) and power than chimpanzees ( P + ds2 : F 1,18 = 76.51, p = 0.0009 ω 2 = 0.93; Fig. 5 ). In all cases, the effect sizes were ‘large.’ This provides partial support for our first hypothesis. Download: Download high-res image (189KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 5 . The stance phase positive joint work (A) and power (B) output in the first double-support (DS1), single-support (SS), and second double-support (DS2) periods of a walking stride for humans (black) and chimpanzees (red; mean ± SD). The relative contributions of the ankle elastic work and power (‘ankle elastic’) and muscle fiber work and power (‘muscle fiber’) to the total limb work and power output in the human DS2 period is shown. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Humans generated less dimensionless positive mechanical work ( W + sw : F 1,18 = 16.71, p = 0.0016; ω 2 = 0.72) and power ( P + sw : F 1,18 = 6.649, p = 0.0614; ω 2 = 0.48) than chimpanzees in limb swing. The difference in positive mechanical work was significant, but the difference in power was only near significant; however, in both cases, the effect size was ‘large’ ( Fig. 6 ). This provides partial support for our second hypothesis. Download: Download high-res image (104KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 6 . Total positive limb work (A) and average positive limb power (B) used to swing the limb during walking in humans (black) and chimpanzees (red; mean ± SD). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
The total dimensionless positive mechanical work ( W + tot ) and power ( P + tot ) were 23.3% and 12.0% smaller in humans than in chimpanzees, respectively. The difference in mechanical work was ‘large’ and significant (F 1,18 = 11.55, p = 0.0273; ω 2 = 0.64), whereas the difference in power was a ‘medium’ effect, and not statistically significant (F 1,18 = 1.372, p = 0.3070; ω 2 = 0.06). The modest differential in total mechanical power is due to the substantial positive power output in the second double-support period of a human walking stride. However, when the mechanical work and power attributable to elastic storage and release at the human ankle and hip were accounted for, the estimated total positive ‘muscle fiber’ work and power percent differential between species increased to 46.9% and 35.8%, respectively. The differences in estimated total positive ‘muscle fiber’ work (F 1,18 = 33.19, p = 0.0045, ω 2 = 0.84) and power (F 1,18 = 10.56, p = 0.0314, ω 2 = 0.61) between species were both significant, and the effect sizes were ‘large’ ( Fig. 7 ), supporting our third hypothesis. Download: Download high-res image (217KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 7 . Total positive limb work (A) and average positive limb power (B) over a full walking stride in humans (black) and chimpanzees (red; mean ± SD). The human total lower limb work and power is due to contributions from both elastic mechanisms at the hip and ankle (‘elastic’) as well as muscle fibers (‘muscle fiber’). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
In human walking, the stance phase work was predominately from the ankle (47.0 ± 6.5%), and from the hip in the swing phase (82.9 ± 3.2%). This contrasts with chimpanzees in which most of their positive mechanical work was from the hip in both stance (49.1 ± 3.7%) and swing (88.5 ± 1.9%) phases ( Fig. 8 ). Download: Download high-res image (856KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 8 . The distribution of positive mechanical work (A) and negative mechanical work among the limb joints (B) during stance and swing in humans (column 1) and chimpanzees (column 2).
In the stance phase, human negative work was predominately absorbed at the knee (46.6 ± 3.0%), whereas chimpanzees absorbed most of their mechanical work at the ankle (42.4 ± 2.0%). In the swing phase, the knee accounted for nearly all of the negative work in both species (H = 91.2 ± 4.6%; C = 93.0 ± 2.1%).
For the comparison at matched dimensional speeds (i.e., absolute-speed match), the average human walking speed was 1.08 ± 0.02 m s −1 . This corresponds to a v’ of 0.36 ± 0.01 and Fr of 0.13 ± 0.02 ( SOM Table S2 ), which are slower than the relative-speed match.
Overall, the humans had smaller moments, work, and power at matched dimensional speed than at matched dimensionless speed. As such, the interspecific differences in dimensional positive mechanical work and power output were consistently larger, with the exception of the second double-support period positive work and power ( SOM Figs. S2–S8 ; SOM Tables S2–S5 ). In this case, the positive mechanical work and power output were more similar between species than at the relative-speed match ( SOM Fig S5 ). The human 3-D joint moments and powers had similar profiles at 1.08 ms −1 and 1.66 ms −1 . However, the magnitude of the interspecific difference in total mechanical work and power was much larger (H = 83.6% vs. C = 77.8%; SOM Fig. S7 ) than at matched dimensionless speeds, even without accounting for elastic power output. Indeed, the interspecific difference in total ‘muscle fiber’ work and power are larger still (H = 106.9% vs. C = 111.9%; SOM Fig S7 ). This reinforces the importance of careful, speed-controlled comparisons for testing the effects of musculoskeletal structure on locomotor capabilities.

Section: Discussion

Our results are broadly consistent with previous descriptions of the 3-D ground force components in bipedal chimpanzee walking ( Kimura et al., 1977 ; Pontzer et al., 2009 ). As expected, all three animals exhibited monophasic vertical force patterns, with small magnitude anterior-posterior force peaks compared to a human walking step at similar dimensionless speeds, especially in the second double-support period (i.e., push-off). The species difference in peak vertical force magnitude (H = 1.27, C = 1.13; Fig. 2 ) supports the inference that facultative bipeds walk with lower peak vertical force ( Schmitt, 2003 ), albeit by a small amount at matched dimensionless speeds. However, this difference is not present at matched dimensional speeds ( SOM Fig. S2 ). Overall, the ground reaction forces in bipedal chimpanzees appear quite similar to the 3-D forces of ‘highly trained’ bipedal macaques ( Kimura et al., 1977 ; Ogihara et al., 2007 ), as well as some other facultative bipeds ( Kimura, 1977 ). A qualitative comparison of our chimpanzee data set to similar data from ‘highly-trained’ bipedal macaques ( Ogihara et al., 2007 ) suggests that bipedal chimpanzees and macaques are much more similar to each other than either are to humans.
The data herein indicate that bipedal chimpanzees exceed humans in the variation of their ground reaction forces from stride to stride. Among individuals, chimpanzees are more variable than humans in their anterior-posterior and mediolateral ground forces but similar in their vertical component. These results are consistent with CMC results for the pelvis and lower/hind limb 3-D kinematics reported in O'Neill et al. (2015) . The similarities in the vertical force CMC values suggest that the monophasic pattern is quite consistent across our three subjects, as suggested by average patterns from chimpanzees in earlier studies from a range of ages and body masses ( Kimura et al., 1977 ; Pontzer et al., 2009 ).
Our results are consistent with earlier 2-D data on the sagittal plane moments of humans and bipedal chimpanzees throughout stance (Yamazaki et al., 1981; Sockol et al., 2007 ). In particular, bipedal chimpanzees—like all facultative bipeds studied to date ( Yamazaki et al., 1979 ; Yamazaki, 1985 )—have a substantial hip extension moment for nearly the full duration of stance.
However, these 3-D data also provide insight into bipedal chimpanzee mechanics in the nonsagittal planes, and over a full walking stride. Hip abduction-adduction moments are different in magnitude and opposite in direction for human and bipedal chimpanzee walking. The absence of an abductor moment in the stance phase in bipedal chimpanzee walking, and throughout the single-support period, in particular, provides quantitative support to the longstanding view that the human ‘lateral balance mechanism’ is a derived aspect of hominin walking (e.g., Stern and Susman, 1981 ; Lovejoy, 1988 ). The marked contrast in hip abduction-adduction moments between humans and bipedal chimpanzees demonstrates that the single-support period of a bipedal walking stride need not follow the simple ‘mechanical model’ of hip loading, which assumes a large abduction moment during single-support (e.g., Lovejoy et al., 2016 ; Ruff, 1995 ; see also Warrener, 2017 ). This is an important consideration in general, but especially when extending this human-based approach to the earliest hominins (e.g., Richmond and Jungers, 2008 ).
The single-support period of bipedal chimpanzees is characterized by a larger internal (i.e., medial) rotation moment than in human walking. This supports the inference of Stern and Susman (1981 :164) that for chimpanzees, “… the problem posed during the single-support phase of bipedality is to prevent collapse into lateral rotation at the stance side hip.” Our results confirm and extend this inference, indicating that there is also a substantial hip adduction moment in bipedal chimpanzee walking, which reaches a similar magnitude to the internal rotation moment near the end of the single-support period. Taken together, the moment data herein confirm that the distinction between the 3-D mechanics of the single-support period in bipedal chimpanzee and human walking is a reliance on ‘rotation-based’ or ‘rotation-adduction-based’ hip mechanics in chimpanzees and ‘abduction-based’ hip mechanics in humans for ‘maintaining lateral balance.’ How individual hindlimb muscle-tendon units contribute to balancing these moments in bipedal chimpanzees requires additional quantitative analyses, since an individual muscle-tendon unit will, in general, have non-zero moment arms about all three hip joint axes that can change in magnitude and sign during movement (e.g., O'Neill et al., 2013 ).
The joint moment data also extend our earlier findings ( O'Neill et al., 2015 , 2018 ) that the use of a ‘heel strike’ during walking in humans is distinct, not just in its consistency (Elftman and Manter, 1938; Webber and Raichlen, 2016 ), but in both its associated ankle kinematics and mechanics, despite some qualitative similarities with other African apes overall ( Schmitt and Larson, 1995 ). At the human ankle, there is a consistent, net dorsiflexion moment from ‘heel strike’ through the first double-support period, which contrasts with the net plantar flexor moment in bipedal chimpanzees. How these different foot strike patterns impact ankle muscle-tendon mechanics and energetics in walking is still unclear, but some limited metabolic data indicate that evolution of the hominin ‘heel strike’ is of much greater consequence for walking than running (e.g., Cunningham et al., 2010 ; Gruber et al., 2013 ). When humanlike ‘heel strike’ walking first appeared in hominin evolution is still unclear, although a robust calcaneal tuber and lateral plantar process has been used to infer its presence as early as Australopithecus afarensis (e.g., Latimer and Lovejoy, 1989 ; Prang, 2015 ; DeSilva et al., 2019 ). Still, this is difficult to establish even from fossil footprints such as the Laetoli site tracks (e.g., Leakey and Hay, 1979 ; Masao et al., 2016 ), because both human and bipedal chimpanzee foot strikes induce relatively deep heel impressions ( Hatala et al., 2016a ).
Human and bipedal chimpanzee joint moments are broadly similar in direction and magnitude throughout limb swing, except in hip internal-external rotation. This is consistent with greater circumduction of the hindlimb in bipedal chimpanzee walking ( O'Neill et al., 2015 ). The limb-swing rotational moments also provide some indirect support to the inference of Stern and Larson (1993 :425) that the obturator externus muscle is activated “to counteract [a] medial rotatory effect” in the first half of limb swing, as there is a net internal (i.e., medial) rotation moment at this time in bipedal chimpanzees.
Our results provide some support for the first hypothesis that human walking involves lower work and power output in the stance phase than bipedal chimpanzees. This is due, in large part, to significantly less positive mechanical work and power output in the first double-support and single-support periods of a human walking stride. Although both humans and chimpanzees absorb mechanical energy at the hip in the first double-support period, there is greater net positive mechanical work at the knee ( Fig. 4 A, B) in bipedal chimpanzee walking.
The greater positive mechanical work in the single-support period in chimpanzees is due primarily to greater positive power at the hip, with small contributions from the knee and ankle. This is consistent with previous assessments of sagittal plane hip moments, which had indicated a substantial force requirement at the hip during the stance phase in bipedal chimpanzees ( Sockol et al., 2007 ; Pontzer et al., 2009 ). In middle single-support, the lower back, pelvis, and lower limbs of humans facilitate near-zero lower limb joint power, followed by a short period in which mechanical energy is absorbed at the hip and ankle (i.e., ‘preload’: Kuo et al., 2005 ; Zelik et al., 2015 ).
In contrast to the first double-support and single-support periods, humans markedly exceed bipedal chimpanzees in total positive mechanical work and power during the second double-support period due to substantial mechanical energy generation at the ankle for push-off. Muscle-tendon models (e.g., Hof et al., 1983 ) and direct imaging of muscle fiber dynamics (e.g., Fukanaga et al., 2001 ; Ishikawa et al., 2005 ; Farris and Sawicki, 2012b ) indicate that a substantial component of the positive power for human push-off is due to the elastic recoil of the Achilles tendon, stretched during the single-support period. Based on the mechanical energy absorbed at the ankle during the single-support period at this speed, we estimated that 39 ± 13% of the positive power for ankle push-off is from elastic storage, on average ( Fig. 5 ). The upper error margin of our indirect, inverse dynamics-based approximation overlaps direct imaging of muscle fiber behavior in humans walking between 1.25 and 1.75 ms −1 , which indicates a significant contribution from elastic power (i.e., 50–55%), at least for the gastrocnemius muscle ( Farris and Sawicki, 2012b ). It has been reported that the typical procedures used in direct imaging studies can overestimate the elastic energy returned from tendons ( Zelik and Franz, 2017 ), which may account for some of the difference in mean values. Of course, both these indirect and direct estimates are subject to the limitations of the inverse-dynamics approach and would benefit from continued refinement using detailed musculoskeletal models that account for individual muscle-tendon unit behavior (e.g., Honert and Zelik, 2016 ).
The contribution of elastic positive hip work to the second double-support period and limb swing is less well understood but has been estimated to be 10–58% across a range of walking speeds ( Yoon and Mansour, 1982 ; Varhas et al., 1990 ; Whittington et al., 2008 ). Herein, we estimated that the human hip stored and released 25.5 ± 10.7% of the positive work to the second double-support period and limb swing, which is in the middle of this published range. Hip joint capsular ligaments and associated tissues have long been identified as a source of hip elastic work (e.g., Neptune et al., 2008 ; Whittingon et al., 2008 ), since the anterior tissues (e.g., iliofemoral ligament) will be strained during hip extension. The iliotibial tract, which has a hip flexion moment arm, appears to contribute as well ( Eng et al., 2015 ). Direct imaging of hip flexor muscle fiber behavior (e.g., rectus femoris) would help elucidate the role of muscle and tendon to positive power output in the second double-support and limb swing periods of a human walking stride.
Over a full stride, our estimated total elastic work contributions (i.e., ankle and hip: 24.2 ± 3.1% at 1.66 ms −1 ; 31.1 ± 7.2% at 1.08 ms −1 ) are similar to the series elastic element contributions to the total lower limb work from individual muscle-tendon dynamics (e.g., 29.4% tendon elastic work to muscle fiber work at 1.2 ms −1 : Sasaki et al., 2009 ). This suggests that our estimates are reasonable initial approximations. It is well known that net joint-level measures do not equate to total muscle-tendon unit work and power, owing to biarticular muscle recruitment and muscle cocontraction ( Sasaki et al., 2009 ), which may differ between human and bipedal chimpanzee walking.
The hindlimb joint mechanics and muscle-tendon structure of bipedal chimpanzees suggest a limited capacity for elastic work and power output in a walking stride. First, the joint mechanics data herein demonstrate that, unlike human walking, the second half of the single-support period of chimpanzee bipedal walking involves no net negative hip or ankle work (see Fig. 4 ; SOM Fig. S4 ) for elastic energy storage and is instead a continuous period of positive work. The absence of this negative work suggests that there is no significant elastic contribution from the hip and ankle to ‘push-off’ in bipedal chimpanzees. This is also implied by the hip flexion-extension range of motion, which is about half that of humans ( O'Neill et al., 2015 : C: 27°; H: 48°), indicating less capacity for hip tissue strain and elastic energy storage overall. Indeed, the passive tissue strain and elastic work of the iliotibial tract of bipedal chimpanzees has been estimated to be only a small fraction of human values ( Eng et al., 2015 ), due in large part to this kinematic difference. Second, chimpanzee pelvis and hindlimb muscles are also characterized by relatively longer muscle fibers than human lower limb muscles, and the near absence of a free Achilles tendon (e.g., Thorpe et al., 1999 ; O'Neill et al., 2013 , 2017 ). Chimpanzee pelvis and hindlimb relative muscle fiber lengths (i.e., ratio of muscle fiber length to total muscle-tendon unit length) are about 15% longer than humans overall (C = 0.59 ± 0.21, H = 0.44 ± 0.25), and about twice as long for the leg/shank muscles in particular (C = 0.33 ± 0.14, H = 0.15 ± 0.04; Arnold et al., 2010 ; O'Neill et al., 2013 ; see also Thorpe et al., 1999 ). This architectural design requires the muscle fibers to more closely track the muscle-tendon length changes due to the joint motions, implying a limited capacity for tendon strain and thus storage and release of elastic energy. Still, short, stiff tendons, long, thin internal tendons, and sarcomeric proteins may permit some degree of elastic work and power output (e.g., Alexander, 1988 ; Roberts, 2016 ). Decomposition of joint-level 3-D mechanics among individual muscles and series elastic elements via optimization can provide a more detailed accounting of the muscle-tendon mechanical work and power (e.g., Anderson and Pandy, 1993 , 2001 ), and more precise estimates of the elastic contribution to human and bipedal chimpanzee walking.
Our results also provide some limited support for our second hypothesis that human limb structure reduces limb swing positive work and power. The greater positive work and, to a lesser extent, power in bipedal chimpanzee limb swing is consistent with the hypothesized differences in limb structure. However, it is difficult to isolate the contribution of the limb-mass distribution per se. This is because bipedal chimpanzees engage in more hip rotation about abducted, flexed hindlimbs throughout limb swing ( O'Neill et al., 2015 ), for reasons likely independent of limb-mass distribution. Increasing limb flexion ( Wu and Kuo, 2019 ) and circumduction ( Shorter et al., 2017 ) in limb swing increases limb joint work and positive power over a stride in human perturbation studies, regardless of limb-mass distribution.
Elastic work and power from the hip likely contribute to both the second double-support period and the first half of limb swing in human walking. Given the sinusoidal shape of the positive power burst at the hip that peaks at the stance-swing transition ( Fig. 4 A), we can estimate that about half of the hip elastic work and power is output for limb swing, which would further increase the human-chimpanzee limb swing differential. In contrast, in the second double-support period of bipedal chimpanzee walking, the hip is insufficiently extended (i.e., 25° of hip flexion, on average; O'Neill et al., 2015 ) to strain the associated elastic tissues and permit a positive elastic power contribution to the first half of limb swing. This suggests a distinct contribution of human hip mechanics during the single- and second double-support periods to reducing limb swing work and power, independent of limb-mass distribution.
On average, human walking involves 23.3% and 12.0% less positive mechanical work and power than bipedal chimpanzees, respectively. These differentials are enhanced by human capacities for elastic work and power output over a stride, which are assumed to be zero in bipedal chimpanzees herein. Together, these results support our third hypothesis, as the total ‘muscle fiber’ work and power output of the human lower limb is 46.9% and 35.8% lower, respectively, than the hindlimbs of bipedal chimpanzees walking at matched dimensionless speeds. This is consistent with the broad-sense expectation that our mobile lower back, pelvis, and long lower limbs with short feet of humans reduce the total mechanical work and power output of our walking stride when compared with bipedal chimpanzees; however, decomposing the individual contributions of specific traits to these joint-level differences is complex, and requires additional investigation.
Our total mechanical power differential accounts for some, but not all, of the differential in the metabolic cost of walking between humans and bipedal chimpanzees (i.e., 50–75%: Sockol et al., 2007 ; Pontzer et al., 2014 ). Of course, joint-level metrics do not account for differences in muscle cocontraction, muscle contractile behavior (i.e., force-length-velocity dynamics), muscle architecture, and myosin heavy chain content between species (e.g., O'Neill et al., 2013 , 2017 ), all of which can further increase the human-chimpanzee differential. For example, the relatively small, mobile limb joints of chimpanzees (e.g., Jungers, 1988 ) may require higher levels of muscle cocontraction for joint stabilization over a bipedal walking stride. In our view, model-based approaches that permit optimization of individual muscle mechanics and metabolic costs can improve upon previous joint-level ‘force-based approximations’ of muscle energy use (e.g., Roberts et al., 1998 ; Sockol et al., 2007 ; Pontzer et al., 2009 ), as they parameterize individual-muscle excitation patterns as well as the metabolic costs of activation, cross-bridge cycling, shortening-lengthening, and associated contractile element dynamics (e.g., Umberger and Rubenson, 2011 ).
In humans, positive mechanical work and power output has been shifted to the distal joints, with 47% of the work performed at the ankle throughout the stance phase. Notably, this facilitates the use of shorter muscle fibers ( Thorpe et al., 1999 ; Arnold et al., 2010 ; O'Neill et al., 2013 , 2017 ) and a greater reliance on elastic energy storage and release at the ankle. Both humans and chimpanzees have relative muscle fiber lengths (i.e., ratio of muscle fiber length to total muscle-tendon unit length) that are more than twice as long for pelvis and thigh muscles (H = 0.55 ± 0.15, C = 0.67 ± 0.20) as for leg muscles (H = 0.15 ± 0.04, C = 0.33 ± 0.14; Arnold et al., 2010 ; O'Neill et al., 2013 ; see also Thorpe et al., 1999 ). Our large soleus muscle and long Achilles tendon (e.g., O'Neill et al., 2013 ), in particular, are likely derived traits within the hominin lineage that enhance our positive push-off mechanics as well as elastic energy storage and release. Bipedal chimpanzees have a more proximal distribution of limb work, with 49% performed at the hip during stance. A reliance on proximal joints for positive work and power necessitates the activation of longer, parallel-fibered muscles (e.g., Thorpe et al., 1999 ; O'Neill et al., 2013 ), whose shortening-lengthening behavior is expected to more faithfully track 3-D joint motion, with less capacity for decoupling of muscle fiber and tendon strain. In limb swing, both humans and bipedal chimpanzees primarily use the hip. To the extent that the longer, heavier feet of chimpanzees affect their limb swing mechanics, this may account for some of the relatively larger contribution of hip (H = 83%, C = 89%) work ( Fig. 8 ) in bipedal chimpanzees than humans.
Over a steady, level walking stride, no net mechanical work is performed on the environment, and the total whole-body positive and negative work must sum to zero. In humans, muscle-tendon units of the lower limb provide most of the positive work through rotations of the joints; however, soft tissues such as the heel pad, intervertebral discs , or articular cartilages likely compress and perform significant negative work on the body without rotating the lower limb joints ( Zelik and Kuo, 2010 ; Zelik et al., 2015 ). Our results indicate that humans exhibit an imbalance of limb joint work, with average negative-to-positive ratios of 67 ± 9% per step (i.e., excluding limb swing). This is nearly identical to the ratio of 68% per step in level walking in DeVita et al. (2007) . At matched dimensionless speeds, bipedal chimpanzee negative-to-positive work is more balanced, with a ratio of 88 ± 8% per step. This is due to greater negative work—and more active muscle-tendon unit lengthening—in bipedal chimpanzees than in human walking. Although the metabolic cost of performing negative muscle fiber work is low ( Woledge et al., 1985 ), soft tissue energy dissipation has no cost at all. As an example, a humanlike heel strike permits mechanical energy dissipation via the heel pad (e.g., Baines et al., 2018 ; Honert and Zelik, 2019 ), rather than muscle-tendon lengthening. The shift from facultative to habitual bipedal walking in hominin evolution likely increased our reliance on soft (non-muscular) tissues for mechanical energy dissipation, which may have some metabolic and fatigue-resistance benefits in walking overall.
Studies of the development of human walking mechanics indicate that children over the age of 5 years have adultlike gait mechanics and metabolic costs, once differences in size are accounted for ( Sutherland, 1997 ; Stansfield et al., 2003b , Stansfield et al., 2003a ; Weyand et al., 2010 ). Chimpanzees grow into adults at a faster rate than humans ( Zihlman et al., 2004 ), but are still subadults between 5 and 6 years of age. Ontogenetic studies of chimpanzee bipedal walking ground reaction forces indicate that by the age of 5 years, chimpanzees exhibit adultlike mechanics, independent of speed ( Kimura, 1996 ). Sagittal plane hip, knee, and ankle joint moments of bipedal chimpanzees that range in age from 6 to 33 years were all quite similar to each other ( Pontzer et al., 2014 ). A qualitative comparison of our ground reaction forces and sagittal plane moments during the stance phase to these data indicates that our results are similar to chimpanzees across a broad age and size range and, given the commonalities in the between-subject CMCs for both the force and kinematic results ( Table 2 ; O'Neill et al., 2015 ) as well, should therefore be representative of bipedal chimpanzee walking in general.
Our analyses did not quantify intrinsic foot motion. Bipedal chimpanzees walk with less 3-D midfoot ( Holowka et al., 2017 ) and forefoot ( Fernandez et al., 2016 ) motion than humans. These new data indicating greater intrinsic foot motion in humans than in bipedal chimpanzees were unexpected, given long-standing dichotomies of human feet as ‘stiff’ and chimpanzees as ‘mobile’ in bipedal walking (e.g., Elftman and Manter, 1935 ; Susman, 1983 ). However, the ‘stiff’ and ‘mobile’ dichotomy may be more reflective of passive ranges of motion as well as an overemphasis on the ‘midtarsal break’ in the single-support period of bipedal chimpanzee walking. Indeed, most human 3-D midfoot and forefoot motion actually occurs in the second double-support period, not in the single-support period (e.g., Lundgren et al., 2008 ; Holowka et al., 2017 ). Our inverse kinematics weighted markers located on the calcaneus more heavily than other foot markers for calculating ankle joint kinematics, which keeps intrinsic foot deformation from contaminating ankle joint angular velocities, and therefore ankle joint power. This approach helps prevent overestimation of ‘push-off’ power, which is important for proper calculation of plantar flexor muscle function (e.g., Zelik and Hornet, 2018 ). Still, we did not take into account the possible intrinsic foot power generation in the late stance. Greater human intrinsic foot motion may have some adaptive value in contributing positive power to push-off (e.g., Takahashi et al., 2017 ; Farris et al., 2019 ). The limited midfoot and forefoot motion, together with small peak forces in the second double-support period of bipedal chimpanzee walking (see Fig. 2 ) suggest little foot positive power in push-off, by comparison. Thus, the inclusion of intrinsic foot mechanics in comparisons of human and bipedal chimpanzee walking may affect the total limb power output and is an important area of future study for understanding hominin foot evolution.
The single-support period of a walking stride has particular relevance for hominin evolution as several skeletal traits have been tied to ‘maintaining lateral balance’ in hominins, such as ilia orientation (e.g., Stern and Susman, 1981 ; Lovejoy, 1988 ). Humans are well known to use an ‘abductor-based hip mechanism’ in the single-support period, an assumption that has been extended to a wide range of fossil hominins (e.g., Lovejoy et al., 1973 ; Ruff, 1995 ), including the earliest hominins (e.g., Richmond and Jungers, 2008 ). Our results demonstrate that bipedal chimpanzees use an alternate mechanism, in which there are large internal rotation and adduction moments in the single-support period. This ‘rotation-based’ or ‘rotation-adduction-based’ mechanism for ‘maintaining lateral balance’ confirms and extends the inferences of Stern and Susman (1981) , who proposed these single-support period mechanics for bipedal chimpanzees and other apes (i.e., gibbons , orangutans). This represents an alternative means of maintaining whole-body stability during bipedal walking; one that likely preceded the ‘abductor-based’ mechanism in the hominin lineage. Indeed, the likelihood that the kinematics and mechanics of bipedal walking at the origins of hominin lineage were quite distinct from humans and much more similar to bipedal walking in facultative bipeds (cf. O'Neill et al., 2018 ) is an important consideration when searching for skeletal adaptations for ‘terrestrial bipedal travel’ in the earliest putative hominins (e.g., Macchiarelli et al., 2020 ). More experimental and modeling-simulation studies are needed to evaluate how musculoskeletal trait evolution in the pelvis and hind/lower limbs, including shifts in ilia length and orientation (e.g., Stern and Susman, 1981 ; Lovejoy, 1988 ) facilitate the use of an ‘adduction-based mechanism’ for ‘maintaining lateral balance.’
An important difference in musculoskeletal structure between humans and chimpanzees is that chimpanzees possess a relatively longer ischium than humans (e.g., Stern and Susman, 1983 ; Lovejoy, 1988 ). A long ischium is evident in Ardipithecus ramidus at 4.4. Ma ( Lovejoy et al., 2009b , Lovejoy et al., 2009a ), as well as in all Miocene apes with associated pelvis remains ( Ward, 1993 ; Hammond et al., 2013 , 2020 ; Morgan et al., 2015 ; Ward et al., 2019 ). Komza et al. (2018 :4136) has recently proposed that shortening the ischium in hominin evolution facilitated ‘hamstrings-powered hip extension.’ However, our results demonstrate that the second double-support period in a human walking stride is associated with a net flexion moment at the hip, not a net extension moment (cf. Fig. 3 ; SOM Fig. S3 ). As such, the net mechanical energy generated during the second double-support period at the human hip is not due to ‘hamstrings power,’ but instead to substantial hip flexor muscle (e.g., iliopsoas muscle; Capellini et al., 2006 ) and elastic power. Indeed, in both human and bipedal chimpanzee walking, the hamstring muscles (i.e., semimembranosus, semitendinosus and biceps femoris, long head) are quiescent in late stance (e.g., Winter and Yack, 1987 ; Capellini et al., 2006 ; Schmitz et al., 2009 ; Larson and Stern, personal communication). Instead, our results indicate that a shorter ischium in humans is associated with greater hip extension than bipedal chimpanzees in the second half of the single-support and double-support periods, which permits a passive elastic contribution at the hip, and net positive power through push-off into limb swing.
Our results demonstrate significant differences between humans and bipedal chimpanzees over a full walking stride but place new emphasis on the second half of the single-support period (i.e., for elastic tissues strain) and the second double-support period (i.e., for push-off) for the evolution of hominin walking. An abducted hallux in Ar. ramidus ( Lovejoy et al., 2009b ; Simpson et al., 2019 ; see also Haile-Selassie et al., 2012 ) suggests that the earliest hominins still utilized a relatively weak push-off in the double-support period at 4.4 Ma, distinct from human walking. Lovejoy et al. (2009b) has proposed that, in the absence of an adducted hallux, the center of pressure was directed along the full length of the foot and through the more lateral phalanges in Ar. ramidus . In bipedal chimpanzees, the center of pressure remains proximal to the phalanges over a walking step, including during the second double-support period (see Fig. 1 ; see also Vereecke et al., 2003 ). Skeletal correlates of an enhanced capacity for metatarsophalangeal flexion in digits 2–4 in Ar. ramidus compared to African apes ( Lovejoy et al., 2009b ; Fernández et al., 2018 ; Simpson et al., 2019 ), raise the possibility of a more distal progression of the center of pressure than in bipedal chimpanzees; however, the lateral digits still lack the structural integrity of a large hallux for applying a substantial push-off impulse via the ankle plantar flexors (and, to a lesser extent, the intrinsic foot tissues: Takahashi et al., 2017 ). Nevertheless, this may represent some improvement over the limited capabilities of bipedal chimpanzees or a Pan - Homo last common ancestor with an African apelike foot (e.g., Pilbeam and Lieberman, 2017 ; Prang, 2019 ). A more adducted hallux is evident in Au. afarensis (e.g., Susman et al., 1984 ; DeSilva et al., 2019 ) as well as the associated Lateoli site G and site S footprints ( Leakey and Hay, 1979 ; Masao et al., 2016 ), although the substantial positive power at the ankle via a humanlike push-off may not appear until Homo (e.g., Fernández et al., 2016 , 2018 ). Indeed, the differences between the ca. 3.7 Ma Laetoli footprints and the 1.5 Ma Ileret footprints may reflect this ( Bennett et al., 2009 ; Hatala et al., 2016b ; but see; Raichlen and Gordon, 2017 ). More experimental modeling studies of the effects of foot musculoskeletal structure on push-off mechanics in walking are needed to clarify these issues.

Section: Conclusion

The analyses presented herein provide the first description of the 3-D hip, knee, and ankle moments, work, and power of bipedal chimpanzees, and direct comparisons to humans walking at matched dimensionless and dimensional speeds over a full walking stride. They provide partial or full support for our three main hypotheses relating musculoskeletal structure to mechanics across a full walking stride.
Still, it is difficult to decompose the individual contributions of musculoskeletal traits such as a mobile lower back, a short pelvis, and long lower limbs and short feet via joint-level analyses alone. Additional contributions from differences in upper body size and shape or neural control may also be relevant. Yet, this is a necessary step for linking the hominin fossil record to shifts in hominin walking capabilities. As such, future research should use the results herein to investigate the effects of isolated traits, both skeletal (e.g., ilia orientation, hallux adduction) and soft tissue (e.g., soleus muscle, Achilles tendon), on the mechanics of human walking (e.g., single-support, ‘push-off’, etc.) and across lower limb joints over a stride. Although studies of isolated traits in hominin evolution have historically been approached using either comparative morphology or, to a much lesser extent, experimentation in living taxa (e.g., Ross et al., 2002 ), there is an increasingly viable and important role for computer simulation and optimization methods to establish direct cause-and-effect relationships based on high-fidelity models of the neuromusculoskeletal systems (e.g., Falisse et al., 2019 ). This approach may be especially useful for testing the adaptive nature of trait combinations not present in living species or along a single lineage , such as hominins. High-quality, controlled experimental data, such as the force, moment, work, and power measurements of humans and bipedal chimpanzees herein, provide the experimental basis for these studies.

Section: Acknowledgements

We would like to thank K. Lasek for chimpanzee care and training; L.-F. Lee, R. Johnson, and N. Smith for providing valuable assistance with human data collection and processing; and M. Berg for his help in compiling Figure 1 . We would also like to thank Co-Editor-in-Chief A. Taylor, the Associate Editor, and six anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. This study was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) awards BCS 0935327 and BCS 0935321 .
