Section: Abstract

Beginning in earnest in the 1990s, archaeologists have used the material record as an alternative window into the experiences and practices of Black and Indigenous peoples in North America from the sixteenth century onward. This now robust body of scholarship on settler colonialism has been shaped by postcolonial theories of power and broad-based calls to diversify Western history. While archaeologists have long recognized the political, cultural, biological, and economic entanglements produced by settler colonialism, the lives of Indigenous peoples have largely been studied in isolation from peoples of African descent. In addition to reinforcing static ethnic divisions, until recently, most archaeological studies of settler colonialism have focused on early periods of interethnic interaction, ending abruptly in the nineteenth century. These intellectual silos gloss over the intimate relationships that formed between diverse communities and hinder a deeper understanding of settler colonialism's continued impact on archaeological praxis.

Section: Introduction

The term BIPOC—an acronym that stands for Black, Indigenous, and people of color—is the most recent in a long line of identity markers to circulate on social media and in academic discourse. In a recent New York Times article, Chelsey Luger (Turtle Mountain Band Chippewa) argued that the term BIPOC represents a fraught attempt to represent historically marginalized racial identities brought together, often violently, through settler colonialism in North America ( Garcia 2020 ). Through the enslavement of African peoples, the expropriation of Indigenous lands, and the opening of conquered territories for occupation by immigrants from various ethnic backgrounds, European settler colonialism created the conditions for the emergence of “BIPOC” as a racialized category in the twenty-first century.
Recent activism by archaeologists around the Black Lives Matter movement and ongoing calls by Indigenous scholars to decolonize anthropology have drawn into stark relief how the racial dynamics encapsulated in the term BIPOC have shaped North American archaeology. Building on this critical scholarship, I use the term BIPOC as a foil for discussing archaeological studies of Black and Indigenous lives under settler colonialism. In the first section of this review, I discuss how cultural studies scholars have approached settler colonialism as an analytical construction. This description is followed by an outline of the major developments in archaeological engagements with settler colonialism in North America. As a complement to Agbe-Davies's ( 2022 ) discussion of African American archaeology in this volume of the Annual Review of Anthropology , the remainder of this review discusses key developments in Indigenous archaeologies of settler colonialism over the past decade. Throughout this review, I put forth an argument for a new direction in the archaeology of settler colonialism, which critically engages with the ongoing impacts of this hegemonic system on archaeological praxis while breaking down disciplinary boundaries between Black and Indigenous peoples in the past.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion

Settler colonialism is a political and economic system that uses coordinated actions across state-level agencies to conquer, expropriate, and occupy Indigenous lands. Settler colonialism is distinct from other forms of colonialism in that the primary natural resource under contestation is land rather than labor ( Sturn 2017 , p. 342). In “Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native,” Wolfe (2006) describes how settler colonialism strives to remove Native societies from the land through colonial wars, sterilization, epidemic disease, and child abduction. These physical and structural forms of violence are fueled by a logic of elimination, which demands the eradication of Indigenous counterclaims to the land ( Wolfe 2006 , p. 393). The ultimate goal of elimination is the physical replacement of Indigenous peoples with settlers—a form of conquest that “insists on settler sovereignty over all things in their new domain” ( Tuck & Yang 2012 , p. 5).
The incorporation of Indigenous peoples into settler-colonial society is facilitated through the dissolution of Native land title into alienable individual freeholdings, the erosion of tribal political sovereignty, religious conversion, and coerced assimilation. To fill the demographic void produced by Indigenous elimination and the economic demand for labor created by the territorial expansion of the colonial state, workers are imported into the colony. In the United States, this new labor force was initially made up of African slaves but was subsequently filled by new waves of European, Black, and brown immigrants ( Wolfe 1999 , p. 3). The concept of race serves as the organizing grammar of the settler-colonial state and has been used to systematically justify the hegemony of white European settlers, to police and erase Indigenous claims to land, and to legitimize the enslavement of Black labor.
Settler colonialism as an interpretive concept within cultural studies first emerged in the 1960s in response to protracted anticolonial struggles in the Global South. At this time, scholars conceptualized settler colonialism and colonialism as facets of intergroup domination, with researchers often focusing on the role of settlers within these imperial systems ( Veracini 2013 , p. 319). Over the next 20 years, researchers in cultural studies increasingly focused on the unique economic dimensions of settler colonialism compared to other forms of imperialism ( Veracini 2013 , p. 321). By the 1980s, studies of settler colonialism had expanded beyond issues of political economy to examine violence, theft, classicism, and racism in both the Global North and the Global South ( Veracini 2013 , p. 324).
Drawing largely on Wolfe's work, contemporary theorizations of settler colonialism within cultural studies are characterized by four principles: ( a ) Settler colonialism is a structure rather than an event, ( b ) settler colonialism requires the dispossession of Indigenous lands, ( c ) settler colonialism is defined by a triadic relationship among settler, Indigenous, and chattel slave, and ( d ) cultural productions remain complicit in the ongoing settlement of Indigenous lands ( Row & Tuck 2017 , p. 6). While much more can be said about the logic of settler colonialism as a system (see Coombes 2006 , Row & Tuck 2017 , A. Simpson 2011 , Smith 2012 , Sturn 2017 ), there are two facets of the current body of cultural studies research that may be more productively integrated into archaeological investigations of settler colonialism. First, the racialized relationships between land and labor posited by Wolfe gestures toward a new historiographical approach that bridges archaeological studies of economic, political, and social processes among Indigenous and Black communities under settler colonialism. Second, Wolfe's argument that settler colonialism is a structure, not an event, adds fuel to growing efforts to document and address the ongoing nature of settler-colonial power dynamics in the discipline of archaeology.
The rich body of archaeological research that has emerged around settler colonialism in North America has largely taken two distinct forms: research on Indigenous histories since 1492 and studies of enslaved Africans and their descendants. The racialized division of settler colonial studies in archaeology has led to an undertheorization of the “settler” as a sociopolitical category that transcends ethnic and racial lines. This disciplinary separation has also hindered a more complex understanding of the articulations of and frictions between Black and Indigenous experiences of settler colonialism. Finally, the bifurcation of archaeological research on Black and Indigenous life under settler colonialism has left little space for research on non-European “settlers” and the broad category of “people of color” encapsulated in the term BIPOC. To date, archaeologists have largely avoided the messy work of reconstructing the daily lives of people who occupied multiple racial identities within colonial regimes and have often glossed over the experiences of communities who do not conventionally fit within the categories of Black, Indigenous, or European settler.
There are some notable exceptions to these trends. For example, Sayers (2014) has recently explored the historical and material relationships between Native Americans, African American maroons, and free Blacks in the American South. There is also a steadily growing body of research on how non-European settlers, including Latinx and Asian immigrants, have been integrated into the racialized hierarchies and capitalist labor regimes of settler colonialism. In contrast to the majority of archaeological histories on Black and Indigenous communities, many studies of “people of color” have focused on the contemporary past, including discussions of Chinese railroad workers in the late nineteenth century ( Voss 2015a , 2018 ), Japanese internment during World War II ( Camp 2016 , Clark 2017 , Lau-Ozawa 2019 ), and undocumented immigration along the Mexico–US borderlands ( De León 2013 , 2015 ; Soto 2018 , 2020 ). These non-White settler communities have often been studied in isolation from the larger system of settler colonialism and their complex intersections with Black and Indigenous groups within this system.
Despite the separation of African diaspora studies from Indigenous historic archaeologies of settler colonialism, there are clear similarities in the themes and critiques levied by scholars in each subfield. These similarities reflect in part the shared origins of this body of research in the race-radical social justice activism of the 1960s and 1970s. The emergence of African diaspora and Indigenous archaeologies of settler colonialism is also linked to the passage of federal historic preservation legislation and broader pushes for the inclusion of historically marginalized people, cultural heritage, and narratives within public history during the late twentieth century. This legacy of political engagement with antiracist and decolonizing activism continues to shape both subdisciplinary perspectives today.
As an analytical construct, settler colonialism gained traction among a wider range of historians and historically oriented archaeologists during the 1990s ( Sturn 2017 , p. 341). Before this time, North American archaeologists had largely used an acculturation framework to interpret material evidence of interethnic interaction between colonizers and colonized. Through quantitative studies of shifts in artifact assemblages over time, this framework reinforced dominant ideas about the loss of traditional lifeways among colonized communities in the wake of European colonialism. The origins of these acculturation models lie in early-nineteenth-century debates about the place of Native Americans, African Americans, and other immigrants in US democracy and the imperative of erasing their distinctive cultures ( Rubertone 2000 , p. 428).
A more concerted archaeological engagement with Indigenous life under settler colonialism was spurred by calls for historical representation in the lead-up to the Columbus Quincentenary celebration in 1992 ( Silliman 2010b , pp. 146–47). Similarly, African diaspora studies emerged out of growing critiques of written history, which was seen as excluding the lives of marginalized and disenfranchised communities ( Cipolla 2017b , p. 3). As a more direct reflection of Black and Indigenous identities and practices, material culture was used as a critical source of evidence that could fill in the gaps within European archives ( Ojala 2019 , p. 183). Moving away from textual analyses of colonial archives, archaeologists turned instead toward the materiality of settler colonialism, including the exchange of objects, adornment, domesticity, and landscape construction ( Pels 1997 ).
During the 1990s and 2000s, the acculturation models that had dominated North American archaeologies for nearly a century were critiqued for reinforcing harmful and inaccurate stereotypes of colonized people as passive receptors of superior Western technologies ( Walder & Yann 2018 , p. 7). This body of scholarship was influenced by postcolonial theories emerging out of literary criticism. Postcolonial archaeologies are characterized by an “awareness of colonial histories, in terms both of their material and economic impacts and of the forms of thought which the colonial world produced” ( Gosden 2012 , p. 252). Postcolonial critiques directly challenged the assumption that settler practices were innovative while the cultural practices of the colonized represented a loss of identity ( Ȁikȁs & Salmi 2019a , p. 2). Instead, North American archaeologists began to produce more complex narratives of Black and Indigenous resistance, accommodation, and adaptation.
A significant number of archaeological studies on settler colonialism are oriented around interethnic interactions. These studies have often focused on how colonized groups adapted and modified foreign materials through the development of new production processes and technologies or on how social relationships shaped interethnic exchange (e.g., Deagan 2004 , Ehrhardt 2013 , Panich 2014 , Singleton & Bograd 2000 ). Postcolonial approaches to Indigenous historic archaeology have produced a robust body of scholarship around resistance to oppressive structures such as capitalism ( Silliman 2010a , Sleeper-Smith 2009 ) and missionization (e.g., Cipolla & Hayes 2015 , Liebmann 2014 , Panich & Schneider 2015 , Wilcox 2009 ). Similarly, much of the archaeological research on the African diaspora has examined material evidence of resistance to slavery and cultural continuity on plantation sites in the southern United States and the Caribbean ( Lee & Scott 2019 , p. 89; e.g., Agbe-Davies 2014 ; Battle-Baptiste 2010 ; Flewellen 2017 ; Howson 1990 ; Leone & Fry 1999 ; Orser & Funari 2001 ; Samford 1996 ; Singleton 1990 , 1995 ; Weik 2012 ; Wilkie 1997 ). These studies complicate the freedom–subjugation dichotomy and emphasize diversity within Black and Indigenous responses to colonization ( Voss 2015b , p. 359).
Despite these important advances, postcolonial frameworks have been critiqued for glossing over the ongoing nature of settler colonialism while reinforcing notions of Native and Black lives as less dynamic in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (e.g., Beaudoin 2017 , Liebmann & Rizvi 2008 , Rubertone 2012 ). In addressing the slippage between postcolonial theory and the ongoing realities of settler colonialism, archaeologists have increasingly engaged with critical race theory as well as feminist writings to document how race, class, and gender have intersected in the past and present (e.g., Barnett 2015 , Epperson 2000 , Franklin 2001 ). For instance, Battle-Baptiste (2011) has used critical race theory and Black feminism to analyze plantation landscapes while centering the intersectional identities and practices of Black women. Todd (2016) draws on her positionality as an Indigenous woman to critique archaeological theorizations of Indigenous ontology, calling for more direct engagements with Native thinkers and writings. Similarly, in an American Antiquity forum article, Flewellen et al. (2021) discuss how a Black feminist approach can be used to identify and dismantle systems of oppression within archaeological praxis. These studies have moved archaeological investigations of settler colonialism forward by demonstrating how material culture and the discipline of archaeology more broadly are entangled in processes of racialization and sexism.
Scholars engaging with postcolonial and critical theories have also challenged bounded notions of identity, based on an uninterrupted connection to an “authentic” past ( Rubertone 2012 ). Drawing on postcolonial critiques of the overly simplistic categories of “colonizer” and “colonized,” archaeologists have instead adopted a malleable approach to identity, as historically situated, hybrid, discordant, and reproduced in daily practices ( Silliman 2010b , p. 146). Drawing on postcolonial critiques, archaeologists have also challenged top-down portrayals of agentive colonists and passive colonized populations.
These more theoretical interventions have led to growing efforts within Black historical archaeologies to broaden the temporal and geographical scope of their research. Today, African diaspora studies have taken on a more global scope, incorporating Canada, Latin America, and Africa into the study of settler colonialism ( Franklin & McKee 2004 , p. 2; e.g., Orser 1998 ). In addition to expanding their purview beyond the United States, these African diaspora researchers have sought to move beyond the plantation context to include a broader range of lived realities over time, including the Jim Crow era ( Deagan & Landers 1999 ), Black lives in the northern and western United States ( Bastian 1999 , Lee 2020 , Paynter & Allen 1992 , Odewale & Slocum 2020 , Shackel & Larsen 2000 ), and the great migration from the Reconstruction-era south to northern cities ( Franklin & McKee 2004 , p. 3). Scholars working in Native North America have also recognized the importance of studying later historical periods and places, such as boarding schools, lumber camps, churches, hotels, and urban spaces.
Archaeologists studying African diaspora or Indigenous historical archaeologies are continuing to engage with critical theory in various ways, including critiques of disciplinary norms and a methodological commitment to community-based research. Community-based archaeology facilitates equity between archaeologists and descendant communities by foregrounding “the knowledge and experiences of community partners to guide the process of archaeological research, ensuring it is grassroots and ground-up” in all phases of the project ( Atalay 2019 , p. 515). Scholars working within both subfields have embraced this approach, drawing critical attention to the heterogeneity of descendant communities and the challenges of establishing mutually beneficial relationships between archaeologists and historically marginalized groups ( Franklin & McKee 2004 , p. 4; e.g., Odewale et al. 2018 ). While a full discussion of collaborative community-based research is beyond the scope of this review (see Colwell 2016 ), within the context of settler-colonial studies, collaboration is widely seen as part of a decolonizing tool kit aimed at dismantling colonial power structures by redistributing control over the interpretation of Black and Indigenous pasts, ancestral remains, and material culture.
Although one can see many parallels between Black and Indigenous studies of settler colonialism, there are also notable divergences, particularly with regard to identity formation. African diaspora archaeologies have broadly used the concept of diaspora to understand the formation of new communities that have been willingly or forcefully displaced from their homelands and now reside in a foreign territory. In contrast, Indigenous archaeologies have historically drawn on models of ethnogenesis to understand the emergence of new ethnic groups through the push and pull of internal and external social boundary formation. While both approaches offer insights into identity in the past, they have been overly restricted in their applications to specific ethnic groups. Many Indigenous communities became diasporic following physical displacement from their traditional homelands or relocation to urban areas as a result of settler colonialism. Furthermore, African descendants sometimes formed new ethnic communities through interactions with Europeans, Indigenous peoples, and other settler communities.
More recently, scholars studying Indigenous identity formation in settler-colonial contexts have broadened the concept of ethnogenesis to emphasize cultural persistence and continuity (see Voss 2015c ). In contrast, a growing number of African diaspora archaeologists have turned away from diaspora and toward race and investigations of racial hegemony (e.g., Agbe-Davies 2014 , Barile 2004 , Epperson 2004 , Mullins 1999 , Orser 2001 ). Such critical examinations of racial discourse within the African diaspora literature have facilitated the formation of antiracist heritage practices, which are equally applicable to Indigenous contexts.
Over the past decade, Indigenous archaeologists studying settler colonialism have increasingly engaged with scholarship within sociocultural anthropology and Indigenous studies on resurgence ( L. Simpson 2016 ) and refusal ( A. Simpson 2007 , 2014 ). This emerging body of archaeological scholarship can be categorized into two broad overlapping frameworks: presencing models and decolonizing/Indigenizing approaches. Presencing models and decolonizing/Indigenizing approaches both emphasize the incorporation of Indigenous voices into archaeology through the use of Indigenous worldviews as interpretive frameworks and collaborative community-based research practices.
Drawing on engaged research by Indigenous scholars, archaeologists have worked to challenge settler-colonial narratives of Native disappearance by documenting the flexibility of traditional social systems (i.e., resiliency), the adaptability of Indigenous people (i.e., persistence), and resistance to settler power structures (i.e., survivance). I refer to these distinct yet overlapping approaches as presencing models due to their shared emphasis on centering Indigenous people in the past and present. In Dancing on Our Turtle's Back , L. Simpson (2011) uses “presencing” to refer to acts of recognition and affirmation that make Indigenous lives visible within systems of asymmetrical power. Presencing narratives push back against settler stories of absence and, in doing so, contribute to assertions of Indigenous sovereignty and reclamation ( Vizenor 2003 ).
Deriving from ecological models of environmental adaptation, resiliency refers to dynamic processes of reorganization within natural environments that enable organisms to thrive in the face of adversity ( Walder & Yann 2018 , p. 10). Current applications of resiliency within Indigenous historical archaeology have largely divorced this concept from its ties to environmental data and notions of elasticity (the idea that systems return to a previous state). Instead, this framework has been used to describe the flexibility of social systems and cultural practices under oppressive conditions. Several contributions to Walder & Yann's (2018) edition of the Midwest Archaeological Conference Occasional Papers document how Indigenous communities in the Great Lakes region used alliance building and established social connections to adapt in culturally grounded ways to the changing political and economic systems created by settler colonialism. Similarly, in The Archaeology of Refuge and Recourse , Schneider (2021) demonstrates how Coast Miwok communities in California responded to various waves of colonial invasion by maintaining long-term relationships with places and landscapes. Inspired by Indigenous responses to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, Montgomery (2020) has also drawn on the framework of resiliency to show how Indigenous people explained and mitigated the impacts of foreign diseases from the eighteenth through the twentieth centuries.
The concept of persistence has also been used by North American archaeologists to examine the culturally situated responses of Indigenous actors to settler colonialism. The framework of persistence acknowledges the violence of settler colonialism while attending to the various ways that communities persevere ( Panich 2013 , p. 107). A growing number of scholars have documented the persistence of Native American communities through overt resistance, ethnogenesis, mobility, shifts in sociopolitical structures, or evolving everyday practices (e.g., Cipolla 2013 , Lelièvre 2017 , Silliman 2009 , Webster 2017 ). The case studies compiled in Law Pezzarossi & Sheptak's (2019) edited volume Indigenous Persistence in the Colonized Americas demonstrate the diversity of ways in which researchers have synthesized oral histories, archival records, and material culture to document the strategies employed by Indigenous societies in navigating settler-colonial systems. Uniting these variable approaches to persistence is a shared engagement with practice theory and the use of material residues of repetitive everyday practices to understand cultural negotiation.
Archaeologists studying Indigenous–settler relationships have also turned to the postmodernist writings of Anishinaabe author Gerald Vizenor (2008a) and his concept of survivance. As described by Velie (2008 , p. 148), “[S]urvivance connotes survival with attitude, implying activity rather than passivity, using aggressive means not only to stay alive but to flourish.” Survivance frameworks are used by archaeologists to renounce totalizing narratives of colonial dominance, tragedy, and victimry. Archaeologies of survivance portray Indigenous peoples as actively rejecting and surviving settler colonialism rather than portraying stories of loss and absence ( Vizenor 1999 , p. vii). A growing number of archaeologists have used survivance to examine Indigenous agency in the face of settler colonialism, including acts of autonomy, sovereignty, and reorganization ( Acebo & Martinez 2018 , Kretzler 2019 , McGovern 2015 , Silliman 2014 ). Although documenting different social, spatial, and political mechanisms of survivance, these studies share an emphasis on collaborative methodologies and capacity building among Indigenous nations.
In addition to serving as an interpretive lens, survivance is a reflexive analytical approach, which calls on archaeologists to examine how insidious narratives of loss also infiltrate their academic writing and heritage practices. For example, Atalay (2006) has used the concept of survivance to critique the relationship between museum practice and Indigenous peoples, focusing in particular on the National Museum of the American Indian. Kasper & Handsman (2015) have engaged with survivance as a method for cocreating exhibits that emphasize Indigenous presence at the Mashantucket Pequot Museum.
Resiliency, persistence, and survivance approaches are part of a broader effort to decolonize and Indigenize the discipline of archaeology. Building on Smith & Wobst's (2005) critiques of archaeology as a colonial endeavor, decolonizing scholarship works to deconstruct the practices and frameworks that reproduce power differences between stakeholders ( Walder & Yann 2018 , p. 8). Within North American archaeology, decolonizing praxis has primarily challenged the colonial relations of power and privilege embedded in academia by unpacking and disrupting taken-for-granted biases and assumptions in our interpretations of the past ( Styres 2018 , p. 32). While decolonization is largely a critical and deconstructive process, Indigenizing is an active insertion and integration of Indigenous worldviews, epistemologies, and people into archaeological narratives and practices. Decolonizing and Indigenizing approaches to settler colonialism in Native North America have taken on a range of forms, including the documentation of long-term Indigenous histories, counter storytelling, critical reflections on the discipline, and social justice initiatives.
One way in which scholars have worked to disrupt what Wilcox (2010) calls “terminal narratives” of Indigenous collapse, disappearance, and assimilation is by using the unique capacity of the archaeological record to document long-term Indigenous histories. Building on earlier critiques by Lightfoot (1995) regarding the problematic division between “prehistory” and “history” in North American archaeology, several edited volumes have compiled case studies that take up a diachronic approach to settler colonialism. Scheiber & Mitchell's (2010) edited volume Across a Great Divide is one of the first synthetic efforts to place Indigenous economic, social, and political transformations and stabilities from the sixteenth century onward into a longer historical context of technological and cultural change.
In Decolonizing Indigenous Histories , Oland et al. (2012) use the concept of “transitions” to reconceptualize anthropological notions of tradition as something negotiated, historically situated, and informed by long-term relationships to places and people. Similarly, Rethinking Colonialism: Comparative Archaeological Approaches ( Cipolla & Hayes 2015 ) brings together a variety of archaeological case studies that challenge linear narratives of Indigenous assimilation by highlighting the continuous ways in which Native American communities have responded to and thrived within settler-colonial systems. For example, Mrozowski et al. (2015) present Nipmuc technological innovation as a means of challenging notions of prehistoric authenticity and historic period assimilation.
Whereas Cipolla & Hayes's ( 2015 ) volume takes a comparative approach that bridges “old” and “new” world histories of colonialism, Panich & Gonzalez's (2021) Routledge Handbook of the Archaeology of Indigenous-Colonial Interactions in the Americas focuses exclusively on case studies from the Americas. Many of the contributions to this edited volume discuss the continued colonial nature of archaeology and the role of Native perspectives in deconstructing colonial histories. For example, Lightfoot et al. (2021) provide a detailed study of the long-term entanglement of Indigenous societies during successive waves of colonialism in North America. Marek-Martinez (2021) also critiques the ideological concepts that continue to marginalize Indigenous voices within the discipline.
Growing efforts to incorporate the contemporary past into archaeological studies of Indigenous–settler interactions are a direct outgrowth of this diachronic approach to North American history ( Liebmann 2012 ). Several recent studies have focused specifically on the Indian boarding school system in the United States during the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries (e.g., Cowie et al. 2019 , Montgomery 2019 , Przystupa 2020 ). For example, Surface-Evans's work at the Mount Pleasant Indian Industrial Boarding School in Michigan uses community-based research methods to synthesize archaeological, archival, and oral historical data in ways that reveal new stories about the daily lives of the Indigenous students at the school ( Surface-Evans 2016 , Surface-Evans & Jones 2020 ). Drawing on the concept of survivance, Montgomery & Colwell (2019) use oral histories, ethnographic objects, and historic photographs to document resistance and persistence among Indigenous communities across the American West during the boarding school era. Two Bears (2021) has used a similar framework to demonstrate Diné survivance at the Old Leupp Boarding School in Arizona. In dialogue with existing historical scholarship on Native American schooling, this emerging body of archaeological research creates counternarratives that challenge the mission of Indigenous acculturation and assimilation at the heart of American settler colonialism.
Counternarratives that highlight Indigenous agency and power are another key way in which archaeologists are decolonizing and Indigenizing the study of settler colonialism. In conversation with Trouillot's (1995) argument that academic histories contain silences, historical archaeologists have increasingly worked to reinterpret ethnographic, archival, and archaeological sources in search of Indigenous voices and perspectives ( Ȁikȁs & Salmi 2019a , p. 7). This body of research has often taken a comparative approach, bringing case studies from different geographic, temporal, and cultural contexts into conversation to better understand questions of empire, Indigeneity, power, and cultural entanglement ( Silliman 2015 , p. 213).
Several contributions to Rethinking Colonial Pasts through Archaeology ( Ferris et al. 2015 ) take up a revisionist perspective by challenging dominant tropes within colonial histories such as precontact versus postcontact and Indigenous versus settler. While Rethinking Colonial Pasts through Archaeology is international in scope, including case studies from non-settler-colonial contexts such as Ireland, several of the chapters focus specifically on North America. Of particular note is Sunseri's (2015) chapter “Hiding in Plain Sight,” which reframes the formation of Genízaro communities in eighteenth-century New Mexico as part of a dynamic process of interethnic interaction and Indigenous reinvention rather than one of imperial domination. Similarly, Cobb & Sapp's (2015) contribution to this volume critically reexamines the imperial discourse around Native peoples in the southeastern United States, demonstrating a slippage between colonial control and daily practice among Indigenous communities living near Fort Moore in South Carolina.
Schneider & Hayes's ( 2020 ) special issue for American Indian Quarterly explicitly critiques the logic of settler colonialism, which continues to influence archaeological theory and practice in North America. In addressing forms of epistemic colonialism in the discipline, Schneider & Hayes call for an Indigenizing approach that produces archaeological knowledge for the benefit of Indigenous communities rather than for a universal human history ( Schneider & Hayes 2020 , p. 131). This edited journal series compiles a broad range of case studies that draw on scholarship from Indigenous studies to challenge narratives of Indigenous absence in the American Great Lakes ( Allard 2020 ), California ( Nelson 2020 ), the US Southwest ( Montgomery & Fowles 2020 ), and the US Southeast ( Townsend et al. 2020 ) as well as Canada ( Lelièvre et al. 2020 ).
Panich & Schneider's (2014) edited volume, Indigenous Landscapes and Spanish Missions , provides yet another compilation of North American case studies convened to challenge conventional archaeological narratives of Indigenous–settler relations, specifically portrayals of Spanish missions as confining hegemonic institutions. Contributions to this volume draw on archaeological as well as ethnohistoric lines of evidence to produce culturally situated counter histories that center Indigenous lives and highlight the various ways that Native people shaped the mission system. Rather than focusing on missions, the case studies presented in Foreign Objects , edited by Cipolla (2017a) , synthesize Indigenous knowledge with archaeological evidence to reconceptualize processes of production, consumption, and circulation. Contributors to this volume focus specifically on how objects become embedded within new contexts as Indigenous peoples negotiate European colonialism and capitalism. The chapters within Foreign Objects reflect the theoretical influence of new materialism on the discipline, which has drawn renewed attention to the agency of things and the role of material culture in actively shaping power dynamics between groups within colonial contexts ( Ȁikȁs & Salmi 2019a , p. 4).
Finally, a growing number of North American archaeologists have taken up social justice initiatives as part of an ongoing effort to decolonize the discipline. Harkening back to the origins of settler-colonial studies in the 1960s and 1970s, this emerging body of archaeological scholarship has been shaped by calls for sociopolitical reform in the face of racism, police brutality, and structural violence. To date, much of this research has focused on relationship building, caring for the well-being of self and others, as well as attending to how our actions or practices might cause harm ( Lyons & Supernant 2020 , p. 8). For instance, in Transforming Archaeology , the editors argue for the transformation of archaeology into a service-oriented community-centered discipline ( Atalay et al. 2016 ). Many of the chapters in this volume discuss how an ethic of stewardship and extant historic preservation legislation continue to disenfranchise Indigenous communities in North America (e.g., Ferguson 2016 , Nicholas 2016 , Welch & Ferris 2016 ). To create a more socially just archaeological praxis, Welch (2018) and Laluk (2020) have promoted a sovereignty-driven research paradigm that contributes to reform by facilitating the rights of Indigenous communities to govern and represent themselves.
Over the past five years, a growing number of conference panels and publications have centered on social justice issues and the role of scholars in addressing systemic power imbalances created by ongoing settler colonialism. The growing discourse on social justice in archaeology is reflected in several initiatives by the Society for American Archaeology, including a seminar led by Barbara Little on “Archaeology and Social Justice” in 2019 and the formation of the Social Justice Task Force in 2020. These engaged and activist efforts in North American archaeology are part of a more global set of conversations centered on making archaeological practice more inclusive of and responsive to the ongoing social and political issues facing historically marginalized populations (e.g., Barton 2021 , Franklin et al. 2020 , Hamilakis 2018 , Johnston & Marwood 2017 , Shackel & Little 2016 , Zimmerman et al. 2010 ). These developments mark an important shift from archaeology as primarily a method for unveiling the hidden lives of historically disenfranchised sectors of society toward “socially oriented action” research ( Franklin & McKee 2004 , p. 1).

Section: Conclusion

In response to the postcolonial critiques of the 1980s and 1990s, archaeological studies of settler colonialism have shifted away from the static dualisms found within acculturation paradigms. Instead, scholars have embraced a more intersectional approach, examining the relationships between gender, labor, race, sex, and inequality in settler-colonial contexts. Despite increasing attentiveness to the malleability and historically situated nature of interethnic interaction, archaeological studies of settler colonialism have rarely examined the intersection of Black and Indigenous lives explicitly. Instead, two parallel approaches have emerged within the field: One studies variability in Indigenous negotiations of settler colonialism, and the other examines the complexities of daily life within the African diaspora. These ethnic subfields share several similarities, including a critical approach to disciplinary norms within North American archaeology, a growing effort to expand the temporal scope of settler-colonial studies to include the contemporary past, and an emphasis on Black and Indigenous agency in response to oppression and violence. Black diaspora and Indigenous archaeologies of settler colonialism also share an investment in community-based research methods and have demanded that the discipline become more inclusive of and responsive to Black and Indigenous peoples in the present.
The postcolonial critiques of previous decades have led to a reckoning with anthropology's colonial origins, but there is a continuing need for self-reflexivity. Recognizing how settler colonialism as a hegemonic system continues to persist in North American archaeology is an essential facet of decolonizing our disciplinary practices and interpretative schema. Today, North American archaeologists continue to support settler colonialism through their participation in heritage regimes that assert settler control over the material culture of Black and Indigenous communities and their representation. Archaeologists have also perpetuated the settler-colonial logic of elimination through the propagation of research that erases Indigenous people from the contemporary past and present. In often focusing on the eliminatory dimensions of settler colonialism—for example, research that enumerates Indigenous population decline or settler violence—archaeologists have unintentionally perpetuated stories of disappearance and loss. These terminal narratives serve the interests of the settler state by reinforcing a disjuncture between living communities and their ancestors, thereby justifying settler claims over Indigenous lands and resources. Finally, in many instances, archaeologists have normalized settler colonialism by ignoring their own identities (at least in most cases) as “settlers.” As Vandyke & McGuire (2021 , p. 643) point out, “Euromerican archaeologists are the descendants of the conquerors studying the ancestors of the conquered.” Although often uncomfortable, this type of self-reflexivity is critical for decolonizing power relationships within the discipline.
While considerable advances have been made in the archaeological study of settler colonialism, this hesitancy toward self-reflexivity by settler archaeologists along with the current racialized approach has hindered the development of a comprehensive understanding of settler colonialism and its ongoing structures in North America. In an effort to create a more synthetic collaborative approach, I join Cipolla (2017b) in advocating for a more synthetic collaborative approach that critically examines settler colonialism as a historic phenomenon and as a persistent system. Within cultural studies, a growing theoretical oeuvre also seeks to understand the logic of settler colonialism by breaking down disciplinary, theoretical, and historical silos and placing Black and Indigenous thinkers into dialogue. In The Black Shoals , Lethabo King (2019) theorizes the relationship between Black and Native studies and aesthetics to develop new lines of critical inquiry into slavery, genocide, and white supremacy. Similarly, in A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None , Yussof (2018) critically examines the relationship between geologic knowledge, the theft of Indigenous lands, and the institutionalization of the transatlantic slave trade. Taking a more speculative approach, Rifkin (2019) draws on the work of Black and Indigenous futurist writers to explore the connections and tensions between Black and Indigenous studies.
In developing a more integrative approach to settler colonialism, archaeologists might look to the work of scholars in Native, Indigenous, African American, and Black studies who have increasingly complicated the Indigenous–settler paradigm. Rather than understanding Indigenous and settler identities as monolithic and unchanging, these scholars argue for a closer examination of the various gradations and dimensions of the “settler” ( Amadahy & Lawrence 2009 , Cox 2018 , Harper 2012 ). For instance, in “Beyond a Boundary: Black Lives and the Settler-Native Divide,” Miles (2019) documents how Black survival on the Western frontier depended on the formation of alliances and kinship relations with Native peoples. As an alternative to the homogenous category of settler, Miles uses the notion of “arrivants” to refer to Black peoples brought to North America by European immigrants. In discussing her identity as a Seminole woman, Waters has also written about the intimate “interdependent connections” between her Indigenous ancestors who “survived the colonization of Spain, and through this Indigenous survival, our blending with Africa was made possible” ( Waters 2004 , p. 166). Waters's personal history poetically demonstrates how settler colonialism has fused the lives of Black, Indigenous, and European peoples in North America. Exploring this fission offers an important new line of research for the archaeology of settler colonialism to explore.

Section: Acknowledgements

This review was inspired by the growing solidarity among BIPOC scholars working to decolonize the discipline of archaeology and has benefited greatly from the comments and suggestions of reviewers.
