Section: Abstract

Anthropological work on political theology has been informed by Agamben's work on the state of exception and, thus, by a Schmittian account of sovereignty as analogous to that of the God who bestows miracles. In this review, we read gestures to this analogy's limits in recent ethnographies of the state, vital force, and the Anthropocene as also pointing to the limits of anthropology's secularity and its embedding in the colonial enterprise. In so doing, we recover a potential opening to theistic force that anthropology has long fought to foreclose. We conclude by proposing a conceptual counter to political theology, grounded in negative theology as well as critical theories drawing on the force of the negative, which we call theopolitics. Theopolitics refers to a sovereignty from below characterized by vulnerability and openness to an ever-provisional messianic force that partakes in history, including the colonial history of anthropology itself.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion, Conclusion

Despite the recent eviction of Donald Trump from the White House, the “liberal settlement” whose intellectual and geopolitical contours Mazzarella (2019) traces is facing unprecedented headwinds. Anthropology, to the arguably vast extent that its modes of reasoning depend on this enterprise, is in danger of going down with it—perhaps, as calls to let the discipline “burn” ( Jobson 2020 ) suggest, for the better. This review adds fuel to the fires enlivening contemporary anthropological thinking about the political by pointing to the perils and potentials of excavating a long-standing but, until recently, too often ignored or unnamed presence within the discipline, namely that of theology ( Robbins 2006 , Fountain 2013 , Marshall 2014 ). Anthropology, Furani (2019) argues, was constructed as a fortification against theology's openness to a divine Other, securing its place in the modern constellation of disciplines by responding to the crisis of God's death with an alternative project of liberal self-fashioning through engagement with secularized, cultural alterity. Yet anthropology has also retained more spaces for nonsecularist reason in its architecture than have other disciplines, most obviously in its studies of religion. Here, we show how these spaces inflect anthropological accounts of the political, with the hope of expanding the discipline's political grammar beyond an unhelpful secular/religious divide.
Political theology and the concept of sovereignty that it proposes have provided one language for anthropology to approach such questions. Coming to anthropology largely through Agamben's reading of the work of Carl Schmitt, this tradition takes aim at the claims of liberalism to be self-authorizing by subjecting to investigation the state's means of achieving sovereignty. Schmitt roots this claim in the state of exception, which sanctions the law by deciding when it needs to be suspended. He identifies the structure of the exception with the theological relationship between God and the miracle, giving rise to such aphorisms as “sovereign is he who decides on the exception” ( Schmitt 2005 , p. 5).
The spectacle of September 11, 2001, the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq, and the global intensification of securitization that followed made this articulation of political theology almost unavoidable across the social sciences at the beginning of the millennium. As Hansen & Stepputat (2006) argued in their Annual Review of Anthropology review, anthropological work in this vein was prescient in showing that state sovereignty in practice was often far more precariously achieved and less concerned with legitimacy—more violent, put bluntly—than anticipated in Schmitt's emphasis on the constituent nature of the decision. But more recent work suggests that anthropology can also play a critical role in evolving debates on political theology by revisiting the conceptual dependence on particular historical enactments and secularizations of the theological informing the concept of sovereignty and, through it, the concepts of the political that emerge out of this tradition ( Lebner 2015 ).
Furani notes that the themes that theology's engagement with divine alterity bring to the fore have been present in anthropology throughout its history, but their naming as theos threatens their admissibility within the field of anthropological knowledge. This review seeks to demonstrate the productivity of admitting them in all their theistic glory by tracing anthropological critiques of various iterations of the received concept of sovereignty since Hansen & Stepputat's (2006) review and drawing out the entailments of these critiques for anthropology's relationship to alterity, especially those forms of it that might authorize alternatives to the state. We thus identify a concern with the limits of sovereignty as implying forces and kinds of knowledge that exceed anthropology; likewise, we suggest, a concern with what exceeds anthropology—including its colonialist history—raises questions about the secularity of the concept of sovereignty.
These twinned concerns, we argue, are especially evident in three areas of contemporary anthropologies of the political: anthropologies of the state and the state of exception, especially as these are complicated by formations of empire and borderlands; anthropologies of vital force and its thresholds; and anthropologies of the Anthropocene and the temporal questions that it makes newly visible within the political. In all three areas, a sharp decolonial critique of anthropology tends to be coupled with a longing for an otherwise or a beyond whose contours are nonetheless conjured by appeals to long-standing anthropological notions of alterity as that which is not Western. We conclude the review by proposing an emergent concept that we call theopolitics, which builds on the questions raised by this literature but also embraces their affinities with theistic reasoning. In this embrace, we argue, theopolitics pushes the discipline to confront how its enforcement of secularized notions of alterity participates in the liberal fictions of the political that Schmitt critiques.
The concept of theopolitics is grounded in negative or apophatic theology, which speaks of the divine in terms of that which cannot be said ( de Certeau 1986 , Keller 2018 ). It builds on anarchist and Marxist critiques—often with roots in Jewish mysticism—of Schmittian political theology and its real-world manifestation in the Third Reich, as well as on Black, Latin American, and feminist liberation theologies. A theopolitical analytics approaches God as what Caputo & Keller (2007) call “an unconditional claim or solicitation without power, as a weak force or power of powerlessness, as opposed to the theology of omnipotence that underlies sovereignty” (p. 107). We conclude this review by showing how this concept responds to threads drawn out in the discussion and charts avenues for research that engage the claims of powerlessness and explore the forms of justice beyond its capture by rights and the law. Theopolitics invites anthropologists to attend ethnographically to that which does not name itself and yet undeniably is by exploring the shades of sovereignty from below.
The concept of political theology most familiar to anthropology is derived from Agamben's invocation of Schmitt's theory of the state of exception to complement and complete Foucault's account of biopolitics. What Schmitt helps us see, Agamben argues, is that “bare life,” the Aristotelian animal being that unifies humanity through its exclusion from political life and the polities organized around it, is the true subject of politics under modernity and thus the point at which the “juridico-institutional and the biopolitical models of power” converge to define the modern epoch ( Agamben 1998 , p. 4). The sovereign decision, which enacts the force of law without itself being beholden to the law, renders the threshold between bare life and its political forms, between what lies outside and inside the polity, a zone of indistinction. This permanent state of exception is where the exercise of modern power along with its constitutive aporia fully reveal themselves, making the concentration camp, rather than the prison or the clinic, modernity's true paradigm ( 1998 , 2005 ).
Less central to Agamben's account of the state of exception are the genealogical concerns that Schmitt (2005) signaled in another of his lapidary phrases: “All significant concepts of the modern theory of the state are secularized theological concepts” (p. 36). Here, the theology is Christian, and its secularization was a historical process, passing through the treaty of Westphalia, which separated the powers of church and state, and culminating in the formation of the nineteenth-century nation-state in Europe. As theological concepts were secularized, Schmitt argues, they became mere analogs of their theological forebears, evacuating their political force, which for him resides in their capacity to define differences between friends and enemies as matters of blind faith rather than disinterested debate. Schmitt notoriously sees the loss of this force, rather than the concentration camp, as the true besetting ill of modernity. But within the Classical genealogy of bare life that Agamben traces in the first two volumes of Homo Sacer , Schmitt's concern with the missing force of the divine appears only as a “mystical element,” residing in the moment of the sovereign decision, when what Agamben (2005) calls the “force of law without law” is exercised (p. 40). Here, the sovereign decision evokes not the miracle but the “enunciative function” that Benveniste (1971) locates in the speech act, whereby the speaker assumes the structure of langue and its institutional powers. The disappearance of the analogical structure of Schmitt's argument, in short, obscures its embedding in a historical process of secularization and genericizes its sacred lineage.
Although Agamben later took up the Christian genealogies of his concerns, as discussed below, this work has so far found less uptake in political anthropology. Within the field, critical engagement with Agamben's account of bare life has informed work on the God-like powers of the state and the perils of subjection to them, producing rich ethnographies of zones of abandonment, pastoral pedagogies, and carceral regimes ( Biehl 2005 , Das 2006 , Garces 2010 , Povinelli 2011 , O'Neill 2018 ). Yet this work also shows that the state's capacity to exercise these attributes is often less absolute and more subject to failure than the invocation of the concentration camp might suggest.
Bare life can be a space of politicization as well as endurance ( Rao 2009 , Collins 2015 ). Ethnographies of the enfolding of the state of exception into formations of empire or humanitarianism, which refract neat processes of territorialization, likewise relativize the state's claims to sovereignty as a matter of degrees rather than constitution ( Stoler 2006 , Fassin 2011 , Graeber & Sahlins 2017 ). Often legitimated through appeals to sacralized notions of compassion, redemption, hospitality, or witnessing that the separation of church and state was supposed to have disenchanted ( Redfield 2013 , Ticktin 2017 ), these formations also point to the ongoing operations of something akin to the “mystical element” that Agamben sees the camp as foreclosing ( Bretherton 2006 , Fassin & Vásquez 2005 ). Meanwhile, studies of religious humanitarianism show that such interventions sometimes bypass the state altogether by addressing themselves to the divine, revealing the mystical to be a critical third element structuring the scene of what appears as a binary relationship between sovereign powers and their objects rather than a residue ( Mittermaier 2014 ).
The introduction of this third element reveals the vulnerability of sovereign enunciations to recontextualization ( Agrama 2012 , Rutherford 2012 ). Simpson (2014) characterizes this recontextualization among Kahnawá:ke Mohawks as a “refusal,” which articulates a distinctive sovereignty by negating the state's authority to define its demands for consent and bestowals of recognition as matters for it to decide (see also Cattelino 2008 , Rosas 2012 , McKee 2019 ). Bonilla's (2015) account of politics in Caribbean nations long constituted by their partial or deferred claims to sovereignty deploys a parallel figure, that of “marronage” or escape from slavery, to imagine collective possibilities for the future that are not circumscribed by failed hopes for citizenship or nationhood in Westphalian terms (see also Berry et al. 2017 , Shange 2019 ). These moments of weakness of the sovereign decision problematize the universality of sovereignty as a frame for the political ( Trouillot 2003 ), exposing the exception as the ongoing working of the structures of domination set in motion by the formation of the North Atlantic rather than as the marker of modernity ( Thomas 2019 ).
Studies of the movements of noncitizens across nation-state boundaries suggest that these are also passages between regimes of sovereignty ( Giordano 2014 ). In response to the threat that the permeability of these regimes poses to state legitimacy, militarized regimes of surveillance and securitization have turned many borderland formations—emblematically the Sonora Desert, the trans-Mediterranean, and the checkpoints between Israel and Palestine—into spaces of annihilating illegality ( Albahari 2015 , de León 2015 , Peteet 2017 ). Yet ethnographies of these spaces also suggest that the concepts of sovereignty and bare life can never “fully account for the complexities of the system of differential inclusion that characterizes current migration regimes,” even within refugee camps themselves ( Mezzadra & Neilson 2013 , p. 24). Borderlands are thresholds as well as checkpoints ( Jusionyte 2018 ). But their fluidity, while providing opportunities for the refusal of criminalization ( Rosas 2012 ), also makes them potent sites for capital accumulation that pushes the “border” well beyond its physical footprint ( Andersson 2014 ).
Borderland spaces are also sites where political and religious regimes of sovereignty become entangled ( Napolitano et al. 2015 , Kormina & Naumescu 2020 ). This entanglement harkens to older anthropological questions about who and what is invited across thresholds and who is named in the invitation [ Pitt-Rivers 2011 (1992) , Candea & da Col 2012 ]. Anthropological studies of hospitality thematize connections between divinity and the unknown [ Pitt-Rivers 2011 (1992) ] and foreground the “crucial role of alterity and externality in the formation of political theologies” by pointing again to a sometimes unacknowledged third party in whose presence the space of hospitality is staged ( Candea & da Col 2012 , p. S7, emphasis in original). In so doing, they open up new scales and spaces for framing the problem of welcoming the Other beyond its capture by the nation-state or global humanity ( Ben-Yehoyada 2017 , Kahn 2019 ).
Examining devotional practices at roadside shrines to a headless warrior named Thakur Baba, common throughout the Shahbad region of Rajasthan, India, Singh proposes an analogous rescaling of the problematic of political theology. What theos , he asks, do we assume when we speak of political theology, and how might pluralizing that entity “open other ways of thinking about sovereign power” ( Singh 2012 , p. 386)? Ethnographers, he suggests, are ideally situated to move from the life-denying rigidity of accounts of the state of exception to consider instead the modulated “thresholds of life”—passages through vital states, including ones that may persist beyond death—that practices such as the veneration of Thakur Baba mediate (p. 392). In so doing, as Maunaguru (2020) argues, anthropology can bring the vulnerability and multiplicity of sovereignty itself into view.
One effect of using theos to pluralize the forms of the life that is the object of sovereignty is to open up long-standing anthropological commitments to studying comparative political authority. Originally building on Kantorowicz's [1997 (1957) ] claims about the two bodies of the (European) Christian King—his status as at once fleshy and divine—classical anthropological studies of non-Western politics located sovereignty in the self-sacrificing body of the king or priest [ Frazer 2009 (1900) ] or in the sacred nature of the office of kingship itself [ Evans-Pritchard 2011 (1948) , Graeber & Sahlins 2017 ]. Those studies, however, tended to foster an antinomical separation of “native religions” from Euro-American theology that allowed empire to incorporate and bureaucratize native politics under the sign of the fetish ( Feeley-Harnik 1985 , Graeber 2005 , Matory 2018 ). Ethnographies of thresholds of life are thus fertile grounds for decolonial critiques of the discipline.
Critical moves such as placing African and Caribbean religions—prime sites for the constitution of the fetish and similar categories—in conversation with political theology implode distinctions between religion and politics, exposing the anthropological assumptions that undergird the separation of those domains in the process ( Castor 2017 ). Crosson (2019) describes Trinidadian Obeah as an experience of “catching power” that “reformulates agency and resistance as a relational process of living and working with powers that exceed and inhabit human frames” (pp. 609–10), paralleling critiques of the disciplinary apparatus of the liberal state from within Western theory. Linking liberalism to the long-standing conceptual apparatus of “spirit possession”—that anthropological projection onto the Other against which “the rational, autonomous, self-possessed individual” of Western modernity could be defined ( Johnson 2011 , p. 398)—in turn allows us to understand humans as cohabiting with all manner of powers that exceed them ( Lambek 2014 ). Instead of reproducing Durkheimian distinctions between the sacred and the profane, the varied forms of “living with theos ” ( Pandolfo 2018 ) emergent in encounters between colonizer and “native” point to the entangled, enfleshed, and transactional nature of the substance of power for all parties involved ( Bernault 2019 ).
Similar entanglements characterize transactions at the threshold between the living and the dead. Extending the exercise of sovereignty beyond life, necropolitics ( Mbembe 2003 ) makes authority over the dead a critical site for the formation of polities ( Verdery 1999 , Magaña 2011 , Rubin 2020 ). Ritualized interactions with the dead, whether secular or sacralized, are likewise critical modalities for political participation ( Mueggler 2014 , Bacigalupo 2016 ). Sacralized remains and the artifacts associated with them, meanwhile, can recenter collectivity in religious modes of authority ( Bernstein 2011 , Heo 2018 ). But the “emotive materiality” of the dead ( Krmpotich et al. 2010 ) can also exceed and subvert necropolitics by mattering forth frameworks for coeval obligation that refuse those of both religion and state ( McAllister 2017 , Rojas-Pérez 2017 , Zengin 2019 ).
Over the past decade, anthropologists have also begun to recognize and attend to the coevality of myriad other presences at a greater historical distance from the discipline than the dead or the ancestors. Animating the “multispecies” ( Kirksey & Helmreich 2010 ) and “ontological” ( Holbraad & Pedersen 2017 , Kohn 2015 ) turns alike is an approach that Stengers (2010) dubs “cosmopolitical.” Cosmopolitics, in Stengers's usage, is concerned with the substances and potencies of dwelling together beyond those identified with the concept of anthropos and the forms of knowledge—including science but also the liberal secular reason that undergirds scientific claims to universal truth—through which anthropos came into being. Without wishing to rehearse the extensive accounts of these turns provided elsewhere, we invoke them here to emphasize that the cosmopolitical lens they share foregrounds forms of commons that are “more than one, but less than many,” in Strathern's (1991) words (p. 35). This immanent multiplicity works politically both to exceed “prevalent state practices that demand simple either difference or sameness” ( de la Cadena 2015 , p. 33) and to ground imaginaries of and designs for “worlds otherwise” ( Escobar 2018 ). Yet even as those invoking cosmopolitics move to pluralize and decolonize the thresholds of life recognized by Western modernity, their figurations of the plural are largely circumscribed by earthly forms of difference.
Recent work on “geontologies” ( Povinelli 2016 ) suggests that thresholds of vital force always exist in tension with Nonlife, whose distinction from Life itself is constantly remade and maintained in the bleak omnipresence of extractive economies of (settler) colonialism. Meanwhile, extractive capitalism, diving ever deeper into the inorganic depths of the earth, further extends state sovereignty volumetrically ( Billé 2020 ), even as it may awaken a “tellurian insurgency” that threatens to render the world into dust ( Negarestani 2008 ). But ethnographies of the borderlands between bios and geos , Life and Nonlife, also suggest that these binaries may be less operative than geontopower would have it, not least because this emergent “inorganic slot” ( Ferry 2020 ) resists the traditional ethnographic move toward empathy with the (savage) Other and, thus, opens up space for new varieties of wonderment about “what might be said to exist, on what terms, and of what such existence entails” ( Reinert 2016 , p. 105).
Such a sense of wonderment reconnects the new study of the inorganic to the old study of kinship—the primordial modality through which anthropology has historically imagined collectivity and its ever-changing boundaries. If affinity rather than inheritance or consanguinity lies at the core of kinship, there is always a residue (perhaps even a mystical one) that exceeds the reciprocities through which kin is made ( Roy 2020 ). The excess is bound up in the nonreciprocal nature of the gift of life, a never-extinguishable debt that, anthropologically speaking, figures as the “magical” nature of indebtedness (what Mauss called mana ), such that “kinship is magic, for magic is kinship” ( Viveiros de Castro 2009 , p. 251). This magic is not exclusive to so-called kin-based societies, but, as Cannell (2019) argues, also infuses the nation-state with a sense of lived mutuality without ever being fully contained by the state paradigm. Cannell's point parallels Strathern's analysis of the primacy of “relations” over kinship. Relations are neither a space where the division between the personal and impersonal is adjudicated, nor something internal to the individual, but rather a kind of “mystical element,” effecting a cosmological ordering—often unseen—that works simultaneously as logic, structuring, and substance and gives a “force to exposition that goes beyond and thereby transcends any material in hand” ( Strathern 2020 , p. 189).
But if not from life itself, from where and what does the force of relations arise? One possibility can be gleaned by exploring links between the mystical element of living together and capitalism. In the early church, God was conceived as a kind of administrator of the oikonomia of His own trinitarian nature. Agamben takes up this genealogy of the economy in later volumes of Homo Sacer (2011 , 2013) to understand the trinitarian play of “immaterial” (divine) force and “material” (incarnated) nature in the management of both market and household under capitalism, an interplay that also undergirds the workings of the capitalist corporation ( Weeks 2020 ). This immaterial force, Stimilli (2018) argues, shapes capitalism's inextinguishable drive to accumulate economic debt in a quest to reciprocate the gift of life, the divine nature of which renders the quest ultimately impossible.
Appreciating the Christian theological and medieval underpinnings of the economy and its paradoxes may help chart new paths for struggles against capitalism. Thus, Robinson (2019) locates socialism not in what comes after capitalism but in medieval mendicant orders and communities of laywomen (see also Federici 2018 ). Modes of living in these communities were shaped not only by laboring in common and living in reciprocity with a local environment ( Schneider 1991 ), but also by enacting theological positions on the primacy of common possession of property that often earned them condemnation as “heretics” by the Papal church ( Agamben 2013 ). This genealogy also enables a shift in the lens of economic anthropology from formations of precarity and the neoliberal calculative logics that produce them to logics of relating to one another and God through forms of sharing, such as “halal exchange” ( Henig 2019 ), or—albeit perhaps only implicitly—the “rightful share” of basic income programs ( Ferguson 2015 ). At the same time, it illuminates how religious communities and their expressions are intertwined with the language and logic of the market, pluralizing the theistic groundings of the economy ( Rudnyckyj & Osella 2017 , Kauppinen 2020 ).
Contemporary anthropological discussions of transcendent force are likely to invoke the “Anthropocene,” a term that originated in earth systems science ( Crutzen & Stoermer 2000 ) as the name for the epoch in which humans have begun to act as a geological force capable of shaping the earth, not least thanks to capitalism. Yet the idea of the Anthropocene also paradoxically renders the relationship between the grounds of action and action itself, and thus the claim of humans to sovereignty over the earth, one of profound ambiguity ( Hetherington 2019b ). The Christian languages of Apocalypse or Armageddon that often structure invocations of the Anthropocene signal not only the rupture of this epoch with everything that has gone before, but also the world-ending terrors that this ambiguity is imagined to entail ( Swyngedouw 2010 , Myers 2019 ).
To counter these terrors, anthropologists have worked to temper the radical nature of this break and reclaim a different, deeper future ( Masco 2010 ). Some seek to recover the workings of ongoing power-laden histories of capitalism and colonialism within the Anthropocenic present by renaming the epoch to foreground the agencies of sovereigns other than a totalizing anthropos ( Haraway 2016 , Moore 2015 , Myers 2019 ). Other researchers, recognizing that the unsettling effects of the Anthropocene, while planetary in scope, are also uneven in distribution ( Chakrabarty 2015 ), recover nonapocalyptic futures from the hybrid forms of “patchy” ( Tsing et al. 2019 ) Anthropocenic landscapes, which reveal the complicity of divisions between humans and nature in ongoing processes of exploitation, racialization, and extraction ( Wakefield & Braun 2019 ). Ethnographies that “stay with the trouble” ( Haraway 2016 ) of Anthropocenic cohabitation, even or perhaps especially with those entities ostensibly most toxic to human survival ( Shapiro 2015 , Liboiron 2016 ), excavate possibilities for future coexistence that are beholden neither to a modernity-that-never-really-was or to the sudden discovery (by some) that modernity is in crisis ( Latour 1993 , Povinelli 2016 , Sheller 2020 ).
Cracks in the edifice of modernity also permit glimpses into an underappreciated dimension of Latour's (1993) argument that we have never been modern, namely that the separation of nature from culture also required the separation of the supernatural from both ( Fernando 2018 ). Under Anthropocenic conditions, as Bubandt argues, that which was imagined as “nature” often “takes on the uncanny characteristics of those forms of the supernatural that never had a proper place of their own in the modern West: spirits, monsters, ghosts” ( Bubandt 2018 , p. 4; see also Gan et al. 2017 ). Spectral and/or monstrous avatars of the “anthropo-not-seen” ( de la Cadena 2019 ) signal the failure of colonialism and capitalism to extinguish other worlds and harken to something beyond their collapse ( Bonelli 2019 , Johnson 2019 ).
Yet even as they gesture at a nonsecular Anthropocene, these accounts of the otherwise are not meant to “point to a place, a domain outside of the secular” ( Bubandt 2018 , p. 9), begging anew the question of how anthropologists delimit this domain and why what lies outside this domain is intellectually out of bounds. For while environmental scientists might find ghosts, monsters, and spirits to be novel, these entities—like the fetish, discussed in the previous section—are deeply familiar to anthropologists. Indeed, they are integral elements of what Fountain (2013) calls “the archetypal domain of anthropological expertise and mastery” (p. 313), namely religion—at least, the religion of Others. Anthropological attempts to conjure the Anthropocenic agencies of these entities tend to rely on equally familiar strategies for circumscribing what counts as legitimate difference to exclude theological competition for mastery over this domain.
Thus, Szerszynski (2017) distinguishes between the “low spirits” and “high gods” of the Anthropocene (p. 235). The former category includes old supernatural friends such as cannibals, vampires, and devils, which serve to “thematize the limits of human thought when confronted by the immanence-breaking relation between the human and the nonhuman” (p. 265). The latter lumps the “God of Abraham” in with entities like anthropos , capital, the sun, the earth, and the cosmos, historically defined as belonging to the domain of science and thus against theos , effectively squelching monotheism's claims to theistic alterity. Szerszynski likewise draws on anthropological theories of ritual, poststructuralist philosophy, and natural science to understand “immanence-breaking relations,” but—except for a brief nod to Pope Francis I's encyclical Laudato si —never theology, which has a long history of thematizing those relations through and beyond monotheism. As anthropologists of religion have argued for some time, such maneuvers bracket out the forces through which “high gods” and “low spirits,” as well as the hierarchies between them, have come into being, including not only capitalism and colonialism but also monotheism and anthropology themselves ( Asad 1993 , Masuzawa 2005 ). In the process, these forces condition the recognition of nonsecular presences within the Anthropocene not only on their “lowness” but also on their dehistoricization and monolithicization. This approach dismisses the status of these presences as objects of curiosity, debate, and strategic reinvention for those who feel their force most immediately ( Cepek 2016 , Bond 2017 ).
What would become of the anthropology of the Anthropocene if it refused these brackets? For one thing, it might provide new tools for revisiting the question of how we might confront our present crisis. Analogizing modernity's commitment to progress to the Christian eschatology of the Apocalypse asks those who would resist the lure of the end times to reject the “future perfect,” the will-have-been-justified tense of action that modernity imposes on political projects as the condition of doing justice, and ethically anchor themselves instead in the durative present ( Povinelli 2011 , Myers 2019 ). Yet even within Christianity, the end times are more differentiated than this conflation would suggest, multiplying possibilities for acting in and on time beyond retrenchment in the immanent ( Keller 2018 ).
Schmitt's account of political authority hinges on the figure of the katechon , who appears in the writings of St. Paul as “he or what withholds” Christ's Second Coming, but whom Schmitt (2003) called “the restrainer” (p. 62). Taking different forms throughout history, paradigmatically that of the Holy Roman Emperor, but also that of the legal and spatial nomos that European colonialism extended across the planet, the katechon restrains the appearance of the Antichrist by ordering the world. In so doing, however, he also impedes the return of the Messiah, which can only take place after the Antichrist has come. Katechontic power thus mediates the historical incarnation of Christian eschatology ( McAllister & Napolitano 2020 ). But while this power often entails a politics of restriction and domination, as its association with the state form and the colonial enterprise suggests, Salvatore (2011) argues, drawing on Jacob Taubes's reading of St. Paul, that it also opens space for a messianic imagination to subvert the order of the world from below. As anthropologists deploy the discipline's distinctive ways of knowing the present to protect the future from capture by modernity, we should take care not to reflexively hold back such an insurgency.
Anthropological engagements with questions of sovereignty—whether of the state, life itself, or humanity—are directed, albeit often implicitly, at a particular political theology, one that assumes that the quality of sovereignty abides in the decision and is exercised in the exception, like the God of Abraham revealing Himself in a miracle. The discipline has tended to stake its recent contributions to debates about sovereignty on ethnographic demonstrations of how and where the decision fails and thus on revealing the shortcomings of political imaginaries that take the sovereign at his omnipotent word. Unfolding in conversation with the study of colonial spaces of life and death and the regimes of inclusion and exception to state sovereignty that these spaces enact, such revelations expose the faltering line where different realms of justice encounter each other. But at the same time, anthropological accounts of this faltering line have hesitated to explore its fullest implications by pushing past anthropology's secularity or engaging theos beyond contrasting other theistic modes with monotheism's failed claims to transcendence.
But even within Abrahamic traditions, God is not solely transcendent. Apophatic or negative theology, which explores God through her refusal to utter herself, is the shadowy but constant underside of cataphatic or positive theology, which understands God in terms of how she manifests or pronounces herself ( Sells 1994 ). The resistance of the God of apophasis to being rendered as logos makes her vulnerable rather than all-powerful, for in her withdrawal from pronunciation she “relinquishes power for the sake of openness to otherness” ( Schmiedel 2017 , p. 256). Through this openness, the uncertainty of not-knowing God also “infects our knowing of anything that is not God” ( Keller 2014 , p. 5). In releasing knowledge from its dependence on language, withdrawal also opens up a heterological space between theos and social texts in which the mysteries of the flesh can matter forth ( de Certeau 1986 ).
Recent engagements with the negative within anthropology suggest the productivity of such uncertainties for rewriting accounts of the political. Mittermaier's (2019) musings on accounts of the 2011 Egyptian uprising that enfold it in the Islamic al-ghayb —the invisible and the unknown—and thus in the workings of the divine point to the generativity of an anthropology that humbly recognizes that we all must sit with what we cannot know. As Navaro (2020) argues, a “negative methodology” that works through remnants, erasure, ruins, and traces likewise places unknowing at the center of a novel understanding of mass violence. Gordillo's account of rubble haunted by mass violence in the Argentine Chaco, while building on Adorno's negative dialectics and Deleuze's philosophy of immanence and affirmation rather than theology, shows that ruination generates a persistent luminescence, “which can teach us about the radical solidarities that the present demands of us” ( Gordillo 2018 , p. 127). The passionate attachment of andalucistas to the so-called Moorish remains of southern Spain, Hirschkind argues, similarly endows them with the aesthetic disposition to perceive the gleam of the absent Muslims who once lived in that space. The Orientalist tendencies of their passions trouble projects for a liberal democratic Spanish modernity, but also constitute the sensorial ground for a more welcoming relationship to the presence of contemporary Islam in Europe ( Hirschkind 2020 ). These accounts of the negative are allied with what Benjamin (1996) calls the messianic, a “weak power” within history that refuses self-totalizing projects along with what Gordillo calls their “fetishized positivity” ( Gordillo 2018 , p. 125).
The term theopolitics has been used by anthropologists primarily to refer to conflicts among religious and state claims to sovereignty (e.g., Kormina & Naumescu 2020 ). As we have argued elsewhere ( McAllister & Napolitano 2020 ), however, we wish instead to refer the term to the labor of the negative sketched above by drawing on the work of Martin Buber, a German Jew who, like Benjamin, was a contemporary and critic of Schmitt ( Brody 2018 ). Buber's account of political responsibility, grounded in anarchist politics and Jewish mystical theology rather than conservative Catholicism, locates divine justice in the provisional nature of political orders rather than in the transcendental legitimacy that Schmitt's account of the political as secularized Christianity sought to bestow upon the state ( Svenungsson 2016 ). Like Benjamin, Buber (1967) saw justice as characterized by an element of surprise—a prophetic rather than apocalyptic effort to realize God's sovereignty in the everyday—that undoes human juridico-political orders and undermines any claim to “provide a permanent dwelling for God” ( Brody 2018 , p. 140). His argument parallels that of Benjamin's (1996) Critique of Violence . For Benjamin, the decision to sacrifice life for justice, which Schmitt claims for the exception, does not mark the limits of the law but destroys it, liberating the emergency from its circumscription by the exception and potentiating its messianic work. This messianic potentiality is just as constitutive of the concept of the political that anthropology has inherited as is the state of exception.
The messiah, like the unknown, can be terrifying as well as liberatory. In a recent collection of articles ( McAllister & Napolitano 2020 ), we and other contributors trace the emergence of theopolitical formations in Latin America to the workings of the katechon of Spanish imperialism. The cross of the priest rationalized the violence of the conquistador's sword as law, holding back the Antichrist for Europe on the condition of unleashing it within the so-called New World. In the process, Catholicism and its theologies of incarnation became a key site for the clash of imperial sovereignties with the autochthonous ones they sought to displace and thus for the enfleshment of political projects in colonized territory. Drawing on Benjamin's (2019) analysis of Baroque theater—the Baroque being a “scalar and almost fractal” aesthetic with a strong presence and resonance in Latin America ( Norget 2017 , p. 189)—we explore how these projects take shape in performances of sovereignty that oscillate between manifestation and withdrawal.
Through rhythmic and aesthetic practices of movement along a horizontal axis, rather than through the vertical cuts of Schmitt's exception, theopolitics here “names the reflective work by which the critical conditions of the politico-theological are themselves made apparent,” as de Abreu (2020 , p. 44) argues. The unstable formations that emerge from this reflective work can be counterhegemonic, as when the horizontal proliferations of the “People” claimed by Chavismo in Venezuela resist their own totalization in the body of the leader despite his antic restaging of their syncopated movements ( Sánchez 2020 ), when ecclesiastical oscillations between intimacy and distance open a fissure in Papal authority ( Napolitano 2020 ), or when the irresistible rhythms of a powerful river threatened with damming sweep up riverbank denizens in explosive performances of the sacramental transformation of water into everlasting life ( McAllister 2020 ). But they can also be profoundly reactionary, as is the case of the Brazilian charismatics that de Abreu studies, whose tautological and self-referential forms of prayer are echoed in Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro's style of political charisma—and perhaps those of so-called populist leaders elsewhere in the Americas and beyond.
We offer this theopolitical analytics not to argue that Catholic theologies of incarnation are the only theistic portal to critiques of political theology—although we insist, along with others discussed here, including Schmitt himself, that the colonization of the Americas, the projects of secularization it enabled, and the (missionary) ethnographic modes of reasoning it engendered are more fundamental to political theology than is often recognized. Instead, we seek to affirm the political potentialities of the opening to vulnerability that theistic reasoning can effect. In this sense, what theopolitics offers is not only a critique of the secularity of the discipline, but also a proposal for going beyond anthropological critiques of the claims of sovereignty to transcendence. As this review suggests, theopolitics finds considerable overlap with other contemporary attempts to rethink the foundational concerns of anthropology, such as those attached to concepts of ontology, vitalism, or affect. Yet it differs from these moves by affirming that the forms of alterity in which these concepts are grounded may themselves be constituted by their extimacy to a sovereign that anthropology can only provisionally apprehend. As we have argued here, this provisionality is not without threat for the discipline, but it also holds considerable, perhaps even transformative, promise.
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: Acknowledgements

Our thanks go to Stephen Berquist, Jacob Bessen, Elizabeth Ferry, Connie Gagliardi, Charles Hirschkind, Angie Heo, Priya Saibel, Justin Sully, and Valeria Vergani for their suggestions for and careful readings of this review.
