Section: Abstract

Humans have a prolonged childhood, which begins with an immature developmental state at birth. We take care of these helpless infants through a variety of cultural adaptations, including material culture, provisioning of food, and shared child care. Our species has long been characterized as having secondary altriciality, but an examination of human life history shows that we are fundamentally precocial, despite seeming helpless at birth. Human babies are also relatively large and overall require substantial attention and energy from caregivers. Previous work has focused on how culture permits us to give birth to helpless young and how our cultural adaptation solves problems stemming from encephalization. The birth of these dependent, costly creatures poses challenges but also creates opportunities by enhancing the development of social and emotional relationships with caregivers as well as language acquisition and enculturation.

Section: Introduction

Across both literature and scientific writing, human infants have been described as demanding, helpless creatures who need care, protection, and attention and who have physical and behavioral qualities that attract, solicit, and capture that attention from their caregivers. In his Essay on Man , Alexander Pope compared humans with other animals who lavish less attention on their young, writing “A longer care man's helpless kind demands/That longer care contracts more lasting bonds” (Pope 1733 as cited in Gould 1977 ). Using less poetic language, Dobzhansky (1962) argued that the helplessness that human infants exhibit at birth and their continued dependence on caregivers facilitate learning and socialization “on which the transmission of culture wholly depends” (p. 196). Scholars have long recognized ( Schultz 1969 ) that life history characteristics such as life span and rate of maturation vary considerably across primate species and that humans “live slow, die old” ( Smith & Tompkins 1995 ). This life history strategy is associated with large body size, large brains relative to body size, increased parental care and investment, and enhanced learning and sociality.
Humans have a relatively prolonged childhood, which begins with an immature developmental state at birth. This helplessness has been widely recognized since the middle of the twentieth century, with the Swiss zoologist Portmann 1 ( 1990 ) and the American anthropologist Montagu (1961) suggesting that humans’ slow and prolonged childhood development was a key aspect of our biology that differentiates us from other species. Some authors even suggested that this aspect of our life history is more important in distinguishing humans from other animals than any anatomical traits (e.g., Cohen 1947 as cited in Gould 1977 ). Anthropologists have long recognized that humans take care of these helpless infants through a variety of cultural adaptations, including material culture, which buffers babies from the environment, provisioning of food, and shared child care. 2 Many anthropologists have written about how prolonged human childhood extends the time for enculturation, learning, and socialization ( Bogin 1990 , 1997 ; Kaplan et al. 2000 ; Mann 1972 ; Portmann 1990 ). Here, however, I focus on the beginning of childhood rather than its prolongation at the end and consider how infant helplessness at the time of birth and in the months following may facilitate cultural transmission and acquisition of culture.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion

Helplessness at birth is not unique to humans, of course. Many other animals across numerous taxa have newborns who are similarly unable to locomote, obtain food on their own, or otherwise care for themselves. Portmann used the German terms Nesthocker and Nestflüchter , meaning nest-sitter (nidicolous) and nest-fleer (nidifugous), referring to the two extremes of life history strategy in birds; these concepts have been referred to in English as altricial and precocial and have been extended to mammals as exemplified through “blind kittens and frisky colts” ( Portmann 1990 , pp. 19–20) ( Figure 1 ). These very different life history strategies tend to be associated with a suite of features. Altricial species (such as kittens or mice) generally have short gestation lengths and large litters, their eyes and ears are closed by membranes at birth, they are born without hair (or feathers), they are unable to regulate their own body temperature, and they cannot move around independently or find their own food. After a long gestation length, precocial species (such as colts) are generally born covered with hair (or feathers); are part of small litters; have well-developed and functional sensory organs; and are able to locomote, thermoregulate, and forage for food on their own soon after birth ( Martin 2007 , Sacher & Staffeldt 1974 ). Martin (2007) and Halley (2018) have shown that altricial species are typically born before the fastest portion of brain growth (peak velocity) has taken place, whereas precocial species are typically born after this point; thus, for precocial species, the most significant portion of brain growth and the time during which the brain grows fastest both occur in utero ( Halley 2018 ). Although altricial–precocial strategies are generally presented as a continuum along a single axis, the distinction is certainly multidimensional, and species can present mosaics of traits, as the human example exemplifies below.
Primates as a group are precocial, with long gestation lengths, small litters, functioning sensory organs, and body hair at birth. Although human infants are born in a more helpless and less developed state than are the infants of most other primates, they certainly do not have a life history typical of altricial species ( Smith & Tompkins 1995 ). For example, humans, like other precocial primates and mammals, have a long gestation length, small litters, sensory organs that are largely functional at the time of birth, and dilute milk, which necessitates frequent nursing; the latter requires that infants remain with their mothers throughout the day and not be left behind or “cached” in a nest ( Hinde & Milligan 2011 ). However, in other respects, human newborns depart from the general precocial pattern, and how they depart from this pattern is the focus of this review.
Anthropologists, such as Montagu (1961 , 1986) in the mid-twentieth century, referred to human infants as “exterogestate fetuses,” suggesting that human newborns continue to grow rapidly at intrauterine rates (especially with respect to brain size) even after they are born. He argued that humans can give birth to babies at an earlier developmental (and therefore more helpless) stage than can other primates because humans create artificial (cultural) wombs that buffer babies from environmental stressors, such as cold or predators. In a study of comparative development across mammals, Portmann (1990) wrote about the significance of the fundamentally precocial human infant being born in a helpless and relatively undeveloped state. He argued that human helplessness should be seen “not as the primitive, somatic immaturity of an altricial infant, but as a very exceptional situation within the mammalian group. In fact, with respect to the fully precocial type, humans are secondarily altricial ” (p. 38, emphasis added). He described a number of features of human development that are essentially mosaics of the stereotypical patterns of altricial and precocial life histories, something that has also been noted by scholars in the evolutionary psychology literature ( Alexander 1990 , Turke 2013 ), although many others continue to refer to humans as simply altricial. Emphasizing that humans are not, in fact, altricial, Trevathan (2010 , p. 109) and Gould (1977 , p. 361) referred to the concept of secondary altriciality as a metaphor for the evolution of human infants rather than as a literal description of their life history.
Other scholars have made similar arguments using different vocabulary. The psychologist Bostock (1962) described what he called “exterior gestation,” in which the human infant is born when it could still pass through the birth canal but at the cost of it needing greater protection from the environment. Washburn's (1960) famous obstetrical dilemma hypothesis also attributed human helplessness to a shift in the timing of birth relative to development at a time when the infant's large head could still pass through the mother's birth canal. Finally, Montagu (1961) argued that human gestation was not really complete at birth (which is to say that the newborn is underdeveloped) but that it continued outside the womb in the “cultural womb” (i.e., what he referred to as “exterogestation”). Van Manen (2019 , p. 35) puts it differently, saying “it may be argued that all babies are born premature. More than any other primate species, human babies are dependent on caregivers for life-sustaining care, extending for months to years after birth because capabilities such as vision, hearing, expression and cognition are immature relative to the adult individual.” Both Bostock and Washburn saw birth at an early developmental stage as simply an adaptation to the constraints of childbirth (see below). Montagu and Portmann recognized, furthermore, that while being born early in development may have evolved for that reason, it presented opportunities for rapid development in a rich environment that had important consequences for human cognition and emotion [an “exaptation” in Gould's terminology ( Gould 1991 , Gould & Vrba 1982 )].
Portmann emphasized that the maturational events of the first year of human life take place not in the womb, where they would be buffered from the outside world, but in the stimulating cultural and social environment of the postnatal world, where human infants are exposed to language, social interaction, and a wide range of other stimuli and behaviors. He described the first year of human infant life as “an extrauterine spring,” meaning a season of new growth. In the first year after birth, human infants experience critical changes: “the attaining of erect posture, the learning of an actual verbal language, and the entrance into the realm of technical thinking and believing” ( Portmann 1990 , p. 82) or, put another way, the infant “becomes a walker, a talker and a doer” ( Trevathan & Rosenberg 2016b , p. 6). These changes, which correspond to “actual precocial formation” (i.e., developmental status at the time of birth) in other species, take place for humans outside the womb in the rich social and cultural environments in which they live. The development of typically precocial species in the womb provides an environment that is “alike for all individuals of a species” ( Portmann 1990 , p. 91). By contrast, “[I]n humans, maturation processes, which did indeed begin within the mother's body, go through their most important phases in combination with the experiences offered by a much richer environment with many sources of stimulation to the organism capable of development” ( Portmann 1990 , p. 91). For Portmann, the fact that critical developmental changes in humans take place in the stimulating outside world is key to human uniqueness.
Anthropologists have long recognized that this helplessness is a result of being born early in the developmental process. 3 This helpless state at birth in turn has been seen as an accommodation to the obstetrical dilemma ( Washburn 1960 ), the apparent conflict between, on the one hand, selection for efficient and safe bipedal locomotion, which favors a compact pelvis (constraining the dimensions of the birth canal), and, on the other hand, selection for safe childbirth, which favors a spacious birth canal. Giving birth to less developed (and therefore smaller) infants is viewed as an adaptation to mitigate these constraints. One implication of the obstetrical dilemma is that birth occurs when it does because the fetus would be too large to fit through the birth canal if it continued to grow in utero for longer ( Rosenberg & Trevathan 2002 ). Dunsworth and colleagues (2012) have questioned whether the obstetrical dilemma hypothesis is the correct explanation for when in fetal development birth takes place. Martin's maternal energy hypothesis emphasized the importance of maternal energy during pregnancy in building the fetal brain ( Martin 1996 , 2007 , 2013 ), and he suggested that adult brain size is the result of the metabolic resources available to mothers during pregnancy and lactation. Ellison's metabolic crossover hypothesis ( Ellison 2001 ) suggested that optimal birth timing is determined by the mother's ability to meet the energetic needs of the growing fetus. Building on these ideas, Dunsworth and her colleagues proposed the energetics of gestation and growth hypothesis, which postulates a proximate mechanism for birth timing involving maternal metabolic constraints ( Dunsworth 2016 , Dunsworth et al. 2012 , Dunsworth & Eccleston 2015 , Emery Thompson 2013 ). They argue that the inability of the mother's metabolism to support the growing fetus in utero provides a trigger that signals the end of the approximately 40-week gestation period, which culminates with delivery of a highly dependent infant. These authors argue that it is energetic constraints, rather than the mechanics of parturition, that determine when pregnancy ends and birth occurs. These hypotheses are not necessarily in conflict with the obstetrical dilemma, as all parts of the system must work together for a successful outcome ( Finlay & Uchiyama 2017 ). However, regardless of the pattern of interaction among the demands of bipedalism, birth, and maternal metabolism, the net result is a pattern of birth that is relatively early in the developmental process and, as a result, human newborns who are helpless. Human infant helplessness may not be just an accommodation (or an adaptation) to mechanical, obstetric, or metabolic constraints (although all of those factors may be relevant). Infant helplessness may also enhance infants’ social interaction and acculturation, but how did it evolve?
Previous scholars generally focused on how culture permits us to give birth to helpless young because we can buffer them from the environment, that is, how culture solves the obstetrical problems associated with encephalization. Here I also examine how the birth of these dependent, costly creatures might enhance the development of social and emotional relationships with caregivers and promote language acquisition and other learning. “Premature” birth poses challenges but also creates opportunities that have influenced our biocultural evolution.
Human life history generally follows a precocial pattern as is typical of the primate order. Human newborns like most other primates are born in small litters, typically as singletons after a gestation length that is what one would predict for an animal of our body size. In fact, our gestation length is probably something close to the primitive condition for apes ( Emery Thompson 2013 ).
Our young are born with their eyes and ears open and functioning. The senses of human infants are more developed at birth than would be typical for an altricial species. However, vision at birth is not as fully developed as one might expect for a precocial mammal or bird ( Mercuri et al. 2007 ). Newborn humans can focus on objects about 12–18 inches from their eyes. It is probably not a coincidence that this is the distance to their mother's face when they are nursing ( Brazelton et al. 1966 ). Like chimpanzees and macaques ( Kuwahata et al. 2004 , Tomonaga 2007 ), human newborns exhibit a preference for looking at the human face immediately after birth (as soon as in the first ten minutes) ( Buiatti et al. 2019 , Goren et al. 1975 , Hrdy 2016 , van Manen 2019 ); in addition, human infants engage in visual searching early in their extrauterine lives, which apparently provides neural stimulation that leads to development of the visual system. Hearing in humans is already functional by the beginning of the third trimester in utero ( Birnholz & Benacerraf 1983 ).
Portmann observed that most precocial species have newborns that are “miniature versions of their parents” but that such a condition is not the case for human newborns. He wrote that the body proportions of other species are similar in infants and adults, whereas in humans those ratios are quite different. In a comparison of human and chimpanzee body proportions, Portmann showed that chimpanzees at birth were more similar to adults in their proportions than are humans whose legs are longer relative to body size in adults than they are in infants ( Portmann 1990 , Trevathan & Rosenberg 2016b ).
Human infants are less mature at birth in terms of their skeletal ossification than are other primates. Schultz (1969) observed that human newborns have long bone and digit ossification similar to macaque fetuses and do not reach the maturation of newborn macaques until they are several years old ( Gould 1977 , Schultz 1969 ). At birth, dental development in human infants is delayed compared with monkeys and other apes ( Smith et al. 1994 ). Cranial bones in infant monkeys and apes become fused earlier than in human infants, who maintain open fontanelles until several months after birth ( Gould 1977 ). The presence of cranial sutures is an ancestral trait found in reptiles and birds as well as mammals and is not directly related to birth. However, the delay in their closure seen in humans means that the bones of the skull can collapse at the sutures and make it slightly smaller, which can allow the fetus to pass through the tight birth canal. This process is referred to as molding. The fact that the skull remains flexible with open sutures is related to prolonged growth of the brain in humans. Although Posner et al. (2013) suggested that this flexibility of the skull was an adaptation to a tight fit during the birth process, Gould (1991) argued that delayed ossification of sutures did not arise as an adaptation to parturition but that it may have permitted the passage of a large infant skull, which could be molded by the contractions of labor. Late closure of cranial sutures in human infants may be an exaptation to the tight fit of parturition rather than an adaptation. That is, open cranial sutures may not have evolved because of selection for giving birth under challenging constraints. Rather, the open cranial sutures in human infants permitted the passage of a large skull through the birth canal and permitted encephalization. This point can be thought of as an analogy (or a spoiler) to the conclusion of this article. That is, I suggest that infant helplessness did not evolve because more helpless infants were selected for, owing to the needs of enculturation. Rather, because human infants were born in a helpless state (whether because of the obstetrical dilemma or the demands of energy metabolism or both), with their brains still undergoing rapid growth while being exposed to the stimulating environment of the outside world, humans can transmit to their offspring the rich body of knowledge, traditions, and values that constitute culture. In fact, our species being fundamentally precocial may be what sets us up to take advantage of the helplessness that comes from being born at a relatively early developmental stage.
One important aspect of human newborn helplessness is their lack of motoric development ( DeSilva 2016 , Falk 2016a ,b; Gibson 1991 ). Like many other apes, human newborns are unable to move around on their own for a year after birth and unable to move effectively for some time after that. Their mobility may be limited particularly because bipedalism is inherently less stable than quadrupedalism, and young children are likely to fall frequently even after learning to walk ( Adolph et al. 2012 ). Coupled with human infants’ large body size, their limited mobility means that human infants place a considerable burden on their parents or other caregivers by needing to be carried for the first few years of life ( Wall-Scheffler et al. 2007 ). In general, across mammals, altricial species (such as kittens) are also unable to locomote on their own, whereas precocial ones (such as colts) can move independently very shortly after birth. Humans are unusual in that crawling, which typically precedes walking in many (but not all) human cultures ( Tracer & Wyckoff 2020 ), is a very different form of locomotion than the bipedal striding characteristic of older members of our species. Garwicz et al. (2009) showed that if measured from the time of conception, rather than the time of birth, human motor development fits a typical mammalian pattern. The authors found that motor developmental timing is highly conserved across mammals and that the onset of walking in humans is at a time predicted by our adult brain size. So what is different about humans is not so much delayed walking as it is delayed maturation of the brain or, put differently, an earlier timing of birth relative to brain development.
At an average birth weight of seven pounds, human infants might seem to their parents to be very small. However, we know that human babies are actually large in overall body size relative to their mothers (about 6% of their mother's body weight rather than 3% as is typical of other apes) ( DeSilva 2011 , Leutenegger 1982 , Pawłowski 1998 ). Wall-Scheffler and colleagues ( Bouterse & Wall-Scheffler 2018 , Wall-Scheffler et al. 2007 , Wall-Scheffler & Myers 2013 ) have pointed out the significant costs associated with carrying infants. Human infants are large, but in addition, they must be carried in someone's arms because they cannot cling to their bipedal mothers ( Wall-Scheffler et al. 2007 , Tanner & Zihlman 1976 ). Human infants’ inability to cling is a result of their motor immaturity, the fact that they have only two grasping appendages, whereas other apes have four, and the human mother's hairless, vertically oriented surface presents nothing onto which to cling ( Amaral 2008 , DeSilva 2016 , Gibson 1991 ). A carrying device such as a sling reduces the costs of carrying by up to 16% ( Wall-Scheffler et al. 2007 ). The costs of carrying infants include the caloric drain on the carrier (not to mention the caloric needs of a large infant) and also the slower pace and greater exposure to the elements, such as predators. The costliness of these solutions suggests that there are significant evolutionary advantages to human infant helplessness.
Human gestation length is short relative to our brain size, which has led several scholars ( Gould 1977 , Trinkaus 1984 ) to conclude that there was a time in the past when human ancestors would have had a longer gestation length. Portmann (1990) suggested that the functional human gestation length is 21 months because human infants match other primates in developmental milestones, such as relative body proportions, locomotor ability, and communication, at about one year of age. But he did not intend this concept literally; rather, he said that human infants after birth live in a “social uterus” (Portmann 1957 as cited in Jaroš 2021 ). The human gestation of 38 weeks is quite similar to the gestations of the other great apes (∼32 weeks for chimpanzees and 38 weeks for gorillas and orangutans) and very likely represents something close to the primitive condition for great apes ( Dunsworth et al. 2012 , Martin 2007 , Martin & MacLarnon 1990 , Rosenberg 1992 ). We know that human brain size has increased dramatically over the last two million years, and there is no need to posit a decrease in gestation length to explain the position of humans as outliers on the general primate pattern of the relationship of brain size to gestation length.
Although the newborn human cranium fits snugly within the birth canal so that it is large relative to pelvic dimensions ( Rosenberg 1992 ), the newborn skull is actually small relative to the size of the adult skull ( DeSilva 2016 ; DeSilva & Lesnik 2006 , 2008 ). Table 1 provides data on the size of the brain of newborns and adults in several species of primates (data courtesy of Jeremy DeSilva in Trevathan & Rosenberg 2016b ). The neonatal–adult brain size ratios show that a higher percentage of brain growth has been completed by birth in monkeys (between 46.1% and 71.4% among species reported here) than in chimpanzees (at 39.5%), with human infants having a brain only about 28.1% of its final adult size. This lower ratio in humans corresponds to Sacher & Staffeldt's (1974) “advancement factor” (the reciprocal of what Portmann called the “multiplier factor”) and is a measure of how much bigger the adult brain is than the neonatal brain. In general, altricial species have a much lower advancement factor than do precocial species ( DeSilva 2016 ). Humans have an advancement factor that is very low for precocial species and is lower than all other primates, but which is in the upper part of the range for altricial species. We have achieved this low advancement factor by having the brain continue to grow at a fetal (accelerated) rate for a longer period after birth so that, although gestation length does not change, birth occurs earlier relative to brain development. In other primates, the brain grows rapidly in utero and then slows down (but keeps growing) at about the time birth takes place. In humans, birth occurs earlier relative to brain growth, which continues at the accelerated rates typical of a fetus so that a greater proportion of brain growth takes place outside the womb ( Sherwood & Gómez-Robles 2017 ) ( Figure 2 ). In general, primates experience very rapid brain growth in utero, with a slowdown in growth that occurs around the time of birth. In humans, that same pattern of initially rapid brain growth followed by slower growth occurs, but the point at which birth takes place is different. In human infants, the brain continues to grow at fetal rates of growth for most of the first year of life ( Falk 2016b ), making that period “exterogestation” in Montagu's terminology. The fact that human infants are born earlier in the process of brain growth and development contributes to their helplessness ( Martin 2007 ).
Brain size in newborn and adult primates 1
1 Data are courtesy of Jeremy DeSilva and include only species for which samples of 10 or more neonatal individuals were available. Table originally published in Trevathan & Rosenberg (2016b) .
Studies comparing brain development in chimpanzees and humans ( Sakai et al. 2011 , 2012 ) suggest that the brain in humans may be more susceptible than in other species to acquiring social and technical skills in the context of extrauterine stimuli. This notion suggests that slower development leads to more prolonged neural plasticity (that is, the brain continues to be influenced by external stimulation and experiences). Human infants are born early relative to neurodevelopment compared with other primates (for a thorough review, see Sherwood & Gómez-Robles 2017 ). The developmental status of the human brain at birth is one of a number of aspects of human brain development that seem to increase plasticity. For example, humans have a greater and faster increase in cerebral white matter just after birth than do other primates ( Sakai et al. 2012 ). This growth constitutes most of the increase in volume that takes place during a human infant's first year and a half of life. Sherwood & Gómez-Robles (2017 , p. 402) suggest that this pattern of brain development
means that greater exposure to social and environmental variability during postnatal development has the capacity to exert a strong influence during the early establishment of connectivity. This may be especially important in boosting brain plasticity, which enables the achievement of developmental milestones that typically occur in the first year of life, such as the onset of joint attention and the appearance of first words.
This brain plasticity characteristic of human infants is important to humans’ ability to acquire cultural information such as language and social relationships ( Semendeferi & Hanson 2016 ). Typical behaviors of human infants, such as babbling, channel mental and neural development to learn the language and specifics of the culture in which they are born ( Gibson 2002 ). The significance of neurological immaturity at birth in humans is that the newborn brain is exposed to the rich array of environmental stimuli outside the womb, which contributes to the great plasticity of our species ( Halley 2018 ). 4 An example of this plasticity is that, although human infants are born with the capacity to recognize all phonemes across languages, early development during exposure to their environment pares down the range of this capacity in order to efficiently process the phonemes specific to the language of their culture. Infants in all cultures can differentiate tones for lexical contrasts, but by 9 or 10 months of age, infants exposed to languages that do not use tones lose the ability to differentiate them. This is an example of perceptual narrowing, that is, the process by which infants essentially become members of their own culture by eliminating from their perceptual abilities the distinctions that are not part of their particular linguistic and social environment ( Maurer & Werker 2014 ).
Thus, the extensive growth and continued development of human newborns take place outside the womb in the context of a stimulating cultural and social environment, including interactions with others. In this way, they not only observe the world around them but also interact with it. Bjorklund and colleagues ( Bjorklund 1997 , Bjorklund & Beers 2016 , Bjorklund & Pellegrini 2000 ) suggest that the mosaic of features that human infants possess (mental prowess, large but slowly developing brains) gives them the time to learn the social and technological skills that humans need and the plasticity to modify behavior in response to changes around them. Bjorklund's cognitive immaturity hypothesis suggests that infants’ cognitive and perceptual abilities are “well-suited for their particular time in life and are not simply incomplete versions of the adult form” ( Bjorklund & Beers 2016 , p. 3). For example, neonatal imitation of facial expressions facilitates communication and interaction with mothers or other adults and may “be evolutionarily adaptive because it is an effective way for children to rapidly acquire the cultural information and artifacts that are so important to their social group” ( Bjorklund & Beers 2016 , p. 9). In humans, the process of myelination [the “insulation of neurons to yield faster signal transmission with less interference” ( Bjorklund 1997 , p. 156; Gibson 1991 )] is delayed, allowing for greater flexibility. The benefit to humans of having infants with immature brains is that human children are mentally, socially, and emotionally flexible, giving humans great plasticity in behavior ( Bjorklund 1997 , p. 157). In fact, Bjorklund & Bering (2002) argue that human social intelligence could not have evolved without a large, slow-growing brain and a long period in which development can take place in a socially complex environment.
Human infants soak up information about their environment at a remarkable rate and use it to manipulate the world around them. For example, long before they produce language, 4.5-month-old babies recognize (and prefer) the sound of their own names, imitate adult facial expressions, and interact dyadically with others, in a dialogue of emotional expression ( Mandel et al. 1995 ; Meltzoff & Moore 1977 , 1997 ; Tomasello 1999 , Tomasello et al. 2007 ). Preverbal infants point with their fingers for other individuals to influence their intentional/emotional state. Tomasello et al. (2007) showed that this behavior is evidence that infants have a notion of shared intentionality or joint attention.
Catarrhines exhibit a negative allometric relationship between adult and neonatal brain size, such that larger brains in adults are linked to less complete brain growth at birth ( DeSilva & Lesnik 2008 ). In work that was featured in a New Yorker article with the intriguing title “Why Are Babies So Dumb If Humans Are So Smart?” ( Konnikova 2016 ), Piantodosi & Kidd (2016) show that, across primates, infant helplessness (measured as time to weaning) is correlated with adult intelligence. The authors resolve the apparent contradiction in Konnikova's title between human intelligence in adults and helplessness in infants by proposing a model that links human infants’ need for care and attention with our “extraordinary intelligence.” They argue that infant helplessness creates a situation in which there is runaway selection for intelligence in humans because helpless neonates need more intelligent (larger-brained) parents to care for them, and larger brains require being born in an even more helpless condition. In addition, being born early (or relatively immature) may mean that brain growth and development take place in a richly stimulating cultural environment and may serve as a tremendous advantage of human infant helplessness. In turn, the complexity of human culture may place increasing demands on the cognitive capacity of infants to absorb a steadily growing body of learned knowledge and behavior, another aspect of the positive feedback loop between adult encephalization and infant helplessness.
Like the young of other animals, human infants are attractive and appealing to their mothers and to other potential caretakers. In the 1950s, Lorenz described a set of traits that he called Kindenschema (or infant schema) that, across mammals, contributed to the attraction of parents to infants and served to stimulate instinctual caregiver behaviors (e.g., Glocker et al. 2009a , b ). These characteristics included a relatively large head and eyes as well as pudgy cheeks. Such attributes signal health and viability and are thought to have evolved to elicit caregiving ( Hrdy 1999 , 2009 , 2014 ; Konner 2010 ), which is especially important in our species because of the contingent nature of maternal attention and mother's heightened discrimination to attend more to healthy infants ( Hrdy 2016 ). These features also include fat stores, which make infants look healthy and robust from birth and also fuel thermoregulation and energy for a developing brain ( Cunnane & Crawford 2003 , Pawłowski 1998 ), and “cute” morphology and behaviors that elicit care and commitment. Baby schema in human infants have been shown by many scholars to have a significant effect on the behavior of potential caregivers (e.g., Langlois et al. 1995 ; Kringelbach et al. 2008 , 2016 ). Researchers have extended this concept of cuteness to include not only these visual features but also other sensory experiences, including the sounds and smells of infants, which facilitate caregiving, as well as playfulness, which leads to interactive behavior. In addition to the physical attributes that solicit attention, human infants are attuned to the mental and emotional states of others, and they attract and engage others to provide care and attention using characteristics that make them attractive to the very people who are most likely to invest energy to care for them. Hrdy (2009 , 2016) has argued that human infant helplessness sets the stage for the development of our ability to read the intentions of others in order to elicit parental (or alloparental) care. In addition, she has argued that large brains could have evolved only once shared child care had set the stage for meeting the great demands of helpless human infants.
Paleoanthropologists have looked to the fossil record for evidence about when infant helplessness in humans and the need for high levels of parental and alloparental care may have evolved ( Halcrow et al. 2020 ). This area of study has involved looking at aspects of skeletal anatomy that are correlated with one of the traits linked to helplessness, such as birth mechanism, brain advancement factor, or dental development. 5
Human brain growth is different from the pattern seen in other apes because our brains grow both faster and for a longer time period ( Leigh 2004 ). In an analysis of the brain morphology of Australopithecus afarensis (specifically the Dikika child and A.L. 333–105 from Hadar), Gunz et al. (2020) show that at the time of death, these children had reached at most 70% of adult brain growth, making their growth more closely resemble that of modern humans than that of modern chimpanzees (who would have reached about 90% of adult brain growth at the same developmental stage). The authors suggest that this extended period of brain growth may have been linked to a long period of dependence on caregivers ( DeSilva 2021 ). Falk et al. (2012) suggested that the presence of a metopic suture on the Australopithecus africanus child from Taung implied that fast postnatal brain growth may have preceded an increase in brain size ( Tague 2012 ), although this assertion was rejected by Holloway et al. (2014) , who saw no evidence for high frequencies of delayed metopic suture closure in early hominins. Coqueugniot et al. (2004) suggested that the high advancement ratio of the 1.8 million-year-old Mojokerto child from Java made it more similar to living apes than to extant humans, implying that Homo erectus did not experience as much brain growth outside the womb as modern humans do. They concluded that this species lacked the cognitive skills of modern humans, including language. These authors compared Mojokerto to the small-brained skulls from Dmanisi. When the Mojokerto child is compared with adult Homo erectus from nearby Sangiran (who are larger brained than Dmanisi), the investigators proposed that there was a much more human-like pattern of brain growth in Homo erectus , which would imply infant helplessness by about 1 million years ago ( O'Connell & DeSilva 2013 , Cofran & DeSilva 2015 ). DeSilva & Lesnik (2008) have estimated neonatal brain size in a range of fossil hominins on the basis of adult brain size and concluded that the shift from a chimpanzee-like to a human-like pattern of fetal and infant brain growth was a gradual shift rather than a sudden change. As adult brain size increased with encephalization, the proportion of brain growth that took place after birth increased along with it.
Tague & Lovejoy (1986) analyzed the obstetrical pelvic anatomy of the Lucy specimen, A.L. 288–1 ( A. afarensis ). Because the birth canal was anterior-posteriorly flattened at the inlet, midplane, and outlet, the authors inferred that australopithecines gave birth with a nonrotational mechanism, in which the infant's head entered the birth canal at the inlet facing to the side, as in modern humans. However, it did not rotate, as is typical of modern humans ( Figure 3 ), as it passed through the midplane and outlet (although it seems likely that once the head had emerged from the birth canal, the body would have had to rotate to accommodate the broad shoulders ( DeSilva et al. 2017 , Trevathan & Rosenberg 2000 ). On the basis of the morphology of the pelvis and proximal femur, Ruff (1995) suggested that the constraints imposed by the pelvis may have limited the expansion of cranial capacity until rotational birth evolved. He noted the disappearance of the early hominin pelvic-femoral morphology that was associated with a flattened birth canal during the time when encephalization was taking place most rapidly, which suggests that the evolution of rotational birth may have allowed the dramatic increases in brain size that were so critical to the evolution of Homo sapiens . Although it was not known at the time Ruff was writing, the 1.8 million-year-old Homo erectus specimen from Gona in Ethiopia shows some expansion of the inlet and midplane compared with earlier australopithecines, suggesting to Simpson et al. (2008) that pelvic shape was evolving in response to increasing infant brain size. The evolution of large brains, rotational birth, and infant helplessness were related through the constraints imposed by birth canal size and shape and the size of the neonatal brain. When rotational birth evolved, human females probably benefited from assistance during childbirth, much as modern women do today ( Rosenberg & Trevathan 2002 , Trevathan 1987 ), which adds another benefit to cooperative breeding. Although early hominins such as Australopithecus almost certainly gave birth to relatively large babies ( DeSilva 2011 ), which may have placed a premium on shared care, their advancement factors, while lower than modern apes, were not yet at modern levels, suggesting that their infants were not as helpless at birth as ours are today. Thus, as in so many aspects of our biology and culture, the evolution of the modern human pattern of giving birth to large, helpless infants was a mosaic process ( DeSilva 2016 , Nowell & Kurki 2020 ) over the course of the last 3–4 million years.

Section: Conclusion

Regardless of why human babies are born when they are, their immature developmental status at birth exposes them to a rich set of stimuli at a very early stage in their lives. That is, infant helplessness is not merely an accommodation to difficult birth or the limits of maternal metabolism, but a characteristic that enhances infants’ abilities and opportunities to make connections with their mothers and other caregivers, to read the intentional states of others, and to absorb language and other cultural information, which are all essential parts of the human cultural adaptation. The mosaic of developmental features that characterize human infants is not well described by the commonly used term “secondary altriciality” ( Trevathan & Rosenberg 2016b ). In coining the term “secondary altriciality,” Portmann (1990) clearly distinguished the human condition from one of altriciality, writing that “[o]ur insight will continue to be sharply restricted if we persist in the opinion that we are only dealing with a meagerly developed altricial infant,” and yet the term secondary altriciality or even altriciality continues to be applied to humans without caveat ( Kurismaa 2021 , Kurismaa & Jaroš 2021 ). The precocial legacy that our species inherited as primates sets us up for a uniquely human constellation of features. Our newborns are undeveloped in terms of relative brain growth, are large in body size, are motorically immature, and cannot feed themselves, thermoregulate, or protect themselves from predators. However, this helplessness is coupled with an ability to soak up information about the environment at a remarkable rate and to use it to manipulate the world, especially with respect to social and emotional relationships with conspecifics, which are essential in a cooperatively breeding, provisioning species in which infant care is contingent on parental commitment.

Section: Acknowledgements

For helpful discussions and comments on the manuscript, I am very grateful to Rachel Caspari, Jeremy DeSilva, Kathleen Gibson, Roberta Golinkoff, Martin Haeusler, Filip Jaroš, Sang-Hee Lee, Melissa Melby, Thomas Roček, Sara Stinson, and Wenda Trevathan. The research for this article was supported in part by the Czech Science Foundation (GAČR) project “Adolf Portmann: A Pioneer of the Eidetic and Semiotic Approach in the Philosophy of the Life Sciences” (grant 19-11571S).
