Title: Wound Culture


Section: 

This article is part of a special theme on Global Health. For a list of other articles in this theme, see https://www.annualreviews.org/toc/anthro/51/1 |
In memory of Diane Nelson

Section: ABSTRACT

This review offers new perspectives on the anthropology of injuries and wounds. It maps how theories, methods, and ethnographic sensibilities converge on wounds, on the act of wounding, and on the wounded as instructive objects. The review assesses how anthropologists understand social forces to cause wounds and how they accord wounds the power to generate meaning about sociality. Organized across two themes, “breach” and “repair,” the review tests concepts of embodiment across clinical boundaries, manifestations of harm, and formations of justice. It examines how anthropological thought connects to wound culture and assesses links between embodiment and politics that develop in the domains of critical theory and medical anthropology. Ultimately, it aims to shed light on the connections between body politics and ethnography and to ask what wounds might generate as an anthropological concern.

Section: INTRODUCTION

A wound is relational and thus anthropological. Wounds are agentive materializations; it takes moving action in the world to make wounds happen. What, in turn, do wounds generate? Primarily rooted in studies of embodiment and medicine, this review assesses how anthropologists understand social forces to cause wounds and how they accord wounds the power to generate meaning about sociality. Given an extensive anthropological literature on violence and on suffering, this review does not synthesize these topics ( Farmer 2004 , Navaro 2020 , Nelson 2021 ). Instead, it queries how anthropology attaches to wounds and how these attachments inflect ideas about the body politic. It maps how theories, methods, and ethnographic sensibilities converge on wounds, on the act of wounding, and on the wounded as instructive objects. Across two themes, “breach” and “repair,” the review tests concepts of embodiment across clinical boundaries, manifestations of harm, and formations of justice. It assays how anthropological thinking connects to wound culture and assesses links between embodiment and politics that develop in turn. That is, it traces how ethnography's claims develop in relation to wounds.
I write from the position of an anthropologist of medicine who studies how people face life threats from disease and traumatic injury ( Solomon 2016 , 2022 ). I write in a specific moment, as well. Given the current state, in 2022, of mass death, illness, and political struggles to recognize and recover from viral infection and violent regimes, how might wound culture be germane?
In assessing sociocultural anthropology during 2020, Berry suggests that anthropology might work as “a procession for collective dis-ease,” meaning an anthropology guided by “the felt presence of irremediable loss, which is to feel more deeply driven by that which makes premature death an immanent and ever-present reality in ‘normal times’” ( Berry 2021 , p. 942). Taking seriously Berry's call to reckon and forge an anthropology that feels loss, the review questions the place of wounds in relation to that feeling, amid an ongoing scaling up of bodies to politics.
Thus this review queries attachments to wounds retrospectively, currently, and also speculatively to imagine what it might mean to loosen ethnographic attachments to wounds in order to better understand contemporary body politics. This exercise is not intended to be prescriptive. Wounds should not necessarily be a new target upon which we should focus our sights, nor should wound culture necessarily be the stuff of new grant proposals and fieldwork projects. Instead, the review considers wounds as a bellwether of ethnographic relations. It considers wounds as attachment points for ethnographic curiosity. It asks that we pause and ask how and why wounds effect such magnetism and that we consider loosening some attachments to wounds in order to see them anew.
The call to loosen attachments to one's object stems from the work of Berlant ( Berlant 2022 ). An object attachment can be a scene of fantasy or hope or an aspirational relation with an intimate other or a stranger. An object can be a person, a desire, and a political horizon. An object attachment can also be an intellectual and political focus and a topic of study chosen with a political rationale. As Berlant (2011) demonstrates, fortifying an object attachment can generate unintended consequences, often to individual and collective detriment. Berlant writes of the links made between object attachments, historical shifts, and political relationships. In the historical moment of vital atrophy with which we are currently reckoning, unequally, it seems naive at best and deleterious at worst to separate ethnographic research from such relations. Because anthropology's knowledge production is built through relations with others, in terms of both people in the field as well as one's scholarly interlocutors back home (however unstable these topoi are), attachments are at stake in the writing of disaster ( Blanchot 1995 ). As the discipline reckons what ethnography might achieve and on whose terms it might add up to broader relevance, it is worth asking what the discipline's attachments to distressed bodies can do and for whom.
The review's conclusion takes up the proposal to forge different object attachments and considers a what-if scenario from speculative fiction wherein wounding is wholly visible to others. The purpose is to explore what a wounded sociality might entail when wounds are already evident as well as the attachments to embodiment that might follow. This effort is a middle-ground experiment, one in which wounds are neither completely summoned nor denied outright. There must be a way between these two overdetermined poles; it may involve loosening, losing, unlearning, and relearning wounds as an ethnographic interest in order to move forward in future studies of body politics.

Section: THE TERMS OF WOUNDED BODIES

“Wound,” “wounded,” and “wounding” as key terms for object, status, and action are both somatic and clinical terms that refer to bodies in and out of the domains of medicine. The Oxford English Dictionary (2021) defines a wound as “a hurt caused by the laceration or separation of the tissues of the body.” An equally fleshy definition derives from surgery, which tends to define wounds in terms of their relative degree of trauma, with “trauma” meaning blunt or penetrating injuries that are immediately life-threatening. “Wounding,” in turn, is the causative act of creating injury. "Wounded” works as an adjective that describes being inflicted with injury, and the collective noun form “the wounded” expresses a polity of the injured.
With bodily tethers, these terms of wound, wounding, and wounded have broad application in critical theory and the social sciences, including medical anthropology. The terms also interrelate and draw anthropological attention because of the proximities that anthropologists have to medicine and to communities grappling with medicine's forces ( Inhorn & Wentzell 2012 , Kleinman 1995 ). In many instances, the clinic has been a principal domain to make wounding legible, and the ethnographer who gains proximity to scenes of wounds is the ethnographer who has gained proximity to medicine. This proximity may explain in part why among the anthropological subfields, medical anthropology often centers wounds and thus why medical anthropology is a generative case study for wounded attachments. It also may explain why critiques of the centrality of suffering to anthropology often involve critiques of the centrality of wounds to medical anthropology ( Robbins 2013 ).
Other knowledge regimes beyond medicine shape the definition of wounds. The three terms of wound, wounding, and wounded connect to “injury,” a term whose legal definition refers to an event-form at the center of tort law ( Jain 2004 , 2006 ). Jain notes that wounding's materialization in US law involves a focus on actions carried out against someone else's rights, yet injury as a legal form also works as “a project of translation” through which human bodies experience unequal disablement in capitalist, consumer cultures. According to Jain's landmark work, injury is the site to assess wounding. The role of the injury-focused anthropologist entails reading lawsuits alongside product design to question “how human wounding will matter in a political economy” ( Jain 2006 , p. 151). Wounds make injured bodies, injured bodies make lawsuits, and lawsuits translate to politics, such that body politics have legal entailments at every turn. Law, however, does not always clearly assert its presence in scenes of wounding. Legal consequences might remain implicit or vague or go unrecognized. Different valences of individuality and plurality—themselves legal constructs—may make injury only partially discrete as a bodily harm because the law has different ways of making bodies matter alone and in relation.
Some theories of wounding can make claims on the body politic without a cut, burned, maimed, or physically hurt person at their center. Although bodies are often a wound's grounds, sentiments can also be hurt, destabilizing identities and their capacity for political claims ( Brown 1993 , Cohen 2010 ). In Brown's essay “Wounded Attachments,” for instance, wounds may be collective and more-than-clinical and entail “injuries to body and psyche enacted by capitalism (alienation, commodification, displacement, disintegration of sustaining, albeit contradictory, social forms such as families and neighborhoods)” ( Brown 1993 , p. 394). Writing during the US culture wars of the 1990s and reflecting on claims to politico-legal belonging, Brown posits that wounds materialize as both hurt soma and hurt sociality. “Body politics” as such may involve identitarianism in relation to claims of collective hurt. 1
“Embodiment” is more than a matter of cut skin here. The psyche itself can be wounded ( Malabou 2012 ), which may evidence flesh wounds in turn, such that wounded embodiment gets made apparent by studying compromised consciousness. For example, traumatic brain injuries foreground the brain as a nexus of materiality and immateriality of the subject ( MacLeish 2012 , Solomon 2021 ). Wounded minds and subjectivities might situate a person as a subject of “trauma,” another concept-relation of a wound that anthropologists often extend beyond its clinical and corporeal terms of life-threatening wounds ( Young 1995 ). From the tribulations such as asylum and migration ( El-Shaarawi 2021 , Fassin & d'Halluin 2005 , Kelly 2011 , Mittermaier 2019 , Ticktin 2011 ) to terrorism ( Fassin & Rechtman 2009 ), compromised subjectivity or consciousness can accord persons the political category of wounded. Wounded consciousness, compromised through structural and intimate violence, can also seep into psychiatric care, encounters with the divine, and state power ( Pandolfo 2018 , Pinto 2014 , Varma 2016 ). As Fanon (1994) and Anzaldúa (2012) demonstrate, wounds to the body/mind are historical conditions, as they emerge along the jagged lines of colonialism's shifting tectonic plates.
Structurally, war and militarism situate wound culture at the nexus of medicine, capitalism, and formations of violence ( Chua 2018 , Linker 2011 , MacLeish 2013 , Messinger 2009 , Serlin 2004 , Terry 2017 , Webb 2021 , Wool 2015 ). Wound culture can animate the fleshy mytho-poetics of war and conflict that are always both material and storied ( Abu-Sittah 2019 , Açiksöz 2019 , Allen 2009 , Axel 2001 , Fabricant & Postero 2014 , Feldman 2008 , Mookherjee 2015 , Nelson 1999 ). The remnants of conflict and deadly materiel, from undetonated land mines to discarded cluster bombs, create spaces in which bodies must negotiate wounding ecologies ( Kim 2022 , Zani 2019 ). In this instance, the wound may not yet have occurred to a given person, but its potentiality shapes life politics through body–landscape connections.
War also shapes the selective processes of caring for wounds. Triage spills into social rubrics and shapes moral economies of treatment deservingness ( Nguyen 2010 , Redfield 2013 , Solomon 2017 , Ticktin 2011 ). Matters of debt and duty carry forth from the wound to the body politic, too. In the US case, wound culture can entail a twice-owed debt to wounded soldiers who sacrifice their bodies for the nation and, in turn, to the biomedical insights gleaned from treating their suffering ( Terry 2017 ). Wounding through debilitation and its subsequent medicalization can also anchor a mode of biopolitics. As Puar (2017) notes of the Israel/Palestine case, military strategies of nonlethal wounding foreground debility as the core relation between perpetrator and victim. Drawn out in an asymptotic relation to necropolitics, this kind of body politic gains its political charge through state violence that wounds bodies enough to debilitate but not enough to kill. Wounding becomes both means and ends to differentiate one body politic from another.
With echoes of war, wound culture entails and evokes machinic qualities of modernity, made real through the errors in systems, exemplified by road accidents ( Lamont 2012 , Sundaram 2009 ), suicides on mass transit ( Fisch 2018 ), and industrial disasters ( Fortun 2001 , Petryna 2002 ). Machinic terms of modernity fold back into expert sciences about wounds. For instance, trauma surgery and emergency medicine frame the wounded body as the crux of historical and technological epochal shifts ( Cooter & Luckin 1997 , Geroulanos & Meyers 2018 , Macmillan 2002 , Schlich 2006 ). Here, wound culture stems from the glitchy gear turns of modern technology, pulling bodies into the deadly errors of invention. The embodiment of technology may involve the collective materialization of the shock of modern life, connecting wounds to a human sensorium walled off from immanent experience, one so incapacitated that political response seems unlikely. In this instance, the wounds of modernity are wounds to the senses, and political subjectivity is constituted as anesthetic ( Buck-Morss 1992 ).
Although the index body of wound culture is often assumed to be that of the injured person, it can also be that of the unwounded, spectating person who desires to watch violence in the bodies of others. This spectator-oriented theory underlies Seltzer's (1997) definition of wound culture. For Seltzer, wound culture involves the American cultural obsession with scenes of murder and crime ( Seltzer 2013 , 2018 ). His notion of wound culture also rests on the mediation of those scenes through film, television, and news. For Seltzer, the ur -object of wound culture in the United States is the television medical drama ER, a public cultural form he casts as “pure wound culture—the world, half meat and half machinery in a perpetual state of emergency” ( Seltzer 2013 , p. 26).
Different from many ethnographies of people's experiences being wounded, Seltzer's version of wound culture relies on unwounded persons attaching to wounded others. This approach makes wound culture the locus of “spectacles of persons, bodies, and technologies…and the scenes that make up the pathological public sphere” ( Seltzer 2013 , p. 26). Several contingencies are built into this framing. Spectatorship is one, as mentioned above. Location is as well. The hospital emergency room anchors the spot where we come to know the wounding capacities of modern life and the desire for watching that we sustain with those scenes. The line between clinical space and public culture is blurred, and the blurring marks are attachments of desire.
But the hospital need not be an exclusive locus of wounding. As Sundaram (2009) argues in his account of widespread car accidents in Delhi and wound culture in India, deaths on the road put “smashed and dented automobiles, fallen bodies, and the endless cycle of death” on display (p. 170). In this framing, wound culture underlies public culture precisely because it cannot be contained in the clinic. Instead, it originates in the most visible sites of the city—the streets—and then intensifies through mediation in news accounts. Wound culture sutures public space to public shock. Sundaram's theory of wound culture shares a sense of spectatorship with Seltzer's, but it differs in terms of public space and offers an important corrective to the American assumptions built into Seltzer's account. Sundaram's wound culture also contrasts with Seltzer's in terms of everydayness. Seltzer's literary account tends to foreclose the potential for woundedness to bubble up beyond the extreme somatic spectacles of the emergency room. Sundaram's, by contrast, opens up that space. Following Sundaram from mediation to interaction, ethnographers may find a different angle of attachment via more quotidian signs of wounding.
Dividing the boundaries between the social and the somatic here is itself an epistemic move. Social models of wounding may iron out material embodiments of disability that disaggregate along lines of gender, race, caste, class, sexuality, and socioeconomic position. It may become challenging to track how “wounds become the precondition that enable social transformation,” as Ralph (2012) observes. Or, perhaps wounds are not so much inherently social as they “acquire a different social life,” as Dewachi (2015 , p. 63) notes. In Dewachi's account, a wound's acquisition of social life is intersubjective. Its intersubjectivity develops in uneven moments of processing, reflection, display, and recognition in everyday encounters such as those between refugees and host communities. In this case, the ethnographic task is to track how wounds travel intersubjectively and to speculate on what wounds enable. Focused on the generative qualities of wounds, both Ralph and Dewachi foreground the processural qualities of a wound-focused ethnography. Both scholars write of wounds using terms such as “enabling” and “traveling.” An account of generativity can also reveal wound culture's durational qualities, as time lags, narrative rescripting, and recovered memories shape ways that harmed persons appeal for compensation and justice ( Agard-Jones 2013 , Biehl 2013 , Biehl & Petryna 2011 , Das 1995 , Ralph 2013 , Shapiro 2015 ).
With this processural and generativity-focused approach in mind, the next sections of the review examine two broad modes of ethnographic attention to wound culture. Themes of movement underlie each mode. The first section, Breach, considers how wounds are a sentinel site of the somatic breaking-apart of worlds, a disintegration that may be tracked backward to deleterious structures and infrastructures. Breaches conjure incursions that may evidence bodily pathology in ways that are similar to disease but that also involve spatial trespass. The second movement-oriented mode, Repair, considers accounts of wounds that focus less on forensic accounts of damage and more on how people proceed in the face of that damage. Repair might foreground living life as wounded life, in contrast to leaving wounds behind. With no scripted end to injury, there is no happy ending of intactness and a life free of injury for the scholar to attach to. Instead, thriving and wounding are cotravelers in the making of the body politic through scenes of harm that do not resolve so much as they propel forward.

Section: BREACH

As anthropology formed attachments to wounds as an ethnographic object, it often did so via another major rubric: disease. This attachment is a matter of historical field habits, yet it resonates in this current moment of social transformation linked to a global pandemic. Disease galvanized medical anthropology's early years as a subfield, and assaying sociality often hinged on the difference in polarity between disease and illness, with the former indexing the physiological and the latter indexing the social ( Kleinman 1988 , Wendland 2019 ). That is, the subfield's earliest barometer of how bodies signal sociality and politics required attention to physiological or pathological abnormality. Someone's or some group's sickness was required in order to make claims about the social. Medical anthropologists attached to sick bodies, and something could be said about how soma and sociality connect.
The object of the diseased body is an enduring one. Even as conceptual conversations in the subfield shift from knowing to practice ( Mol 2002 ) and pivot toward questions of care, disease continues to be an instructive object attachment. Afflictions such as drug addiction ( Garcia 2010 ) connect to historical wounds of colonial dispossession but also get reckoned by addiction scientists and treatment specialists in part as if they are diseases. Poverty itself can operate similarly ( Das 2015 ), such that disease, economy, and ethics knit together. Medical anthropologists who engage with pharmaceutical politics raise questions about biocapital, genomic epistemologies, and the production of difference, and disease is the pedagogical object through which such claims are made ( Dumit 2002 , Fullwiley 2012 , Peterson 2014 , Sunder Rajan 2017 ). As medical anthropology increasingly elaborates questions of care, it questions how people hold worlds together amid bodily brokenness. It is not that disease is an intractable object of attention and that wounds are competing with it for attention; it is more that disease often forms a reference point for that brokenness. In the process, wounds and disease can co-occur in medical ethnographic accounts, sometimes with one operating as a risk factor for the other.
Whether for reasons of tradition—or because of the close ties between medical anthropology and the hammers of medicine and public health, which see disease as their nails—diseased bodies can make for a formidable proper object. Yet, how stable is this object? Might the ethnography of wounds have looked different if injury—and not pathology—formed the original landscape to reckon power over and through the body? What if medical anthropology developed first as the anthropology of injury rather than as the anthropology of disease?
Consider some alternative pathways in these thought experiments. What if disability had been the first proper attachment of medical anthropology, and disease had to make a case for itself decades later? These hypotheticals are just that, of course, and they are also rhetorical generalizations that obscure the fact that disability scholars have long insisted on a more capacious sense of medical anthropological study. Still, hypotheticals can reveal certain intensities of ethnographic attachments that have marginalized other analyses of body politics and the body politic.
Perhaps spatial aspects of the pathological orientation have been difficult to loosen. For numerous reasons, Foucault's (1975) clinic shades how many medical anthropologists engage embodiment; his is a clinic for disease pathology. This attachment has had significant effects on the relay between disability studies and anthropology ( Durban 2021 , Friedner & Kusters 2020 , Ginsburg & Rapp 2013 , Hartblay 2020 , Shuttleworth & Kasnitz 2004 ). 2 As the clinic gets destabilized or deprioritized as an ethnographic site, scholars of disability have compelled anthropologists to consider relations care to understand how people hold together social worlds ( Livingston 2005 ).
Breaches can be the origin point of the social relation. Somatic splits, whether incomplete or fully severing, ground case studies of amputation and prosthesis ( Nelson 2001 ). In many ways, breaches resonate with broader anthropological theories of the partiality of persons, such that rupturing the intactness of personhood constitutes exchange and relationality ( Strathern 2020 ). Medical anthropology often engages with and reconfigures this theme of partiality, sometimes more biopolitically and sometimes more biomorally, as evidenced in ethnographies of organ transplants and the traffic in human tissues ( Cohen 1999 , 2011 ; Copeman & Banerjee 2019 ; Crowley-Matoka 2016 ; Hamdy 2012 ; Sanal 2011 ; Sharp 2006 ; Waldby & Mitchell 2006 ). A body may be breached so that its parts can be given over to another, a relational ethic that Cohen (2013) terms “excorporation as commitment.”
The wounded body politic can be a sentinel site for structural violence. If wounds tie blame to structural violence, they also raise forensic questions about legitimate forms of materiality in breach conditions ( Weizman 2017 ). Here, wounds point back to specific infrastructures such as walls and borders that tear apart and decompose persons who attempt to cross ( De León 2015 , Jusionyte 2018 ). Wounds accrued on the factory floor evidence how consumer desires for food connect to racialized regimes of manual labor ( Blanchette 2020 , Sangaramoorthy 2019 ). These wounds may appear through the materiality of scars, the enduring sign of wounds that heal but still assert their presence. Indeed, this visible presence may affect how bodily disruption can be legitimated. Such legitimation may be the deciding factor in confirming or ignoring claims in law, especially in contexts where doubt clouds the truths of the body's evidence in cases of trauma ( James 2010 ), sexual violence ( Mulla 2014 ), and police violence ( Ralph 2014 , 2020 ). Amid crises of credibility, wounds can authorize forms of temporality, subjectivity, and visibility; they bridge the immanent and the chronic, the individuated and the collective, and the latent and the manifest. Motifs of breach and split make it possible to understand how bodies concretize discontinuities of time, space, and experience.
Forensic inquiry and retrospection may bring the breach into view. Like disease, wounds can spark questions of “What happened?” in the search for meaning amid scenes of suffering. Yet perhaps differently than those from disease, wounds from purposive action put the quest for healing into complex relation with intentionality of and accountability for violence. The sick person's questions of “Why me?” have conventionally opened up space for medical anthropological analysis ( Wilkinson & Kleinman 2016 ). Yet the wounded person's question of “Why me?” may also be understood as a question of “Why was this violence done to me?” ( Das 2006 ). Subjectivity entails questions of who breaks you, how, and why. Agency is an additional matter to consider in terms of querying how bodies split. Studies of self-harm ( Csordas & Jenkins 2018 , Sargent 2003 , Staples & Widger 2012 ), for instance, take up these questions to arrive at broader insights concerning ritual ( Lester 2012 ) or “a reasonable response to an irrational world” ( Gilman 2012 , p. 1013).
Breaches also hurt and thus make pain central to personal and collective political history ( Wailoo 2014 ), ethics ( Cohen 1999 ), and narrative itself ( Frank 2013 , Scarry 2011 ). The ways that bodily breaches induce pain through deformation have been key for thinking about anthropology's commitments. Pain traced to wounds also poses problems of credibility ( Crowley-Matoka 2020 ). But an individual's expressions of feeling pain may not be enough to substantiate a wound as real or meaningful. Claims at the scale of communities might be necessary to draw attention to the harm of white supremacist political projects that painfully fragment and eradicate humans through different iterations of colonial rule, chattel slavery, forced labor, and capture ( Hartman 1997 , Hunt 2015 , McClintock 2009 , Stevenson 2014 ). Attention focused here may entail a rereading of biopolitics from the standpoint of a wounded or killable body kept out of legal protections ( Mbembe 2019 , Weheliye 2014 ).
Medicine can be far more than the context in which people attest to breach. Medicine itself can often be the engine of wounding. Medicine can generate pain, and tracing these paths of cause and effect can deepen a political commitment to studying iatrogenesis ( Greenhalgh 2001 , Illich 1976 , Owens 2017 , Varley &Varma 2021 ). Clinical pursuits often foreground the degree to which people who pursue therapy can actually live with medicine's splitting forces ( Boyer 2019 , Jain 2013 ). Pathology might be understood to reside as much in the infrastructures of the clinic as it does in patients’ bodies ( Chabrol 2018 ). Also at stake is the need to trace the violence enacted on women's bodies in the name of making medical expertise, from the contexts of obstetrics ( Davis 2019 ) to in-vitro fertilization ( Roberts 2012 ) and to rehabilitative medicine ( Kim 2017 ). Paradoxically and cruelly, medicine's wounds may also ensnare patients in feedback loops where they must pursue more medicine after initial attempts at treatment fail. As medicine breaches bodies, often indelibly, wounds may evidence its very limits ( Bosk 2003 ). In these situations of recursive harm, what would constitute projects of repair, and what kinds of object loosening would be necessary?

Section: REPAIR

Loosening and reimagining attachments to wounds may not resolve pain but in fact may themselves be painful processes. Pain is a doorway and a threshold in which the anthropology of wound culture can dwell. Pain can be a portal to questions about how wounds, wounding, and the wounded endure. In their milestone work “The Mindful Body: A Prolegomenon to Future Work in Medical Anthropology,” Scheper-Hughes & Lock (1987) note that “[m]edical anthropologists are privileged…in that their domain includes not only the unmaking of the world in sickness and death, but also the remaking of the world in healing” (p. 29). A sense of body politics can be developed in terms of not only unmaking, but also remaking—not only through breach, but also through repair. If everyday life is a matter of breach, then ethnographers might best attend to social projects of “suturing” ( De Boeck & Baloji 2016 ).
What is required, then, is attention to living in wounding's aftermath, such as wake work ( Sharpe 2016 ), the labor of living under conditions of Black death-making. Attention to repair may involve an analysis of thriving, what Quashie (2021) terms “aliveness.” It may require attending to scars that accrue through violent events that sustain the event space of the plantation ( Thomas 2019 ). As Thomas notes, however, there are no guarantees that violence has readily visible remains. The aftermaths of wounding may remain invisible or take on different apparitions. The ethnographic task is to describe how people imagine body politics in the cracks between care space and wound space. To repeat, this can be a task that unequally distributes pain.
Conditions of breach can shape conditions of repair. For some scholars of wounds-as-trauma, for instance, it is common to imagine the wounded body as one filled with blockages. Such blockages interrupt and radically break the flow of life, and so repairing the blocked body entails projects of unblocking. Moving on may be a difficult but necessary project. However, does this moving on guarantee a restoration of sociality and intersubjectivity? There is a question of relational, affective, institutional, and psychic labor here. Who must unblock the stopped-up body to achieve a freed-up body politic? If inequality generated the conditions for healing, it would be imprecise to assume that healing removes inequality from the frame ( Chatterji 1998 ). The corporeality of repair may be best understood in terms of uneven vulnerabilities.
Who specifically speaks to inequalities is also an epistemic attachment. Consider Tuck's invitation to scholars to think beyond damage-centered accounts. Speaking to Indigenous communities, Tuck calls for greater attention to “the long-term repercussions of thinking of ourselves as broken” ( Tuck 2009 , p. 409, emphasis in original) and demonstrates that when researchers ask marginal communities to affirm their woundedness, the research that results can have subsequent wounding effects of its own. Tuck calls on scholars to recalibrate damage-focused inquiries to questions of desire and argues that Indigenous communities and Indigenous expertise should set the terms of this shift. Put in terms of loosening, Tuck's invitation can be thought of as one that asks researchers to loosen and rethink attachments to the wounding stories of marginalized communities. Such attachments too often lead to the preservation of research that, under the guise of repair, may lead to more damage. Breach and repair, therefore, are not always so easily opposed, and loosening can be a mode to understand how.
Distinguishing aspiration and desire from suffering can also be a mode to rethink attachments to wound culture, as Weheliye elaborates. Revisiting Brown's (1993) essay “Wounded Attachments,” Weheliye (2014) notes that
many of the political agendas based on identity (the suffragette movement, the movement for the equality of same-sex marriages, or the various movements for the full civil rights of racialized minority subjects, for instance) are less concerned with claiming their suffering per se (I am) than they are with using wounding as a stepping stone in the quest (I want) for rights equal to those of full citizens. (p. 76)
Wounded bodies may help people forge a path toward realizing citizenship, freedom, and political legibility. But the means are not the same thing as the ends, and confusing the two is a misrecognition of what wounds might enable.
Weheliye's framing of wounding as a “stepping stone” is instructive. What if the repair of wounds sets up the means, but not necessarily the ends, of body politics?
Consider an unlikely source for furthering this provocation: Brockmeier's (2012) novel The Illumination . The book's premise is simple yet haunting. On a Friday evening, all around the world, people's wounds begin to shine. A woman's cut finger brightens in a hospital room. She does not understand what is happening. She watches the TV and sees the same phenomenon unfolding on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, where “sparks appeared to swirl through the bodies of traders like the static on a broken television” ( Brockmeier 2012 , p. 8). Everyone's body shines in some way or another. No one is left out. Newer wounds radiate; older ones twinkle. This speculative event comes to be known as “The Illumination.” In the years that follow, it is often unclear how to regard the light of others. Illness becomes visible not as a general form, such as cancer, but rather as the bright spots of chemotherapy's burns. Interpersonal encounters are now mediated by the light because the light enters into the scene of encountering someone else's pain, suffering, and bodily history. The light tilts everyday interpersonal ethics. “Was it discourteous,” one character wonders, “to admit that you could see a person's sickness playing out on the surface of his body?” (p. 140).
In Brockmeier's novel, wounds open and close. But regardless of their status as healed or not, the light still radiates. At no point does the light from a wound extinguish. A cut can heal but it still shines; it just shines less brightly. The walking wounded are the lit-up wounded. It is not their wounds per se, but rather their different intensities of light-shining that reveal how wounding is thoroughly uneven. What might such unequal illuminations suggest in terms of the earlier provocation to loosen attachments to wounds?
One contrast involves differences in concealment. Consider the light of The Illumination in comparison with another proxy for wounds, the scar. Medical anthropologists have often pointed to human scars as evidence of the nefarious forces of structural violence. Scholars of nonhuman animals have shown that scars can illuminate the scope of biopolitics and its injurious forces ( Blanchette 2020 , Parreñas 2018 , Rosenberg 2017 ). But different from the light of wounds, scars can be hidden (sometimes). In The Illumination, the light cannot be concealed.
Because it cannot be unseen, the light introduces complexity into scenes of intersubjective relation and repair. The light makes it possible to have nondeterministic relations to wounds. The light from wounds conditions how characters negotiate desire, conflict, friendship, inequality, poverty, and chance encounters. There is often much more to the story of their relations than the light itself. In fact, most of the characters relate in ways that have nothing to do with a given wound's brightness. “The Illumination” as a phenomenon forms the background, but not the analytic foreground. Characters develop and break friendships and relationships while the light shines, but they do so usually without talking about it or without naming the light as the centerpiece of what matters to them. The light is significant but not deterministic. Wounded bodies are key to the book's plot, but they do not constitute the entirety of the story. Everyone's wounds are on display via the light, and life must proceed amid its shine. The questions at stake for the book's characters are how to build a social infrastructure in the face of everyday disaster. They learn to be in relation to wounded bodies without becoming overdetermined by wounded bodies. Wounds may become incidental or registered in a minor key. Loosening attachments to wounds and to their proxies makes different accounts of human situations possible. One of the lessons of the novel, then, is that reckoning inequality certainly entails reckoning wounds, but it often involves much more.

Section: CONCLUSION

“Much more” suggests the need to loosen wound attachments to expand their ethnographic scope. Potential questions to ask during a loosening project could include, How does wounding shape domains of social visibility and invisibility? What connections exist between the revelation of embodied violence and the responses to it? How do wounds move the body politic into meaning, which dynamic social infrastructures constitute it, and who will do the labor of ethnographic description and analysis? Who stands to benefit as a result, and on what terms? Between illuminating injury's existence and documenting its legitimation, might there be other ways to forge a wounded ethnography, and what might loosening indicate about ethnography's potential? In regimes of wound culture, finding connections between the revelation of harm and our response to it remains central. A wound is a breach, and a breach can be a calamity. But a breach is also an invitation: a chance to think differently in the light.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: acknowledgments

My thanks go to Lauren Berlant, Shalini Shankar, Lee Baker, Sarah Pinto, Jocelyn Chua, Saiba Varma, Nadia El-Shaarawi, Maura Finkelstein, and Gabriel Rosenberg for their ideas and encouragement. I am grateful to Jennifer Mann at Annual Reviews for superb editorial support. This article is dedicated to Diane Nelson, who taught me about wounds beyond words.

Section: literature cited

