Section: Abstract

Covid-19 is managed by many countries with the help of experts provided that people comply with the measures. This paper relies on the basic tenets of Beck’s theory of risk society to explain the production, distribution, and management of Covid-19 and makes suggestions for the management of future pandemics.

Section: Introduction, Literature Review

In November 2019, a new corona virus, later termed Covid-19, was identified in an area in China. At the time, nobody could predict that at the end of April 2020, when submitting this paper, societies would be locked-down as an attempt to restrict the spread of the virus in the absence of a vaccine or medication. Countries all around the world responded to Covid-19 by taking measures sooner or later. The measures were not identical across the countries but they largely had to do with social distancing and staying home. The purpose was to identify those who have the virus, treat them, and prevent further spread. Governments relied on expert advice to control the pandemic, such as immunologists, virologists, epidemiologists, public health experts, and so forth.
Interestingly, the message was that people have to follow the instructions. In other words, a virus which started in one country and rapidly spread all around the world could be controlled if people complied with measures decided by experts. This captures the essence of Beck’s (1992) theory of “risk society.” In a nutshell, risk society refers to the production and distribution of risks in a new society, which Beck terms second modernity. Beck identifies this second modernity in the 1970s onward when societies are structured not on the basis of wealth but on the basis of risks. According to Beck, risk refers to potential hazard resulting from the progress of society. Some examples are pollution, biological weapons, spread of diseases due to globalization, and nuclear and chemical contaminations. These risks are not only produced and distributed by societies; they are also not easily visible and countable, they are not attributed to people or organizations which could be deemed responsible, they can affect everybody, but in different ways, and they are managed by scientists.
The purpose of this paper is to relate Beck’s theory to Covid-19. The purpose is not to apply Beck’s theory in detail or to draw from other sources but to use the theory of risk society as a general framework to make sense of the attempts to control Covid-19 and discuss ways of approaching similar situations in the future. Before applying Beck’s theory, let me first present the methodology used.

Section: Methodology, Results

The methodology for the analysis is that used in qualitative research ( Green and Thorogood, 2018 ). Beck’s theory was read multiple times to extract a number of key words, which would be used as codes. For example, production and distribution of risks, social progress, boomerang effect, visibility, calculability, responsibility, accountability, scientific and social rationality, scientific knowledge, social knowledge, social class, inequalities, and so forth. These words were used for deductively coding ( Bowling 2014 ; Fereday and Muir-Cochrane 2006 ) social observations with regard to Covid-19 between February and April 2020 when the pandemic was at its peak, strict measures were adopted by most countries, and some counties started experiencing a reduction in the daily incidents. Information was drawn from a number of countries such as, China, South Korea, the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, Austria, Sweden, Israel, and south Europe (Greece, Italy, Spain, and Cyprus). Social observations, which included information giving by experts and politicians through the media in various countries, were made on the basis of Bird’s (2003) “opportunistic ethnography” which refers to the observation and recording of spontaneous moments or cases which relate to the aim of the project. That is, how the production, distribution, and management of Covid-19 are explained on the basis of Beck’s theory of risk society. To achieve this successfully, the key terms from Beck’s theory were identified as early as possible and before the systematic gathering of information from opportunistic ethnography. Once the coding was completed, Beck’s basic terms and the observations from opportunistic ethnography were revisited again to make sure they interrelated. From coding the gathered information, three themes were constructed, namely, “production and distribution of Covid-19”; “power relations, visibility, and responsibility in the management of Covid-19”; and “Covid-19 and social inequalities.” These themes are analyzed below as sections.
Beck wrote “risk may be defined as a systematic way dealing with hazards and insecurities induced and introduced by modernization itself.” Beck carried on explaining that risks are spread within globalized industries. Most common examples of such risks in modern societies are pollution, biological weapons, and nuclear and chemical contaminations, and “diseases of civilization.”
The current most dominant explanation for the emergence of Covid-19 is that humans were infected by an animal in an open market in a China city. Such explanation does not reflect the production of other risks as explained by Beck (e.g., pollution) but the way Covid-19 has spread around the globe shows that modern world is globalized and so interconnected that it allowed the virus to intrude easily in many countries. There have been documented pandemics in the past which managed to spread in many segments of the population, such as smallpox, the black death, and cholera. These diseases were spread largely through soldiers and traders. However, the speed of Covid-19 spread, through many groups of travelers, indicates that the society nowadays is more vulnerable because it is not well equipped to protect itself from the limitations and risks of interdependence and interconnectivity.
Interdependence and interconnectivity are products of social and technological progress. The development of globalized trade, rapid advances in aviation, global job interconnectivity and the need for traveling, the establishment of leisure time in people’s life schedule, the expansion of tourism, and so forth are part of the identity of a developed modern society. Interestingly, based on Beck’s theory, such interconnectivity is full of risks that the society has failed to identify and act upon proactively. For example, pollution and health hazards and terrorism show that the tools to proactively tackle such risks are not available or are not well developed. In addition, risks from social interconnectivity and interdependence continue to happen largely because they are not easily visible and calculable, but more importantly, there is no accountability. That is, who is responsible for global interconnectivity? Who is responsible for the expansion of aviation, tourism, and jobs interdependence? The answer could easily be “humanity,” which basically means “all of us.” In light of Beck’s theory, this means “none of us.” As a result, responsibility and accountability are diffused.
Some countries accuse China for producing and spreading Covid-19, without controlling the virus early and for not taking preventive measures before the virus reached other counties. If it is true that the virus started in a Chinese market, China certainly has its share of responsibility but it is only one piece of the mosaic of responsibility and accountability which cannot easily be identified, located, measured, and improved. Social progress and the development of risks without being able to localize responsibility reflects Beck’s reference to a “boomerang effect” in the sense that the consequences of social progress are backfiring and strike all people regardless of social class, even those who actually produced them. As Lash and Wynne write in the introduction of Beck’s book on risk society, “We are therefore concerned no longer exclusively with making nature useful or with releasing mankind from traditional constraints, but also and essentially with problems resulting from techno-economic development itself.” So regardless of where Covid-19 started, it is a product of modern society, a consequence of social progress which is affecting everybody. At the time this article was finalized for submission two and a half million people had been infected and almost two hundred thousand had died.
What is interesting to understand about Covid-19 is not only its production and distribution as described above, but its management as discussed below. The management of Covid-19 also incorporates the element of distribution in the sense that Covid-19 as a risk of spread has been distributed in the society, which is now expected to follow expert instructions.
Covid-19 can infect everybody and is affecting many people’s life and routine. Yet, experts have been called in to control the spread of the virus when people have not been involved in decision making or prepared but only in the implementation of expert decisions. Reflecting on Beck’s theory, Lash and Wayne wrote “hence technical experts are given pole position to define agendas and impose bounding premises a priori on risk discourses.” They describe the case of herbicides in the United Kingdom where farmers raised the issue of health effects. The British government replied that there was no scientific evidence for such hazards. Following public pressure, the authorities clarified later that there was no risk provided that the herbicides were used correctly. However, the farmers knew from experience that proper use was not possible because the proper equipment was not available and weather conditions played a role. Yet the farmers were not consulted and were not involved in the decision making. Interestingly, experts responded in a way that farmers’ knowledge was validated only through experts’ knowledge or approval. Beck has identified the conflict between scientific and social knowledge and called for the need to collaborate constructively. More specifically, Beck clarifies “[risks] require a cooperation across trenches of disciplines, citizen’s groups, factories, administration and politics, or—which is more likely—they disintegrate between these into antagonistic definitions and definitional struggles.” The antagonism happens largely because science claims it can understand and manage risks objectively.
In the case of Covid-19, governments largely relied on experts in epidemiology, virology, and public health to restrict the spread of the virus. The measures had to do with staying home, working from home, washing hands, and use of antiseptic. These measures did not aim to tackle any other consequences such as economic and psychosocial and they were formulated by experts who did not involve people in discussions, even though the measures could be easily conceptualized by people without expertise in the area of controlling pandemics.
Interestingly, these measures when initially announced had little scientific clout because the virus was new and knowledge about how it spreads limited. Covid-19 was initially described as an invisible enemy which could be handled by isolation and social distancing. Information about the use of a mask was unclear and largely did not encourage people to use it unless they had contracted the virus or had symptoms. Instructions about self-isolation or social distancing were not well explained and the use of open spaces was not strictly prohibited. Information about how the virus survives on surfaces was extremely limited. Despite these gaps, experts led the discussions and policy. When the number of new cases increased, experts attributed this to people who did not comply with their instructions and did not respect the measures. The blaming also referred to lack of social responsibility by some people and clarified that if people do not comply, then control of Covid-19 will not be possible; hence, responsibility was shifted to people.
Through the process of formulating and implementing the measures, a risk which was previously presented as invisible was turned into visible, responsibility and accountability had now an owner, and two opposing groups were symbolically constructed. The risk of Covid-19 became visible in the sense that it was a virus that existed out-there and could spread through the help of people who did not comply. So the invisible enemy was turned into an enemy with allies, whose spread increased when people’s sociality increased.
The sense of responsibility and accountability was developed by experts using specific language to describe the situation. To elaborate, the following words were systematically used: Covid-19 specimen, host cells, viral load, negative room pressure, stop chains of transmission, asymptomatic carriers, establish tracking of contacts, social distancing, and so on. These are terms that are not used by people in their daily life and creates two types of knowledge. These are, the expert knowledge, which relies on scientific terminology, and lay knowledge, which is not scientifically informed. Lay people may not have a clear understanding of these terms. Unfamiliarity with, or no use of, such terminology, creates a cognitive distance between lay understanding and Covid-19 and a cognitive proximity between experts and Covid-19. This is a symbolic construction of power relations between experts and lay people. It is lay people who do not know and, as a result, are instructed to comply so if the virus continues to spread then non-compliance is to blame; thus people.
People’s responsibility became even more salient through another tactic which relates to multiplying the initial risk. This means that it is not only the risk of Covid-19 spread but also other risks deriving for failure to control it, such as financial impact, loss of income, protracted social distancing, further deprivation of sociality and activities, and so on. That was another way to increase people’s responsibility in the sense that there will be further consequences in case they do not comply with the measures. Such multiplicity of risks reflects Beck writing that “there must be a distinction between already destructive consequences and the potential element of risks. In the second sense, risks essentially express a future component.”
This symbolic construction of power happened in spite of experts’ responsibility and in spite of the fact that many lay people’s actions were rational. More specifically, even though the information about the use of masks was unclear, many people used masks because it made sense to them to do so as the virus could easily spread through inhaling infected droplets in the air. Later expert instructions about the use of masks changed to encourage people or at least workers in many industries to constantly use them. Lay people used open spaces, such as parks, reflecting unclear information about the danger in social gatherings outdoors. The reference to the invisible enemy caused people to interpret Covid-19 and its control in many ways. Examples are panic and over purchase of groceries and ideas about how to tackle the virus such as drinking heavy alcohol, high climate temperatures, consumptions of spicy foods, and so on. All these were described by experts as subjective, unfounded, and unscientific information alluding to people’s irrational thinking and not that these attitudes and beliefs might have been guided by experts’ insufficient information giving and poor scientific knowledge in Covid-19 at an earlier stage of the pandemic. This reflects what Beck says that “one hazardous product might be defended by dramatizing the risks of the others.” Beck was referring to the risks but it can be applied to experts’ strategy. That is, people’s responsibility is dramatized or exaggerated to minimize the experts’ responsibility and weaknesses.
To summarize, through the use of specific language, Covid-19 has become visible, and lay people responsible and accountable for the spread of the virus. This shows that people were expected to take actions under the assumption that everything was or should be clear to them. Experts constructed themselves as the group of people that would save the world and that this would happen only if lay people followed their instructions. Many lay people complied with the measures. However, many others did not respond as experts wanted. This was possibly because people’s concerns were not only about limiting the spread of the virus but also about meeting with their family and friends, socializing, making sure they and will remain employed, and that they will maintain their daily routine. The experts’ measures were calling people to do something unnatural to them and do it quickly even though the measures could potentially only restrict the spread and not completely dealing or controlling the virus. Clearly there was no collaboration in advance between experts and lay people even though the majority of people complied with the measures and trusted the experts. There was no collaboration because preparing people or involving them in the decision making was not part of a scientific understanding and response to the pandemic. Beck clarified in other words, what becomes clear in risk discussion are the fissures and gaps between scientific and social rationality in dealing with the hazardous potential of civilization. The two sides talk past each other. Social movements raise questions that are not answered by risk technicians at all, and the technicians answer questions which miss the point of what was really asked and what feeds public anxiety.
Experts did not aim to understand people’s needs. Instead they invalidated people’s knowledge to achieve their initial goal which was to restrict the spread by staying home, testing people, and treating patients. Beck called for the need experts and lay people collaborate. He modified a well-known phrase and wrote “scientific rationality without social rationality remains empty, but social rationality without scientific rationality remains blind.” And in the case of Covid-19, the experts did not try to respond to social anxieties. At the same time, people were blinded by inadequate information and being blamed for the spread. This poor response to social anxieties is reflected on social inequalities affecting the spread of or influenced by Covid-19 as discussed below.
Although Beck explained how risks in modern society cause social class to be less important, he also clarified that risks may result in inequalities. More specifically, Beck wrote “the worldwide equalization of risk positions must not deceive us about new social inequalities within the affliction by risk” and “some people are more affected than others by the distribution and growth of risks, that is, social risk positions spring up.”
The application of this part of Beck’s theory to Covid-19 could take many directions. To elaborate, there is a variety of social and economic consequences of Covid-19 ranging from reduced workforce, social isolation, and the increased need for commodities (e.g., food and medical supplies), tourism, aviation, sports, and so on ( Nicola et al. 2020 ). Interestingly, these consequences are not equally experienced. It seems that Covid-19 discriminates as it is affecting more people from lower socioeconomic classes, ethnic minority groups, and women ( Rollston and Galea 2020 ). People with low paid jobs are at greater risks of unemployment and some ethnic minority groups live in houses and areas with poor hygiene. In addition, people living in poverty may not be able to keep up with the hygiene measures either because they cannot afford it or because they very often live together in large numbers. Moreover, women appear to be at greater risk of Covid-19 infection due to the fact that there are more women than men in specific job sectors such as child care, nursing, elderly homes, groceries clerks, and so forth. On this note, Rieländer (2020) highlighted the importance of paying particular attention to third world countries because they will soon become the epicenter of the pandemic but they are not well equipped to respond.
Echoing Beck’s theory that socially disadvantaged groups are more affected by modern risks, Covid-19 also discriminates in terms of morbidity and mortality. The chronically ill and older people are the most vulnerable to the virus as they experience morbidity for longer and higher mortality rates than those who are not ill and are younger. However, outside Covid-19, chronic illness is socially influenced which escalates the discriminatory impact of Covid-19. That is, there is wealth of research evidence to show that poverty and ethnic minority background are associated with higher rates of morbidity and mortality (see Marmot 2017 ). The main reason for the link between lower socioeconomic status and ill health is explained by materialist and behavioralist approaches. That is, poverty limits access to resources, people living in poverty may experience chronic stress, and they are more likely to have unhealthy lifestyles such as smoking. In addition, older people are not only more likely to have a chronic illness, they are at greater risk of living in poverty. Therefore, Covid-19 is not only putting socially vulnerable groups (the poor, ethnic minority groups, the elderly) at increased risk of infection but it is also putting them at increased risk of longer morbidity and death. Such structural inequalities have not made the mosaic of political response to Covid-19 pandemic.
Another dimension of social inequality and Covid-19 is people’s cultural background and health beliefs. People develop their own beliefs about health and illness and which ways could be effective. For example, Wardle and Steptoe (2003) found that people from lower socioeconomic status had stronger beliefs in chance and were more likely to think that individual choices could not make a difference in health outcomes. As a result, people who believe in chance may not use masks and may not pay attention to epidemiological guidelines with regard to Covid-19. Furthermore, the instruction to wear a mask is not received the same across counties. For example, wearing a mask is more acceptable in Eastern countries, such as Japan, than Western ones, such as the United States and the United Kingdom. This might be the case because people have been using face masks in Asian countries for years now for protection from infections. It might also be the case that in countries where the face is covered or partially covered due to cultural and religious beliefs that the use of face masks might be more readily acceptable. This also applies to cross-country traveling as travelers may not be well culturally equipped to follow the measures of wearing a face mask and constant hands sanitation.
In addition to the cultural acceptability of face masks, wearing a mask may trigger cultural meanings and other social reactions such as stigmatization and further social isolation against the people who use them during the Covid-19 pandemic, especially if these people are of Asian origin. As outlined earlier, China has been accused for spreading the virus so people from China or other countries in the area may be blamed and considered dangerous sources for spreading Covid-19. For example, the Asian Pacific Policy & Planning Council and Chinese for Affirmative Action presented evidence showing that between March and April 2020 , about 1,500 Asian Americans experienced, among other encounters, “verbal harassment, shunning, physical assault, work-placed discrimination.” Global response to Covid-19 has not tackled issues of racism; it exclusively focused on controlling the spread which allegedly started in China. So the focus again has been on the role of experts not on social integration, failing to handle the rise of discriminating contexts.
According to sociological theory, when people are left to act on their own devices, they may interpret reality on the basis of their background and understanding. This could potentially result in biases, discrimination, and misconceptions. However, biases, discrimination, and misconceptions are largely structural than individual in the sense that problematic attitudes are nurtured or are left uninformed and unguided in a context, like Covid-19, where people themselves know so little about. Interestingly, even though discriminatory actions may be rooted structurally, responsibility is individualized. A concerning issue here is Beck’s observation that “intensification and individualization of social inequalities interlock. As a consequence, problems of the system are lessened politically and transformed into personal failure” and inequalities by no means disappear. They merely become redefined in terms of an individualization of social risks. The result is that social problems are increasingly perceived in terms of psychological dispositions: as personal inadequacies, guilt feelings, anxieties, conflicts, and neuroses.
The way countries have responded to Covid-19 points toward individual responsibility for controlling the spread, as explained in the previous sections of this paper. The response and the expectations are not about reducing inequalities but about individuals who should take actions to protect themselves and others. This reflects Beck’s words “social crises appear as individual crises, which are no longer (or are only very indirectly) perceived in terms of their rootedness in the social realm.” Such lack of public discussion on structural inequalities further highlights individual responsibility and instills the power position of experts and politicians.

Section: Discussion

Experts focused more on controlling the spread of Covid-19 without asking people, not on other psychological and financial long-term consequences or structural inequalities. The formulated measures, which could easily be conceptualized by everybody (i.e., staying home), and the use of specific language and tactics to invalidate social rationality construct expert knowledge as the only acceptable form of knowledge, portray the virus as visible and an ally of sociality, and made people responsible and accountable in case the spread was not controlled. Social progress, experts’ responsibility, and structural inequalities are not part of the equation. One could easily say that many counties are reducing the number of Covid-19 incidents which means that the experts were right.
Based on Beck’s theory of the risk society, the point here is the process of producing, distributing, and managing risks and not if the measures indeed control the spread of the virus. What the Covid-19 pandemic showed was that humanity was not ready to respond evenly and comfortably. The discussion of Beck’s risk society in this paper also shows that humanity is still not ready for a second Covid-19 wave or for a new pandemic. Quarantines were used in the control of past pandemics and have been proven to be effective. However, it seems that for responding to future pandemics or consequences of risks, societies need to investigate in depth the potential risk from social progress and discuss ways to make them more visible, calculable, controllable, and preventable. In addition, responsibility and accountability for the production and distribution of risks should be made more salient at the stage when a segment in society is progressing or developing. Moreover, the development of active citizenship ( European Social and Economic Committee, 2012 ) could place the grounds of efficient collaboration between experts and lay people, between scientific and social knowledge, by educating, preparing people in how they actively participate in attempts to manage pandemics, and involving them in decision making. These two regimes of knowledge and rationality should not invalidate each other but could work together to benefit all. Expertise is another example of a risk society in the sense that it has been produced by social progress but it can be an enhancing tool by collaboratively working with social rationality. Countries need long-term planning in terms of causing their citizens to actively engage in the decision making and giving the scientific means to protect themselves, their families, and their society. Mooney (2020) , a historian of medicine at John Hopkins University, questioned if it is appropriate for the state to tell people what to do in an authoritative way and wrote I think knowledge is power. People can’t take appropriate action if they don’t have full information. If you’re a citizen who wants to voluntarily isolate, if you’re a citizen who wants to take other kinds of precautionary measures like social distancing, it helps to have information in hand.
This goes back to Beck’s approach that science should be inspired by social rationality and needs and people should be guided by science.
People, experts, and politicians need to be on the same page, have a common understanding of the causes and the solutions. To achieve this effectively, structural social inequalities need to be tackled so that people feel that they live in a more egalitarian society where everybody is equally vulnerable, creating a sense of strong social integration and solidarity which could help people develop a mind-set of social protection and responsibility.

Section: Conclusion

In this paper, the basic tenets of Beck’s theory of risk society were used to explain the production, distribution, and management of Covid-19. The analysis showed that Covid-19 was produced and distributed by social progress due to globalization and it has been managed by experts without the involvement of lay people in decision making and without taking into account structural inequalities. Through the use of language, experts strategically legitimated their limited knowledge of Covid-19 as the only form of acceptable knowledge and portrayed lay people as responsible for the potential failure to control the spread. The analysis is based on Beck’s theory but it constitutes a critical approach to the formal response to Covid-19. However, the criticism is not so much about how Covid-19 was handled because under the circumstances many countries had to take strict measures without time to think or involve other people in the decision making. The analysis is largely about how societies can handle future pandemics.
