Section: Abstract

Background: In the diagnosis of obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD), computed tomography (CT) is an accurate, noninvasive alternative to invasive coronary angiography (ICA). However, the comparative effectiveness of CT and ICA in the management of CAD to reduce the frequency of major adverse cardiovascular events is uncertain.
Methods: We conducted a pragmatic, randomized trial comparing CT with ICA as initial diagnostic imaging strategies for guiding the treatment of patients with stable chest pain who had an intermediate pretest probability of obstructive CAD and were referred for ICA at one of 26 European centers. The primary outcome was major adverse cardiovascular events (cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke) over 3.5 years. Key secondary outcomes were procedure-related complications and angina pectoris.
Results: Among 3561 patients (56.2% of whom were women), follow-up was complete for 3523 (98.9%). Major adverse cardiovascular events occurred in 38 of 1808 patients (2.1%) in the CT group and in 52 of 1753 (3.0%) in the ICA group (hazard ratio, 0.70; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.46 to 1.07; P=0.10). Major procedure-related complications occurred in 9 patients (0.5%) in the CT group and in 33 (1.9%) in the ICA group (hazard ratio, 0.26; 95% CI, 0.13 to 0.55). Angina during the final 4 weeks of follow-up was reported in 8.8% of the patients in the CT group and in 7.5% of those in the ICA group (odds ratio, 1.17; 95% CI, 0.92 to 1.48).
Conclusions: Among patients referred for ICA because of stable chest pain and intermediate pretest probability of CAD, the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events was similar in the CT group and the ICA group. The frequency of major procedure-related complications was lower with an initial CT strategy. (Funded by the European Union Seventh Framework Program and others; DISCHARGE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02400229 .)

Section: Introduction, Literature Review

In the diagnosis of obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD), computed tomography (CT) is an accurate, noninvasive alternative to invasive coronary angiography (ICA) in patients with stable chest pain and intermediate pretest probability for obstructive CAD. ICA is the reference standard for the diagnosis of obstructive CAD and enables coronary revascularization during the same procedure. However, elective ICA is associated with rare but major procedure-related complications and has been reported to reveal obstructive CAD in only 38 to 50% of the patients who are referred for the procedure in the United States and Europe.
CT has generated interest since it may rule out obstructive CAD in a noninvasive procedure with a low risk of adverse events as it identifies patients who are appropriate candidates for coronary revascularization. As compared with an initial strategy of functional testing (exercise electrocardiography, nuclear stress testing, or stress echocardiography), an initial CT strategy in patients with stable symptoms was associated with similar cardiovascular outcomes at 25 months in the PROMISE (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain) trial, which indicated equipoise between functional testing and CT. In the SCOT-HEART (Scottish Computed Tomography of the Heart) trial, CT was added to standard care, which included functional testing, and was compared with standard care alone. The use of CT was associated with a significantly lower incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events, which were defined as death from CAD or nonfatal myocardial infarction at 4.8 years (hazard ratio, 0.59). In two small randomized trials of CT as compared with ICA, an initial CT strategy resulted in a lower number of invasive procedures, a higher percentage (75%) of coronary angiograms showing obstructive CAD, and similar clinical outcomes, which included hospitalization and revascularization.
We conducted the DISCHARGE (Diagnostic Imaging Strategies for Patients with Stable Chest Pain and Intermediate Risk of Coronary Artery Disease) trial to compare CT with ICA as an initial diagnostic imaging strategy for guiding the treatment of patients with stable chest pain who were clinically referred for ICA. Here, we report the comparative effectiveness of CT and ICA in preventing the primary outcome of major adverse cardiovascular events, defined as cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke.

Section: Methodology

We conducted this multicenter, pragmatic, randomized superiority trial to compare CT with ICA in guideline-directed management of stable chest pain. The trial design and methods have been published previously and are described in the protocol (which includes the statistical analysis plan) and the Supplementary Appendix (both of which are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). In brief, this investigator-initiated, assessor-blinded, parallel-group trial was reviewed and approved by the ethics committee at Charité–Universitätsmedizin Berlin as the coordinating center, by the German Federal Office for Radiation Protection, and by local or national ethics committees. The trial was funded by the European Union Seventh Framework Program and others. The authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the data and for the fidelity of the trial to the protocol. The second author and last author wrote the first draft of the manuscript (see the Study Organization section in the Supplementary Appendix ).
Eligible patients were at least 30 years of age and were referred for ICA to one of 26 centers in 16 European countries because of stable chest pain with intermediate (10 to 60%) pretest probability of obstructive CAD. Referral for ICA with or without previous functional testing was in accordance with the European guidelines at the time of trial initiation. The pretest probability of obstructive CAD was assessed after enrollment but before randomization with a contemporary calculator according to the patient’s age, sex, and type of chest pain (Section S7 in the Supplementary Appendix ). Clinical centers were informed by means of the Web-based enrollment system about whether the calculated pretest probability was within the eligible range. Exclusion criteria were the receipt of hemodialysis, an absence of sinus rhythm, and pregnancy.
Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to undergo either CT or ICA with the use of a Web-based system to ensure concealment of group assignments after eligibility criteria had been checked. Block randomization used computer-generated and randomly permuted blocks of 4, 6, or 8, stratified according to center and the patient’s sex with central assignment. All the patients provided written informed consent.
CT and ICA were performed at certified clinical centers (Section S9). CT with at least 64-slice technology was performed according to a 10-step guide and scanner-specific recommendations. CT scans were interpreted by board-certified radiologists who had at least a level 2 qualification, according to the Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography or similar certification, and at least one reader had level 3 certification for cardiac CT laboratory leadership. ICA was performed according to contemporary guidelines by board-certified cardiologists.
In the two groups, it was recommended that patients without obstructive CAD be discharged from the trial center back to their referring physician for further treatment; patients with obstructive CAD were treated according to guidelines. Trial centers were provided with recommendations incorporating European guidelines on the management of stable CAD, on cardiovascular disease prevention, and on myocardial revascularization (Sections S10 and S11). Decisions regarding treatment were made by members of local heart teams and referring physicians on the basis of results on CT and ICA. In the two groups, additional recommendations included risk-factor modification and secondary prevention, according to guidelines regarding cardiovascular disease prevention. A CT-based clinical management guideline was provided to participating trial centers.
The primary outcome of major adverse cardiovascular events was a composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke. In this pragmatic trial, we did not assess myocardial biomarkers for the detection of silent myocardial infarction or perform brain imaging for the detection of asymptomatic stroke after all procedures. Therefore, the trial protocol required that the primary outcome be symptomatic. Cardiovascular death was determined according to the criteria of the Cardiac Safety Research Consortium, myocardial infarction was determined according to the Third Universal Definition of myocardial infarction, and stroke was determined according to the updated definition for the 21st century (Section S12). Possible cardiovascular events were adjudicated by members of an independent clinical events committee, who were unaware of group assignments. We also evaluated an expanded primary outcome that was a composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal stroke, transient ischemic attack, or major procedure-related complications.
Key secondary outcomes were major procedure-related complications occurring during or within 48 hours after CT or ICA or related tests or revascularization procedures. Complications of ICA or revascularization procedures that were performed after CT were attributed to the CT strategy and were classified according to the National Cardiovascular Data Registry CathPCI Registry Coder’s Data Dictionary, version 4.4. Patient-reported outcomes included angina during the last 4 weeks of follow-up, the score on the visual-analogue scale of the European Quality of Life–5 Dimensions (EQ-5D), and the score on the physical component summary of the Short-Form Health Survey (SF-12v2). Additional secondary outcomes were defined in the trial registration and statistical analysis plan but are not the topic of this article (Section S16).
We determined that the enrollment of 3546 patients would provide the trial with 80% power to detect a relative reduction in the annual risk of the primary outcome from 1.4% in the ICA group to 0.8% in the CT group, assuming an annual loss to follow-up of 5%. We used a sequential design in which one interim analysis was performed after the occurrence of 50 major adverse cardiovascular events. The two-sided P value was set at 0.05, with levels of 0.0052 for the interim analysis and 0.048 for the final analysis, according to the O’Brien–Fleming method. After review and approval by the European Commission, the enrollment period was extended from the planned 2 years to 3.5 years to enable the recruitment of the planned number of patients, and the median follow-up period was extended from 3 years to 3.5 years to maintain statistical power.
Analyses were performed in a modified intention-to-treat population that included all the patients who had fulfilled the eligibility criteria, had undergone randomization, and had not withdrawn or been excluded before undergoing CT or ICA. Continuous variables are reported as means and standard deviations for normally distributed data and as medians and interquartile ranges for other continuous data; categorical variables are reported as numbers and percentages.
The primary outcome analysis included an estimation of the cumulative risk of major adverse cardiovascular events and a comparison of randomization groups with the use of the method of Fine and Gray. In this analysis, death from noncardiovascular causes was taken into account as a competing risk, and proportionality was tested (and affirmed) by including in the model a time-dependent covariate with two-way interaction of the randomization group. We analyzed secondary outcomes using absolute frequencies and percentages in the description of subgroups and calculated hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals in the comparisons of groups. Event rates were calculated in percentages as the ratio of the number of events to the person-years at risk for the event. Because a plan to adjust for multiplicity of inferences was not prespecified, all secondary outcomes are reported as point estimates of effects with 95% confidence intervals. The widths of these intervals were not adjusted for multiple comparisons, and inferences drawn from these intervals may not be reproducible.
We performed a comparison of rates of angina in the last 4 weeks of follow-up as the dependent variable using a logistic generalized-estimating-equation model that took into account interactions between groups and prespecified subgroups. For the SF-12v2 and EQ-5D measures, we used linear mixed-effects models with a random intercept for the trial center as the sole random effect. For these analyses, the covariates were trial group, age, sex, angina type at baseline, time from baseline to follow-up, and (on the SF-12v2 and EQ-5D measures) the baseline of the dependent variable. We performed multiple imputation of missing patient-reported outcome data using the R package Multivariate Imputation by Chained Equations (MICE) algorithm, predictive-mean-matching imputation for missing data on metric variables, and logistic regression imputation for missing binary data.
In the total population and in subgroups, we calculated odds ratios to indicate effect sizes for patient-reported angina and hazard ratios to indicate effect sizes for time-to-event data. Sample-size estimation was performed with the use of nQuery, version 7.0, and the R package gsDesign for the group sequential design. Statistical analyses were performed with the use of SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute); SPSS for Windows, version 26 (IBM); and the statistical programming language R, version 4.0.3.

Section: Results

Between October 3, 2015, and April 12, 2019, a total of 3667 patients were enrolled at 26 centers (Table S1). Of these patients, 1833 were randomly assigned to the CT group and 1834 to the ICA group. A total of 3561 patients were included in the modified intention-to-treat analysis; adherence to the randomized assignments was 98.6% in the CT group and 97.3% in the ICA group (Fig. S1). The median follow-up was 3.5 years (interquartile range, 2.9 to 4.2), and complete follow-up for the primary outcome was obtained for 3523 patients (98.9%).
Table 1 presents the characteristics of the patients at baseline, which were similar in the two groups. (An expanded list of characteristics is provided in Table S2, and details regarding the representativeness of the trial population are provided in Table S3.) The mean (±SD) age of the patients was 60.1±10.1 years; 2002 of the 3561 patients were women (56.2%). Noninvasive functional testing was performed at the referral site or trial site before the assigned intervention (CT or ICA) in approximately one third of the patients. The use of cardiovascular medications at baseline, the type of patient-reported angina, and ICA referral categories were balanced between the two groups.
The median time from enrollment to the assigned intervention was 3 days in the CT group and 12 days in the ICA group (hazard ratio, 1.54; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.44 to 1.65), which reflected typical wait times for elective testing ( Table 2 and Fig. S2). The characteristics of the CT and ICA procedures were as specified in guidelines (Tables S4 and S5); the percentage of patients who had findings of obstructive CAD was 25.7% in each group. In the CT group, 404 patients underwent ICA during their initial treatment and were considered for the calculation of diagnostic yield; 293 patients (72.5%) were found to have obstructive CAD on ICA (Table S6).
Over a median follow-up of 3.5 years, the primary composite outcome of major adverse cardiovascular events (cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke) occurred in 38 patients (2.1%) in the CT group and in 52 patients (3.0%) in the ICA group (hazard ratio, 0.70; 95% CI, 0.46 to 1.07; P=0.10) ( Figure 1 and Table 3 ). The results according to trial center are provided in Table S7. The resulting annual rate of major adverse cardiovascular events was 0.61% in the CT group and 0.86% in the ICA group. The results for the primary outcome in the prespecified subgroups were generally consistent with those in the overall population (Fig. S3). The results for the components of the primary outcome are provided in Figure S4A, S4B, and S4C.
The expanded composite outcome of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal stroke, transient ischemic attack, or major procedure-related complications occurred in 50 patients (2.8%) in the CT group and in 80 patients (4.6%) in the ICA group (hazard ratio, 0.60; 95% CI, 0.42 to 0.85) (Fig. S4D). The incidences of other definitions of major adverse cardiovascular events were similar in the two groups (Fig. S4E, S4F, and S4G); the detection of silent myocardial infarction in this pragmatic trial was uncommon.
Overall, 42 major procedure-related complications occurred during initial management, of which 37 were associated with ICA and related intravascular procedures (7 in the CT group and 30 in the ICA group). These major complications related to ICA included 11 nonfatal myocardial infarctions and 1 nonfatal stroke. Of the 5 major complications not related to ICA, 1 was related to CT and 4 to coronary-artery bypass grafting (Tables S8 through S12). Because only 22.3% of the patients in the CT group underwent ICA during initial treatment, as compared with 97.4% in the ICA group, major procedure-related complications were less common in the CT group than in the ICA group (hazard ratio, 0.26; 95% CI, 0.13 to 0.55) ( Table 3 and Fig. S5). The risk of major complications from ICA procedures was four times as high among the patients who had undergone revascularization as among those who had not undergone revascularization (4.2% vs. 0.9%) (Tables S10 and S11).
During the follow-up period, more patients in the CT group underwent additional functional tests than those in the ICA group (336 patients [18.6%] vs. 227 patients [12.9%]; hazard ratio, 1.49; 95% CI, 1.26 to 1.76) (Fig. S6A). The frequency of coronary revascularization procedures was lower in the CT group than in the ICA group (256 patients [14.2%] vs. 315 patients [18.0%]; hazard ratio, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.65 to 0.90) (Fig. S6B, S6C, and S6D). During the last 4 weeks of follow-up, angina was reported by less than 10% of the patients, and the incidence did not differ substantially between the two groups and was similar in most subgroups (Fig. S7). Quality-of-life outcomes that were assessed at follow-up were also similar in the two groups, and medical therapy did not differ substantially between groups at follow-up (Tables S13 and S14).

Section: Discussion, Conclusion

In this multicenter, pragmatic, randomized trial of initial CT as compared with ICA for guiding the treatment of patients with stable chest pain, we found no significant difference in the primary outcome of major adverse cardiovascular events. The annual incidence of such events was lower than expected in the two groups, possibly due to improvements in the methods used to perform ICA and general improvements in cardiovascular care during the past few years. The CT strategy was associated with fewer major complications and revascularization procedures, and there were no substantial differences in the incidence of angina in the two groups at follow-up.
Our findings complement the results of two large trials — the PROMISE and SCOT-HEART trials — that compared CT with functional testing in patients with stable symptoms (Table S18). In both of those trials, investigators found that CT was as good as or better than functional testing as a preliminary evaluation before possible ICA. Our trial confirmed the safety of a CT-first strategy and showed results that were similar to those with ICA. CT identifies covert CAD, which may be of greatest value in patients with atypical symptoms. In a large U.S. registry of almost 400,000 patients referred for ICA, such atypical symptoms were present in approximately 37% of the patients, of whom 25.2% had obstructive CAD. In our trial, the incidence of obstructive CAD in the two groups (25.7% in each) was nearly the same as that reported in the registry, a finding that indicates similar clinical practice patterns in patients with atypical symptoms. In an update of the large U.S. registry, 56.5% of patients with suspected CAD underwent functional testing before being referred for ICA, as compared with only 33.6% of our patients who underwent functional testing before referral.
All the patients in our trial had an intermediate pretest probability of obstructive CAD and were referred by the responsible physician for ICA according to European guidelines. The rationale behind choosing this trial population was that intermediate-risk patients have been found to benefit the most from cardiac imaging. We found that CT may be suitable for certain intermediate-risk patients with stable chest pain who are referred for ICA because they have a clinical constellation suggesting a high risk of cardiovascular events, abnormal or inconclusive results on functional testing, or persistent symptoms despite medical treatment.
The use of ICA in just 22% of the patients in the CT group resulted in fewer major procedure-related complications in the CT group, an important outcome for the comparison of invasive and noninvasive management strategies. The incidence of complications that were associated with ICA in our trial was similar to that in the registry.
Freedom from angina and improvement in quality of life are key objectives in the treatment of patients with stable chest pain. An initial invasive management strategy, as compared with a conservative strategy, had similar event rates but larger reductions in angina symptoms and improvements in quality of life, which persisted for 2 years in the COURAGE trial and 3 years in the ISCHEMIA trial. In our trial, we did not find evidence of differences in angina relief and quality of life between the CT strategy and the ICA strategy.
Strengths of our trial include the multicenter, pragmatic design, which enhances external validity. The adherence to the group assignments and the completeness of follow-up were high, and 56% of the patients were women. Our trial also has some important limitations. First, patients and their clinicians were necessarily aware of the group assignments, which might have influenced outcomes, especially patient-reported outcomes. Because we could not systematically identify silent events (especially procedure-related myocardial infarction or stroke), ascertainment bias might have favored the ICA group. Second, the incidence of nondiagnostic CT in this and previous trials was approximately 6%, which indicates the need for continuous quality control of the conduct and interpretation of CT. Third, because this was a pragmatic trial, diagnostic imaging results informed, but did not mandate, management decisions, which might have resulted in a departure from guideline-based care. Finally, we do not present results for a comparison of the cost-effectiveness of CT and ICA, a factor that is a crucial component of decision making and that warrants rigorous analysis.
Overall, we found that a strategy of initial CT resulted in no significant difference in the incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events as compared with ICA but was associated with a lower risk of major procedure-related complications and revascularization procedures.
