Title: The role of modals in policies: The US opioid crisis as a case study


Abstract: Abstract

The present study uses corpus-assisted discourse analysis to examine the role of modality in policy verb phrases, using California opioid policies as a case study . By tracking the behavior of permissive and restrictive modals across time, this study highlights two potential discourse functions of modals in policy drafting: (i) to reflect the gravity of the issues on the ground, and (ii) to express permission and restriction by highlighting and deemphasizing a policy's suggestive intent , respectively. This study shows that the increased use of restrictive modality has significant positive correlations with California's worsening opioid crisis and its rising fatalities. A closer examination of state policy amendments reveals that altering policy modals has the potential to either broaden or limit the terms of existing policies. Informed by Van Dijk's “context models,” this study provides a cogent applied corpus linguistics framework for analyzing policy text and offers both political and linguistic perspectives into our understanding of modals and how communities address epidemics, respectively.

Section: 1. Introduction

In 2011, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) declared prescription drug abuse a national epidemic after deaths from accidental overdose exceeded fatalities from vehicular accidents ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2011 ). While policy documents are one of the most prominent and consequential outlets by which social issues are discussed ( Fairclough, 2003 ), little attention has been paid to the role of modals—auxiliaries extensively used in statutes despite its potential ambiguity ( Lyons, 1977 )—in shaping policies. Using California opioid policies as a case study , this study addresses the following research question: “What linguistic and discursive functions do modals perform in policies?”
Employing corpus-assisted discourse analysis ( Flowerdew, 2008 ) informed by Van Dijk's (1999) “context model” framework, this paper proposes two possible functions of policy modals. First, this study asserts that modals can reflect the gravity of the issues on the ground. The findings suggest that the worsening crisis and rising overdoses have a significant positive correlation with the use of restrictive modals. Also, the conditions under which restrictive and permissive modals are employed are in sync with the pressing concerns of the time. Second, this article shows that choosing restrictive modals over permissive counterparts can minimize a policy's optionality, while choosing permissive modals could highlight a policy's suggestive intent , therefore narrowing or broadening the set of possible interpretations in which policy stakeholders operate. Finally, this work presents key examples of California's policy amendments in which only modals were changed to show how such a process of narrowing or broadening interpretations could potentially help adapt existing policies to emerging local realities.
Motivated by the need to understand the role of modals in critical policy issues, this study begins with an overview of the pertinent characteristics that allow modals to inform the restrictiveness and permissiveness of a policy. It then summarizes the evolution of US opioid crisis and policies. Next, this work uses corpus-assisted discourse analyses to examine California statutes concerning opioids. Finally, the findings and its implications are presented to identify how this study could inform policy analysis.
This present work contributes to the current body of applied sociolinguistic literature on the impact of policies, language and health ( Hamilton and Chou, 2014 ; Schrauf and Müller, 2013 ; Ramanathan 2009 , 2010 ; Sabat, 2006 ), and local realities ( Hornberger, 2006 ; McCarty, 2014 ; Ricento, 2009 ).

Section: 2. Literature review

(Birkland, 2015) defines policy from a political science perspective as any form of communication from any level of government that declares what government intends to do to address public concerns. ( Ball, 1990 ) and Goodnow (2017) define policies as authoritative texts and de facto practices used by governing institutions to reflect social knowledge into plans, procedures, and goals to guide local decision-making. Drawing on the linguistic aspects of these definitions, this study uses the following linguistically viable definition of policy: chunks of language (discourse) made up of lexical and grammatical features that denote a suggestive intent of regulatory measures and courses of action concerning a given issue.
The specific policy documents investigated herein are the statutes concerning opioids chaptered by the California State Senate and Assembly. As ( Lian, 2020 ) states, “applying a corpus-assisted approach to the language of lawmakers can provide a glimpse into the ideologies of policymakers and politicians who create legislation” (p. 138). The language of policies permits the investigation into the current state of the community that implements it ( Ramanathan and Morgan, 2007 , Wodak, 2006 ). After all, the importance of policies relies on the need that calls for it.
Modals are grammatical features that allow us to carry out one of the most notable features of human language—the ability to express our attitudes, truths, and stances as they are displaced in time and space ( Bhatia et al., 2008 , Hacquard, 2016 , Portner, 2009 ). This makes modals a popular choice for framing discourses, such as policies, intended to be carried out in the future. In fact, modals are highly salient in policy verb phrases, even if their polysemous properties can result in different interpretations of essential healthcare policies ( Asprey, 1992 , Garzone, 2013 ). Such vagueness and uncertainty created by policymakers can inflict issues on policy stakeholders tasked with carrying out the directives of policies addressing severe health concerns such as the opioid crisis among other health epidemics. This warrants a closer investigation of modality's role in today's policies.
The semantics of modals has been well discussed through their deontic (root or intrinsic) and epistemic (extrinsic) interpretations, as summarized in Table 1 ( Coates, 1983 ; Saeed, 1997 ; Werth 1999 ; Kratzer, 2012 ). Table 1 . Deontic and epistemic interpretations of the sentence “You ____ take opioids.” Modal Deontic Interpretation Epistemic Interpretation Can, Could Might, May Ability/ Permission You have the ability/consent to take opioids. Possibility It is a likely that you are to take opioids. Must, Should Obligation You have the responsibility to take opioids. Necessity It is compulsory that you are to take opioids. Will, Shall, Would Volition You have the commitment to take opioids Prediction It is projected that you are to take opioids.
Thompson's (2001) analysis of modal variation within academic writing argues that although distinguishing between deontic and epistemic forms can be informative, such classification offers little information about when or why one would choose one modal over another to communicate meaningful messages. This observation prompted Thompson (2001) to develop a model that quantifies modals according to rhetorical function instead of form. Thompson's (2001) framework examines the range of functions that writers aim to perform using modal auxiliaries to better understand its overall role in thesis writing. The present study takes on a similar, parallel approach by examining the potential range of functions performed by modals in the genre of policy drafting, allowing for a deeper understanding of how language is used in constructing policies.
Modals Mirror Realities: In his work on political discourse and modality, Chilton (2004, pp. 57-59) suggests the “modal axis” concept, which states that people use modality to position themselves relative to their “truth” given the circumstances in that particular space and time. Here, truth could be the reality people deem as right or the actions and thoughts people seek to frame as right and just. Using Chilton's (2004) model, if a person were to say “I will visit the doctor tomorrow,” they are using “will” to express a high degree of confidence towards the proposition because it is true in their reality. Therefore, choosing a different modal, like in the sentence “ I might visit the doctor tomorrow ” would have evoked a meaning that is farther from their truth. Chilton (2004) adds that in most instances of political discourse, the “self” often sees oneself as right or in the right while “the others” are perceived to be wrong or in the wrong. Since modals as a grammatical feature can express force and “realities,” the modals that policymakers use could be indicative of their perceptions towards local issues and the actions they seek to address. Hence, this study renders the concepts of “modal axis” and “realities” into a policy perspective to propose that modals mirror the seriousness of issues on the ground.
Modals restrict and permit interpretation : ( Searle, 1969 ) was among the first to relate ( Austin, 1962 ) concept of “speech acts” to the idea of “rules,” stating that “promising” as a speech act creates an obligation to enact a proposition. Meanwhile, ( Boyd and Thorne, 1969 )were among the first to make connections between “speech acts” and modals—describing the latter, particularly in imperatives, as illocutionary forces that assert, permit, and lay obligations, among others. Lyons (1977, p. 805) further advances the idea by describing modals as “illocutionary force operators” expressing varying levels of commitment. Although using different terminologies, subsequent studies agree that the concepts of “restricting” and “permitting” are speech acts that come with interpreting modals. For instance, Talmy (1988) suggests that some modals are best understood as the mediation between barriers and physical forces that “forbid” or “allow.” Sweetser's (1990) reinterpretation asserts that the implication of these forces could additionally be intentional because modals can add or reduce barriers to either “stop” or “let” specific outcomes. Chilton (2004) uses the terms “command” or “prohibit” to describe the same speech acts associated with modals specifically found in policies. Chilton (2004) argues that—although modal interpretation is contingent upon prevailing norms at the time of use—there are undeniable prevailing patterns that allow modals to be represented in some form of scale. Simply put, Chilton (2004) implies that, although interpretation varies, we do not think of the modal “may” the same way we interpret “must” or “shall.” This present study recontextualizes the speech acts that forbid or allow, stop or let, and command or prohibit into a more policy-oriented perspective that restrict or permit. Fig. 1 combines findings from key literature, including Boyd and Thorne (1969), Chilton (2004) , Saeed (1997) , and Werth (1999) , on the restrictiveness and permissiveness of modality. Download: Download high-res image (139KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Modal Scale Based on Strength of Restriction and Permission Note. Summary of key literature on modality. Policy modals become stricter as they reach both ends of the scale.
Modals found to allow for the most expansive set of interpretations are in the center, while those intended to be perceived as more restrictive are found towards both sides. For example, in the sentence “ The patient may/must/will take opioids ” the word “may” allows for the broadest interpretation because the modal simply denotes mere possibility or permission, leaving the decision to act upon the proposition to the policy stakeholder. Hence, “may” is found at the center of the scale. “Must” is similarly suggestive but more compelling due to its necessary and obligatory implications. The range of possible courses of action intended for policy arbiters to take is expected to be narrower when “must” is used instead of “may.” Out of the three modals, “will” is expected to be the least negotiable of the three due to its predictive and commanding nature. This study draws on modality's ability to communicate discourses intended to prohibit or permit particular actions to make sense of modality's potential role in policies. Using specific examples from California opioid policies, this study suggests that another potential function of modality in policy discourse is to either permit or restrict certain actions through the highlighting or deemphasizing of a policy's suggestive intent, respectively.
Corpus-assisted discourse analysis has been widely used in language policy and political discourse, as it allows for the analysis of large data sets through both quantitative and qualitative techniques ( Flowerdew, 2008 ; Partington, 2003 , 2008 ). Discourse analysis (DA) allows for a closer qualitative examination of the salient patterns revealed by corpus analysis (CA), while CA provides a quantitative textual analysis of specific grammatical features observed through DA ( Baker, 2006 ; Friginal and Hardy, 2020 ; Orpin, 2005 ; Stubbs, 1996 ).
Friginal and Hardy (2020, p. 2) underscored the importance of going beyond the findings and patterns of corpus data and offering new knowledge by providing an “interpretation of the findings” and answering the question: “So what?”
DA is interpretative and explanatory, thus allowing researchers to interpret the set of possibilities that motivate and explain speech acts that are sometimes unknown, even to the language user ( Fairclough and Wodak, 1997 , Johnstone, 2018 ). This study employs DA to make sense of the modal choices of policymakers and aims to illuminate the role that modals play in policies.
Van Dijk's (1999, p. 131) context model framework—a schema designed to reduce the complexity of social situations and efficiently contextualize discourse through schematic categories—serves as the guiding principle for the DA conducted in this study. Specifically, the four schematic categories in Table 2 were conducive to the inductive coding process. Table 2 . Four schematic categories accounted for during close discourse analysis and coding. Category Policy Information Purpose Time When was the policy chaptered? To map the changes in modal usage across time. Location Where is the policy enacted? (In this study, California is the controlled variable) To understand the correlation between local events and modal usage. Participants (Policy stakeholders) To whom are the policies addressed? To identify the policy stakeholders limited or empowered by modality. Action (Policy action) What is the policy about? The proposition introduced by the modal and main verb. To reveal the purpose of the proposition that triggered certain modal choices.

Section: 3. Methodology

A total of 223 state policy documents comprising 110,108 words overall, enacted between 1970 and 2019, were gathered from California's legislative archives using the following primary keywords: opioids, controlled substance, schedule II, and narcotic (see Appendix A for a complete list of policies).
The first step was to map out the landmark opioid policies at the federal (United States) and state levels (California) into a timeline depicting the significant shifts in the history and sentiments associated with the crisis ( Section 4 ). This timeline conceptualized the data narrative ( Strauss and Corbin, 1997 ), making it useful as a backdrop against which the analysis of California policies was grounded.
After establishing the backdrop, the study focused on California opioid policies. The frequency analyses performed in this study tracked the behavior of modality and its correlation to the worsening opioid crisis. Modal frequencies were generated using MAXQDA, while statistical analyses were performed in SPSS (Version 26). The corpus was divided into a subcorpora of original policies and another of amendments to avoid conflating frequencies. In addition, the changes in all preceding and ensuing versions of amendments were carefully compared to account for newly added, deleted, and changed modals ( Section 5 ). The patterns of restrictive and permissive modal usage that emerged from the frequency analysis helped guide the direction of the remaining study. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) and Regression Analysis were conducted with the frequency of permissive and restrictive modals as dependent variables and “time” and “fatality rates” as predictors representing the worsening crisis. Mahalanobis distance was used to detect outliers because, unlike the typical Euclidean distance, it accounts for variables with different units when analyzing correlation ( Divjak et al., 2014 ).
Three coders trained in discourse analysis identified the policy stakeholders and purpose of the clauses in which modals were used. The process was informed by Van Dijk's (1999) context model framework ( Section 2.2 ). Using axial coding, coders identified the major themes as they emerged from the corpus and finalized the categories as connections between themes became more apparent. This coding process allows categories to fit the data rather than the other way around ( Strauss and Corbin, 1997 ). Fig. 2 and Tables 3 and 4 present the coding categories used in this study. Note that this study refers to individuals who enact or are addressed by policies with the more gender-neutral descriptor “policy stakeholders” or “policy arbiters” in place of the familiar “policy actors.” Download: Download high-res image (406KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . The Three Phases of the Opioid Crisis Timeline with Pertinent Policy Examples. Table 3 . Policy Stakeholders Addressed in California Opioid Policies. Major entities addressed in policies Description Examples A State Departments Local institutions, including sectors of state government, whose responsibility include public health concerns. California Department of Health Care Services, California Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, California Department of Social Services, California Health and Human Services Agency B Health care providers Medical providers licensed to furnish and dispense opioids Physicians, Surgeons, Dentists, Pharmacist, Paramedics, EMT personnel, Nurses, Midwives, Emergency responders, Physician Assistants, Anaesthetist, etc. Note. These categories were used in coding the stakeholders addressed in policies. For more examples, see Appendix C . Table 4 . Major themes describing the content of opioid policies. Major categoriesof policy action Description Examples A General policies on handling pain Covers issues surrounding pain treatment. Policies stating who can administer opioids in health centers. B Prescribing guidelines Precautions and requirements needed before opioids can be dispensed, prescribed, or administered. Policies limiting opioid prescribing. Policies on electronic prescriptions C Training/education requirements Policies requiring policy stakeholders to develop and update their medical knowledge. Mandatory certification requirement for physicians to take continuing education on the risks of opioids. D Oversight Statutes granting policy stakeholders oversight power over other policy stakeholders, to keep each other accountable. Policies allowing regulatory board to suspend licenses. E Treatment of substance abuse/ diversion programs Includes all policies intended to address substance abuse. Policies funding diversion programs Note. These categories were used in coding the predicates or the intended actions to which modals were linked. For specific examples, see Appendix C .
Coding was done in tandem—a process that is becoming increasingly popular in corpus-assisted studies surrounding health issues ( Henry et al., 2020 , Hood-Medland et al., 2021 ). as it allows coders to offer their expertise, discuss differences, and keep each other consistent. This method steps away from blindly going with the majority's code and allows the minority to explain their coding decisions. For example, the coders in this study debated whether a certain policy's purpose is to address substance abuse or guide state diversion programs. After listening to each other's reasoning, the coders realized that both themes have the same intended outcome, thus, creating a category for diversion policies. Because the recipients and the contexts of the policies were mostly evident in the text, it would be inefficient to code separately only to convene later and discuss the disagreements if coding in tandem accomplishes this immediately. Chi-square tests of restrictive and permissive modal distributions throughout each phase were conducted as well to measure any significant correlation between modality and the context in which it is used.
Finally, the patterns that emerged from CA helped guide the focus of the DA. I conducted a close reading discourse analysis of the policies, with a particular focus on the amendments of chaptered statutes. I specifically look at instances in which only the modal verbs were changed while the rest of the clause remained constant. By “interpreting” and “explaining” the motivations behind choosing and changing certain modals with respect to the severity of the crisis at the local level, I illustrate modals’ capacity to: (i) reflect the gravity of local issues, and (ii) either highlight or deemphasize a policy's suggestive intent ( Section 6 ).
Thus far, corpus-assisted DA of modals has mostly covered second language writing ( Aijmer, 2002 ; Biber, 2006 ; Chen, 2012 ; McDouall, 2012 ). This paper extends the breadth of corpus-assisted modality research to include policies.

Section: 4. The us opioid crisis timeline

In the 1970s, the United States was dealing with an entirely different crisis—lack of pain treatment. This realization shifted the way physicians addressed pain from simply identifying its source to directly treating the pain itself ( Caudill-Slosberg et al., 2004 ). In 1986, the ( World Health Organization 1986 ) released the “analgesic/pain ladder” as an international guideline focused on advancing cancer pain treatment. This policy stated that if cancer pain relief is not adequate, “another strong opioid drug should be tried.” Thus, physicians started prescribing opioids to relieve chronic pain. In 1990, California passed the Intractable Pain Act (Business and Professions Code section 2241.5), which stated that no physician shall be punished for prescribing opioids for chronic pain. Suffering from surgical operations also triggered the ( Agency for Health Care Policy and Research 1992 ) guideline for more aggressive pain treatment. In 1997, California's Patient's Bill of Rights (Health and Safety Code section 124960) officially supported the use of opioids in treating chronic pain and noncancerous conditions.
Adhering to the calls made by The American Pain Society (1999) and ( Department of Veterans Affairs 2000 ), the California Board of Registered Nursing released a policy in 2000 requiring nurses to include pain along with temperature, blood pressure, pulse rate , and respiration rate as vital signs gathered during clinic intake. Therefore, nurses in the state ask patients to rate their pain from one to ten. Nurses were also tasked with taking appropriate action when the patient's pain is not managed according to the agreed comfort level ( California Board of Registered Nursing, 2000 ).
Based on the statistics presented by the CDC and the US Department of Health and Human Services, it was at this stage when the US opioid prescription rate substantially increased, averaging 81.2 prescriptions for every 100 Americans. In 2004, California released Senate Bill 1838: Alcohol and Drug Prevention Program, a blanket policy that addressed addiction. While the policy neither mentioned nor addressed opioid addiction , its larger-scale focus on drugs meant that it covered narcotics too. That said, some policies that made it easier to prescribe opioids were also enacted during this time. For example, the 2006 amendment to the 1990 Intractable Pain Act ( Table 5 ) underwent subtle yet semantically marginal rewording. The words “dangerous drugs or” were added before “controlled substance,” creating some degree of equivalency. The verb “dispense” was also added to the list of tasks physicians could do, therefore widening the possibilities of opioid treatment. Table 5 . 2006 Amendment of the 1990 California intractable pain act. 1990 2006 “A physician may prescribe or administer controlled substances for intractable pain.” “A physician and surgeon may prescribe, dispense, or administer dangerous drugs or controlled substances for the treatment of pain, including, but not limited to, intractable pain.” “No physician shall be subject to disciplinary action for prescribing or administering controlled substances” “No physician shall be subject to disciplinary action for prescribing, dispensing , or administering dangerous drugs or controlled substances.” Note. Characters in bold represent added segments. Statute was clipped for brevity. The rest of the content can be retrieved from the internet through California's legislation website.
This era marks the beginning of a more deliberate and aggressive campaign against opioid addiction , which started in 2011 when the CDC used the word “epidemic” to describe the state of opioid misuse in the country after deaths from accidental overdose exceeded fatalities from vehicular accidents. In 2013, California turned the law enforcement tool, Controlled Substance Utilization Review and Evaluation System (CURES), into a prescription monitoring system ( Table 6 ). In 2017, physicians were required to consult CURES before prescribing opioids. The transition confirms that the opioid crisis is now predominantly a policy issue instead of a law enforcement concern. Table 6 . The 2013 Amendment of the 1996 California policy defining CURES. 1996 2013 "To assist law enforcement and regulatory agencies in controlling the diversion and abuse of Schedule II controlled substances" "To assist health care practitioners in their efforts to ensure appropriate prescribing, ordering, administering, furnishing, and dispensing of controlled substances, law enforcement and regulatory agencies in controlling the diversion and abuse of Schedule II, Schedule III, and Schedule IV controlled substances" Note. Characters in bold represent added segments. Taken from Health and Safety Code 11165 in which CURES is defined. Characters in bold represent the changes.
In 2016, President Obama signed the Comprehensive Addiction Recovery Act (CARA), which became the first major federal legislation on addiction in 40 years and the most comprehensive effort undertaken to address the opioid epidemic. Ultimately, policies that came after 2011 were mostly focused on fighting the epidemic. Fig. 2 summarizes the key policies within the three timeline phases discussed above, while Table 7 provides an annual breakdown of the opioid-related fatalities in California.

Section: 5. Results

A frequency analysis of modal verbs in California opioid policies was conducted using MAXQDA, separating the original policies from their amendments to avoid conflation ( Table 8 ).
When viewed alongside the modal scale in Fig. 1 , Table 8 reveals the restrictive “shall” and the permissive “may” as the two primary modals used by California policymakers to frame the state's opioid policies. This dynamic contrast in modal choice determined the direction of the remaining analysis. The following section zooms in on the permissive-restrictive distinction to further explore the potential roles modals play in policies. Section 5.1 illustrates the correlation between the restrictiveness of modals and the worsening opioid crisis. While Section 5.2 details the correlations between restrictiveness and context.
As the worsening US opioid crisis continue to be a fraught issue ( Torres et al., 2020 ), changes in the frequency of restrictive and permissive modals across time can determine whether the general perception of the opioid crisis are reflected in the framing of policies. Note that each modal would have appeared in a unique policy clause; therefore, the frequency of restrictive or permissive modal is synonymous with the number of restrictive and permissive clauses.
Using ANOVA and regression analysis, with P values ≤ 0.05 considered statistically significant, time was found to have a significant positive correlation with the number of restrictive policy clauses at p <0.050 (F(1,34)=9.603, p = 0.004) and a positive, yet insignificant effect, on permissive clauses p <0.050 (F(1,34)=2.913, p = 0.970). These findings were justified by the gap between the regression coefficients of restrictive (β=0.774) and permissive (β=0.159) clauses. Hence, as general concerns for the crisis exacerbates with time, restrictive clauses significantly increased annually by 0.774, while permissive propositions increased not significantly only by 0.159 (see Fig. 3 ). Using Mahalanobis distance with a chi-square (χ2) cut off of p <0.010, only one restrictive and two permissive outliers were identified but were not sufficient enough to affect the results. All statistical calculations can be found in Appendix B . Download: Download high-res image (317KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Number of Restrictive (Left) and Permissive (Right) Modals/Clauses Across Time.
Fig. 4 reveals that worsening perception of the crisis has a strong association with the increase of stricter amendments at p <0.050 (F(1,20)=14.541, p = 0.010) but not with permissive amendments at p <0.05 (F(1,7)=0.370, p = 0.562). These findings were affirmed by the positive and negative standardized regression coefficients for stricter (β=0.649) and lenient (β=−0.224) amendments, respectively, thus suggesting that policymakers added more restrictive clauses, expunged more permissive clauses, or replaced more permissive clauses with stringent ones. Download: Download high-res image (389KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Number of Stricter (Left) and More Lenient (Right) Amendments Relative to the Worsening Epidemic.
Another indicator of the worsening crisis is the increasing fatality rate . Fig. 5 reveals the number of fatal cases has a significant positive correlation with the increase in restrictive policies at p <0.050 (F(1,33)=7.352, p = 0.011) and a non-significant correlation with the increase in permissive policies at p <0.050 (F(1,33)=3,236, p = 0.081). The regression coefficient of restrictive policies (β=0.012) means that one restrictive policy is added for every ten opioid-overdose casualties. Download: Download high-res image (307KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 5 . Number of Restrictive (Left) and Permissive (Right) Clauses Relative to Number of Fatalities.
A chi-square test of modal distribution revealed a strong dependency relationship at p <0.050 between modal use and policy stakeholder throughout the first and second phases (see Fig. 6 ). Hence, from the 1970′s up to the 2011 CDC declaration of the opioid epidemic, the likelihood of stricter policies being applied towards health care providers than their state counterparts was higher. Likewise, state departments had a higher chance of being subject to more permissive policies. On the contrary, modal distribution during the third phase was no longer predictable at p <0.050, showing a more balanced distribution of restrictive actions toward state departments and health care providers. Download: Download high-res image (199KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 6 . Stacked Bars Showing the Distribution of Restrictive and Permissive Policies Across the Three Phases in Section 4 Note. The shaded and unshaded segments show the state department's and health care provider's share, respectively.
The use of restrictive framing sheds light on which actions are considered by policymakers as important enough to warrant such phrasing. Fig. 7 presents the distribution of restrictive policies across the five major policy actions that emerged from the coding process (outlined in Table 4 ). Download: Download high-res image (291KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 7 . Stacked Bars Showing Policy Actions and Their Percentage Share of Restrictive Policies.
Fig. 7 reaffirms that modals function as a reflection of the situations on the ground. These findings illustrate the growing concerns in oversight and rehabilitation as the crisis worsens. The distribution of restrictive policies across the three phases hints at the priorities policymakers have at that point in time. When the problem was lack of pain treatment, the first three categories— which were about addressing pain and learning about the ability of opioids to treat pain—recorded their highest share of restrictive modals. These high numbers dwindled as the state's problem switched from lack of pain treatment to addressing the worsening crisis. The more striking result shown in Fig. 7 is the constant increase in restrictive policies addressing (D) oversight and (E) diversion, which reflects the state's growing concerns towards drug abuse and need for rehabilitation programs.

Section: 6. Analysis

To further investigate the possible role of modality in policies, I conducted a closed DA of the amendments in which policymakers decided to keep the rest of clause the same except for the modals. The following excerpt from a 2013 amendment of a 2002 policy ( Table 9 ) shows a shift from permissive towards restrictive by simply replacing a single modal.
Understanding modality would require looking into the modals—the only element that differs in both iterations of the same policy—and the possible outcomes that could arise from choosing one over another. DA assumes that—in this case—California policymakers purposefully choose to replace “may” with “shall” in their legislation. Policymakers are neither legally nor traditionally bound to use “shall” as a default (see Williams, 2009 ). Otherwise, they would not go through all the troubles of amending a policy only to change a single word. Indeed, state policymakers are paying attention to modality when drafting a bill that replaces “may” with “shall.”
The deontic interpretation associated with “may” in the 2002 policy is that the policy stakeholder, the California Department of Justice , has the discretion over whether to release the patient's controlled substance history to the respective physician. Using the permissive “may” to frame the policy gives the policy stakeholder more flexibility, especially because the policy action is presented as an option they could elect not to take. Such interpretation contrasts directly from the volitional (deontic) and predictive (epistemic) nature associated with “shall,” which denotes a more restrictive stance on the part of the policymakers. Policies are meant to suggest certain actions and using “shall” over “may” does not change the fact that the enactment of the policy ultimately relies on the actions and decisions of policy stakeholders, framing a policy using a modal that “restricts” rather than “permits” makes the policy's suggestive intent less apparent. Meanwhile, the use of permissive modals like “may” could remind stakeholders that they have the luxury of making a choice. Thus, “shall” has the potential to limit the interpretation of policies by minimizing the optionality that comes with more permissive modals like “may.” In contrast, using a more permissive modal could assign policy stakeholders more freedom because it broadens individual understanding of policies and highlights suggestive rather than mandatory intent. Thus, modal choice could widen or minimize the space in which the meaning of a policy can be negotiated. Moreover, Table 9 provides further evidence that modal usage mirrors the events on the ground. The amendment, which pushed for more vigilant communication between California's Department of Justice and health care providers, was chaptered during Phase III, when the state's main concern was to address the epidemic.
In the following excerpt ( Table 10 ), a restrictive modal was replaced by a permissive alternative during Phase I, at a time when inadequate pain treatment was the state's problem.
In this example, “shall not,” a modal that denotes strong prohibition was replaced by “may,” a modal that is on the permissive side of the modal scale (see Fig. 1 ). The policy action of prescribing opioids went from being framed as a strongly prohibited action to being at the discretion of nurse-midwives as policy stakeholders. The modal change leaves more room for policy stakeholders to interpret the policy. With a permissive modal, the policymakers are able to elicit less defined outcomes. The amendment enacted during Phase I allowed more healthcare workers to administer opioids, at a time when policymakers were more focused on pushing health care providers to be more aggressive with pain treatment.
The last excerpt ( Table 11 ) illustrates how modal change can intensify the semantic weight of the collocating verb phrase, further minimizing an already small interpretive space.
The wide range of interpretations evoked by “may” can partly be attributed to the modal's ability to convey both what "may" or "may not" be done. Hence, the addition of "not" lessens the ambiguity and optionality that comes with “may.” In other words, while “may” and “may not” are still more permissive than their “shall” counterparts, “may” allows for a broader set of interpretations in comparison to “may not.” This explains why current literature (see Fig. 1 )—including ( Boyd and Thorne, 1969 )Boyd and Thorne (1969) as well as Chilton (2004) —did not group modals with their negative counterparts. The 1994 version of the policy has the modal “may not” which is already less permissive than “may,” yet the modal amendment in 2017 suggest that the level of prohibition “may not” evoked was still insufficient, prompting policymakers to replace it with “shall not” and further minimize what was already a weak semantic expression of possibility. As local policymakers, their knowledge of the severity of the opioid crisis within their constituency makes “shall not” a more fitting choice called for by their immediate environment. These findings offer tangible evidence that appends a policy perspective to Talmy (1988) and Sweetser's (1990) understanding of modality as forces that "stop" or "allow,” but as forces that “limit” or “broaden” interpretations.
The policymakers convening to amend only one lexical item suggests that they perceive the significance of modality in policy framing. The key examples presented here show that particularly targeting modals in amendments suggests its importance in the framing of policies relative to the events happening on the ground.

Section: 7. Limitations

While Table 7 affirms that the opioid-related fatality rates in the state increased with time, the approach used in this study suffered from the limitation of relying on proxies such as time and death rates to quantify the worsening crisis. Some may find it beneficial to learn the motivations behind modal use from the policymakers themselves. Attempts to contact the policymakers involved were unsuccessful. However, the use of DA to “interpret“ and “explain” the set of possibilities motivating speech acts, which are sometimes unknown even to the language user, remedies this issue ( Fairclough and Wodak, 1997 , Friginal and Hardy, 2020 , Johnstone, 2018 ). It should also be acknowledged that DA serves as the backbone of the coding process, and in turn, the frequency analyses, yet these background processes do not often make their way into final papers. Table 7 . Number of opioid-related fatalities in California from 1968 to 2018. Year Fatalities Crude Rate Year Fatalities Crude Rate Year Fatalities Crude Rate 1968 113 0.6 1985 519 2 2002 1453 4.2 1969 166 0.8 1986 520 1.9 2003 1398 4 1970 280 1.4 1987 290 1 2004 1413 4 1971 273 1.3 1988 365 1.3 2005 1372 3.8 1972 376 1.8 1989 432 1.5 2006 1511 4.2 1973 428 2.1 1990 375 1.3 2007 1657 4.6 1974 529 2.5 1991 288 0.9 2008 1801 4.9 1975 629 2.9 1992 523 1.7 2009 1987 5.4 1976 506 2.3 1993 640 2 2010 1929 5.2 1977 161 0.7 1994 501 1.6 2011 1939 5.1 1978 123 0.5 1995 528 1.7 2012 1719 4.5 1979 153 0.7 1996 651 2 2013 1948 5.1 1980 145 0.6 1997 617 1.9 2014 2024 5.2 1981 215 0.9 1998 768 2.3 2015 2018 5.2 1982 314 1.3 1999 1474 4.4 2016 2012 5.1 1983 279 1.1 2000 1012 3 2017 2199 5.6 1984 343 1.3 2001 551 1.6 2018 2410 6.1 Note. Crude rates, or death rates per 100,000 population, is a measure used when age-adjusted rates are not available. Data was gathered using the CDC WONDER database. To generate the report for opioid-related fatalities, the following International Classification of Disease (ICD) codes had to be identified: ICD-8 E853.0 for 1970–1978; ICD-9 E850.0 for 1979–1998; ICD-10 underlying cause-of-death codes: X40–44, X60–64, X85, Y10–Y14 and multiple cause-of-death codes: T40.0- T40.4, and T40.6 for 1999–2018. ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021a , Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b , Centers for Disease Control and Preventionc ) Table 8 . Modal frequencies in original policies and amendments. Subcorpus A: Original Policies n = 30,013 words (97 documents) Subcorpus B: Amendments n = 80,095 words (126 documents) Empty Cell Modal Frequency per 100,000 words Percentage Empty Cell Modal Frequency per 100,000 words Percentage 1 shall 1585.98 70.83 1 shall 1644.30 74.07 2 may 509.78 22.77 2 may 454.46 20.47 3 can 93.29 4.17 3 will 47.44 2.14 4 will 19.99 0.89 4 would 42.45 1.91 5 would 13.33 0.60 5 can 21.22 0.96 6 could 6.66 0.30 6 should 8.74 0.39 6 should 6.66 0.30 7 must 1.25 0.06 7 might 3.33 0.15 0 could 0.00 0.00 0 must 0.00 0.00 0 might 0.00 0.00 Note. Frequency values are calculated relative to every 100,000 words to balance the uneven subcorpus (see Baker, 2006 ). Table 9 . An amendment showing the change from permissive to restrictive modality. Health and Safety Code 11165.1 2002 [Phase I] 2013 [Phase III] The Department of Justice may release to that practitioner the history of controlled substances dispensed to an individual under his or her care… The Department of Justice shall release to that practitioner the history of controlled substances dispensed to an individual under his or her care… Note. Statute was clipped for brevity. The rest of the content can be retrieved from the internet through California's legislation website. Table 10 . An amendment showing the change from restrictive to permissive modality. Business and Professions Code 2746.51 1991 [Phase I] 2001 [Phase I] Drugs furnished by a certified nurse-midwife shall not include controlled substances… Drugs furnished by a certified nurse-midwife may include controlled substances… Note. Opioids are controlled substances. This statute was shortened for brevity. The changes do not affect the analysis. The rest of the content can be retrieved from the internet through California's legislation website. Table 11 . An amendment showing change in modality from slightly permissive to restrictive. Business and Professions Code 3502.1 1994 [Phase I] 2017 [Phase III] A physician assistant may not prescribe controlled substances without a physician's order. A physician assistant shall not prescribe controlled substances without a physician's order. Note. Statute was shortened for brevity. The changes do not affect the analysis. The rest of the content can be retrieved from the internet through California's legislation website. More examples of modal amendments are provided in Appendix D .
The restrictive and permissive framework is not intended to be a definitive categorization of the core functions of modal auxiliaries in policies, as the corpus is limited and discourse analysis, while informative, is intended to be inferential. However, this study is presented because of its heuristic value to policymakers and legal aides who recognize the significance of using modals and to policy stakeholders tasked with interpreting modal-heavy policies to carry out certain functions and achieve outcomes.

Section: 8. Conclusion

The present study provides a cogent linguistic framework for analyzing the role of modal auxiliaries in policy text. The findings of both corpus and discourse analyses suggest two potential functions of modals in policies, which include: (i) mirroring or calling attention to the gravity of the issues happening on the ground, and (ii) highlighting or deemphasizing a policy's optionality to broaden or limit the range of possible interpretations under which policy stakeholder could operate.
As Thompson (2001, p. 151) points out, paying attention to modal usage “reveals something of the choices that are available” in expressing meanings and “something of the way written discourse is constructed.” Chilton (2004) further emphasizes that perceptions of local realities influence one's modal choices. Pairing these two ideas together helps make sense of policymakers' overwhelming decision to use "shall" over alternatives as the opioid crisis worsens.
The approach presented in this study allows policymakers to save time in examining the policies of pertinent local issues because the mining of modals from the corpus (i) created a sketch showing the status of permissively and restrictively framed policies, (ii) uncovered the policy stakeholders addressed in restrictively framed policies, and (iii) exposed the prioritized actions of which optionality is limited. By focusing on modals and their collocating verb phrases, policymakers can assess where policies of pertinent local and even federal issues—such as gun control, abortion, abuse of power, rights to assemble and protest, among many others—stand and whether current restrictions adequately match the community's needs.
This study contributes to the existing small body of literature covering the language of health policies through CA and DA. The investigation, however, also opens several questions regarding opioids: What roles do other grammatical categories serve in policies? How are doctors functioning in these current, relatively narrow interpretive spaces regarding opioid prescriptions? What forces and ideologies are stopping policymakers from using simpler language instead of using modals which clearly relies on the interpretation of policy stakeholders? These questions are crucial for applied, socio, and corpus linguistics to address in future research. This paper is a step in this direction to develop a cohesive understanding of not just modals but also policies and health crises.

Section: Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
