Section: Abstract

Anthropology, especially biological anthropology, owes its origins to the scientific study of human racial differences. That dark history is well-acknowledged and, when it is taught, usually begins with the racism of early figures, such as Johann Friedrich Blumenbach or, more recently, Earnest Hooton, and exonerates itself through a turn toward antiracist scholars such as Frank Livingstone and Franz Boas. Rarely, if ever, is this origin story critically appraised. This article aims to complicate the origin story of biological anthropology by examining how colonial subjects were involved in the development, testing, and refinement of racial theory, and thus of biological anthropology itself. Taking India as an example, I trace how Indians and the caste system were first the subjects and eventually the interlocutors of racial scientific theory and testing. This reorientation, I argue, is important for developing a more expansive and accurate version of the discipline's history and also for shining a light on its relevance to contemporary global racial conflict.

Section: Introduction

More than any other field of study, anthropology is “the race discipline”: It grew directly out of European Enlightenment–era projects of classifying and ranking human racial groups according to physical characteristics, cultural achievement, and intellectual capacity. What we now call “biological anthropology” was, at the time, just “anthropology,” with the roots of other subfields such as linguistic and cultural anthropology developing contemporaneously but not named as part of anthropology until the twentieth century. 1 As the first manifestation of anthropology, then, biological anthropology in particular can trace its origins to race science and Enlightenment–era natural history projects that aimed to answer big questions about human origins and variation, with the work of philosophers and natural historians such as François Bernier (1620–1688), Carl Linnaeus (1707–1778), David Hume (1711–1776), Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), and Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752–1840) ( Graves & Goodman 2021 ). This lineage of white European male scholarship might appear logical at first glance, given the time and place of its emergence, and indeed it goes almost entirely unquestioned in accounts that trace the origins of biological anthropology back this far (and many do not!). But in fact, throughout this formative time, black and brown scholars, administrators, and laypeople were intimately involved, not just as subjects but often as collaborators, in the development and testing of racial theories that would lay the foundations of biological anthropology. This involvement mostly took place through colonial encounters that, in some cases, lasted well into the twentieth century ( Aulette 2016 , Suzuki 2017 , Suzuki & Von Vacano 2018 ).
I am not simply pointing out that European proto-anthropologists did a great deal of work on race in the colonies. Rather, in this article I show that colonial encounters around race—the very encounters that gave rise to what we now call biological anthropology—often involved cyclical (not unidirectional) exchanges of ideas about human difference between colonizers and colonized. Colonial researchers applied European ideas about race to their subjects, and that research, in turn, served as a vehicle through which Western racial ideas were refined. Those retooled ideas were then applied “back home” to European groups deemed to be inferior and were simultaneously adopted by scientists in newly forming postcolonial nations. This is not to say that the power gradient was balanced—colonists and their Western science certainly wielded power over those they colonized. But it is not quite accurate to describe these intellectual enterprises as unidirectional, as most sources on the topic do. 2
This shift in perspective matters because it reveals important connections between the history of biological anthropology and very pressing contemporary racialized and caste inequalities around the world. Without this acknowledgment, biological anthropology misses a significant part of its own story. It even potentially limits our understanding of the field's relevance today by parochializing its influence.
The reorientation I suggest here is in part an intellectual project aimed at decentering biological anthropology's origins, moving the needle toward a more accurate global understanding of how biological anthropology came to be, and making a case for why this history matters today. This project is also pedagogical, however. Given the discipline's present-day commitment to “the values of diversity, equity and human rights” in “professional research, scholarship, practice, and teaching to overturning the deeply entrenched institutional sources of race-based inequality that are barriers to a more just and sustainable world” ( Am. Anthropol. Assoc. 2021 ), we need to teach a more globally expansive survey of scientific racism in colonial contexts and make a serious inquiry into how those projects were iteratively shaped by knowledges and practices of those colonized. This is especially urgent given the explicit white supremacy that underpinned biological (then called physical) anthropology until the mid-twentieth century through the prolific mentorship of foundational scholars such as Earnest Hooton (1887–1954) and his student Carlton Coon (1904–1981), who centered their research programs around the premise that white Europeans were racially superior and darker-skinned peoples were closer to apes.
With these twinned intellectual and pedagogical aims in mind, this article aims to introduce readers to the complex histories of early proto-anthropology and scientific racism in non-Western contexts using my primary fieldsite, India, as a case study. My hope is that it will serve as an example of how a shift toward a more global perspective can be incorporated into our understanding of the history of biological anthropology and that it will provide those who teach about anthropology and race with a resource to broaden their pedagogies.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion

The story of race in India does not, somewhat ironically, begin with race per se; it begins with caste. Caste has always been a topic of fascination for Westerners working in India; Appadurai (1986) refers to it as a “gatekeeping concept” that “seem[s] to limit anthropological theorizing about the place in question, and that define[s] the quintessential and dominant questions of interest in the region” (p. 357; see also Inden 1990 ). Although sociologist Louis Dumont's (1966) seminal work Homo Hierarchicus is often treated as the anchor that placed caste at the center of modern Indian anthropology, colonial administrators had already done so several hundred years prior.
As Europeans began establishing global trade routes in the seventeenth century, differences between Western Europeans and their colonial subjects became focal points for European philosophers and natural historians who laid the early foundations of what would eventually become anthropology: among them, Bernier, Linnaeus, Hume, and Kant. Each of these individuals made distinct contributions to scientific racism (see Graves & Goodman 2021 ), but for the purposes of the discussion at hand, Bernier is especially important. He was among the first European world travelers to live and explore across the Indian subcontinent. He published his observations in Travels in the Mughal Empire ( Bernier 1670 ). Shortly after came A New Division of the Earth, according to the Different Species or Races of Men Who Inhabit It ( Bernier 1684 ), in which Bernier parlayed his long experience in India into the first European attempt to classify all of humankind into races. Bernier thought there were four races; he categorized peoples of the Indian subcontinent along with Europeans, North Africans, peoples from the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and the Americas into a single race, attributing their differences in appearance and lifeways to the influence of climate and history, not biology.
Biological race soon made its way to India. Beginning in 1612, the British East India Company established a presence on the Indian subcontinent that would gain power until it established formal rule around 1757. At this precise moment in time, Linnaeus (1758) published the tenth edition of his magnum opus Systema Naturae , in which he divided Homo sapiens into four varieties with accompanying descriptions that folded in both biological and behavioral characteristics. This move represents the first instance where a prominent scientific thinker articulated the foundational idea of scientific racism: that there are innate biological traits that make some inheritance groups superior to others in character and/or appearance and that these traits can be used to make inferences about these groups’ geographic origins and relative worth ( Marks 2007 ). That blurring between appearance, behavior, and biology constitutes the foundation of scientific racism.
Armed with this new understanding of biological race, the colonial scholars and administrators who poured into India in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries took a much more certain stance than Bernier had done the previous century: that Indians were a people apart from themselves. As the largest, richest, and most culturally diverse colony in the British Empire, India became a crucial proving ground for emergent theories about race and biology—“not merely a source for British ethnological discourse which the accidents of history had put in its way, but the very center of its debates,” according to anthropologist and historian Trautmann (1997 , p. 3). This relationship would come to exert a powerful influence on both nations’ self-concepts.
The British enthusiastically pursued ethnological and biological study of Indian caste groups almost from their first point of contact. Caste in the British view consisted of the varna system laid out in the Laws of Manu , a Sanskrit text on law and conduct dated between the second century BCE and the third century CE and translated to English in the late eighteenth century by philologist William Jones (whose work in India we will revisit shortly). That text delineates a Hindu social hierarchy consisting of Brahmin priests and scholars, Kshatriya warriors and politicians, Vaishya businesspeople and agriculturalists, and Shudra laborers and service providers. Below those come the groups now known as Dalit, 3 who were required to engage in ritually polluting work such as trash collection, waste disposal, and street sweeping. Within the five major varna divisions is nested the jati system, a complex subdivision of varnas often indicated by regionally, ethnically, and/or linguistically specific surnames indicative of inheritance group. No one knows the exact number of jatis in India, but it is certainly in the many thousands ( Mines 2009 ). The term caste can refer to either varnas or jatis, and below, I try to indicate (when known) which level of classification was under scrutiny by which scholars. In cases where it was not obvious, I revert to the term caste.
The British were, of course, already exposed to the idea that different inheritance groups had fundamentally different natures, thanks to the work of Linnaeus and others on the European mainland. By these lights, the largely endogamous varna and jati systems appeared to be a perfect case study of endogamous racial differentiation. To document what they expected were inherent biological differences between groups, regional colonial administrators began developing in the 1800s catalogs of “tribes” (a term used interchangeably with “caste” at the time), soliciting contributions from Indian and British police, ethnologists, Indian census-like workers, and regional rulers to document the physical appearance, occupation, religious habits, nomadism, and other behaviors that were supposedly typical of each jati (for an example, see Mullaly 1892 ). These projects had two major aims: First was the practical enterprise of developing ways to identify and regulate those groups deemed “deviant”; second was a more philosophical project aiming to situate Europeans with respect to other people groups around the world ( Brown 2003 ). Both of these projects were really about attempting to justify Europeans’ incremental takeover of people groups around the world, though that motivation was often understated or silent.
Caste became racialized in India—tied to notions of biological superiority or inferiority related to separate origins—largely via the British effort to control specific jatis it perceived as immoral ( Brown 2003 , Dirks 2001 ). “Criminality under colonialism was about both classification and control,” writes anthropologist Dirks (2001 , p. 188), and “thus criminal castes occasioned some of the first ethnological monographs, and thus anthropology collaborated with policing to provide a scientific means to measure—and by measurement to contain the subjectivity of—persons whose identities were otherwise fluid within caste boundaries.” This effort to control crime motivated the work on caste typologies, and it also solidified caste groups into discrete administrative entities when, in fact, they had been more fluid prior to this time ( Cohn 1987 , Dirks 2001 ). Much of this work happened through the budding sciences of phrenology and anthropometry, which were at the time considered the most advanced tools of race science ( Bates 1995 , Wagner 2010 ).
As just one example of the ways in which early biological anthropology conflated caste as a racial grouping, consider colonial administrator William Sleeman's (1788–1856) work among groups known as “Thugs” in central India (meaning “cheat” or “deceiver” in Hindi and serving as the origin of the English slang term). Thugs were organized crime guilds, working as highwaymen or sometimes on retainer for landholders who hired them to protect their property ( Wagner 2010 ). Sleeman made it his life's work to document the structures and lifeways of Thugs [ Sleeman 2011 (1836) ]. He worked in parallel with others, including his counterpart in south India, Frederick S. Mullaly, who was intent on cataloging the “criminal tribes” of the Madras Presidency ( Tolen 1991 ). These administrators together concluded that Thugs were not just a criminal group, but a criminal race because of their insularity, apparent intermarriage, and “inherent” criminality ( Bates 1995 ). Sleeman luridly described a typical Thug as follows: “He meditates his murders without any misgivings, he perpetrates them without any emotions of pity, and he remembers them without any feelings of remorse. They trouble not his dreams, nor does their recollection ever cause him inquietude in darkness, in solitude, or in the hour of death” [ Sleeman 2011 (1836) , p. 8]. In actuality, Thugs appear to have come from a wide variety of caste and even religious backgrounds—many of them, for instance, Muslim despite the fact that Sleeman described them as a specific Hindu jati with particular devotion to the goddess Kali—but united by marginalization and extreme poverty ( Wagner 2010 ). In addition to being evidence of how caste was treated as an immutable biological identity, this example clearly demonstrates the colonial tendency to flatten diverse religious, ethnic, and social identities into overdetermined and artificially bounded groups ( Dirks 2001 , Tolen 1991 )—a common function of racial typologies even today.
In the case of the Thugs (and many other groups), this overdetermination had murderous consequences. Sleeman was responsible for legislation devoted to wiping out Thugs in the 1830s. The British had an obvious interest in substantiating the criminal nature of this group to justify this small-scale genocide. It was this impulse that led Henry Harpur Spry of the Bengal Medical Service to remove and export the heads of seven Thugs who were executed for criminal activity in 1833 under Sleeman's supervision ( Bates 1995 ). Phrenology, the now discredited analytic science based on the premise that mental faculties and personal character were reflected in the shape of the skull, seemed a particularly promising direction for researchers trying to substantiate how racial groups differed from one another in their very cognition. To that end, the Thug skulls were sent to the prestigious Edinburgh Phrenological Society in Scotland to be analyzed for what phrenologists presumed would be signs of innate, heritable criminality. There, eminent phrenologist Robert Cox was surprised to find that the skulls reflected no evidence of a heightened tendency toward destructiveness, “and yet they were murderers” (cited in Spry 1837 , p. 168). Although the skulls actually challenged both Spry's and Cox's expectations, this new information was chalked up to anomaly rather than evidence against phrenology. To this day, the skulls remain at the Anatomical Museum of the University of Edinburgh, where, at the time of this writing, they were off display.
Besides attempting to control what they perceived as innate criminality, the British typologized caste-as-race as part of their larger effort to understand the peopling of the world and to situate themselves therein (usually at its pinnacle). This question about human origins became one of the key routes through which information about India cycled back to Britain, shaping how the British understood their own role in the world vis-à-vis Indian societies ( Trautmann 1997 ). Precolonial India was an intricately developed, economically and socially powerful set of kingdoms, and this fact raised profound questions for the British about human origins, interrelations, and probable antiquity. In the earlier part of the colonial period, philologist William Jones (1746–1794) 4 identified the common root of Indo-European languages, a landmark discovery for linguistics that also laid the foundations of the specious theory about the peopling of India known as the Aryan invasion theory. This theory purported that India's modern varna groups are the result of a violent encounter roughly 3,500 years ago between Dravidian language–speaking, darker-skinned indigenous groups in India and invading lighter-skinned Aryan peoples from Central Asia who spoke a proto-Indo-European language. These invaders ostensibly displaced Dravidian groups southward and subordinated them as lower castes while positioning themselves as higher castes. Those basic varna groups would have presumably then fragmented into jatis, whose identity would have been crystallized through strict endogamy and thus distinct biological heritage. Drawing on Jones's work, Friedrich Max Müller (1823–1900), philologist and Orientalist, proposed the idea of a common Aryan race spanning the globe and destined to conquer others ( Trautmann 1997 ), which was adopted by colonial administrator Herbert Hope Risley (1851–1911).
Herbert Hope Risley was a civil servant in West Bengal for some 30 years in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, during which he commissioned the first synchronous census of India in 1901 and later headed the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. Risley is important to our story because—as a man of science who had carefully followed the developing theories about Aryan invasion—he believed that racial caste groups could be classified through anthropometry 5 rather than behavioral characteristics such as language or religion ( Valiani 2021 ), and he was in an administrative position to carry out such classification on a large scale. Drawing on the Aryan invasion theory, Risley theorized that racial caste groups could be delineated by the proportion of Aryan ancestry they possessed, and with the 1901 census, he became the first to attempt a pan-Indian classification of castes (mostly at the jati level) into race groups based on anthropometry ( Cohn 1987 ). This emphasis on anthropometry was a departure from the dominant ethnological and philological scholarship of the time, which emphasized cultural similarity as the basis for delineating people groups, and it constituted one of the first attempts to correlate racialized physical characteristics with caste in a systematic manner. Deciding which anthropometric feature to measure was, however, an open question. European and American scholars had been engaged in a century-spanning scramble to find an anthropometric measurement that could reliably discern between races. Samuel George Morton (1839) , for instance, developed measurements of cranial capacity for this purpose; Petrus Camper (1770) used facial angle; John Beddoe [1885 (1862) ] used a combination of hair and eye color and skull morphology; and of course there was phrenology, which was already being used for criminal profiling in India. Risley eventually settled on the nasal index, a measure developed by French anthropologist Paul Topinard (1885) , which expresses the ratio of nose breadth to height. In a rather teleological moment, Risley defended this decision by pointing out that, after all, Dravidian South Indians did have broader, flatter noses, whereas (presumably more Aryan) North Indians had pointier, narrower noses. Moreover, he cited a passage of the Rig Veda 6 that contained references to a “noseless” people, which he believed proved the deep historical importance of nose morphology as an index of caste precedence on the subcontinent. Never mind that that translation was shortly afterward refined to remove mentions of noses, which had been an inaccurate translation ( Trautmann 1997 ).
Risley's two landmark publications, Tribes and Castes of Bengal ( 1892 ) and The People of India ( 1908 ), cemented his reputation as an eminent ethnologist, but he summarized much of his racial thinking in a shorter, pithier piece on caste in 1891. 7 In this paper, Risley sketched out a proposition that Indians could be divided into racial groups with distinctive physical appearances, behaviors, temperaments, and languages, onto which castes—both jatis and varnas—would reliably map. The schema consisted of two main races: the flat-nosed Dravidians he described as “the black, noseless, squat Dasyus described in the Vedas…[flat-nosed] to a degree closely approaching to the negro,” and, inevitably, the pointy-nosed Aryans, who according to Risley resembled “the population of Southern Europe,” reflecting the notion of a shared Aryan descent that Müller and others had already proposed ( Risley 1891 , pp. 251–52). Risley also identified a third “Mongoloid” group with yellowish skin, consisting mostly of Northeastern hill tribes, along with intermediary groups representing mixes between these three main categories and others. Risley did not simply describe these hereditary race groups; he also ranked them by “social precedence”: “Enough has been said to prove that a high average nasal index [flat nose] is usually, I may even say invariably, found along with low social position and totemistic subdivisions, while conversely a low index denotes high social rank and a system of eponymous subdivisions” ( Risley 1891 , p. 254). Key to this argument was the practice of caste endogamy. The idea was that multiple generations of intermarriage would produce groups with distinctive biological profiles that could be traced along caste and race lines. In a separate publication, Risley even referred to India as “the great storehouse of ethnographical data which British rule in India has thrown open to European enquirers” ( Risley 1886 , p. 71).
It nearly goes without saying that Risley's attempt to separate Indian castes into lighter-skinned Aryans, “Negro-like” Dravidians, and East Asian–looking Mongoloids very closely mirrored the state of European racial thinking at the time, which also divided humans into three main groups: Caucasians, Africans, and East Asians—a scheme we see even today in racist genomics work (e.g., Wade 2015 ). Risley's work, and the Aryan invasion theory more generally, also clearly reflects the master narrative of “the opposition of the dark-skinned savage and the fair-skinned civilized European” ( Trautmann 1997 , p. 3). It is striking that this theory has continued to dominate the scholarship on the peopling of India, even though it has never been substantiated despite centuries of debate and research in archaeology, linguistics, and now genomics ( Valiani 2021 ).
Caste became racialized in India—tied to notions of biological superiority or inferiority related to separate origins—largely via the British effort to control specific jatis it perceived as immoral ( Brown 2003 , Dirks 2001 ). “Criminality under colonialism was about both classification and control,” writes anthropologist Dirks (2001 , p. 188), and “thus criminal castes occasioned some of the first ethnological monographs, and thus anthropology collaborated with policing to provide a scientific means to measure—and by measurement to contain the subjectivity of—persons whose identities were otherwise fluid within caste boundaries.” This effort to control crime motivated the work on caste typologies, and it also solidified caste groups into discrete administrative entities when, in fact, they had been more fluid prior to this time ( Cohn 1987 , Dirks 2001 ). Much of this work happened through the budding sciences of phrenology and anthropometry, which were at the time considered the most advanced tools of race science ( Bates 1995 , Wagner 2010 ).
As just one example of the ways in which early biological anthropology conflated caste as a racial grouping, consider colonial administrator William Sleeman's (1788–1856) work among groups known as “Thugs” in central India (meaning “cheat” or “deceiver” in Hindi and serving as the origin of the English slang term). Thugs were organized crime guilds, working as highwaymen or sometimes on retainer for landholders who hired them to protect their property ( Wagner 2010 ). Sleeman made it his life's work to document the structures and lifeways of Thugs [ Sleeman 2011 (1836) ]. He worked in parallel with others, including his counterpart in south India, Frederick S. Mullaly, who was intent on cataloging the “criminal tribes” of the Madras Presidency ( Tolen 1991 ). These administrators together concluded that Thugs were not just a criminal group, but a criminal race because of their insularity, apparent intermarriage, and “inherent” criminality ( Bates 1995 ). Sleeman luridly described a typical Thug as follows: “He meditates his murders without any misgivings, he perpetrates them without any emotions of pity, and he remembers them without any feelings of remorse. They trouble not his dreams, nor does their recollection ever cause him inquietude in darkness, in solitude, or in the hour of death” [ Sleeman 2011 (1836) , p. 8]. In actuality, Thugs appear to have come from a wide variety of caste and even religious backgrounds—many of them, for instance, Muslim despite the fact that Sleeman described them as a specific Hindu jati with particular devotion to the goddess Kali—but united by marginalization and extreme poverty ( Wagner 2010 ). In addition to being evidence of how caste was treated as an immutable biological identity, this example clearly demonstrates the colonial tendency to flatten diverse religious, ethnic, and social identities into overdetermined and artificially bounded groups ( Dirks 2001 , Tolen 1991 )—a common function of racial typologies even today.
In the case of the Thugs (and many other groups), this overdetermination had murderous consequences. Sleeman was responsible for legislation devoted to wiping out Thugs in the 1830s. The British had an obvious interest in substantiating the criminal nature of this group to justify this small-scale genocide. It was this impulse that led Henry Harpur Spry of the Bengal Medical Service to remove and export the heads of seven Thugs who were executed for criminal activity in 1833 under Sleeman's supervision ( Bates 1995 ). Phrenology, the now discredited analytic science based on the premise that mental faculties and personal character were reflected in the shape of the skull, seemed a particularly promising direction for researchers trying to substantiate how racial groups differed from one another in their very cognition. To that end, the Thug skulls were sent to the prestigious Edinburgh Phrenological Society in Scotland to be analyzed for what phrenologists presumed would be signs of innate, heritable criminality. There, eminent phrenologist Robert Cox was surprised to find that the skulls reflected no evidence of a heightened tendency toward destructiveness, “and yet they were murderers” (cited in Spry 1837 , p. 168). Although the skulls actually challenged both Spry's and Cox's expectations, this new information was chalked up to anomaly rather than evidence against phrenology. To this day, the skulls remain at the Anatomical Museum of the University of Edinburgh, where, at the time of this writing, they were off display.
Besides attempting to control what they perceived as innate criminality, the British typologized caste-as-race as part of their larger effort to understand the peopling of the world and to situate themselves therein (usually at its pinnacle). This question about human origins became one of the key routes through which information about India cycled back to Britain, shaping how the British understood their own role in the world vis-à-vis Indian societies ( Trautmann 1997 ). Precolonial India was an intricately developed, economically and socially powerful set of kingdoms, and this fact raised profound questions for the British about human origins, interrelations, and probable antiquity. In the earlier part of the colonial period, philologist William Jones (1746–1794) 4 identified the common root of Indo-European languages, a landmark discovery for linguistics that also laid the foundations of the specious theory about the peopling of India known as the Aryan invasion theory. This theory purported that India's modern varna groups are the result of a violent encounter roughly 3,500 years ago between Dravidian language–speaking, darker-skinned indigenous groups in India and invading lighter-skinned Aryan peoples from Central Asia who spoke a proto-Indo-European language. These invaders ostensibly displaced Dravidian groups southward and subordinated them as lower castes while positioning themselves as higher castes. Those basic varna groups would have presumably then fragmented into jatis, whose identity would have been crystallized through strict endogamy and thus distinct biological heritage. Drawing on Jones's work, Friedrich Max Müller (1823–1900), philologist and Orientalist, proposed the idea of a common Aryan race spanning the globe and destined to conquer others ( Trautmann 1997 ), which was adopted by colonial administrator Herbert Hope Risley (1851–1911).
Herbert Hope Risley was a civil servant in West Bengal for some 30 years in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, during which he commissioned the first synchronous census of India in 1901 and later headed the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. Risley is important to our story because—as a man of science who had carefully followed the developing theories about Aryan invasion—he believed that racial caste groups could be classified through anthropometry 5 rather than behavioral characteristics such as language or religion ( Valiani 2021 ), and he was in an administrative position to carry out such classification on a large scale. Drawing on the Aryan invasion theory, Risley theorized that racial caste groups could be delineated by the proportion of Aryan ancestry they possessed, and with the 1901 census, he became the first to attempt a pan-Indian classification of castes (mostly at the jati level) into race groups based on anthropometry ( Cohn 1987 ). This emphasis on anthropometry was a departure from the dominant ethnological and philological scholarship of the time, which emphasized cultural similarity as the basis for delineating people groups, and it constituted one of the first attempts to correlate racialized physical characteristics with caste in a systematic manner. Deciding which anthropometric feature to measure was, however, an open question. European and American scholars had been engaged in a century-spanning scramble to find an anthropometric measurement that could reliably discern between races. Samuel George Morton (1839) , for instance, developed measurements of cranial capacity for this purpose; Petrus Camper (1770) used facial angle; John Beddoe [1885 (1862) ] used a combination of hair and eye color and skull morphology; and of course there was phrenology, which was already being used for criminal profiling in India. Risley eventually settled on the nasal index, a measure developed by French anthropologist Paul Topinard (1885) , which expresses the ratio of nose breadth to height. In a rather teleological moment, Risley defended this decision by pointing out that, after all, Dravidian South Indians did have broader, flatter noses, whereas (presumably more Aryan) North Indians had pointier, narrower noses. Moreover, he cited a passage of the Rig Veda 6 that contained references to a “noseless” people, which he believed proved the deep historical importance of nose morphology as an index of caste precedence on the subcontinent. Never mind that that translation was shortly afterward refined to remove mentions of noses, which had been an inaccurate translation ( Trautmann 1997 ).
Risley's two landmark publications, Tribes and Castes of Bengal ( 1892 ) and The People of India ( 1908 ), cemented his reputation as an eminent ethnologist, but he summarized much of his racial thinking in a shorter, pithier piece on caste in 1891. 7 In this paper, Risley sketched out a proposition that Indians could be divided into racial groups with distinctive physical appearances, behaviors, temperaments, and languages, onto which castes—both jatis and varnas—would reliably map. The schema consisted of two main races: the flat-nosed Dravidians he described as “the black, noseless, squat Dasyus described in the Vedas…[flat-nosed] to a degree closely approaching to the negro,” and, inevitably, the pointy-nosed Aryans, who according to Risley resembled “the population of Southern Europe,” reflecting the notion of a shared Aryan descent that Müller and others had already proposed ( Risley 1891 , pp. 251–52). Risley also identified a third “Mongoloid” group with yellowish skin, consisting mostly of Northeastern hill tribes, along with intermediary groups representing mixes between these three main categories and others. Risley did not simply describe these hereditary race groups; he also ranked them by “social precedence”: “Enough has been said to prove that a high average nasal index [flat nose] is usually, I may even say invariably, found along with low social position and totemistic subdivisions, while conversely a low index denotes high social rank and a system of eponymous subdivisions” ( Risley 1891 , p. 254). Key to this argument was the practice of caste endogamy. The idea was that multiple generations of intermarriage would produce groups with distinctive biological profiles that could be traced along caste and race lines. In a separate publication, Risley even referred to India as “the great storehouse of ethnographical data which British rule in India has thrown open to European enquirers” ( Risley 1886 , p. 71).
It nearly goes without saying that Risley's attempt to separate Indian castes into lighter-skinned Aryans, “Negro-like” Dravidians, and East Asian–looking Mongoloids very closely mirrored the state of European racial thinking at the time, which also divided humans into three main groups: Caucasians, Africans, and East Asians—a scheme we see even today in racist genomics work (e.g., Wade 2015 ). Risley's work, and the Aryan invasion theory more generally, also clearly reflects the master narrative of “the opposition of the dark-skinned savage and the fair-skinned civilized European” ( Trautmann 1997 , p. 3). It is striking that this theory has continued to dominate the scholarship on the peopling of India, even though it has never been substantiated despite centuries of debate and research in archaeology, linguistics, and now genomics ( Valiani 2021 ).
Thus far, I have been discussing how European scientific racist ideas were applied to Indian caste groups during colonialism, and much like the narratives of my predecessors, this story has been dominated by European men. But, as I proposed in the introduction, the racial science of India did not consist of merely the application of already formed ideas to a foreign human laboratory; it was also a vehicle through which Western racial ideas were tested, refined, and then reapplied to Europeans.
Take, for instance, the efforts at criminal control in India described above. Indian ethnology was surprisingly central to the development of British liberalist governance and doctrine in the nineteenth century ( Brown 2003 ). British jurists developed those policies using a comparative approach that drew parallels between Thugs, Irish nationalists, impoverished Londoners, and European Gypsies ( Radhakrishna 2008 ). The discussion of similarities between marginalized groups in different parts of the world is nicely encapsulated in the writings of Henry Mayhew (1812–1887), the British journalist who in the mid-nineteenth century published a series of high-profile ethnographic studies of the London poor, which would eventually be compiled into his seminal work London Labour and the London Poor ( Mayhew 1851–1962 ). In that body of work, he typologized all nomadic peoples across the world as a lesser race (“vagabond savages,” in the language of the day), drawing on Indian lower-caste and nomadic tribal groups as examples to support the supposed global applicability and even shared provenance of this type ( Radhakrishna 2008 ). Social reformer Edwin Chadwick (1800–1890), a disciple of Jeremy Bentham who is best known for his work on reform of the Poor Laws, even suggested that London's poor classes ought to be governed like a colony—treated as a separate people-within-a-nation and disciplined using the techniques that had been developed in places like India ( Philip 2002 , Radhakrishna 2008 ). This idea made its way up the British gubernatorial ranks until it reached Prime Minister Lord Rosebery himself (1847–1929), who stated that domestic policy had a duty to promote the “imperial race” of Britain, which could not thrive in the “rookeries and slums which still survive” ( Rosebery 1921 , p. 250).
Jones's and Risley's work on the Aryan invasion theory also indirectly supported new virulent strains of European supremacy grounded in the notion that Aryan-descended groups around the world had a universal claim to superiority. The linkages to Nazism were not explicit, but one need not scratch far below the surface to find connections. Risley's 1891 paper cited Karl Penka, an Austrian philologist and anthropologist who was a well-known racist and anti-Semitic scholar and a key figure in the development of the Aryan supremacy ideas that would eventually inform the Holocaust. In the same period, Swiss-German physical anthropologist Adolf H. Schultz cited Risley's work on nasal index in India in his own study of white and black Americans’ nose morphology, which he describes as “one of the best, if not the most distinctive racial characteristic[s]” ( Schultz 1918 , p. 329). The term Aryan itself is borrowed from Sanskrit (and was first used by Max Müller to refer to European groups), as is the swastika symbol that became the emblem of the Nazi movement. This information does not imply a direct connection between Indian colonization and Nazism, but there was most certainly an indirect one. European self-consciousness of its own supremacy was solidified through juxtaposition of white Europeans against those they colonized, including Indians, and by the ideas of Aryan supremacy that caste/race typologies were used to support.
In short, knowledge that the British obtained in India and other colonies through racial science, population enumeration, and experimental legislation cycled back to Western Europe in ways that would significantly shape both British and world history. The cycle of information extended beyond that, however. The British presence in India underwrote a new form of Brahmin supremacy as high-caste individuals were offered English education and colonial government employment—one of the many routes through which colonialism reified castes as seemingly natural divisions of humankind ( Dirks 1993 ). The early ethnological projects aimed at cataloging castes and tribes employed urban, upper-caste Indians to collect much of the information that would eventually comprise the handbooks on “primitive” lifestyles. This work resulted in a cadre of high-caste Indian ethnographers and administrators who had been trained in scientific racist approaches to studying and categorizing their fellow countrymen by their caste identities ( Philip 2002 ). One might assume that Indians rejected Risley's scientific racism as soon as they got the chance, given its origins in oppressive colonial projects, but that was not the case.
When India attained independence in 1947, B.R. Ambedkar, the architect of free India's constitution and an outspoken Dalit rights activist, included provisions that explicitly outlawed caste-based discrimination and reserved seats in government and public employment for people of historically oppressed caste groups. Despite this built-in caste equity policy, at the time of independence, Indian thinkers were actively adopting racial science in the building of the new nation ( Arnold 2000 , Mukharji 2017 ). The incorporation of scientific racist thought into independent India's policies and institutions represents another part of the under-acknowledged story of India, race, and biological anthropology, and it is important because it shows how anthropological methods—flawed though they were—underpin India's present-day approaches to human difference. It also provided another avenue through which racial theories were exchanged, tested, and refined between European and Indian elites.
One key figure of the European–Indian knowledge exchange around the time of Indian independence was P.C. Mahalanobis, a brilliant Bengali statistician who began as a student of physics at Cambridge University. When World War I broke out, Mahalanobis taught himself the cutting-edge methods of statistics on the ship home to India ( Mukharji 2017 ). He quickly applied those methods to the anthropometric data on India's caste groups, including those collected by Risley's census. Mahalanobis is best known in biological anthropology for his development of the multivariate distance measure D 2 , which he created to analyze Risley's anthropometric measurements so that race mixture could be statistically characterized ( Mahalanobis 1925 ). He eventually became the founder and first director of the Indian Statistical Institute, establishing independent India's protocol for large-scale surveys using Risley's racial anthropometry methods to document physical differences between caste groups. A friend and advisor to India's first prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru, Mahalanobis also used his considerable influence to convince British population geneticist J.B.S. Haldane to spend the final years of his life in India, bringing his Journal of Genetics with him and thereby altering the history of the field of genetics as well.
Another central figure at this time was anthropologist B.S. Guha, the first South Asian to earn a PhD in anthropology, which he completed in 1924 at Harvard University for his thesis, which was very tellingly titled “The Racial Basis of the Caste System in India.” While there, he trained under physical anthropologist and prolific mentor Earnest Hooton and alongside classmate Carlton Coon, with whom he became close both personally and professionally. Guha went on to become the founder-director of the Anthropological Survey of India, which classified Indian people into races in the early part of the twentieth century ( Mukharji 2014 , 2017 ). Coon, meanwhile, mused about the separate origins of North and South Indians over the entire course of his twentieth-century work ( Coon 1939 , 1965 ).
Even before India's independence, the search was under way for new technologies that could be used to replace the clunky, error-prone anthropometrics that Risley and others had used to (unsuccessfully) map race and caste in India, and this search for better measures too evolved through the cyclical exchange of scientific ideas between Europeans and Indians. Polish scientists Ludwik and Hanna Hirzfeld, medical volunteers in Serbia during WWI, made the watershed discovery that blood type B was more common among Indian soldiers than among others ( Mukharji 2014 ). This discovery was supported by the emerging sciences of genetics and serology, and it led to a new human origins story that involved India as “the cradle of one part of humanity—namely, of the biochemical race B” ( Hirschfeld & Hirschfeld 1919 , p. 679, also cited in Mukharji 2014 under the spelling “Hirzfeld”). This work inaugurated the subfield of sero-anthropology and spurred a body of research on blood groups in India in the ensuing half-century, most of which was predicated on the old Risleyan idea that caste groups, being strictly endogamous, would represent pure, distinct blood lines ( Mukharji 2014 ).
Today, of course, blood groups have been superseded by more advanced genomic and genetic methods to quantify human difference. Despite these technological advancements, many studies are still framed by the old idea of the Aryan invasion theory (which, lest readers forget, has never been proven). Mahalanobis's Indian Statistical Institute and Guha's Anthropological Survey of India still exist and are now actively involved in genomic population surveys to assess biological similarities and difference among Indians ( Mukharji 2017 ). For instance, in the late 1990s, working at the Indian Statistical Institute, geneticist Partha Majumder (1998) delineated Indian diversity using old racial classifications from the nineteenth century and tried to explain this diversity with anthropometric and genetic data. Using measurements such as cranial and nasal indices, harking directly back to Risley, Majumder found a distribution of what he referred to as “morphological types” (p. 102) in different regions of India (e.g., Negrito in the Nilgiri Hills, Australoid in the central and southern regions, Mongoloid in the Northeast, and Caucasoid in other regions). From classic genetic polymorphisms, he reported that Indians were most closely related to Mongoloids and most distant from Negroids ( Majumder 1998 ). But his main finding was a genetic separation between Northern and Southern Indians, overriding “socio-cultural affinities” (p. 106). While we might assume that Majumder's work is now dated, a version minus the racial types (Mongoloids, etc.) is still in circulation. In 2015 , Majumder & Basu reviewed genomic studies and concluded that Majumdar's earlier North–South split was valid under Reich's more recent ancestral North Indian (ANI) and ancestral South Indian (ASI) clinal model of gradated difference ( Reich et al. 2009 ).
Other genetic and genomic studies are grappling even more directly with various facets of the Aryan invasion theory. Work by Thanseem et al. (2006) , based on their discovery of relatively uniform mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) results between castes and tribal groups, suggested that Aryan invaders would have been mostly male and that they would have conquered indigenous tribal groups and subordinated them as lower castes. Similar findings have come from other genomic studies, such as the idea that an Aryan racial heritage predominates in North Indians and in higher caste groups ( Bamshad et al. 2001 , Basu et al. 2003 , Reich et al. 2009 ), the assumption of caste endogamy ( Majumder 2010 , Nakatsuka et al. 2017 ), and the slightly different theory that invading Aryan men would have reproduced with Dravidian women who were already occupying the region ( Bamshad et al. 2001 , Silva et al. 2017 ).
Not all contemporary India-focused geneticists and genomicists are working from this simplified two-group North–South model, fortunately. Some researchers find the genomic complexity of South Asia to be greater than varying levels of admixture between ANI and ASI ancestral groups. Basu and colleagues specify four major ancestries with much more complicated admixing and endogamy effects ( Basu et al. 2016 ). But many of these studies are thwarted by shared problems, such as the fact that ( a ) Indians are not very well represented in global whole-genome databases that serve as the reference populations for most comparative genomics studies ( Basu et al. 2016 , Sengupta et al. 2016 ) and ( b ) South Asia is very poorly represented in ancient DNA (aDNA) studies ( Thangaraj & Rai 2019 ).
aDNA studies that do exist, however, are also framed by efforts to either prove or disprove Aryan invasion questions. A recent aDNA study of a Harappan individual (Indus Valley Civilization, 2600–1900 BCE) showed affinities with ancient Iranians and Southeast Asian foragers ( Shinde et al. 2019 ). From these results, Shinde and colleagues suggest that farming in South Asia arose from local foragers rather than from large-scale migration from the West (as the Aryan model posits). But another recent aDNA study looked for ancestry signals from the Eurasian Steppe populations that were involved with the spread of the Indo-European languages ( Narasimhan et al. 2019 ). The researchers concluded that Steppe populations contributed about 30% to the genetic profile of northwestern South Asian groups after the Indus Valley Civilization declined, forming the basis of ANI genomes, which then mixed with the ASI “tribal” populations to form the South Asian genetic cline. aDNA is still missing entirely from central and southern groups in India, leaving a gap when trying to piece together the genesis of modern Indian genetic diversity.
The upshot of all this work is that, genetically, the Aryan invasion theory is simply wrong ( Silva et al. 2017 , Tamang et al. 2012 ). Given the staggering genetic diversity in India, it is incredibly difficult to delimit which varna or jati groups would comprise endogamous extant populations or—even more challenging—those in the past. While many studies do report detectable genetic differences between groups, the differences follow a general North–South cline ( Narasimhan et al. 2019 , figure 3B) and are not racial. Both modern and aDNA analyses indicate complex, multiple movements in and out of the subcontinent over 10,000 or more years, resulting in a structure that resembles “ramen noodles,” in the words of Marks (2015) . Jones's nineteenth-century linguistic groupings for the Aryan invasion theory and Risley's anthropometric observations are actually the result of complicated multi-millennial expansions of Yamnaya Steppe pastoralists ( Narasimhan et al. 2019 ). The failure of the Aryan invasion theory is an important coda to the story of race in India because Aryanism has historically constituted one of the key grounds of scientific caste/race theories there, and continues to do so.
The racialization of caste has contemporary implications beyond population genetics. Today, India boasts one of the world's largest-scale affirmative action programs, and it is based on caste affiliation. Since the late 1990s, 49.5% of seats in public and government employment have been reserved for people belonging to government-designated lower castes and tribes. Despite this progressive policy, the racial inflections of caste in India continue to profoundly limit the life chances of oppressed groups.
India, much like the United States, has a vested ideological interest in maintaining the perception that it is a democracy free of racism. Consequently, until recently, Indian officials have publicly disavowed any possibility of racism within national borders ( McDuie-Ra 2015 ). But scholars have long debated the similarities and differences between Indian caste and American race (e.g., Beteille 1990 , Cox 1945 ). Indian and US-based activists, too, have been using transnational parallels between race and caste to marshal support for populations subject to discrimination since at least the 1960s. These parallels have been drawn repeatedly by both sides to argue for greater legal representation of oppressed race and caste groups and to highlight human rights violations against them.
For instance, during the US Civil Rights movements, the Dalit Panthers formed in India in parallel with the Black Panthers, with whom they articulated explicit political alliances ( Gokhale-Turner 1979 ). Gunnar Myrdal (1944) used the idea that “race is like caste” in his landmark sociological study An American Dilemma , a key piece of scholarship cited by Chief Justice Earl Warren in the Brown v. Board of Education decision, which resulted in the desegregation of American public schools. In 2001, the National Campaign on Dalit Human Rights sent a delegation to present on the parallels between caste and race at the Third UN World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance. They were thwarted by India's central government, however, which publicly declared that caste and race were not at all parallel and therefore that caste had no relevance for international law ( Berg 2018 ). More recently, the idea that race in the United States functions as a caste system has been revived by Alexander's (2012) book The New Jim Crow and by the 2020 bestseller Caste: The Origins of Our Discontents ( Wilkerson 2020 ).
The notion of inherited caste as a reliable marker of criminality also continues to resonate today for many Indians. The idea was codified in the Criminal Tribes Act (CTA) of the 1870s, which built on William Sleeman's Thug work to legally designate certain jatis and tribes—amounting to millions of individuals—as habitual criminals. The laws required government registration and restricted people's movements under penalty of incarceration ( Tolen 1991 ). The CTA was, fortunately, repealed in 1949, but these laws ultimately resulted in a set of 198 groups who still today carry the government designation “denotified tribes,” referring to the fact that after the repeal of the CTA, they are no longer “notified” criminal classes. Although the “denotified” designation might sound like progress, the 1952 Habitual Offenders Act quickly replaced the CTA, empowering police to monitor the lifestyles and livelihoods of the newly denotified and providing a legislative mechanism for perpetuating an already entrenched cycle of social marginalization ( Bhukya 2007 ). In 2007, the United Nations called for a repeal of the Habitual Offenders Act, but at the time of this writing it was still in place. Under its aegis, human rights groups claim, these already marginalized groups are continually subjected to abuses such as forced registration with the police, questioning or imprisonment without cause, and forced removal from ancestral lands.
It took a set of high-profile racially motivated murders of Northeast Indians between 2012 and 2014 to motivate India's government to acknowledge racism within its borders ( McDuie-Ra 2015 ). Risley's nineteenth-century tripartite Aryan, Dravidian, and Mongoloid race groups have long underwritten anti-Asian racism within India by shoring up the idea that Northeastern Indians, who speak Tibeto-Burman and Austro-Asiatic languages and are considered East Asian looking compared with North and South Indians, are categorically and racially “other.” “While other communities experience discrimination,” explains sociologist Duncan McDuie-Ra, “communities from the Northeast are the only category of citizens to be construed at the national level as a separate racial group with a dubious connection to the rest of the nation—‘mongoloids,’ ‘chinkies,’ ‘Chinese’” ( McDuie-Ra 2015 , p. 3; emphasis in the original). That perception of Northeastern otherness is motivated, in part, by anxieties around their migration to mainland Indian cities and manifests in routine hypersexualization of women and the use of racial slurs and intrusive questions such as, “Are you Chinese?” ( Haokip 2021 , McDuie-Ra 2015 ). Most recently, Northeastern groups have experienced another wave of racism related to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, which has been globally characterized as a “Chinese virus” ( Haokip 2021 ). The perception that Northeasterners are outsiders that pose a threat is a lingering result of the nineteenth-century racializing discourses that characterized these groups as fundamentally biologically different from either Aryan- or Dravidian-descended races.
Scientific racism also lingers in contemporary India's colorism, which has given rise to a flourishing skin-whitening industry consisting of products that claim to impart a fairer tone to skin ( Nadeem 2014 , Varghese 2017 ). While it would be an oversimplification to equate the desire for whiteness as a simple effort to mimic Caucasian or Aryan skin tones ( Saraswati 2020 ), sociologist Shehzad Nadeem explores how individuals today draw on the old Risleyan idea to explain lighter skin as reflecting a higher proportion of Aryan ancestry. “[T]he [Aryan invasion] theory has considerable staying power as many light skinned Indians attribute their complexions to such a heritage” ( Nadeem 2014 , p. 226). Feminist ethnographers and other social scientists agree that the fixation on skin lightening in India and other parts of South Asia reinforces power gradients between higher and lower castes and between Westerners and Indians as postcolonial subjects ( Nadeem 2014 , Shrestha 2013 ). The fixation on lighter skin also reflects a more complex transnational cosmopolitanism associated with whiteness that is seen as crucial for improved life chances, especially for women in globalizing India ( Saraswati 2020 ).
Finally, scientific racism in India lingers in indices of caste inequality, which, like racism in the United States, is achingly obvious. Firsthand accounts (e.g., Yengde 2019 ) and statistics on employment by caste demonstrate that Dalit communities face systematic, multigenerational barriers that severely curtail their ability to accumulate wealth ( Borooah et al. 2014 , Zacharias & Vakulabharanam 2011 ). These structural barriers make it significantly less likely that individuals of lower caste will obtain an education beyond primary school ( Desai & Kulkarni 2008 ) and leave them especially susceptible to the consequences of poor health care access, such as high levels of under-five child mortality ( Baru et al. 2010 ). Recalling his own experience in the 1990s growing up in a Dalit neighborhood in urban Maharashtra, Dalit scholar-activist Suraj Yengde (2019) writes,
[Dalits] lived with constant troubles which were not of their own making. Thus, they never enjoyed a protected working-class stature. They were class outcastes who had the bare minimum for survival. They seldom had a stable job or a life. Owing to financial distress, many turned to drugs and crime as refuge as they seemed to be the only avenues open for survival. Fights—verbal and physical—violence, prostitution, sexual abuse, alcohol and drug abuse were common. These were the circumstances I grew up in. (p. 6)

Section: Conclusion

Biological anthropology owes its very existence to the scientific study of, by, and with peoples subject to European colonialism. As historian Gyan Prakash (1999) notes, “The [academic] disciplines did not simply depend upon Europe's prior self-generated cultural and political resources; rather, their development in the course of trade, exploration, conquest, and domination instantiated Western modernity” (p. 13). In this article, I have taken the case study of India, Britain's largest colonial holding, to demonstrate how truly global the founding of biological anthropology was, despite the fact that it is usually characterized only as a product of European thought.
If this account feels convoluted, that is because it is: It is almost impossible to separate the colonization of India from scientific racism, and that association persists in ways that become remarkably obvious when we begin to untangle the history. During the early development of anthropology, Indians and Indian cultures served quite literally as a “great storehouse of ethnographical data” ( Risley 1886 , p. 71)—a human laboratory on which many European anthropologists cut their teeth. In particular, the racial sciences of phrenology and anthropometry enjoyed significant advancement through their application to Indian caste groups deemed criminally deviant. Through mechanisms such as the census, that racialization also extended to the more general population, which was seen as obsessively communitarian because of widespread caste endogamy. This perspective is itself an important and rarely acknowledged part of biological anthropology's disciplinary history; without this interaction in India, biological anthropology as we know it today might look very different.
But, as this article has discussed, the entanglements between India and biological anthropology go even deeper. Early anthropological work among Indian caste and regional groups fundamentally changed Europeans’ understandings of their own position in the world by providing justification for racial superiority through Aryan heritage. Reciprocally, race science became a central part of how Indians viewed and enumerated themselves, particularly after the nation attained independence ( Mukharji 2017 ).
I realize that this is a tangled web, and I hope this case study can act as a resource for those teaching about the history of biological anthropology and/or about race and anthropology. This goal is, in part, a matter of developing a more holistic and accurate disciplinary origin story that acknowledges the role of colonial subjects whose lifeways served as raw material for the development of anthropology. That aim aligns with contemporary anthropology's disciplinary commitment to social justice, decolonization, and attention to global concerns.
Perhaps paradoxically, this reorientation toward a more globally inclusive origin story is also a way of arguing for anthropology's global relevance right now. Early anthropology in India directly shaped how contemporary Indian societies view and treat caste differences. Marginalization of caste and tribal groups believed to be inherently criminal, increases in caste-related hate crimes with the ascendancy of the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (culminating in the election of populist prime minister Narendra Modi in 2014), anti-Asian racism directed at Northeastern Indians, and a booming skin-whitening industry all have origins in colonial anthropology. While shining a light on this history might not be flattering to the discipline, it also points to important ways that new anthropological work pushing back against this history could be relevant in, and for, India and other postcolonial nations.

Section: Acknowledgements

Many thanks go to Alan Goodman and James Bindon for encouraging me to write this piece and to Zachary DuBois, Erik Peterson, Arafaat Valiani, Dan Hruschka, and Josh Snodgrass for reading early drafts and workshopping ideas. James Bindon reviewed the genetics and genomics literature for the article, and I first began developing much of the content through research for episodes of our American Anthropological Association–sponsored podcast Speaking of Race .
