Section: Abstract

Objective: Health economic evaluations using common health-related quality of life measures may fall short in adequately incorporating all relevant benefits of health and social care interventions targeted at older people. The Well-being of Older People measure (WOOP) is a broader well-being measure that comprises nine well-being domains. The objective of this study was to estimate a utility tariff for the WOOP, to facilitate its application in cost-utility analyses.
Methods: A discrete choice experiment (DCE) with duration approach was set up and fielded among 2,012 individuals from the Netherlands aged 65 years and above. Matched pairwise choice tasks, colour-coding and level overlap were used to reduce the cognitive burden of the DCE. The choice tasks were created using a Bayesian heterogeneous D-efficient design. The estimation procedure accommodated for nonlinear time preferences via an exponential discounting function.
Results: The estimation results showed that ‘physical health’, ‘mental health’, and ‘making ends meet’ were the most important well-being domains for older people, followed by ‘independence’ and ‘living situation’. Of somewhat lesser importance were domains like ‘social life’, ‘receiving support’ and ‘feeling useful’. The generated utility tariffs can be used to translate well-being states described with the WOOP to a utility score between −0.616 and 1.
Conclusions: This study established a tariff for the WOOP, which will facilitate its use in economic evaluations of health and social care interventions targeted at older people, first of all in the Netherlands.

Section: Introduction, Literature Review

Health care , social care and long-term care spending is increasing worldwide ( Lorenzoni et al., 2019 ), propelled by the interaction of ageing populations , increased public expectations, and advances in medical technology ( de Meijer et al., 2013 ). In high income countries, health care spending in the age group above 65 years is already two to three times higher compared to spending in all other age groups combined ( Papanicolas et al., 2020 ). Therefore, the efficient use of scarce care resources, especially within this age group, is crucial. Health economic evaluations, like cost-utility analyses, are established tools to assess whether care services are offering value for money and, therefore, are worthwhile investing in. The results of such analyses guide policy makers in their endeavour to provide the best possible care from the available budget. So far, cost-utility analyses predominantly use quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) as outcome measure, which combine health-related quality of life (HRQoL) with length of life ( Neumann et al., 2016 ).
Especially in long-term care, social care and end-of-life care, which often aim to improve (or preserve) quality of life domains beyond health, generic HRQoL measures may fall short of measuring the full benefits of these services ( Makai et al., 2014 ). As a result, different well-being measures have been developed that aim to capture these quality of life domains beyond health ( Bulamu et al., 2015 ; Cleland et al., 2019 ; Helter et al., 2019 ; Makai et al., 2014 ). However, in developing these measures, lay perspectives on what is important for the well-being of older people have often been overlooked ( Bowling and Stenner, 2011 ), as well as the heterogeneity in older people's views on what constitutes well-being ( Hackert et al., 2019 ). Moreover, some of the existing well-being measures are very lengthy and, therefore, not well-suited for self-completion. Most also lack a utility tariff to reflect the relative importance of their domains to overall well-being ( Makai et al., 2014 ). While measures like Adult Social Care Outcomes Toolkit (ASCOT) and the ICEpop CAPability measure for Older people (ICECAP-O) do not seem to have these shortcomings ( Grewal et al., 2006 ; Netten et al., 2012 ), questions remain about their evaluative scope ( Makai et al., 2014 ). For instance, these measures do not directly measure the quality of life domain ‘health’ ( Grewal et al., 2006 ; Netten et al., 2012 ), even though older people consider this to be (very) important for their well-being ( Hackert et al., 2017 , 2019 ). While health supposedly is captured indirectly in the ICECAP-O, research suggests that this may not be sufficiently the case, in particular physical health ( Davis et al., 2013 ; Hackert et al., 2020 ; Van Leeuwen et al., 2015 ).
To overcome some of the shortcomings of existing well-being measures, an alternative measure was developed: the Well-being of Older People measure (WOOP) ( Hackert et al., 2021 ). Its domains are directly based on the views of older people in the Netherlands themselves on what constitutes well-being ( Hackert et al., 2019 ). and covers a comprehensive set of nine well-being domains: ‘physical health’, ‘mental health’, ‘social life’, ‘receiving support’, ‘acceptance and resilience’, ‘feeling useful’, ‘independence’, ‘making ends meet’, and ‘living situation’. For each of the domains, respondents can indicate their level of functioning by selecting one of five response categories (see Appendix). Qualitative research confirmed the content validity and feasibility of the WOOP as it demonstrated that it captured the important domains of well-being for older people and was considered clear and suitable to self-report their level of well-being ( Hackert et al., 2021 ). Quantitative research showed satisfactory to good results for construct, convergent and discriminant validity , as well as test-retest reliability ( Hackert et al., 2020 ).
Utility tariffs for the WOOP are currently lacking, which clearly hampers its application in (economic) evaluations of health and social care services for older people ( Neumann et al., 2016 ). Therefore, the objective of this study is to estimate a Dutch WOOP utility tariff. The structure of this paper is as follows: the next paragraph specifies the methods, with an emphasis on the design of the choice experiment and the data collection; subsequently, the results are presented, including the WOOP utility tariff; finally, we discuss our findings and their implications.

Section: Methodology

To estimate utility tariffs for the WOOP for the Netherlands a discrete choice experiment was designed. More specifically, a ‘DCE with duration’ approach was employed, entailing including duration of life as an additional attribute in the choice tasks. This allows anchoring of utilities on a scale from 0 (dead) to 1 (perfect well-being) ( Rowen et al., 2015 ). This method was preferred over standard gamble and time-trade-off approaches due to concerns relating to the cognitive burden of these iterative procedures, the size of the WOOP instrument, and due to the possibility of administering DCE tasks online ( Mulhern et al., 2014 ).
The traditional estimation approach for DCE with duration data assumes linear time preferences. This implies that the general public is willing to give up a constant proportion of remaining life years for a certain health improvement, without consideration of the number of life years that remain ( Dolan and Stalmeier, 2003 ). Previous work provided evidence that this assumption does not hold in DCE with duration data and that it would introduce biased parameters, as health state preferences would be contaminated by time preferences ( Craig et al., 2018 ; Jonker et al., 2018a ). As such, we did not want to presume linear time preferences from the outset and selected an approach that can accommodate non-linear time preferences with a more flexible approach ( Jonker et al., 2018a ). How this was achieved is outlined below under ‘conceptual framework’.
Attributes and levels used in the choice experiment were defined by the descriptive system of the WOOP (see Appendix) ( Hackert et al., 2020 ). Each of the nine domains of the WOOP is represented by one item with five response levels, generally ranging from excellent (level 1) to bad (level 5). Physical health level 1, for instance, represents being very satisfied with one's physical health. In addition to the nine WOOP domains, a duration attribute was included to enable trade-offs between quality and duration of life. Duration was specified in years using 17 values (0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, …, 15). The values and the range thereof were selected to provide realistic quantities of remaining life years in our target population (smallest and highest values were designed to appear less frequently than the more commonly occurring and hence more realistic middle values). To further increase realism in the choice tasks, we ruled out that the following attribute levels could appear together: Level 1 of independence together with either level 5 of physical or mental health , as well as level 1 of social life and level 5 of support. In a previous data collection with 1,113 respondents, the first two combinations did not occur in the data, while the latter occurred just once ( Hackert et al., 2020 ).
To reduce the cognitive burden of the ten-attribute choice task for the target population, we undertook several steps. First, descriptions of domains and levels were carefully simplified by the researchers involved in the development and qualitative work of the WOOP instrument. Full domain descriptions were still accessible to respondents in the choice task upon moving the cursor over the abbreviated versions. Second, a previously used matched pairs choice task format, which was found to reduce the cognitive burden of choice tasks, was applied ( Fig. 1 ) ( Jonker et al., 2017 , 2018a ). This entailed a first choice between two well-being states A and B, both with equal duration, followed by a matched second choice between the same well-being state B and perfect well-being. This format already simplified the choice tasks by avoiding simultaneous comparisons between the quantity and quality of well-being. This feature of this choice task format additionally helps respondents to treat health and duration multiplicatively. This is theoretically required, but not the case for most respondents when using a traditional, single choice, DCE with duration format ( Jonker and Norman, 2022 ). To further reduce the complexity of the choice tasks, five out of the nine domains were constrained to be overlapped (i.e., well-being states differed in only four domains). To highlight the differences, the level descriptions were colour-coded using shades of purple (with darker shades representing worse levels). This combination of level overlap and colour-coding successfully reduced drop-out rates and attribute non-attendance in earlier studies ( Jonker et al., 2018b , 2019 , 2018b ). The second choice was between the same well-being state B and perfect well-being, but with a shorter duration. We confirmed the feasibility of the final choice tasks in think-aloud interviews among individuals aged 65 years and above. In the executed think-aloud protocol, users were asked to verbalize their thoughts as they completed the full concept online survey, in which the DCE was embedded (for the elements of the survey see “Data collection and survey design”). Data saturation was reached after four think-aloud interviews. Obtained information was summarised into three meaningful categories: instructions choice tasks, instructions other tasks, overall layout. Based on the corresponding insights, minor changes were made to the layout of the survey and to the instructions accompanying the warm-up choice tasks. Download: Download high-res image (1020KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Visual presentation of the pairwise choice task (translated from Dutch).
Optimizing the statistical efficiency of the DCE design was crucial due to the large descriptive system of the WOOP (a total of 1,953,125 possible well-being states) and the imposed level overlap constraints. Therefore, an efficient design was implemented and optimized using the TPC-QALY software package ( Jonker and Bliemer, 2019 ). More specifically, a Bayesian heterogeneous D-efficient design with ten sub-designs was used. This implied a simultaneous optimisation of the efficiency of ten separate designs, as well as the efficiency of their aggregate. To give more detail, the D-efficiency criterion was calculated with 100 Bayesian draws based on the weighted average of the overall (i.e., combined) D-error (0.25) and D-errors of the individual blocks (0.75). An exponential discount function was assumed, which appeared to be the most efficient discount function tested with the TPC-QALY software ( Jonker and Bliemer, 2019 ). The design was optimized for the above-described matched choice task format (see also Fig. 1 ). The number of matched choice tasks per respondent was set at 15, resulting in ten versions and a total set of 300 paired comparisons between two well-being states. Priors for optimizing the initial design were informed by logit model estimates of WOOP best-worst scaling data (N = 310) from a previous study ( Himmler et al., 2020a ). The experimental design was updated twice after calculating priors based on 201 and a total of 514 completes to further increase the efficiency of the design.
The DCE was embedded in an online questionnaire and administered to citizens in the Netherlands aged 65 years and above recruited from the panel of the market research company Dynata. We aimed to sample around 2,000 respondents, representative in terms of age and gender, using stratified sampling. After completion, respondents could make a small donation to a charity of their choice. Data collection took place between December 2020 and March 2021.
The survey started with a description of its purpose and a consent form. Next, respondents had to rate their well-being using the WOOP. The DCE training procedure started with a two-alternative choice task with three (randomly selected) WOOP domains. Subsequently, the complexity of the introductory choice task was increased step by step. First, colour-coding was introduced. Second, the duration attribute was added. Third, alternative C and, therefore, the second of the pairwise choice tasks was included. Fourth, all nine WOOP domains were included. Colour-coding, level overlap, and duration were explicitly described. Respondents were randomised to one of the ten blocks of 15 choice tasks between two well-being states. To avoid ordering biases, further randomisation took place regarding the order of choice tasks, the order of the well-being states within choice tasks (A and B), and the order of WOOP domains across respondents (constant order per respondent). The 15 choice tasks were split in three blocks of five tasks, interrupted by two sets of standard socio-demographic questions to reduce response fatigue with respect to the choice tasks. The questionnaire ended with cognitive debriefing questions, an inquiry into whether COVID-19 changed the importance of the WOOP domains for respondents' well-being, and measures for health (EQ-VAS) and life satisfaction (Cantril's ladder).
In line with the conceptual framework of time-preference corrected QALY tariffs (see Jonker et al., 2018a ), the utility derived by individual i for well-being state j in choice task t was defined as the product of the quality of life of the well-being state and the net present value (NPV) of the number of years lived in that well-being state, or: (1) U i j t = q u a l i t y i j t ∗ N P V ( y e a r s ) i j t + ε i j t
An exponential discount function was used, which has a single discount rate parameter (r) that controls the degree of discounting and results in the following specification of the NPV: (2) N P V ( y e a r s ) i j t = ( 1 − exp ( − r * y e a r s i j t ) ) / ( exp ( r ) − 1 )
The quality of life component in equation (1) was defined as follows: Step 1. (3a) q u a l i t y i j t = β i 1 + ∑ d = 1 9 β i ( d + 1 ) * W O O P d o m a i n i j t d in which β i denotes a respondent-specific parameter vector that captures the importance of the nine WOOP domains ( i . e . β i ( 2 − 10 ) ) relative to each other and to perfect well-being (i.e., excellent levels in all domains, captured by the β i 1 intercept), and. Step 2. (3b) W O O P d o m a i n i j t d = ∑ l = 1 5 γ d l ∗ X i j t d l . in which γ d denotes a WOOP domain-specific parameter vector that measures the relative importance of levels 2, 3 and 4 relative to levels 1 and 5 of each WOOP domain, subject to the constraints that γ d 1 ≡ 0 and γ d 5 ≡ 1 for identification, and where X i j t d denotes a dummy-coded vector that equals 1 for the level at which each WOOP domain was presented to the respondent in the specific choice task, and 0 otherwise.
This specification was programmed in the BUGS language and fitted with OpenBUGS using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques. A technical appendix provides details about the statistical modelling . Worthy to note here is that the used approach implies by construction that the QALY decrements for levels 2 to 4 are monotonically increasing proportional to the γ d WOOP domain-specific level importance parameters.

Section: Results

A total of 2,660 respondents provided informed consent to participate in the study, of which 2,169 (82%) started with the DCE valuation tasks after the warm-up tasks. 2,012 respondents completed the full survey, which constitutes 93% of those who started with the DCE valuation tasks. The average age was 73 years, with 57% of respondents being male. The gender distribution of respondents above 75 years did not reflect the targeted sample quota, with females in this age category being underrepresented and males overrepresented ( Table 1 ). Respondents generally reported high levels of well-being in the nine well-being domains of the WOOP ( Fig. 2 ). Lower levels were most frequently reported for the domains ‘physical health’, ‘social life’, ‘feeling useful’, and ‘making ends meet’. Table 1 . Study sample characteristics (N = 2,012). Empty Cell Sample Sampling quota (census data) a Maledsl 57.3% Age in years (SD) b 73.3 (5.6) Age and gender distribution 65–74 male 27% 26% 75+ male 30% 18% 65–74 female 28% 27% 75+ female 14% 29% Finished tertiary education 35.4% Married 64.7% Employment Retired 84.9% Gainfully employed 6.0% Informal work and volunteering 5.6% Other 3.5% Country of birth Netherlands 94.2% Other 5.8% Cantril's Ladder (SD) 7.6 (1.2) EQ-VAS (SD) 73.4 (18.6) Note: SD, Standard deviation. a Data from Statistics Netherlands (Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek) 2020. b Age ranged from 65 to 101. Download: Download high-res image (263KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Distribution of responses to the nine well-being domains of the WOOP (N = 2,012). Note: * The worst level was selected by less than 1% of respondents in all WOOP dimensions.
The average survey completion time was 34 min (median 24 min). Speeding, defined as a completion time of less than one-third of the median, occurred in 2% of responses (speeders were not excluded from the analysis). The cognitive debriefing questions in general provided favourable results, for instance, 78% of individuals at least partially agreed to the statement that the choice tasks were ‘clear’ to them (details in suppl. material, Table A1 ). We did not find large or significant differences in the response patterns to the cognitive debriefing questions between the three different experimental designs used (suppl. material, Table A2 ). This alleviates concerns about sacrificing (too much) respondent efficiency at the gain of statistical efficiency, which has been discussed before ( Flynn et al., 2016 ; Mulhern et al., 2017 ).
The calculated domain importance coefficients (equation (3a) ) show that ‘physical health’ and ‘mental health’, and to a lesser degree ‘making ends meet’, were the most important well-being domains among the older people in our sample ( Table 2 ). Similarly, when summarising and plotting the terms used by respondents for describing well-being in their own words, physical and mental health were most frequently mentioned (see suppl. material, Figure A1 ). Table 2 . Domain importance on latent utility scale. Domain Mean Lower 95% CI Upper 95% CI SD Physical health −1.381 −1.482 −1.283 0.051 Mental health −1.507 −1.615 −1.401 0.055 Social life −0.556 −0.606 −0.507 0.025 Receiving support −0.457 −0.506 −0.409 0.025 Acceptance and resilience −0.543 −0.596 −0.493 0.026 Feeling useful −0.426 −0.475 −0.380 0.025 Independence −0.718 −0.781 −0.657 0.032 Making ends meet −1.136 −1.218 −1.054 0.042 Living situation −0.674 −0.735 −0.615 0.031 CI = Credible Interval.
The anchored domain level utility weights are presented in Fig. 3 (suppl. material, Table A4 shows the 95% CI). By construction, the estimated domain level weights are logically consistent within all nine well-being domains and non-positive. Two levels failed to reach statistical significance (i.e., the second-best levels of ‘acceptance & resilience’ and ‘making ends meet’). The strongest decrements were found for ‘mental health’ (−0.329), ‘physical health’ (−0.302) and ‘making ends meet’ (−0.248), followed by ‘independence’ (−0.157) and ‘living environment’ (−0.147). ‘Social life’, ‘receiving support’, ‘acceptance and resilience’, and ‘feeling useful’ were generally perceived as less important for well-being. The theoretical spread of the WOOP utility ranges from −0.616 (worst possible state) to 1 (best possible state). The estimated discount rate was 0.173, considerably larger than has been found in a related general population study (0.057) ( Jonker et al., 2018a ). A higher discount rate may relate to a lower remaining life expectancy among older people. Jonker et al. (2018a) also found that people with more severe health problems had a higher discount rate, thus finding this higher discount rate for older people, who tend to have more, and more severe health problems, is not completely unexpected. Download: Download high-res image (314KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Utilities weights of the WOOP domain levels, with level 1 (excellent) as reference category.
Applying the utility tariffs to the WOOP responses in the sample produced a mean WOOP utility of 0.856 (SD 0.120). A utility value of 1 was observed for 34 respondents (1.7%) and a utility value below 0 (−0.067) for one respondent. The 25%, 50%, and 75% quantiles were 0.831, 0.889, and 0.929, respectively. When plotting utilities against EQ-VAS and Cantril's ladder ( Fig. 4 ), a strongly positive correlation was observed (r = 0.59 and r = 0.54, respectively) with similar trends for males and females. Download: Download high-res image (476KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . WOOP utility values plotted against health (EQ-VAS) and life satisfaction . Note: For illustration purposes, jitter was added to the EQ-VAS and life satisfaction values, which are bounded on 0 to 100 and 0 to 10 range, respectively.
Results for the question about whether the importance of the different well-being domains had changed due to COVID-19 were the following: The domains ‘physical health’, ‘mental health’, ‘independence’, and ‘social life’ generally appear to have become more important (suppl. material, Figure A2 ). Depending on the dimension, between 61% and 74% of respondents indicated that each respective domain had remained equally important for their well-being, with the lowest value observed for ‘social life’.

Section: Discussion

Given the increasing relevance of health and social care services for older people, and the fact that these services usually aim to improve well-being rather than health (alone), adequate instruments for measuring the well-being of older people are required. The WOOP was recently developed for this purpose. To be useful as outcome measure in economic evaluations, such a measure ideally is accompanied by utility tariffs. Hence, in this study we present the results of a discrete choice experiment fielded among 2,012 individuals in the Netherlands aged 65 years and above to obtain preference-based utility tariffs for the WOOP. The resulting tariffs enable transformation of well-being states described with the WOOP into a utility score anchored on perfect well-being (1) and dead (0), and hence the use of the WOOP as outcome measure in cost-utility analyses of interventions in health and social care aimed at older people.
We elicited preferences from individuals aged 65 years and above, hence in the group of older people themselves and not in the general adult population as is commonly done for other outcome measures. Therefore, the utility tariffs for the WOOP reflect the relative importance for well-being of the different domains and functioning levels therein in the target population of the WOOP. This approach was deemed most relevant in informing the allocation of resources intended to improve the well-being of older people, and especially to evaluate optimal allocation within the budget for health and social care services for older people according to their preferences. Therefore, in contrast to measures like the EQ-5D, the WOOP is specifically targeted at one age group and not intended for comparisons across all adult age groups.
Given the large descriptive system and the target population of the WOOP, the optimal elicitation method was selected based on a preceding study ( Himmler et al., 2020a ). Furthermore, we undertook several steps to reduce the cognitive burden of the choice tasks. Based on the responses to the cognitive debriefing statements presented to respondents after the choice tasks, it seems that the combination of a stepwise introduction to the experiment, colour-coding, level overlap and the separation of the trade-offs between well-being domains and duration was successful in reducing the cognitive burden to a manageable amount for this sample of older people.
In line with the Q-methodology study conducted to identify the domains of the WOOP ( Hackert et al., 2019 ) and with previous research ( Douma et al., 2017 ; Van Leeuwen et al., 2019 ), we found that ‘physical health’ and ‘mental health’ were the most important domains for the well-being of older people, followed by ‘making ends meet’. Domains like ‘independence’, ‘social life’, ‘receiving support’ and ‘feeling useful’ seem to be of somewhat lesser importance to their well-being. The relatively low importance of the domain ‘social life’ was somewhat surprising given the results of previous research ( Douma et al., 2017 ; Hackert et al., 2019 ; Van Leeuwen et al., 2019 ).
Previous studies estimating utility tariffs for well-being measures primarily applied best-worst scaling (BWS) approaches ( Coast et al., 2008 ; Flynn et al., 2015 ; Netten et al., 2012 ) (or intend to do so ( Ratcliffe et al., 2019 )). Therefore, a noteworthy strength of the applied methodology is that it provides a feasible alternative approach, which was also shown to be preferable for older people in terms of the cognitive burden of choice tasks in a previous study ( Himmler et al., 2020a ). Moreover, the DCE design with a duration attribute allowed anchoring the utility weights of the WOOP on a QALY-like scale, facilitating a more straightforward combination of length and quality of life in computing the benefits of interventions. The applied approach furthermore accounts for non-linear time preferences, which otherwise would bias estimates in DCE with duration approaches ( Jonker et al., 2018a ). The estimated discount rate of 0.173 implies that parameter estimates would have been severely biased by time preferences if we would have assumed linear time preferences. A more general implication of this is that for older people, estimated/empirical discount rates are much higher than the discount rates used in traditional HTA calculations, which mostly range between 1.5% and 5% ( Attema et al., 2018 ). The use of exponential (as opposed to, for example, hyperbolic) discounting in our analysis is also consistent with the common approach to discounting of health effects in health technology assessment.
More particularly, the implemented modelling approach has the advantage that it reduces the number of respondent-specific parameters, allows for correlated preferences between the WOOP domains, and produces readily available estimates of the relative importance of the WOOP domains, while ensuring a logically consistent utility tariff. The modelling approach used here was more structured than the one used by Jonker et al. (2018a) , but a more parsimonious model structure was crucial considering the large descriptive system of the WOOP and the limited number of respondents relative to the number of utility decrements.
While the pilot tests indicated that we reduced the complexity of the DCE choice tasks to a manageable cognitive burden for most respondents, decision heuristics could still have played an important role. For instance, while the colour-coding helped in identifying the differences between the two well-being states in a choice task, it may have stimulated respondents to focus on the colour intensity when making their choices. To what extent respondents used decision heuristics in general is unknown, although 89% of respondents reported to have compared all different aspects before making their choices (suppl. material, Table A1 ). At the same time, colour-coding combined with level overlap have previously been established as effective strategies to reduce the use of (other) decision heuristics ( Jonker et al., 2017 ).
Reducing the complexity also entailed simplifying the attribute and level descriptions in the choice tasks—as is common in health state valuation (see e.g. ( Devlin et al., 2018 ). We do not know whether and how this might have impacted the interpretation of attributes and levels, as we did not formally test the equivalence of abbreviated and full descriptions. Nevertheless, this is not expected to have had a substantial impact on the valuation results. First, as much as possible, all domains and levels were abbreviated in the same manner. Second, prior to the valuation tasks, individuals already were introduced to the full WOOP instrument with the full descriptions. Third, respondents had the full attribute descriptions available as mouse-over elements in the choice task to ease interpretation.
A clear limitation of the analysis relates to the representativeness of the sample, which is hampered by two factors. First, females aged 75 years and above were underrepresented in the sample (see Table 1 ). The market research company was unable to reach the desired number of completes in this group even after considerable effort.
Second, and more importantly, people above 65 years of age, who are part of online survey panels, and perhaps especially those above 75 years, likely will not be fully representative of this age group in terms of functioning, living situation, digital skills, and cognitive ability. Unfortunately, we did not collect data about these characteristics, but we could use EQ-VAS values as an indicator. When we compare age-stratified EQ-VAS values in our sample with data from a previous large-scale study among community dwelling Dutch elderly (suppl. Materials, Table A3 ), we find that individuals in our sample have a lower level of health ( Mangen et al., 2017 ). This might hint towards capturing a wider range of respondents than just community dwelling individuals, but this cannot be confirmed. At the same time, it is very likely that people in poor health and well-being states are underrepresented in our study. For instance, another study found that among residents of nursing homes in the Netherlands, the mean EQ-5D VAS score was 64.8 (SD 21.7) ( Nijsten et al., 2019 ), which is clearly lower than in our sample. The underrepresentation of individuals in poorer states, including those in nursing homes may explain the high levels of well-being in most domains of the WOOP observed in our sample.
Worth mentioning in this context is that 18% of survey participants dropped out during the introduction and warm-up tasks. It is likely that this drop-out is related to the cognitive capabilities of participants, which may have further contributed to an analysis sample of relatively capable, healthy, and happy respondents.
The preferences of older people in poorer states, including those that who are frail, dependent, or living in nursing homes, may thus differ from what we observed in our sample. These groups are, however, difficult to reach and experience more difficulty with participating in (this type of) research. As such, the utility tariffs presented here may not fully reflect the preferences of the older population in its entirety. Given the aim of the WOOP, assessing whether preferences regarding the WOOP states differ in the subgroup of the oldest old and frailest individuals is important, but appears to require a different study design. This might include purposive sampling, also within nursing homes, and interviewer-assisted survey techniques, with an adjusted and simplified choice experiment.
Finally, we emphasize that the data for this study was collected during the COVID-19 pandemic, an extraordinary context with special relevance to older peoples' well-being. Our attempts to assess the impact of this on the estimated preferences showed that ‘physical health’, ‘mental health’, and ‘independence’ domains may have especially increased in importance (see suppl. material, Figure A1 ). It is not clear whether possible effects of the pandemic on preferences for the WOOP domains are temporary or may last after the pandemic is over. After all, a possible effect of the current crisis may be that people became more aware of what they consider most important for their well-being and, hence, the preferences we measured in this study may even be closer to their true preferences.
The estimated utility tariffs enable the use of the WOOP in economic evaluations of health and social care interventions targeted at older people, first of all in the Netherlands. Using the WOOP may provide a more comprehensive overview of the benefits of such interventions as compared to health-related quality of life measures (e.g. EQ-5D), but also as compared to the ICECAP-O and the ASCOT ( Makai et al., 2014 ). Moreover, the WOOP has the advantage over other well-being measures that its utility tariff is anchored on dead and perfect wellbeing, facilitating a more straightforward combination of length and quality of life in computing the benefits of interventions. Consequently, the WOOP may also be useful when evaluation cross-sectoral interventions, for instance health and social care services combined with housing or income support. However, until further research confirms the (psychometric) validity of the WOOP and assessing interventions in health and social care in terms of their full benefits to older people becomes more established, we would advocate the use of the WOOP next to standard measures of health-related quality of life. This is also in line with the current recommendation of the Dutch health care institute (Zorginstituut Nederlands) for the use of the ICECAP-O. We do note that since the WOOP captures broader wellbeing including health, the measure cannot be readily added to results obtained using generic health-related quality of life measures , as this would imply double-counting.
Decision makers and analysts need to be aware that using an outcome measure like the WOOP, which focuses on broader outcomes than health and is conceptually targeted at a specific age group, makes it difficult to compare the results of evaluation studies with those using other outcome measures. Hence, the comprehensiveness and relevance of the WOOP in the specific context of health and social care for older people comes at the price of reducing the comparability of findings with those from economic evaluations in other populations or focused on health as outcome. Furthermore, for economic evaluations using the WOOP to be truly informative for decision-making about whether or not to implement particular health and social care services, a threshold value representing the monetary value of a well-being adjusted life year (WALY) is required. Considering that the scope of benefits is broader, it is likely to be higher than that the threshold for a QALY. While different methods may be used to estimate such a threshold value ( Himmler et al., 2020b ; Kinghorn and Afentou, 2021 ; Ryen and Svensson, 2015 ) an important conceptual question will be whether this valuation should be done within the target population, as the beneficiaries of health and social care interventions, or within the general public, as the payer of such interventions in a collective system (like in the Netherlands). A last noteworthy aspect of the use of broader outcome measures in general is that by extending the scope of the benefit dimension, one needs to consider also extending the cost dimension beyond health care to stay within a consistent framework.

Section: Conclusion

By generating utility weights, the WOOP can now be used in economic evaluations of health and social care services targeted at older people, first of all in the Netherlands. Furthermore, the methodological approach used in this study may be helpful for future studies valuing newly developed measures with similarly large descriptive systems.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank members of the Erasmus Choice Modelling Center for ideas and feedback on the study at different stages.
