Title: The impact of kin proximity on net marital fertility and maternal survival in Sweden 1900–1910—Evidence for cooperative breeding in a societal context of nuclear families, or just contextual correlations?


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Objective

We investigate the association between the geographic proximity of the grandparents on net marital fertility and maternal survival in Sweden, 1900–1910, within the framework of the cooperative-breeding-hypothesis.

Abstract_Section: Methods

Data were derived from Swedish full-count censuses (1880–1910) and the Swedish Death Index. Married couples were linked to their parental households. Poisson and logistic regression analyses were used to investigate the association between the geographical proximity of the grandparents on net marital fertility, which we measured as the number of surviving children born between 1900 and 1910, and the mother's survival. Models were fitted with and without fixed effects to assess the effects of unobserved characteristics shared at the parish and the family level.

Abstract_Section: Results

The results indicate that net fertility and maternal survival increased with the husband's parents' geographic proximity. In contrast, we found no evidence that the geographic proximity of the wife's parents was associated with increased fertility or maternal survival. Rather, the presence of the mother's parents in the household lowered net fertility and reduced maternal survival.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

This study provides evidence that kin proximity was associated with fertility and mortality of married women, and that the associations differed for paternal and maternal kin in the societal context of Swedish nuclear families (1900–1910). However, the patterns of kin proximity that we identified were correlated with characteristics such as socioeconomic status, occupation, and wealth, which also exhibited strong correlations with fertility and survival. Future research assessing the effects of kinship on demographic developments must therefore carefully consider the socio-environmental context.

Section: 1 INTRODUCTION

In this study, we investigate the association between the geographic proximity of the wife's and the husband's parents and net fertility and maternal survival using Swedish full-count censuses (1880–1910) and the Swedish Death Index in Sweden, 1900–1910. Our research is motivated by the cooperative breeding hypothesis, and by the assumption that the socioeconomic and institutional context must be taken into account when seeking to understand intergenerational helping behavior.
In studying kin effects, evolutionary anthropologists have mainly investigated contemporary hunter-gather and pre-industrial agricultural societies. Reproduction in these societies is organized in family networks in which parents and others, also referred to as alloparents (Hrdy, 2009 ), raise children cooperatively. Following the vocabulary of behavioral ecology, some scholars have argued that humans are cooperative breeders, because in these populations the parents' reproductive success relies heavily on the support of others (Hrdy, 2006 ; Mace & Sear, 2005 ). The motivations to provide alloparental care and to interfere with couples' reproductive activities are not entirely congruent between natal and in-law relatives: that is, whereas the biological parents exhibit an evolved interest in their child's lifetime reproductive success, the interest of the parents-in-law in the reproductive success of their child's spouse is restricted to the time period in which the spouse is in a union with their child. These different interests result in lineage differentials, and the husband's parents are expected to have a different impact on the couple's fertility and mortality than the parents of the wife (Voland & Beise, 2002 ).
Lineage differentials are likely moderated by socioeconomic and institutional factors (formal and informal rules and norms in society, such as family systems, inheritance laws, and practices) that structure co-residence patterns. For instance, traditional agricultural societies often have patrilocal customs in which the wife is expected to join the household of her husband's family. As well as relying on the resources and assistance of her husband's family, a wife in such a society might be encouraged by her in-law relatives to have more children than she would have without these interventions. This kin-related fertility enhancement effect, which is based on communication more than on resource transfer or assistance, has been referred to as kin-priming (Mathews & Sear, 2013 ). The traditional family forms and pre-industrial societal structures (e.g., extended family systems and family alliance formations) differ fundamentally from the nuclear family model that dominated in Western Europe, at least from the industrial revolution onward, but possibly much earlier (Hajnal, 1983 ; Laslett, 1965 ; Laslett & Wall, 1972 ). The naïve transferability of findings in pre-industrial and traditional contexts to modern societies has been questioned in evolutionary anthropology as well (Mattison & Sear, 2016 ). Moreover, representative studies on kin-priming and on kin-related fertility enhancement effects are rare in a nuclear family context. While intergenerational co-residence may be uncommon in such a context, cooperative breeding could still play an important role as long as grandparental kin live nearby. However, most historical studies on this issue have dealt exclusively with co-residence because of a lack of data on the precise location of kin outside the household.
In this article, we study how the geographic proximity of kin affected marital net fertility and maternal survival in Sweden during the fertility transition (1900–1910). For our analysis, we use full-count micro-level census data that cover the entire population in 1880, 1890, 1900, and 1910. These data enable us to provide a reliable estimation of the effect sizes, and to conduct sub-analyses of selected sections of the population. We focus on how the presence of maternal and paternal grandmothers and grandfathers influenced net marital fertility (surviving children under age 10 in the subsequent census) as well as maternal survival among couples of childbearing age, and explicitly investigate the effect of grandparental geographic proximity. We then discuss how evolutionary anthropology can contribute to the explanation of kin effects on fertility and maternal survival in Sweden at the beginning of the 20th century.
The effects of grandparents and other kin on human reproduction have been studied in several disciplines of the social and biological sciences. Many population studies have applied an evolutionary perspective in examining to what extent parents and parents-in-law affect the number of offspring their children of reproductive age produce (Chapman et al., 2021 ; Snopkowski & Sear, 2013 ), and to what extent their presence affects the survival of their grandchildren (Sear & Mace, 2008 ). Different scientific disciplines have established different theoretical approaches and frameworks to study kin effects, and in interdisciplinary exchanges, scientists have argued about the relevance of the different mechanisms. For instance, the wealth and the socioeconomic status of the (grand-)parents might be of similar relevance for fertility (Adhikari, 2010 ) and child survival (Houweling & Kunst, 2009 ) as the actual childcare support provided by the (grand-)parents (Scelza & Hinde, 2019 ).
One of the core arguments of the evolutionary behavioral sciences is that human behavior is shaped by natural selection. Evolutionary anthropologists argue that the motivational and emotional capacity to work and to reproduce in kin networks is a key adaptation that separates humans from the Great Apes (Hrdy, 2009 ). Ultimately, to increase inclusive fitness, evolved motivational patterns lead parents to intervene in their children's reproductive attempts. On the one hand, some of these (grand-)parental motivations are expected to be universal and effective across cultures. Most notably, maternal grandmothers are expected to be inclined to support their daughters' reproductive activities, because investment in uterine-related kin indirectly increases biological fitness (Danielsbacka et al., 2011 ; Euler & Weitzel, 1996 ). On the other hand, even among close biological kin, it is expected that support and help are not provided unconditionally, but are offered based on a cost–benefit calculation, which may, in turn, be highly dependent on the socioeconomic and institutional contexts (Voland & Dunbar, 1995 ; West et al., 2002 ). Such contextual factors shape relationships between family members, and vary strongly across time and space. Large-scale social changes, such as industrialization and modernization, alter the fundamental conditions human nature faces (Borgerhoff Mulder, 1998 ; Stulp & Barrett, 2016 ), and, in turn, structure the ways kin effects are manifested. For instance, in pre-industrial societies, couples often co-resided either with the husband's parents (patrilocality) or the wife's parents (matrilocality), whereas neo-locality, in which the couple did not co-reside with either lineage, was more unusual. Parts of Western Europe may have been an exception to this general pattern, as in these societies, nuclear family households, and, thus, neo-locality, were common before industrialization as well (e.g., Hajnal, 1983 ; Laslett & Wall, 1972 ). In addition, when seeking to understand kin effects, inheritance practices related to socioeconomic status should be taken into account, as they also have an impact on intergenerational relations.
Evolutionary anthropology predicts, a priori, that the motivation—and, consequently, the effects—of the individual kin's efforts to interfere with a couple's reproductive activities are dependent on the degree and type of the relationship (natal, in-law, uterine, or agnate). However, in addition to these purely biological mechanisms, kin effects depend on the societal context; for example, whether wealth is inherited through the matriline or the patriline. A hypothesis regarding kin effects that has become widely known outside the field of evolutionary anthropology is the grandmother hypothesis (Hawkes et al., 1998 ). One of the original strengths of this hypothesis was its ability to explain the post-menopausal lifespan of women, which is relatively long in comparison to that of other female primates (Hill & Hurtado, 1991 ). This hypothesis asserts that female lifetime reproductive success is greater if a woman's reproduction stops in midlife, as assisting her daughters and sons of reproductive age, rather than having more children herself, is beneficial from the perspective of inclusive fitness (Williams, 1957 ). According to this theory, natural selection would have favored longer post-menopausal survival, which would, in turn, have resulted in generally longer lifespans. However, the hypothesis that the grandmother effect caused the emergence of the long human lifespan has since been refuted (Hawkes et al., 1998 ; Hill & Hurtado, 1991 ; Peccei, 2001 ), although the question of why women have long post-menopausal lifespans has yet to be resolved (Moorad & Walling, 2017 ). Regardless of the origins of the post-menopausal lifespan, grandmaternal assistance in reproduction appears to matter, given that in many populations, the presence of the maternal grandmother is associated with reduced infant and child mortality (Sear & Mace, 2008 ); with lower maternal mortality (Chapman et al., 2021 ; Hammel & Gullickson, 2004 ; Willführ et al., 2018 ); and, in some populations, with higher fertility (Chapman et al., 2021 ; Engelhardt et al., 2019 ). Men, by contrast, do not have a significant sterile period. Therefore, it may be expected that men will have less interest than women in assisting their children's reproductive activities, although they will have an interest in their offspring's prosperity. Another factor that might reduce the willingness of paternal (grand-)parents to invest in their children and grandchildren is uncertainty about paternity (Euler & Weitzel, 1996 ). The level of paternal investment increases with the level of paternal confidence (Gaulin & Schlegel, 1980 ). While recent reviews of predominantly Western populations have shown that cuckoldry is generally infrequent, such findings are not necessarily transferable to past and pre-modern populations (Greeff & Erasmus, 2015 ). Levels of paternity uncertainty may vary between populations because of differences in household forms and rules of residence. Levels of certainty about fatherhood tend to be higher in patrilocal societies, in which measures of social control, including strict moral codes regulating sexuality, are common (Strassmann et al., 2012 ).
Paternity uncertainty may also lead to differences in the investments made by grandmothers. Like her son, the paternal grandmother shares the risk that the children of her son's wife will not be biologically related to her. In most societies, grandmothers invest more in the children of their daughters than of their sons (Danielsbacka et al., 2011 ). An exception was found in rural Greece, where grandmothers cared more for the children of their sons, even when effects of proximity were controlled for (Pashos, 2000 ). In this patrilocal society, grandmaternal investment in reproductive sons was more beneficial than grandmaternal investment in reproductive daughters for economic reasons. This “patrilateral bias” rendered the paternity uncertainty effect irrelevant at the behavioral level. Interestingly, Greek rural women today exhibit a strong uterine bias in grandchild childcare, and invest more in the children of their daughters than of their sons. This shift has been interpreted as a response to the financial crisis in 2008–2009 (Daly & Perry, 2019 ). Based on a sample of 33 sub-Saharan African countries, Schrijner and Smits reported that children who were living with a paternal grandmother had better schooling outcomes than children who were living with a maternal grandmother. This finding fits with Pashos' “patrilineal bias,” as the advantage was shown to be stronger for boys and when the father was higher educated (Schrijner & Smits, 2019 ). Thus, it appears that the tendency for grandparents to prefer their daughter's to their son's children is not biologically hardwired, but is, rather, a default setting that can change depending on the societal context.
Evolutionary anthropology further predicts that there will be a genetic conflict between the spouse and his or her parents-in-law. In the absence of consanguinity, the parents-in-law have no interest in the prosperity of their son's wife or their daughter's husband. Of course, their indirect fitness will increase with the reproductive success of their son- or daughter-in-law, but the interests are not entirely congruent, as the parents-in-law will benefit from the reproductive success of their child's spouse only if the offspring are derived from the union with their child. Essentially, from the perspective of the parents-in-law, it is only fertility in the current union that counts, and not the lifetime reproductive success of their son- or daughter-in-law, if the son- or daughter-in-law has reproductive success outside the current union that does not enhance the household or family status, the economic viability, or the marriage prospects for all offspring. Therefore, the grandparents might encourage their daughter-in-law to have more children in short intervals than she would have without her mother-in-law's intervention. This fertility enhancement effect of kin, which has been referred to as kin-priming (Mathews & Sear, 2013 ), can result in detrimental, if not dangerous, consequences for both the reproductive female and her offspring (Voland & Beise, 2002 ; Voland & Beise, 2005 ). High fertility is associated with increased maternal mortality (Stover & Ross, 2010 ), as well as with increased childhood mortality (Mosley & Chen, 1984 ). The mechanism of kin-priming may vary on a continuous scale from friendly encouragement in combination with offers of help and assistance, through to reproductive exploitation. Moreover, in patrilocal societies in which the wife is cut off from the support of her natal family after she marries, the risks of economic exploitation might be especially high. For example, in societies such as India, the wife's family may be forced to pay a dowry, and face harassment by the wife's in-laws (Jeyaseelan et al., 2015 ). Some scholars have suggested that consanguinity might significantly weaken such in-law conflicts, because in, for instance, cousin marriages one of the parents-in-law is a biological aunt or uncle (Willführ et al., 2018 ).
To summarize, evolutionary anthropology predicts that the availability of the mother's parents increases a couple's reproductive success by improving the chances of survival of both the mother and her children, but not necessarily by increasing the number of childbirths. In contrast, the presence of the husband's parents is expected to be associated with higher fertility for the couple, which may, in turn, be associated with lower chances of survival for both the mother and her offspring. The effects of the presence of the maternal and paternal grandparents are expected to weaken with increasing geographical distance, as the frequency of interactions would likely decline, which would, in turn, decrease the strength of the grandparents' influence (priming), and their opportunities to help.

Section: 2 CONTEXT: SWEDEN AROUND 1900

Around 1900, Sweden became fully industrialized, and an industrial society emerged in the country (see Schön, 2010 ). Earlier in the 19th century, several important changes happened that paved the way for the industrial economy. Increased demand for agricultural products, both domestically and from abroad, led to massive investments in agriculture and to profound institutional changes. From the mid-century onward, investments in railroads and innovations in steel-making expanded rapidly. At the same time, both the economic and the political institutions of the country were transformed in a more liberal direction, including the introduction of a modern parliamentary system (although universal suffrage for both men and women was not fully implemented until 1921); the deregulation of production, trade, and the labor market; and a strengthening of property rights.
The growth of both domestic and external demand led to increasing growth in industrial investments, and, ultimately, to a transition to modern forms of economic growth (Jörberg, 1961 , pp. 8–28). Iron and timber were the leading industrial sectors, and the export of oats and, later, butter became important sources of income. Annual rates of growth in GDP per capita increased from 0.4 % in the first half of the 19th century to 2.1% between 1890 and 1930 (Schön, 2010 , p. 13). While the process of urbanization was ongoing in Sweden, the country retained its rural character. A majority of the population was still employed in agriculture at the turn of the 20th century, and it was not until the 1950s that more than half of the population were living in towns (Statistiska Centralbyrån, 1999 : table 14).
Beginning around 1880, Sweden also entered its fertility transition, about 100 years after the start of the mortality decline (Dribe, 2009 ). By 1901/05, total fertility (TFR) was 3.9, down from 4.5 in 1871/75. In the following 30 years, total fertility declined to 1.8 (Statistiska Centralbyrån, 1999 : table 3.3). The fertility decline started in the upper classes, and spread gradually to the lower classes, with the rural classes of farmers and agricultural workers lagging behind (Dribe & Scalone, 2014 ; Klüsener et al., 2019 ).
Long before 1900, most families in Sweden were nuclear families (Lundh, 1995 ), with intergenerational co-residence mainly occurring when there was a need to care for elderly parents, or as part of a retirement or land transmission strategy among farmers (Dribe & Lundh, 2005b ). Outside of farming families, couples with children would normally co-reside with the children's grandparents only under special circumstances. Thus, we would expect to observe strong selection in terms of both health and socioeconomic conditions into this specific household arrangement. While Sweden did not have a primogeniture system by law, it was nonetheless customary for parents to transfer their farm to one of their sons (e.g., Dribe & Lundh, 2005a ). We would therefore expect to find that co-residence with the husband's parents was positively selected in terms of resources, at least in rural contexts where such an arrangement was connected to the transfer of the farm.

Section: 3 DATA

We use full-count census data for Sweden that cover the entire population in 1880, 1890, 1900, and 1910. These data are distributed through IPUMS international (The Swedish National Archives, Umeå University, and the Minnesota Population Center, 2011a, 2011b, 2014; The Swedish National Archives and the Minnesota Population Center, 2016). The Swedish historical full-count censuses are unique sources for researchers studying kin and fertility. Unlike other contemporary censuses, women appear with their maiden names even when married. This feature allows us to link women between the censuses to nearly the same extent as men. Thus, we are able to follow a woman from the first observation when she was child, through to her marriage and family formation.
To follow individuals over time, we employ probabilistic linking techniques, which identify an individual in different censuses based on birthplace, sex, birth year, and names (see Eriksson, 2015). To improve our ability to follow individuals between the censuses, we also link each census to the Swedish Death Index (The Federation of Swedish Genealogical Societies, 2019), which includes all Swedes who died between 1860 and 2016. Thus, the links between individuals are made both directly from one census to another, and indirectly between censuses through links from different censuses to a common death record.
A total of 2 627 820 females were counted in the census of 1900. Of these females, 708 805 were between 20 and 39 years old at the time the census was taken. Our study population consists of all married women who were aged 20–39 in 1900 ( N = 337 180). By using both direct links between the censuses and indirect links made to the death register, we are able to link 81.52% of the study population to the 1910 census, yielding an analytical sample of 274 640 women (5554 excluded because of data errors) for the models estimating net fertility, and of 290 939 women (16 299 died before 1910) for the models estimating survival. We use links to the 1890 and 1880 censuses to identify parents and parents-in-law by observing our sample of women (and their husbands) in their parental homes 10 or 20 years prior to 1900. The linkage rates are given in Table 1 . These intergenerational links allow us to identify and locate kin beyond those who were residing in the same household (which is not possible with most census data), including those who were located elsewhere in the country. We use coordinates of parish centroids to calculate the actual distance of the women in our sample to their kin. The identification of the parents also allows us to identify pairs and groups of sisters in the linked sample. For an individual to be defined as a woman's sister, we require that the biological mother and father of the individual are identical to those of the woman in 1880 or 1890 (sister sample N = 58 267 women from 26 720 families; Figure S7 ). The resulting linked sample is a rich data source that allows for the precise identification of kinship and variation in proximity to kin over time.
We measure net fertility in the 10-year period after the 1900 census by the number of own children under age 10 in the family in 1910. This kind of measure of net fertility has been used extensively in past research, and forms the basis of the own-children method for estimating standard aggregate fertility rates (Breschi et al., 2003 ; Cho et al., 1986 ). For the Swedish censuses used here, it has also been demonstrated that the unadjusted child woman ratios (own children under age 5) reflect quite closely the socioeconomic differentials in total marital fertility (Scalone & Dribe, 2017 ). In addition, we have information on social status (occupation) for all men (husbands, brothers-in-law, fathers, and fathers-in-law), as well as information on other household and family-related conditions for all individuals, such as place of residence (at the parish level).
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request or via the Minnesota Population Center ( 2019 ).

Section: 4 ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS

The great advantage of the data used here is that the population of an entire nation is covered, which frees the analysis from biases that may arise due to data coverage issues or unrepresentative data selection. The estimation of the geographical proximity can be considered reliable at the parish level, and further, in cases in which the couple was living in the same parish as the grandparents, we know whether they were sharing the same household. As we explained above, our aim is to observe net fertility; that is, the number of surviving children born between the 1900 and 1910 censuses. We only observe how many children survived to 1910; thus, we do not know how many children were born after 1900 and died before the census was taken in 1910. Therefore, we cannot rule out the possibility that there were antagonistic mechanisms that canceled each other out. For instance, it is possible that the kin-priming effects that increased the number of childbirths did not result in a greater number of surviving children because of an increase in infant and child mortality. Moreover, we do not observe timing effects, such as the length of individual interbirth intervals. Kin-priming effects might have targeted the sex composition of the offspring. For instance, the grandparents might have encouraged the couple to produce at least one child of a specific gender, which could, in turn, have resulted in shorter interbirth intervals. The level of encouragement might have subsided when the wanted grandchild had been born; thus, thereafter, the interbirth intervals may have been significantly longer. A minor issue we face in testing these assumptions is that it can be difficult to disentangle the impact of the grandmother from the impact of grandfather. Divorce was rare and extramarital fertility was low during the study period. Thus, the grandparents usually lived together in the same household until one of them passed away. Therefore, we observe low variance regarding the proximity of the grandfather and the grandmother of the maternal and paternal lineages.

Section: 5 STATISTICAL METHODS

The category “no linkage” is by far the biggest fraction. Compared to other census linkage projects, our linkage rate is very high. We linked 81.52% of the couples in the 1900 census to the 1910 census and 4.89% to the death register (Table 1 , line B & C). As a comparison linking rates for individuals between U.S. censuses at the same time are often below 30% (Bailey et al., 2020 ). Moreover, previous analyses have shown that the quality of the links are high, with only about 3% of the links being wrong (Dribe et al., 2019 ). We have no reason to believe that the cases in which the grandparents could not be linked are systematically biased. In the supplement (Figures S5 & S6 ), we compared the number of children, the HISCLASS distribution, and the age differences between the spouses regarding paternal and maternal grandmothers' statuses. We found no noticeable differences.
We created different sets of control variables. The current fertility was associated with the mother's age and with the number of children she was currently caring for. Therefore, we included the mother's age in 1900 (based on year of birth) as well as the mother's age squared. We also included the number of children in the family under age 5, as well as the number of children between ages five and 15 in the model. Another potential predictor of fertility is the age of the father, which we included indirectly via a four-level categorical variable of spousal age differentials: (1) the wife was older, (2) the husband was up to 3 years older, (3) the husband was between 4 and 7 years older, and (4) the husband was at least 7 years older. The fertility patterns varied across social strata (Dribe & Scalone, 2014 ), and we grouped the families into six categories based on the husband's socioeconomic status, measured by HISCLASS. HISCLASS is an internationally comparable historical social class scheme (van Leeuwen & Maas, 2011 ), which is, in turn, based on the occupational coding scheme HISCO (van Leeuwen et al., 2002 ). We used a condensed version of the class scheme: higher occupations (HISCLASS 1–5), skilled workers (HISCLASS 6–7), farmers and fishermen (HISCLASS 8), lower-skilled workers (HISCLASS 9–10), unskilled workers (HISCLASS 11–12), and unknown (no occupation). Descriptive statistics of the control variables are shown in Figure 2 .
In separate regressions, we assessed the role of unobserved geographic heterogeneity using parish-level fixed effects, and the role of shared family characteristics using sister fixed effects. A fixed-effects model excluded from the analysis all singletons and levels with zero variation. In our analysis, this was unproblematic for parish fixed effects, because there were, on average, about 100 cases per parish; hence, there were almost no singletons. However, the inclusion of sister fixed effects significantly reduced the sample size because there were many women without sisters in the sample (singletons; see Figure S7 ). Without further evaluation, it is unclear whether the different results generated by the models can be explained by the inclusion of the fixed effects, or by a biased reduction in the sample size. Therefore, we fitted the models without the sister fixed effects to all of the available cases, as well as with the same (singleton-free) sample used in the sister fixed-effects model.
As is the case in all GLM, single coefficients in multiple Poisson regression and logit models cannot be interpreted ceteris paribus. Different approaches have been proposed to enhance the interpretability of generalized linear models and to determine the effect sizes of individual independent variables. Popular methods, such as average marginal effects or marginal effects at the mean, summarize the impact of each independent variable in single values. We use a related approach, and predict for each observation the number of children under age 10 by using the observed values of the control variables, but manipulating the status of the respective grandparents. We obtain for each case the predicted values for the actual observed, as well as for the hypothetical, grandparental statuses. The predictions for the different grandparental statuses are then summarized in mean statistics, which we plot together with the corresponding confidence interval over the mother's age. This gives us a much more intuitive interpretation of the impact of different grandparental statuses on net fertility, and, more importantly, it allows us to more easily evaluate the effect sizes over the mother's age. The latter advantage is crucial for the aim of study, because the effect sizes of the estimates are of equal interest as the statistical significance of the estimates. Since the mother's age is measured discretely in years, this calculation corresponds to the method of the average marginal effects at representative values.
Data linkage was done using STATA 16, and the statistical modeling was done in R (version 3.6.3) using the following libraries: data.table (version 1.12.8), fixest (version 0.3.1), lmtest (version 0.9–37), Rmisc (version 1.5), ggplot2 (version 3.3.0), and ggpubr (version 0.2.4).

Section: 6 RESULTS

The Poisson regression analysis (Figure 3 ; also Figure S1 & Tables S2 & S3 ) suggests that the fertility of married women with a dead mother did not differ statistically from the reference category of married women who lived within a 10-km radius of their mothers. The models without fixed effects and with parish fixed effects both indicate that fertility was higher compared to the reference category if the maternal grandmother lived 10–50 km away from the couple, but was lower if she lived in the same household. These effects are not indicated by the sibling fixed-effects model. All three models consistently show that fertility was lower if the maternal grandmother lived more than 50 km away. The results for the maternal grandfather are similar to those for the maternal grandmother in categories in which he was alive and for which the spatial proximity was known. In contrast to the effect of a deceased maternal grandmother, a dead maternal grandfather was associated with lower net fertility. The plots of the marginal effects at representative values (Figure 3 ) suggest that the effect sizes were moderate, and that the differences between the categories shrank with the mother's age, most likely because fertility decreases at older ages. An exception was the much lower net fertility observed in families in which the maternal grandparents lived in the same household.
The logit models (Figure 4 ; also Figure S3 & Table S6 & S7 ) show that the geographic proximity of the maternal grandmother and grandfather was also associated with the survival of the mother. If the maternal grandmother was dead, her daughter's probability of survival was lower compared to the reference category in which the maternal grandmother lived within a 10-km radius. The lowest mortality was observed for women whose mothers lived within a 10- to 50-km radius. While the models provide similar results for the geographic proximity of the maternal grandfather, they also show that the mortality of the mother was reduced as well if her father lived more than 50 km away. None of the models indicate that the mortality of the mother was higher compared to the reference category when the couple co-resided with the maternal grandparents.
The Poisson regression model (Figure 5; Figure S2 & Tables S4 & S5 ) without fixed effects and the parish fixed-effects model consistently indicate that the fertility of married women was lower compared to the reference category when the paternal grandmother and/or grandfather lived more than 10 km away. In addition, the findings show that fertility was lower if the husband's father or mother was dead, and fertility was higher if the paternal grandparents lived in the same household. The results of the sibling fixed-effects model also suggest that fertility was higher if the paternal grandparents lived in the same household. In this model, none of the categories in which the paternal grandparents were alive and in a known geographical proximity were found to be statistically significant. The plots for the marginal effects at representative values of the full model and of the parish fixed-effects model suggest that the farther away the paternal grandparents lived, the lower was the couple's fertility.
The logit models (Figure 6 ; Figure S4 & Table S8 & S9 ) indicate that the association between maternal survival and the spatial proximity of the paternal grandparents was weak. The model without fixed effects ( p < .1) and the parish fixed-effects model ( p < .05) both suggest that maternal mortality was lower than that of the reference category if the paternal grandmother lived in the same household. A similar association was found in the parish fixed-effects model if the paternal grandfather lived in the same household ( p < .1).

Section: 7 DISCUSSION

Evolutionary anthropology predicts that the presence of grandparents in a family is associated with both higher fertility (Engelhardt et al., 2019 ; Sear & Mace, 2008 ; Snopkowski & Sear, 2013 ) and a greater probability of maternal survival among their daughters of childbearing age (Hammel & Gullickson, 2004 ; Willführ et al., 2018 ). Maternal grandmothers are expected to assist their daughters in their reproductive activities, which should increase their reproductive success. The transfer of resources, help, and knowledge (Scelza & Hinde, 2019 ) from grandmothers to their daughters might increase the likelihood of child survival, decrease the chances of maternal depletion, and increase fertility. We, therefore, expected to find that net marital fertility was higher when the maternal grandmother was living in close geographical proximity. We measured the net fertility of married couples as the number of surviving children they had between 1900 and 1910. In addition, we expected to find that the presence of the maternal grandmother reduced the mortality risk of her daughter. However, our analysis did not provide support for this hypothesis. The net fertility of the married women with a dead mother was not lower than that of women with a mother who lived within a 10-km radius. Moreover, we found that the net fertility of married women with a mother who lived more than 10 km away had higher net fertility. Thus, it appears that the geographical proximity of the grandparents reflected not only kin availability, but also unobserved characteristics that may have affected fertility and mortality. This was evident from the finding that sharing a household with the maternal grandmother (or grandfather) was correlated with lower net fertility and reduced maternal survival. Hacker et al. (forthcoming) report a similar association for the United States 1900–1910. It is unlikely that these associations were direct consequences of the presence of the maternal grandparents. It is more likely that co-residence selected families with certain characteristics, such as those who were caring for grandparents in need of assistance. This interpretation is supported by the finding of the sibling fixed-effects model that sharing a household with maternal kin was not associated with lower net fertility. It should be noted that this result in was not a consequence of the exclusion of singletons (in this case, the married women without married sisters in the sample) in the sibling comparative approach. Like the findings of the full model, the results of the model without fixed effects, in which we removed the singletons, indicated that net fertility was reduced when the couple co-resided with the maternal grandmother. If sharing a household with the grandmother had a causal effect, we should have observed a difference in net fertility between daughters who did and did not co-reside with their mother (see Table S1 ).
Moreover, we did not find support for the hypothesis that the geographic proximity of the maternal grandparents improved the mother's survival prospects. Although the mothers had higher mortality when one of the maternal grandparents were dead, compared to when they lived within a 10-km radius, their mortality was lower if the grandparents lived more than 10 km away. We therefore argue that the higher mortality among women with a dead mother was caused by unobserved factors. Unfortunately, our study design did not allow us to estimate the effects of parental loss using a sibling fixed-effects approach. As the survival status of the parents in 1900 applied to all children in the data, there was no variation on the family level.
Our findings regarding the effects of the proximity of the paternal grandparents are more consistent with predictions from evolutionary anthropology on the fertility-enhancing effects of kin proximity and kin-priming (Mathews & Sear, 2013 ). The closer the paternal grandparents lived to the couple, the higher their net fertility. The highest fertility was observed when they co-resided with the paternal grandparents. Some scholars have pointed out that the fertility-enhancing effects of the presence of the paternal grandmother could reflect a reproductive exploitation scenario in which the mother's reproductive activities were increased, often to the disadvantage of the health of both the mother and her children (Voland & Beise, 2002 ). Our findings do not support this scenario, as we found that the presence of the paternal grandmother in the household was not only associated with higher fertility, but also with lower mortality for the mother. More births mean shorter birth intervals, which are usually associated with higher mortality (Norton, 2005 ). However, in our case, it appears that the kin-priming effect of the presence of the husband's parents either did not push the mother to the limits of her reproductive capacity, or the health costs were compensated for by kin assistance and resource transfer.
Willführ et al. ( 2018 ) reported a similar association for the historical population of the Krummhörn region in Germany (1720–1874): that is, that the mother-in-law residing in the parish was associated with reduced mortality for her son's wife. This effect was found to be especially strong among families of the economic elite (Willführ et al., 2018 ). The authors argued that the positive in-law effect in this agricultural society was caused by a combination of consanguinity (Johow et al., 2019 ) and selection of wealthier households. Consanguinity might substantially lower the levels of (genetic) in-law conflict, since, for instance, in first-degree cousin marriages, one of the in-law parents is a biological aunt or uncle. Moreover, patrilocality is typically practiced in societies with greater wealth and larger farms with considerable resources. In the present study on Sweden, we can only speculate about the role of consanguinity, though estimates for our study period suggest that cousin marriages were not frequent (Fraccaro, 1958 ). However, our finding that the presence of the husband's parents in the household had a positive effect might indicate that these families had wealthier backgrounds. When not a consequence of the need to care for grandparents requiring assistance, intergenerational co-residence was often connected to farming and the transmission of land. Indeed, the results of our sensitivity analysis on regional differences and class differences in the kin effects are consistent with this interpretation (see Tables S13–S24 ).
Thus, although the findings regarding the geographical proximity of the paternal grandparents were consistent with the expectations of the fertility enhancement and the kin-priming effects, there was also strong evidence that the societal context played an important role, and may have affected fertility and maternal survival in two different ways. On the one hand, social groups tend to adopt different fertility and mortality patterns in response to socioeconomic factors and cultural constraints. On the other hand, kin relations themselves might depend on the socioeconomic context. Moreover, it is doubtful that evolved motivational patterns alone drove the effect of the geographic proximity of the paternal grandparents, especially given that these patterns failed to explain the effect of the geographic proximity of the maternal grandparents. The context of an industrializing population undergoing the demographic transition is different from those of traditional agricultural and hunter-gather societies, which have been the main focus of evolutionary anthropologists. Evolved emotional patterns to assist (or to compete with) reproductive members of the kin network might have become ineffective or have shifted to other domains. For instance, in a modern context, kin assistance might be more about marriage and household formation than about providing immediate assistance to reproductive couples.
Our findings regarding the impact of the proximity of the maternal grandmother on fertility and maternal survival among couples in Sweden during the study period contrast sharply with those of Engelhardt et al. ( 2019 ), who investigated a historical population in the St. Lawrence Valley in Canada; and of Chapman et al. ( 2021 ), who investigated a historical rural Finish population. These studies found that the presence and the close geographic proximity of the maternal grandmother was associated with greater reproductive success among couples, including higher fertility. This mixed evidence suggests that when conducting studies within the framework of evolutionary anthropology, it is important to take into account contextual factors related to socioeconomic and institutional conditions, because these factors affect kin behavior through multiple pathways.
Taken together, our findings clearly show that kin proximity was associated with fertility and mortality in our sample of married women, and that the associations differed for paternal and maternal kin. However, as has been demonstrated, the findings did not point to a clear direct influence of kin on childbearing or maternal survival. Instead, our results suggest that kin proximity was correlated with observed and unobserved characteristics, such as socioeconomic status, wealth, and possibly health; which were, in turn, associated with fertility and maternal survival. While we found no evidence that the proximity of the maternal grandparents increased net fertility or improved maternal survival, our finding that the proximity of the paternal grandparents had an impact on fertility is in line with the predictions from evolutionary theory. Thus, while our results provide some support for the claim that evolutionary theory is important for understanding kin behavior in the societal context of nuclear families, they also show that it is necessary to carefully consider the socioeconomic and institutional contexts when assessing the effects of kin structure and kin availability on demographic outcomes.

Section: AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Kai Willführ: Conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; investigation; methodology; visualization; writing-original draft. Björn Eriksson: Conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; methodology; writing-original draft. Martin Dribe: Conceptualization; formal analysis; investigation; methodology; writing-original draft.

Section: DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST

The authors declare no potential conflict of interest.

Section: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study is part of the research program “The Rise and Fall of the Industrial City: Landskrona Population Study,” funded by the Swedish Foundation for Humanities and Social Sciences (RJ). We thank participants at the IUSSP seminar “Kinship and Reproduction in Past Societies,” at the University of Minnesota, USA, August 22–23, 2019. We are also grateful to Eckart Voland for his helpful comments on a previous draft of this manuscript.
