Section: Abstract

On November 16, 1990, US President George H.W. Bush signed into law the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA). This federal legislation marked the culmination of decades of debate among scientists, curators, and Native American leaders and activists over the control of ancestral human remains and sacred, funerary, and communally owned objects. Anthropologists have now investigated myriad aspects of NAGPRA, from its underlying philosophical arguments; to its legislative history, its legal ramifications and political effects, and the methods of its implementation; to how it has remade American museums, archaeologists, tribes, and federally funded repositories; and to how it has ushered in a new (even if imperfect) period of collaboration and partnership. This article reviews the last 50 years of scholarship on repatriation, with a particular focus on NAGPRA's last 30 years.

Section: Introduction

US President George H.W. Bush signed into law the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) on November 16, 1990, marking a quiet start to a law that was the result of decades of vigorous debates and a law that had the potential to radically transform America's art, anthropology, and natural history museums ( Bray 2001 , Fine-Dare 2002 , Killion 2008 , Mihesuah 2000 ).
NAGPRA went to the heart of Native America's rights to its ancestors, cultural practices, and religious freedoms. It was a law that directly confronted the colonial histories of museums and the ethical blinders of archaeology. Few would agree the law is perfect, but no other country has (yet) created a similar national law. NAGPRA established a process that brought Native peoples and scientists and curators together, often for the first time, showing that although a gulf had long divided the communities, they in fact shared much common ground. After 30 years, according to the US National Park Service's NAGPRA website, the legislation has facilitated the return of about 67,000 ancestral human remains, 1.9 million funerary objects, and 15,000 sacred and communally owned objects. 1 The US National Park Service estimates that the remains of some 127,000 Native Americans and millions of belongings from graves continue to sit on the shelves of American museums.
NAGPRA established a process for US federal agencies and museums to return ancestral human remains and three types of cultural items—funerary objects, sacred objects, and objects of cultural patrimony—to lineal descendants, Indian tribes, and Native Hawaiian Organizations. NAGPRA addresses collections made before 1990 as well as those made after the law's passage. The legislation further established an advisory review committee to hear disputes and to monitor the law's progress. NAGPRA created a grants program for documenting collections and facilitating returns ( Chari 2010 ); it also provides penalties for violations and trafficking, which can be prosecuted through civil and criminal enforcement, although some have argued that the legislation lacks real enforcement power ( Cryne 2010 ). A central office to administer NAGPRA, known colloquially as National NAGPRA, was established by the National Park Service in 2000 in order to separate its own compliance activities from oversight activities that focus on museums and other federal agencies ( Watkins 2011 ).
NAGPRA is now many things to many people. Legally, it is civil rights law, administrative law, Indian law, and property law, and it requires US federal agencies and institutions with Native American collections that receive federal funding to engage in a formal inventory process. It also requires federal agencies and museums to engage in a formal repatriation process if ancestors and objects are formally claimed by federally recognized tribes or lineal descendants. Morally and ethically, NAGPRA has induced, if not forced, colonialist institutions, particularly those with long collecting histories, to (re)consider their role in the development of archaeology, anthropology, and even civil society if their collections contained Native Americans but (comparatively) few other human remains.
The NAGPRA-related literature is rich and diverse; most of it occurs in books, law review articles, and master's theses and PhD dissertations. Mainstream anthropology and archaeology research journals contain comparatively few papers related to NAGPRA ( Nash & Colwell-Chanthaphonh 2010 ). Over the last three decades, however, a substantial literature has been published on ( a ) historical practices and legislative histories; ( b ) legal analyses and questions of implementation; ( c ) philosophy, ethics, and values; ( d ) ethnographic studies and analyzing practice; ( e ) reflexive considerations; and ( f ) new, old problems. We address these broad categories in sequence.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion

The long sociopolitical and legal journey that culminated in the 1990 passage of NAGPRA dates back more than a century. That journey tacked across US government and tribal diplomatic relations, weaving together emotional, spiritual, intellectual, and financial and monetary domains in both scientific and tribal institutions ( Mihesuah 1996 ).
NAGPRA built on, and in some cases superseded, strictures put forth in the American Antiquities Act of 1906, which, among other things, defined Native American human remains found on federal land as objects of antiquity, not as people ( Highet 2005 ). Other relevant federal legislation includes the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, the American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978, the Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979, and the National Museum of the American Indian Act of 1989 (NMAIA). NMAIA was an immediate precursor to NAGPRA that affected only the Smithsonian Institution, but it was significant because it marked the first time that Native American human remains in US federal custody were legally treated as deceased human beings, not as archaeological resources ( Echo-Hawk & Echo-Hawk 1994 ). Kintigh (2008) provides an accessible summary of the law from the perspective of an archaeologist who was involved in the original negotiations, and we refer the reader to his account if interested in more detail regarding the law's origins. It bears noting, however, that NAGPRA is a living piece of legislation. As we discuss below, new rules regarding the disposition of culturally unaffiliated remains were promulgated on May 14, 2010, nearly two decades after NAGPRA's passage ( Mountain 2017 ).
Echo-Hawk & Echo-Hawk (1994) provide a useful and accessible introduction to the subject of US government and tribal relations, which also shaped NAGPRA. McManamon (2002) notes that scientific exploration of federal lands began in the early nineteenth century; while these expeditions included archaeological investigations, it was the 1868 order by the US Army Surgeon General to obtain Indian skulls for the Army Medical Museum that vastly accelerated the collection of Native American ancestors. That directive led to an orders-of-magnitude increase in the number of desecrated Native American graves, battlefields, and massacre sites ( Colwell 2017 ).
The American Indian Movement (AIM) was critical to the sociopolitical environment that begat NAGPRA ( Echo-Hawk 2010a ). Founded in Minneapolis in 1968, AIM led protests against archaeological research and museums in 1971 ( Breske 2018 ). AIM thereby called attention to the discriminatory treatment of Native American ancestors by scientists in the field and in museums ( Watkins 2002 ). These critiques bore some fruit, as a small number of museums began to voluntarily repatriate long-requested objects and ancestors in the 1980s ( Kakaliouras 2012 ; Zimmerman 2014 ). These early concessions by museums should not be misconstrued as an adoption or endorsement of repatriation as a practice, however; they involved only the most egregious cases, in which museums were in wrongful if not illegal possession of known individuals or undeniably sacred objects, such as Zuni Ahayu:da , or war gods ( Merrill et al. 1993 ).
Legal questions surrounding repatriation have long been a subject of scholarly analysis, as NAGPRA would ultimately combine civil rights law, administrative law, Indian law, and property law ( Birkhold 2011 , McKeown 2002 , McKeown & Hutt 2003 ). Much of this literature is published in legal and other outlets that are not typically read by archaeologists and anthropologists, including journals such as the William Mitchell Law Review ( Birkhold 2011 ), New York University Review of Law and Social Change ( Echo-Hawk 1986 ), Wake Forest Law Review ( Niesel 2011 ), Legal Reference Services Quarterly ( Smith 2012 ), and Concept , an interdisciplinary journal of graduate studies at Villanova University ( Putnam 2014 ), just to name a few. NAGPRA, its origins, and its implementation have also been the subject of dozens, if not hundreds, of master's theses (e.g., Rewolinski 2014 ) and PhD dissertations in museum studies, anthropology, archaeology, and the law (e.g., Aranui 2018 ). There are also numerous contributions in the gray literature, the unpublished literature of federal agencies, contracting firms, and institutions that are subject to NAGPRA. These contributions are far too numerous to list herein, but published bibliographies and review articles are available (e.g., Seidemann 2010 , Smith 2012 ).
Although there were questions about NAGPRA's fundamental purpose and constitutionality, most scholars have moved on from these debates, perhaps because of NAGPRA's long period of implementation and the fact that it has survived numerous tests in the courts ( Echo-Hawk 1986 , Harding 1997 , Hurtado 1993 , Platzman 1992 , Riley 2002 ).
Of NAGPRA's many key concepts, “cultural affiliation” is the law's “axial term” ( Johnson 2007 , p. 65; Kuprecht 2012 ). Under NAGPRA, “Cultural affiliation means a relationship of shared group identity that may be reasonably traced historically or prehistorically between a present-day Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian organization and an identifiable earlier group” [25 U.S.C. § 3001(2)]. This relationship is determined through 10 lines of evidence (geographical, kinship, biological, archaeological, anthropological, linguistic, folklore, oral tradition, historical, and other relevant information or expert opinion) [43 CFR § 10.2(e)(1)]. The law stipulates that determination of cultural affiliation “should be based upon an overall evaluation of the totality of the circumstances and evidence pertaining to the connection between the claimant and the material being claimed and should not be precluded solely because of some gaps in the record” [43 CFR § 10.14(d)]. NAGPRA specifies that the degree of certainty is a “preponderance” standard (meaning 51% or more certain) and that “[c]laimants do not have to establish cultural affiliation with scientific certainty” [43 CFR § 10.14(f)].
NAGPRA's underpinnings are legal in nature, and a number of scholars have sought to frame NAGPRA's requirements within archaeological constructs or Native American ideas of kinship and social identity ( Dongoske et al. 1997 , Ferguson 2004 , Liebmann 2008 , Welch & Ferguson 2007 ). Liebmann (2008) criticizes the essentialism inherent in NAGPRA, which, among other things, restricts claimants to include only members of federally recognized tribes and lineal descendants. The former are bureaucratic constructs of a colonizing government; the latter can be exceedingly difficult to identify with any degree of certainty. As Liebmann (2008 , p. 73) writes,
Essentialist discourses reduce complex heterogeneous structures to a supposed inner truth or essence and function within colonialist regimes to reinforce hegemonic control over colonized peoples, inscribing inferiority upon them by controlling the dominant modes of representation.
Other scholars emphasize epistemological dissonance and critique the findings of cultural affiliation determinations ( Colwell-Chanthaphonh & Powell 2012 , Cordell & Kintigh 2010 , Ousley 2010 , Schillaci & Bustard 2010 ).
The case that has been the subject of the most extensive debate surrounding the concept of cultural affiliation is that of The Ancient One, also known as Kennewick Man, the nearly 9,000-year-old human remains accidentally uncovered in the US state of Washington in 1996 ( Chatters 2001 , Downey 2000 , Thomas 2000 , Zimmerman & Clinton 1999 ). A long court case unfolded over the rights to the skeleton when eight archaeologists brought suit against the US government ( Burke et al. 2008 ). Much of the disagreement centered on the US government's cultural affiliation determination ( Watkins 2004 ). The plaintiffs argued that, based on skeletal morphology, The Ancient One seemed most related to the Moriori, who live on a remote archipelago in the Pacific Ocean, and the Ainu people of Japan ( Fiedel 2004 , Owsley & Jantz 2014 ). In 2002, the US District Court of Oregon ruled that Kennewick Man did not meet the definition of Native American under NAGPRA because he was too old; the remains were turned over to a group of scientists ( Bruning 2006 , Dussias 2005 , Edgar et al. 2007 , Kelly 2004 ). In 2015, an ancient DNA study showed, unsurprisingly, The Ancient One was most closely related to the Indigenous peoples of the Americas ( Rasmussen et al. 2015 ). Unfortunately, the broader issues surrounding ambiguities in cultural affiliation claims raised by this case were not addressed, as Congress simply passed a law mandating that this particular set of remains be returned to the five claimant tribes. He was reburied in 2017 ( Breske 2018 ).
The question of cultural affiliation came to the fore in 2010, when the National Park Service published a new regulation (titled 43 CFR § 10.11, or often “10.11” for short) that addressed remains and belongings that museums and agencies had determined could not be affiliated (see Rewolinski 2014 ). The rule established a hierarchy of rights to these remains, and it requires museums and agencies to consult with tribes and return remains and belongings to tribes that claimed them, unless the institution can demonstrate that it has right of possession. These regulations were intensively criticized by some ( Birkhold 2011 ) and generally supported by others ( Niesel 2011 , Tsosie 2012 ). Dumont (2011) argued that archaeological critiques were self-serving and ignored NAGPRA's legislative history. Others showed how the regulations could be implemented ( Colwell-Chanthaphonh et al. 2011 , Harms 2012 ). Still others sought to look beyond the specifics of 10.11 to reflect on the larger issues of human rights and the informed consent of communities ( Colwell & Nash 2015 , Noble 2015 ).
Reflections on NAGPRA show that many archaeologists, particularly in academia, consider it complicated, difficult, burdensome, or even worse ( Meighan 1992 ). Yet, for the most part, NAGPRA has empowered some tribes to reclaim their heritage and pushed museums to be more oriented toward Native concerns and critiques ( Chari & Lavallee 2013 , Graham & Murphy 2010 , Lippert 2015 , Wilcox 2010 ). It has led museums to acknowledge the “appalling fact” that not all museum collections were properly cataloged (see Isaac 2002 , p. 164). In fact, archaeologists recognized this so-called “curation crisis” in print as early as 1982, nearly a decade before the passage of NAGPRA ( Marquardt et al. 1982 ), but their focus was on archaeological collections. NAGPRA applies to archaeological, ethnographic, art, and some biological collections as well.
Repatriation has led to meaningful individual, community, and intercultural healing, even if that healing has not come easily ( Colwell 2019 , Hill 1996 , Thornton 2002 ). Atalay (2018 , p. 545) considers the liminal nature of repatriation while acknowledging that NAGPRA-related work can be elegiac and even lyrical:
It is difficult to witness firsthand the way ancestral remains have been treated—sorted into trays by body part; permanently marked and labeled with numbers, offensive words, or the university's name; wired together or encased in plaster for hanging or easy display. Yet there is also something incredibly powerful in witnessing such things, then working in a meticulous, loving way to care for those ancestors and assist in bringing them home for reburial. Such is the difficult work in bearing witness in repatriation—carrying these visual memories, soundscapes, and past practices while working in partnership to bring repatriations and reburials to completion.
Dongoske (1996 , pp. 293–95) notes, on the other hand, that in spite of “100 years of archaeological insensitivity to the living descendants of the people whose villages and physical remains are the focus of [archaeological] study,” the Hopi Tribe has come to recognize the benefits of osteological analyses that are “relevant to their understanding of their heritage,” thus demonstrating the potentially reciprocal nature of relationships established under NAGPRA.
NAGPRA clearly has its limits ( McKeown 2010 , Ray 2016 , Roberts 2016 ). Daehnke & Lonetree (2011) suggest that the foundations of NAGPRA's inherent limitations were laid as early as 1906 with the passage of the Antiquities Act (see Thompson 2000 ):
The Antiquities Act, which was intended to protect the cultural resources of the United States by creating a permitting process for archaeological excavation and establishing punishments for looting, in effect further reified the authority that anthropologists held over Native American material culture, including human remains.…In effect [the Antiquities Act] turned Native American human remains into archaeological resources and the property of the federal government. ( Daehnke & Lonetree 2011 , p. 90)
A survey of Society for American Archaeology members and repatriation workers in Indian country showed much division even within the discipline of archaeology; many of the faults arise along generational lines: Younger practitioners tend to see NAGPRA in a more favorable light than do older practitioners ( Alonzi 2016 , Colwell-Chanthaphonh 2012 ).
Several scholars argue that NAGPRA results from a fundamental conflict between science and religion ( Clark 1996 , Cryne 2010 ); others argue more bluntly that NAGPRA is a threat to science ( Arnold & Jeske 2014 , Clark 1999 , Weiss 2008 ). Still others argue that NAGPRA is a carefully constructed balancing act, accommodating human rights, race relations, religion, science, education, and ethics ( Klesert & Powell 1993 , McKeown 2002 , Ousley et al. 2005 ). Regardless of whether one sees in NAGPRA a conflict or a balancing act, reducing the discussion to binary dichotomies does not do justice to the remarkable complexity of NAGPRA's reach and its implications, the full effects of which continue to play out in archaeology, museums, Indian country, and beyond.
An organization's philosophy, ethics, and values are evident in what it does as well as in what it chooses not to do. The American Alliance of Museums, which represents some 35,000 museums in the United States, remains largely silent on NAGPRA specifically and on repatriation issues in general. The American Association of Art Museum Directors, which represents leaders from organizations that receive federal funding and to which NAGPRA therefore applies, also remains too quiet on the subject. US museums have justifiably been taken to task for failing to comprehensively address the repatriation issue ( Wunderlich 2017 ).
The American Anthropological Association, the largest anthropology organization in the world, has few resources or NAGPRA-related content available on its website. In contrast, the Society for American Archaeology maintains its Committee on Repatriation and has many useful repatriation-related resources for educators and practitioners and historical documents available on its website. 2
The scholarly give-and-take regarding NAGPRA, repatriation, and their effects on science is not typically published in mainstream anthropological and archaeological journals ( Nash & Colwell-Chanthaphonh 2010 ). Most NAGPRA-related scholarship is published in books or in law review journals that are not typically read by anthropologists. Whereas NAGPRA and repatriation remain critically important to museum-based scholars, not to mention tribal employees and religious and cultural practitioners, many anthropologists and archaeologists scarcely have to consider the topic in the course of their daily work. It is often seen as having narrow applicability, which ignores the fact that the broader ethical, social, and political concerns that underpin NAGPRA have relevance across anthropology and archaeology.
While repatriation is now a broad anthropological theme, it is the specifics of its implementation that matter. Some studies take on a specific repatriation ( Bray & Killion 1994 ) or how a single tribe has worked to comply with NAGPRA and its effects on that community ( Tweedie 2002 ; see also Dongoske 1996 ). Tweedie (2002) considers how the Makah, who live in the northwest corner of Washington state, work with and within the law while challenging its assumptions and legal definitions, including NAGPRA's basic (though complicated) concepts including “sacred objects,” “cultural patrimony,” and “funerary objects.” Other books confront the histories of removal and return through the lens of a specific state ( Platt 2011 ) or through a series of cases across from the United States ( Colwell 2017 ).
A number of important papers address how repatriation has become a form of ritual and expression of sovereignty ( Jonaitis 2017 , Mathisen 2017 ). Jonaitis (2017) provides details from Tlingit performances during repatriation ceremonies at numerous museums over the last several decades, including the Oakland Museum in 2014 and the Denver Museum of Nature & Science in 1997. Such ceremonies are not necessarily about the repatriation itself; they are about demonstrating ownership and caretaking authority far beyond and before the museum sphere. As Jonaitis (2017 , p. 50) writes, “During repatriation ceremonies, the songs, dances, and speeches that embody the [Tlingit] clan history reinforce and explicate their rights to at.óow [sacred cultural patrimony] in the museum's possession; they represent the expressions of sovereignty.” As a piece of legislation, NAGPRA never intended to address the use, much less creation, of new Indigenous ceremonies as a matter of practice, but these are important, if unintended, cultural consequences of the newly created processes and relationships between tribes, institutions, and the individuals therein.
Other studies turn the lens back on the museum itself. Colwell (2015) argues through a historical analysis of repatriation claims that museums have nimbly used secrecy as a way to reassert colonial power relations. Peers (2017) shows how the administrative structures of museums are a performance of “corporate identity,” an expression of power, and ritualistic systems. Her paper, provocatively entitled “The Magic of Bureaucracy: Repatriation as Ceremony,” offers several case studies in repatriation from her perspective as curator for the Americas at the Pitt Rivers Museum at Oxford University but does so using the anthropological concepts of ritual and ceremony to guide the discussion. Her pessimistic conclusions regarding repatriation beyond NAGPRA suggest that despite the new relationships created, not much has changed:
Repatriation ceremonies have very little effect. While they may create moments of communitas when museum staff weep or pray with delegates, museums continue to own objects, set the rules by which repatriation claims are accepted or rejected, and determine the nature of the entire set of ceremonies. Colonial structures of power as embodied in museums appear to be untouched by repatriation ceremonies. ( Peers 2017 , p. 18)
Knight explores one museum's register (its record of acquisitions) to show how it navigated a repatriation claim in the 1960s. In so doing, she determines that the register allows us to “witness the confrontations and resolutions within museums” throughout the repatriation process ( Knight 2017 , p. 45). Indeed, historians and historians of science will find rich archival data sets with which to analyze NAGPRA-related work in the coming years.
Nearly two decades ago, some scholars identified how emerging digital technologies might mix up notions of intellectual and cultural property ( Milun 2001 ). A special issue of Museum Anthropology Review provided a string of compelling examples of how technologies such as online databases and three-dimensional printing are reshaping the relationship between museums and source communities ( Hollinger et al. 2013 , Leopold 2013 , Rowley 2013 ). Boast & Enote (2013) warn us not to confuse the return of ancestors and sacred objects with the sharing of digital or printed copies of what a community demands, however. Digital copies are rarely good substitutes for the originals.
The problems and limits of NAGPRA are made clear in studies that speak to the tangle of museum records ( Bruchac 2010 ) and the ways in which repatriations are crosscut by notions of blood, kinship, and identity ( Kelsey & Carpenter 2011 , Kirsch 2011 ). Kirsch (2011) explores the restricted and hierarchical structure of the scientific research process, rules and restrictions regarding Western property rights, and the comparatively fluid nature of kinship relations, which are social as well as biological, all with an eye toward the complicated work of NAGPRA. He concludes by noting that
Participants in debates concerning repatriation often restrict their claims to a single domain. As scientists, archaeologists may treat human remains primarily in terms of the research questions they can help answer. As institutions chartered by law, universities and museums may view the same human remains primarily in terms of property rights governing their disposition.…Native Americans tend to view these human remains as ancestors and kin to whom they have important and even sacred responsibilities. ( Kirsch 2011 , pp. 93–94)
New methods of dialogue about repatriation have also emerged in recent years, including poetry ( Erdich 2010 , Poremski 2015 ) and comic books ( Atalay et al. 2017 ). Returning to the notion of “the sacred” has been another productive lens through which to consider how scientific and Indigenous communities negotiate their cultural values ( Colwell 2014 , Matthews 2016 , Putnam 2014 ). As Colwell (2014 , p. 20) notes,
It is now common practice—even considered best practice in many places—for museums to give special treatment to…sacred [objects]. These sacred objects have restricted access (enforcing cultural prescriptions against public consumption and display), limited photography (enforcing cultural prescriptions against replication), and offerings left by traditional believers (giving implicit acknowledgment that communities hold these objects to be living beings, which need to be fed and renewed).
NAGPRA has been the law of the land in the United States for three decades. Although other countries may not yet have similar laws formally on the books, the repatriation movement has gained steam during that time period. Atalay recently declared that “repatriation is healing” ( Shannon et al. 2017 , p. 89). Whether or not one agrees with that sentiment, repatriation has stimulated and brought about fundamental changes in anthropology, archaeology, and museum studies, not to mention tribal cultural and religious practices, and it will continue to do so in the future. NAGPRA tends to alter everyone who encounters it ( Bradley 2018 , Preucel 2011 ).
Despite shrill objections to the reburial “problem” voiced decades ago ( Meighan 1992 , Turner 1986 ), NAGPRA and repatriation have not led to the decimation of museum collections or anthropological scholarship ( Rose et al. 1996 ). Quite the contrary, no museum has gone out of business because of the law. Even three decades after the passage of NAGPRA, however, many museums and federal agencies are not in full compliance with the law ( Watkins 2002 ). Daehnke & Lonetree (2011 , p. 96) note that even “under NAGPRA, the vast majority of Native American human remains are not presently being repatriated.” This situation has not changed in the decade since their writing—the majority of Native American ancestors that were in museum collections in 1990 remain there today. A new generation of scholars is emphasizing how NAGPRA presents opportunities for research rather than roadblocks to it ( Gonzalez & Marek-Martinez 2015 , Thoms 2015 ).
Many scholars, recently including bioarchaeologists, are now looking forward to a new era of collaboration between tribes and scientists, wherein productive dialogue advances everyone toward a mutual, reciprocal, and greater understanding of the process of knowledge creation and accumulation on all sides of these complex issues ( Alfonso & Powell 2007 , Dongoske 1996 , Kakaliouras 2014 , Mayes 2010 , Nicholas et al. 2010 ). Still, the intellectual and emotional distance between bioarchaeologists and native communities is substantial ( Hamilton 2009 ). Even decades after NAGPRA's implementation, many practitioners in the United States continue to find solutions to addressing the discovery of human remains in the field ( Powless & Freiwald 2019 ). Time will tell if these new attitudes lead to a new and different form of compliance with the law.
Repatriation is emerging as a key theme in new areas of science, social identities, and international relations. In many ways, the questions and problems today are those of years past that have been left unresolved. The subject of repatriation is entwined with new technologies that can sequence the DNA of ancient peoples. The florescence of this technology is leading to what some have called a “bone bonanza,” in which geneticists and their partners are gathering human tissue for study without addressing the legacies of museum collecting or seriously engaging with descendant communities ( Fox & Hawks 2019 , p. 582). In 2003, for instance, the Havasupai Tribe of Arizona discovered their DNA samples, which had been collected for a type II diabetes study, had been used for other studies, including one on schizophrenia, without their approval ( Garrison 2013 , Sterling 2011 ). In 2017, Kennett and colleagues announced the discovery of a possible elite lineage with matrilineal descent at Pueblo Bonito in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, as evinced by their study of ancient DNA samples taken from nine sets of human remains excavated more than a century ago from Room 33 at Pueblo Bonito ( Kennett et al. 2017 ). That research, occurring as it did more than two decades after the passage of NAGPRA and apparently in the absence of any tribal consultation, went ahead because the American Museum of Natural History, where the remains are curated, did not acknowledge cultural affiliation between the human remains examined and modern Pueblo tribes ( Claw et al. 2017 ). Numerous repatriations over the last three decades have asserted cultural affiliation between Ancestral Pueblo populations and two dozen modern Southwestern tribes; the American Museum's anomalous stance on this issue clearly demonstrates that the power to culturally affiliate human remains still resides within the museums, universities, and the federal government, not with the tribes.
Although there are some positive examples of collaboration in ways that do not replicate colonial science ( Kemp et al. 2007 , Moreno-Mayar et al. 2018 , Travis 2010 ), some have called for a much deeper disciplinary reflection and revision to genomic methods and ethics ( Bardill 2014 , 2018 ; Claw et al. 2017 ). Although genetics can be only one line of evidence, because of its perceived clarity and apparent scientific certainty, it can come to dominate cultural affiliation determinations under NAGPRA ( Beckenhauer 2003 , Callaway 2015 , Mayes 2010 ).
Related to the growing dominance of genetics in public discourse about history and identity is how NAGPRA and the sciences surrounding it can perpetuate racism and racialist thinking. Echo-Hawk (2010a , 2011 ) has offered the most pointed critique of NAGPRA's complicity in sustaining false constructs of race. In The Magic Children , Echo-Hawk (2010a) offers a first-person account of his decades-long work in repatriation and other topics related to Native American identity, rights, and relations. He examines the deeply problematic concept of race on both sides of the repatriation issue while simultaneously critiquing mainstream archaeology for not being more supportive of tribal concerns and Indigenous archaeology for encouraging the use of a discredited biological concept—race—in archaeological research. While some have engaged his arguments, his concerns have largely been left unresolved ( Echo-Hawk 2010b , Echo-Hawk & Zimmerman 2006 , Zimmerman 2010 ).
Repatriation is also deeply shaping notions of national heritage and the attempt to confront colonial legacies far outside the United States. This is true both in the sense that Native Americans in the United States are increasingly looking to reclaim their heritage outside the country (since NAGPRA applies only to US museums and agencies), as when the Hopi attempt to stop the auction of katsinam in French auction houses ( Liljeblad 2017 ), and in that NAGPRA-like conversations and claims are engulfing many countries beyond the United States. England, France, Germany, Belgium—not to mention colonial settler nations such as Canada, Australia, and New Zealand—and many others are actively debating the control of Indigenous material heritages and ancestral remains ( Aranui 2018 , Hanna 2005 , Hole 2007 , Krmpotich 2014 , Marselis 2016 , Pullman 2018 ). Curtis (2006) critiques the “Declaration on the Importance and Value of Universal Museums,” issued in 2002 by a consortium of museums in Europe and the United States, focusing on the colonial nature of the document and its arguments. In so doing, he addresses the problematic history of encyclopedic museums, their collecting histories, and possibilities for productive interactions with source communities. NAGPRA's effects have reached around the globe.

Section: Conclusion

NAGPRA and the repatriation process it set in motion occasionally require tribes to develop new ceremonies in order to return powerful objects and ancestors that were taken from their original cultural and spiritual contexts. Scientists and museum personnel have, in turn, had to adopt new behaviors, largely in the form of legally mandated consultations with tribes but also having to do with basic museological practice, such as inventories and curation practices. NAGPRA's passage in 1990 marks a point of inflection for Americanist anthropology, the ramifications of which will be felt for decades to come. The work prompted by NAGPRA is important. It makes for better, more informed scholarship. And it will never be completed.

Section: Acknowledgements

We thank the Annual Review of Anthropology for the opportunity to publish this article, which we hope will mark an important moment in NAGPRA's history. As always, the editorial staff has been exceptional. We also express our deep gratitude to the Denver Museum of Nature & Science and the leadership there that, for more than a dozen years, has fostered a forward-looking outlook on NAGPRA. Finally, our work and our thinking on NAGPRA have been shaped so much by our museum and Native colleagues through long conversations and collaborations. We are especially grateful to Octavius Seowtewa, Leigh J. Kuwanwisiwma, Stewart B. Koyiyumptewa, Terry Knight, Ernest House Jr., Gordon Yellowman Sr., and Harold Jacobs for their wisdom to help teach us about the power of history and the demands of justice.
