Section: Abstract

Ancient DNA analyses have shown that interbreeding between hominin taxa occurred multiple times. Although admixture is often reflected in skeletal phenotype, the relationship between the two remains poorly understood, hampering interpretation of the hominin fossil record. Direct study of this relationship is often impossible due to the paucity of hominin fossils and difficulties retrieving ancient genetic material. Here, we use a sample of known ancestry hybrids between two closely related nonhuman primate taxa (Indian and Chinese Macaca mulatta ) to investigate the effect of admixture on skeletal morphology. We focus on pelvic shape, which has potential fitness implications in hybrids, as mismatches between maternal pelvic and fetal cranial morphology are often fatal to mother and offspring. As the pelvis is also one of the skeletal regions that differs most between Homo sapiens and Neanderthals, investigating the pelvic consequences of interbreeding could be informative regarding the viability of their hybrids. We find that the effect of admixture in M. mulatta is small and proportional to the relatively small morphological difference between the parent taxa. Sexual dimorphism appears to be the main determinant of pelvic shape in M. mulatta . The lack of difference in pelvic shape between Chinese and Indian M. mulatta is in contrast to that between Neanderthals and H. sapiens , despite a similar split time (in generations) between the hybridizing pairs. Greater phenotypic divergence between hominins may relate to adaptations to disparate environments but may also highlight how the unique degree of cultural buffering in hominins allowed for greater neutral divergence. In contrast to some previous work identifying extreme morphologies in first- and second-generation hybrids, here the relationship between pelvic shape and admixture is linear. This linearity may be because most sampled animals have a multigenerational admixture history or because of relatively high constraints on the pelvis compared with other skeletal regions.

Section: Introduction

Elucidating the effects of hybridization is critical for understanding the context of human evolution and the processes driving it ( Ackermann et al., 2016 ). The past few years have seen great methodological advances in ancient DNA (aDNA) analyses, enabling the detection of interbreeding events and resulting in an increased appreciation of their frequency and importance (for reviews, refer to Gopalan et al., 2021 ; Wolf and Akey, 2018 ). Despite these advances, we are still far from understanding the importance of gene flow between hominin lineages in determining morphology and from recognizing hybrids in the fossil record ( Warren et al., 2018 ). Claims of hybrid Neanderthal/ Homo sapiens fossils were made for decades before supporting genetic evidence was available ( Duarte et al., 1999 ; Trinkaus et al., 2003a , 2003b ; Rougier et al., 2007 ). When the data are limited to fossil material and its archaeological context, however, these assertions are almost inevitably subject to counterclaims, such as those asserting that intermediate morphology is within the boundaries of intraspecific variation in H. sapiens (e.g., Tattersall and Schwartz, 1999 ) .
In many cases, even now, preservation issues mean there is limited potential for aDNA evidence to resolve the question of which putative (morphological) hybrids are actual (genetic) hybrids. There have nonetheless been some spectacular finds. One such was the aDNA analysis of the Oase 1 mandible from Romania, which showed that this H. sapiens individual did indeed have a recent Neanderthal ancestor ( Fu et al., 2015 ), as had been suggested from its morphology ( Trinkaus et al., 2003a , 2003b ; Rougier et al., 2007 ). Although the exact relationship between Oase 1's hybrid ancestry and suggested Neanderthal traits is not clear, the fact that it was identified as a hybrid based on both morphology and genetics supports a growing body of research, indicating that signatures of hybridization are detectable in skeletal morphology.
Here, we build on existing research using nonhuman primates to inform our understanding of hominin hybrids (e.g., Ackermann et al., 2006 , 2014 ; Boel et al., 2019 ; Martinez et al., 2019 ). We use a large sample of captive full-bred and admixed Chinese and Indian rhesus macaques ( Macaca mulatta ) to elucidate the expected morphological consequences of admixture between closely related primate species, including hominins. Of particular interest because Chinese and Indian M. mulatta have been mixing in this captive colony for decades, the study also examines how admixture effects on phenotype vary with ancestry contributions from the two subspecies lines.
We focus on the effects of hybridization on pelvic morphology. In some primates, these effects may be particularly acute due to interactions between the functional and physiological constraints of locomotion and parturition ( Trevathan, 2015 ; Kawada et al., 2020 ). The pelvis is also a region of divergent shape in H. sapiens and H . neanderthalensis ( Rak and Arensburg, 1987 ; Weaver and Hublin, 2009 ). Combined with neonatal crania that, although less distinct than the adult crania of these taxa, are also differently shaped ( Ponce de León and Zollikofer, 2001 ; Gunz et al., 2012 ), this could have had implications for the viability of hybrid offspring. A more Neanderthal-like fetal cranium and a more H. sapiens -like birth canal could have led to increased likelihood of dystocia and the potential death of both mother and child. These severe consequences would have constituted a strong selective pressure likely to shape morphology, as has been suggested for the effect of caesarean sections on fetopelvic disproportion in recent humans ( Mitteroecker et al., 2016 , 2017 ). To the best of our knowledge, the relationship between pelvic morphology and admixture in the fossil record has not yet been addressed, most likely due to the paucity of both suitable well-preserved fossils and postcranial material from extant known hybrids. Thus, it is a skeletal region from which we might learn a considerable amount, regarding the morphological impact of hybridization, by adopting an approach based on nonhuman primate analogs.
The genus Macaca is divided into four species groups . The fascicularis group, which contains M. mulatta , is the most widely distributed group ( Fooden, 1976 , 2006 ). In 2000, Fooden reported that M. mulatta inhabited Southeast and South Asia with a geographic range of ∼15–36 N° and ∼70–120 °E, although this range was historically wider and has likely been further reduced in the last two decades. Fossils show that M. mulatta , or a very similar precursor, was present in its current range by >40 ka, notwithstanding the last glacial maximum, which likely caused local extinctions and subsequent postglacial in-migrations in some presently inhabited regions ( Fooden, 2000 ).
There is substantial disagreement over the systematics of M. mulatta , which appears to be polyphyletic: mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) analyses cluster Chinese M. mulatta with Macaca cyclopis or Macaca fuscata , rather with than their supposed conspecifics, including Indian M. mulatta ( Melnick et al., 1993 ; Hayasaka et al., 1996 ). mtDNA also suggests deep divergences between geographic groups of M. mulatta to at least a subspecific level, although there remains disagreement as to how many subspecies should be recognized ( Zhang and Shi, 1993 ; Smith and Mcdonough, 2005 ). Indeed, the divergence between Indian and Chinese M. mulatta mtDNA is deeper than between some well-accepted species pairs of macaques such as Macaca assamensis and Macaca thibetana ( Hayasaka et al., 1996 ; Smith and Mcdonough, 2005 ). Similar divisions between Chinese and Indian M. mulatta have also been found in studies of protein polymorphisms , microsatellite single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and major histocompatibility-complex (MHC) alleles ( Smith and Mcdonough, 2005 ; Ferguson et al., 2007 ).
Here, we refer to Chinese and Indian M. mulatta as different subspecies solely to avoid more confusing terms, such as ‘group’ or ‘population’. Our analyses are not intended to address the validity or otherwise of that taxonomic designation. The differences between extant Chinese and Indian M. mulatta subspecies, particularly the molecular and physiological differences, have been studied extensively due to the species' role as a biomedical model. Chinese-derived M. mulatta has greater genetic heterozygosity ( Smith and Mcdonough, 2005 ; Ferguson et al., 2007 ; Kanthaswamy et al., 2009 ) and morphological diversity ( Fooden, 2000 ) than Indian-derived animals. Indeed, Smith and Mcdonough (2005) found pairwise differences between Indian M. mulatta populations to be half as great as between comparable pairs of human populations, despite the extremely low levels of genetic variation in H. sapiens ( Smith and Mcdonough, 2005 ). These low levels of variation may be due to a bottleneck experienced by Indian populations in their recent evolutionary past ( Smith and Mcdonough, 2005 ; Hernandez et al., 2007 ; Kanthaswamy et al., 2009 ). Because Neanderthals also appear to have had small population sizes and low genetic diversity ( Green et al., 2010 ; Bocquet-Appel and Degioanni, 2013 ), this is another way in which this M. mulatta cross-sample is an interesting analog for hybridization during human evolution.
Relative to the known genetic differences, the extent of morphological variation within M. mulatta and between Chinese and Indian groups is less clear. Fooden (e.g., 1976 , 1982 , 1995 , 2000 , 2006 ) argues that although there is substantial geographic variation in the phenotype, the pattern of variation within M. mulatta is insufficiently clear to warrant subspecific divisions ( Fooden, 2000 ). Fooden's (1995 , 2000) taxonomy is based on a conservative designation requiring at least one trait with discontinuous variation between subspecies. Many other researchers, however, have noted substantial morphological differences between Indian- and Chinese-derived animals in particular (see discussion in Fooden, 2000 ). For example, Chinese males are larger than Indian males, which may reflect adaptation to a colder climate, following Bergmann's rule ( Bergmann, 1847 ; Clarke and O'Neil, 1999 ). Indeed, across the species' natural range, stature and mass tend to increase gradually with latitude, although there are regional exceptions to this trend ( Fooden, 2000 ). Tail length decreases with longitude, particularly east of 95 °E, and is, therefore, longer in Indian than in Chinese M. mulatta ( Fooden, 2000 ; Hamada et al., 2005 ). In captive-bred Chinese and Indian M. mulatta housed in Louisiana, USA (Tulane National Primate Research Center), there are differences in patterns of sexual dimorphism , with greater sexual dimorphism in Chinese than in Indian monkeys ( Clarke and O'Neil, 1999 ). These studies suggest that size, allometric shape, and patterns of sexual dimorphism may be variables that differ between the two M. mulatta taxa and which therefore may vary in admixed individuals.
Chinese and Indian M. mulatta have been isolated from one another since at least the Late Pleistocene ( Zhang and Shi, 1993 ; Smith and Mcdonough, 2005 ), likely since ∼162 ka, based on genetic analyses of ∼1,500 SNPs ( Hernandez et al., 2007 ). Given a generation time of approximately 7.5 years ( Wolfe, 1986 ) and the split time of ∼162 ka ( Hernandez et al., 2007 ), about 21,600 generations passed between the divergence of Indian and Chinese M. mulatta and their interbreeding in the California National Primate Research Center (CNPRC) colony in the mid-1980s (see section 2.1 ). The same calculation for H. sapiens and Neanderthals depends upon more assumptions and disputed dates, but an approximate estimation of the same variables is possible. If we use a relatively conservative split date of 550–765 ka ( Meyer et al., 2016 ), a generation length of 26–30 years ( Moorjani et al., 2016 ), and a date for interbreeding of 47–65 ka ( Sankararaman et al., 2012 ), the middle point of each range results in a rough estimate of 21,482 generations between divergence and interbreeding. The macaque and hominin taxa can thus be argued to have had similar degrees of divergence between taxon pairs at the time of introgression , making Chinese and Indian M. mulatta an interesting model for examining Neanderthal/ H. sapiens hybridization.
Hybridization appears to be commonplace in the primate order, occurring in all major lineages ( Cortés-Ortiz et al., 2019 ). Some well-established macaque species, such as Macaca arctoides , are even thought to have hybrid origins ( Tosi et al., 2000 ). Ackermann and colleagues (e.g., Ackermann et al., 2006 , 2014 , 2019 ; Ackermann and Bishop, 2010 ) have used nonhuman primates as hominin analogs to study the potential effects of hybridization during human evolution. The majority of this work has been carried out on baboons, which are well studied, provide a good ecological analog for hominins ( Jolly, 2001 ; for review, see Fischer et al., 2019 ), and are housed in several major captive colonies with known pedigree information. Ackermann et al. (2006 , 2014) showed that first- and second-generation olive-yellow baboon hybrids exhibit extreme size (heterosis) and size variation outside the parental ranges. They also display high frequencies of unusual nonmetric cranial traits and dental and sutural anomalies. This body of work, supported by other research on nonhuman primate hybridization (for reviews, see Ackermann et al., 2019 ; Cortés-Ortiz et al., 2019 ), provides some important insights to underpin the present study. Notably, there is a skeletal signal of hybridization, and the effects of hybridization appear to be similar across primate taxa, albeit with an effect of phylogenetic proximity, such that more extreme hybrids are more likely to result from interbreeding between more divergent taxa. It also provides some expectations to test with our macaque data: hybrid primates generally show increased variation and heterosis compared with parent taxa.

Section: Methodology

Our sample is composed of M. mulatta housed at the CNPRC, University of California, Davis. The CNPRC colony was initially composed entirely of Indian M. mulatta , but after a ban on exporting primates from India in 1978, the colony's managers introduced a small number of Chinese animals to maintain genetic variation within the population. The first interbreeding was recorded in 1983 ( Kanthaswamy et al., 2009 ). Unlike many nonhuman hybrid studies, which focus on the first few hybrid generations (e.g., Ackermann et al., 2006 , 2014 ; Savriama et al., 2018 ; Warren et al., 2018 ), interbreeding between Indian and Chinese M. mulatta has been occurring in this colony for at least four to five generations (based on a generation time of ∼7.5 years; Wolfe, 1986 ). The colony now provides a sample with a distribution from full-bred Indian to full-bred Chinese animals, including many individuals with low percentages of Chinese ancestry. This range of admixture is a better representation of what we might expect in natural hybrid zones and in the hominin fossil record if hybridization leads to viable offspring ( Kelaita and Cortés-Ortiz, 2013 ; Fuzessy et al., 2014 ). In effect, the Indian M. mulatta housed at the CNPRC are a population experiencing a relatively small amount of genetic input from another taxon (Chinese M. mulatta ); this can be seen as analogous to a Pleistocene H. sapiens population undergoing a small number of time-limited interbreeding events with Neanderthals.
Our sample data consisted of 138 full-body medical computed tomography (CT) scans from adult (>6 years) M. mulatta housed at the CNPRC: 94 females and 44 males. Sex ratios in the CNPRC colony are deliberately kept unbalanced to reduce intramale fighting, resulting in unequal numbers of available males and females. To optimize the spread of admixture proportions (Chinese ancestry) in our sample, we included more females than males; however, we sought to maintain the same degree of female bias in both Indian and Chinese M. mulatta samples to the extent possible. We included 19 full-bred Indian M. mulatta , 17 full-bred Chinese M. mulatta , and hybrid animals with a range of admixture proportions ( Table 1 ). Estimates of Chinese ancestry were obtained from the CNPRC and are constructed from pedigree records. In our aim to obtain the best range of admixture in our sample, we included individuals with some arthritis if the original morphology was sufficiently unobscured as to allow confident landmark placement (see following paragraphs); however, we removed six animals with pathological pelves from our initial sample after examination of their CT scans, leaving the final sample of 138 ( Table 1 ). Table 1 . Breakdown of sample ( n = 138) by Chinese ancestry and sex. Ancestry category 0% 12.5% 25% 37.5% 50% 62.5% 75% 87.5% 100% Female 11 29 15 12 5 3 7 1 11 Male 8 15 8 3 2 2 0 0 6 Total 19 44 23 15 7 5 7 1 17 Ancestry category reflects the percentage of Chinese ancestry: 0% Chinese ancestry = full-bred Indian, 100% Chinese ancestry = full-bred Chinese. Full-bred sample n = 36.
All animals were CT scanned at the CNPRC by appropriately trained staff. CT scanning and all other experimental procedures for this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of California, Davis (protocol #19057). In most cases, monkeys were sedated and scanned in vivo. Although in a few cases monkeys were scanned as cadavers, no monkeys were sacrificed for this study. As they become available, macerated skeletal remains from cadavers of animals involved in this study are being curated in the Department of Anthropology, University of California, Davis. CT scans from the sample are also freely available on request via the MorphoSource digital archive (Morphosource.org; project name: The rhesus macaque admixture project).
Using the CT scans, in Avizo v. 9.1 Lite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham), we virtually segmented the skeleton from the other tissue types and the pelvis from the rest of the skeleton using a mixture of automatic and manual thresholding and segmentation tools. To collect landmark coordinates for analyses using geometric morphometric methods (GMM), we digitized landmarks and semilandmarks on virtual reconstructions (shaded isosurfaces and transparent volume renderings) using Avizo and exported the coordinates for analysis in R v. 3.5.2–3.6.3 ( R Core Team, 2020 ). We collected 48 true landmarks plus semilandmarks describing seven curves by digitizing many points along each curve ( Fig. 1 ; Table 2 ). These curve semilandmarks then were resampled in R using a custom script ( Supplementary Online Material [SOM] ) so that each curve contained the same number of semilandmarks for each individual as follows: curve 1 (40 semilandmarks), curves 2 and 3 (18 semilandmarks each), curves 4 and 5 (30 landmarks each), and curves 6 and 7 (10 landmarks each; Fig. 2 ). After processing, our data set consisted of 204 total landmarks: 48 true landmarks and 156 semilandmarks. We selected landmarks and semilandmarks with the intent to optimally characterize the size and shape of the pelvis. We examined intraobserver error by using ten repetitions each of two individuals digitized repeatedly, with more than a day elapsing between each digitizing session. We processed each landmark configuration as described in the following paragraphs and compared the Procrustes distances between iterations of the same individual versus those between different individuals (see Results ). Download: Download high-res image (606KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 1 . Landmarks and semilandmarks used in the analyses presented here viewed from (clockwise from top left) ventral, cranial, caudal, dorsal, and right lateral views. Black spheres: true landmarks, gray spheres: semilandmarks, lines: wireframe connecting landmarks and semilandmarks. For landmarks that correspond to numbers, refer to Table 2 . For ease of visualization, only true landmarks are numbered, and they are numbered only in the view where they are most easily seen. In the visualization of results throughout the remaining article, only the wireframes are shown to better visualize differences between shapes. Download: Download high-res image (183KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 2 . Semilandmark curves and wireframe used in the analyses presented here, viewed from (left to right) anterior and posterior. 1: pelvic inlet (closed) curve, 2: right dorsal ischial curve, 3: left dorsal ischial curve, 4: right iliac blade curve, 5: left iliac blade curve, 6: right pubic symphysis curve, 7: left pubic symphysis curve. Table 2 . Numbers and definitions of all landmarks (1–48) and semilandmarks (49–204). Landmark number Definition 1 Most cranial point on the sacral wing—right 2 Most caudoventral point on the sacral wing, on linea terminalis—right 3 Most lateral point on the cranial articular surface of S1—right 4 Most ventral point on the cranial articular surface of S1 body—midline 5 Most ventral point on the dorsal margin of articular cranial surface of S1 body—midline 6 Most ventral point on the cranial articular surface of S2 body—midline 7 Most caudal point on the sacrum—midline 8 Dorsal caudal iliac spine—right 9 Cranialmost point on the iliac spine—right 10 Cranialmost point on the acetabular rim—right 11 Medialmost point on cranial portion of the lunate—right 12 Medialmost point on caudal portion of the lunate—right 13 Center of the acetabulum—right 14 Caudalmost point on the acetabular rim—right 15 Dorsalmost point on the acetabular rim—right 16 Ventrolateral point on the lateral ischial crest at min. breadth—right 17 Iliac blade medial (most medial intersection of the iliac blade and sacrum)—right 18 Dorsalmost point on the ischial spine—right 19 Intersection of the dorsal ischial crest and ischial tuberosity—right 20 Dorsalmost point on the ischial tuberosity—right 21 Most ventrolateral point on the ischial tuberosity—right 22 Most ventromedial point on the ischial tuberosity—right 23 Cranialmost point on the obturator foramen—right 24 Ventralmost point on the obturator foramen—right 25 Caudalmost point on the obturator foramen—right 26 Pubic symphysis cranial—right 27 Most cranial point on the sacral wing—left 28 Most caudoventral point on the sacral wing, on linea terminalis—left 29 Most lateral point on the cranial articular surface of S1—left 30 Dorsal caudal iliac spine—left 31 Cranialmost point on the iliac spine—left 32 Cranialmost point on the acetabular rim—left 33 Medialmost point on cranial portion of the lunate—left 34 Medialmost point on caudal portion of the lunate—left 35 Center of the acetabulum—left 36 Caudalmost point on the acetabular rim—left 37 Dorsalmost point on the acetabular rim—left 38 Ventrolateral point on the lateral ischial crest at min. breadth—left 39 Iliac crest medial (most medial intersection of the iliac crest and sacrum)—left 40 Dorsalmost point on the ischial spine—left 41 Intersection of the dorsal ischial crest and ischial tuberosity—left 42 Dorsalmost point on the ischial tuberosity—left 43 Most ventrolateral point on the ischial tuberosity—left 44 Most ventromedial point on the ischial tuberosity—left 45 Cranialmost point on the obturator foramen—left 46 Ventralmost point on the obturator foramen—left 47 Most caudodorsal point on the obturator foramen—left 48 Pubic symphysis cranial—left Semilandmark number Definition 49 to 88 Pelvic inlet curve 89 to 106 Dorsal ischial curve—right 107 to 124 Dorsal ischial curve—left 125 to 154 Iliac blade curve—right 155 to 184 Iliac blade curve—left 185 to 194 Pubic symphysis curve—right 195 to 204 Pubic symphysis curve—left
All analyses were carried out in R v. 3.5.2–3.6.3 ( R Core Team, 2020 ) using the geomorph ( Collyer and Adams, 2018 , 2020 ; Adams et al., 2020 ) and Morpho ( Schlager, 2017 ) packages and base R functions ( SOM ). To register the shape data, we used the procSym function in Morpho ( Schlager, 2017 ) to perform a generalized Procrustes superimposition of the landmarks, to slide the semilandmarks along their curves using a criterion of minimizing bending energy, and to project the superimposed configurations into a tangent space. We performed principal component analysis (PCA) in geomorph (using the plotTangentSpace function) to summarize the high-dimensional data into axes of greatest explanatory power and to visualize variation within and between groups of interest on these axes. We then used geomorph's procD.lm function to perform Procrustes analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test for relationships between predictor and response variables of interest and to compare model fits. To test for the presence of different patterns of sexual dimorphism in different admixture groups, we compared the fit of additive (shape ∼ admixture + sex) and interactive (shape ∼ admixture ∗ sex) models of shape, sex, and admixture. We also included a three-knot B spline model of admixture and sex-adjusted shape in the comparison to investigate whether departures from a linear relationship between sex and ancestry could result from genetic factors such as dominance or epistasis. The B-spline model allows for the relationship between the response and predictor variables to be described by a smooth curve.
Owing to sexual dimorphism in our sample (described in more detail in the following paragraphs), we used least squares linear regression to account for the effects of sex on admixture and shape. Because sex ratios varied with Chinese ancestry percentages, it was necessary to adjust both variables to control for the effect of sex entirely. The sex-adjusted residuals were used in all subsequent analyses of the relationship between shape and admixture.
To quantify and visualize the relationship between admixture and pelvic shape, we regressed pelvic shape on admixture using least squares linear regression and then projected the sex-adjusted shape observations onto the resulting regression vector to compute admixture scores ( Drake and Klingenberg, 2008 ; Ledevin and Koyabu, 2019 ; Sheratt et al., 2019 ; Moore, 2021 ). Displayed in a bivariate plot, the results provide a straightforward way to compare the magnitude of shape differences attributable to admixture (the regression trend) to the magnitude of shape differences not explained by the model (residuals about the trend). To visualize the relative contributions of sex and admixture variables to overall shape variation, we display distributions of pairwise Procrustes distances between specimens using different filters of group and sex membership. To test for differences in variance, we used the function morphol.disparity in geomorph ( Adams et al., 2020 ; Collyer and Adams, 2020 ), which calculates the Procrustes variance for each group, the pairwise distances between group variances, and the p -values of tests of significant difference between pairs ( p < 0.05 throughout).

Section: Results

In our intraobserver error analysis, the mean Procrustes distances between iterations of the same individual were much smaller than those between different individuals, and the 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of their means did not overlap. The mean Procrustes distance between iterations of the same individual was 0.026 (95% CI: 0.023–0.029) and 0.036 (95% CI: 0.024–0.048); between different individuals, the mean Procrustes distance was 0.105 (95% CI: 0.101–0.109). We judged this to mean that levels of intraobserver error in our data were within acceptable limits.
As expected, given the known sexual dimorphism in macaque species (e.g., Plavcan, 2001 ) and the obstetric function of the pelvis, our initial Procrustes ANOVAs showed a relatively high degree of sexual dimorphism in the pelvic morphology of the complete sample: sex explains ∼18% of the variation in shape (F [1, 136] = 30.13, r 2 = 0.18, p < 0.05). To investigate the nature of sexual dimorphism within the sample, we compared the fit of additive and interaction models of sex and shape ( Table 3 ). The interaction model of the relationship between sex, admixture (% Chinese ancestry), and shape does not fit the data significantly better than a simple additive model, suggesting that sexual dimorphism does not vary with degree of admixture. This being the case, we used additive regression models with sex as the predictor and shape or admixture as the response to produce residuals that allowed us to adjust for sex in both shape and admixture variables for use in further analyses. These residuals are used in all subsequent analyses performed on the complete sample. Table 3 . Comparison (analysis of variance) of interactive and additive models for the relationship between sex, admixture (percent Chinese ancestry), and shape in the complete sample ( n = 138). Model Residual df df RSS SS r 2 F p Shape ∼ sex + admix 135 2+ 0.508 0.000 Shape ∼ sex ∗ admix 134 3+ 0.504 0.004 0.007 1.105 0.292 Total 137 0.635 The larger interactive model is not a significantly better fit than the smaller additive model.
After adjusting for sex in both shape and admixture variables, the amount of Chinese ancestry explains a very small, although significant, portion of remaining shape variation: approximately 2% (F [1, 136] = 3.07, r 2 = 0.02, p < 0.05). The weak effect of admixture on shape, in contrast to sexual dimorphism, can be seen when pairwise Procrustes distances between the sexes in each Chinese ancestry category are compared with within-sex variation between categories ( Fig. 3 ). Also shown in Figure 3 is variation between members of the same sex within the same admixture category. This can be considered baseline interindividual variation resulting from a combination of many factors, likely including age, weight, and lifetime experiences in the colony. Levels of variation between those with different Chinese ancestry categories, whether adjacent or more distant, are indistinguishable from that baseline variation, demonstrating the very weak effect of admixture compared with other sources of interindividual variation. Download: Download high-res image (160KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 3 . Distributions of pairwise Procrustes distances generated directly from the data. Distributions show distances between members of different sexes within a Chinese ancestry category (orange, dashed line), between individuals of the same sex in the same Chinese ancestry category (gray, solid line), in categories 12.5% apart/adjacent categories (turquoise, solid line), and in categories 50% apart (purple, solid line). Variation between individuals in the same sex and ancestry category (gray, solid line) may be considered baseline levels of variation against which to compare the effects of sex or admixture. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
The effect of ancestry on pelvic shape (adjusting both for sex) is mostly evident in the shape of the iliac blades ( Fig. 4 ). In animals with more Chinese ancestry, the cranial border of the iliac blades is of relatively equal height, ventral to dorsal, whereas in animals with less Chinese ancestry, the iliac blades extend further laterally and the cranial edges are more angled, extending further cranially at their ventral extent. The dorsal part of the iliac blades, in the region of the vertebrae S2 and S3 ( Fig. 1 ), also extends more caudally in animals with higher regression scores. There are further differences in the ischium: in higher scoring animals, the medial border of the ischial tuberosities is more laterally placed, compared with animals with lower scores, and the superior border of the pubic symphysis is more ventrally placed. Finally, the sacrum differs between individuals who vary in regression scores: higher scoring individuals have a sacrum that is craniocaudally shorter and more ventrally orientated in the region of S2/S3. All of these differences are very slight, however. Download: Download high-res image (509KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 4 . Plot of regression scores showing the relationship between pelvic shape and admixture, both adjusted for sex. Jitter is used to improve the visibility of separate points. Full-bred Indian animals (0% Chinese ancestry) in red; full-bred Chinese animals (100% Chinese ancestry) in dark blue; all other admixture percentages correspond to a color scale between the two extremes, as shown to the right of the graph. Wireframes below the graph show minimum (in red) and maximum (in dark blue) scoring shapes on the regression score axis with displacement magnified by two to aid visualization. Views shown (left to right) are ventral, cranial, caudal, and right lateral. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
The relationship between regression scores and admixture displayed in Figure 4 appears to approach a linear or additive relationship, meaning that change in shape and increasing Chinese ancestry is relatively proportional. This is supported by model comparison, which shows that a three-knot B spline model does not fit the data significantly better than a simple linear model of shape and Chinese ancestry % (adjusted for sex; Table 4 ). Table 4 . Model comparison (analysis of variance) of three-knot B spline and simple additive models for the relationship between shape and admixture in the complete sample ( n = 138 , sex held constant for both variables). Model Residual df df RSS SS r 2 F p Additive 135 2+ 0.508 0.000 B spline 130 5 0.489 0.120 0.307 1.038 0.388 Total 137 0.635 The B-spline model is not a significantly better fit than the smaller additive model.
In the complete sample, there is no significant difference in pelvic centroid size between any pairwise comparison of full-bred Indian, Chinese, or admixed groups ( Table 5 ). Similarly, there are no significant differences between group variances, showing that no one group is more variable in pelvic shape than another ( Table 6 , Table 7 ). This suggests there are no transgressive sizes and no increase in shape variation in admixed individuals in this sample. Table 5 . Analysis of variance of differences in centroid size between full-bred and admixed animals in the complete sample ( n = 138). Empty Cell df SS MS r 2 F P Admixture status a 2 11377 5688.70 0.04 2.58 0.07 b Residuals 135 298013 2207.50 0.96 Total 137 309391 a Admixture status groups: full-bred Indian, full-bred Chinese, admixed. b There is no significant difference ( p > 0.05) in centroid size between groups with different admixture status. Table 6 . Procrustes variances for admixture categories in the complete sample ( n = 138). Admixture status Procrustes variance Ind 0.0043 Chi 0.0049 Ad 0.0046 Ind, full-bred Indian; Chi, full-bred Chinese; Ad, admixed. Table 7 . Test for significant differences in variance ( Table 6 ) between full-bred and admixed animals in the complete sample ( n = 138). Empty Cell Ind Chi Ad Ind – 0.00054 0.00026 Chi 0.34 – 0.00028 Ad 0.53 0.54 – Ind, full-bred Indian; Chi, full-bred Chinese; Ad, admixed. Pairwise differences between Procrustes variances are given above the trace; p -values of tests of significance of differences are given below the trace. None of the comparisons reaches significance ( p > 0.05).
In contrast to the full sample analysis ( Table 3 ), analysis of solely the Indian and Chinese full-bred macaques indicates that an interaction model of the relationship between sex and shape is a significantly better fit for the data than an additive model ( Table 8 ). This suggests a difference in sexual dimorphism between the two subspecies that is masked by the greater variation in the complete sample (refer also Clarke and O'Neil, 1999 ). Owing to these apparent differences in sexual dimorphism, for the full-bred sample we adjusted for differences in the effects of sex on shape separately for each subspecies, by adding the difference between the subspecies-specific male and female means to the female configurations for each subspecies. A PCA showing the separation between the subspecies on the main axes of sex-adjusted shape can be seen in Figure 5 . The sex-adjusted residual shapes were used as response variables in a Procrustes ANOVA to quantify the effect of subspecies designation on shape (F [1, 34] = 1.47, r 2 = 0.07, p < 0.05). After accounting for sexual dimorphism, there is a significant but fairly weak relationship between the remaining shape variation and subspecies designation ( Fig. 6 ). Designation as Indian or Chinese subspecies accounts for approximately 7% of pelvic shape variation in the full-bred sample. Table 8 . Comparison (analysis of variance) of additive and interactive models of the relationship between sex, subspecies designation (Indian or Chinese), and shape in the full-bred sample ( n = 36). Model Residual Df RSS SS R 2 F p Shape ∼ sex + subspecies 33 0.149 0.000 Shape ∼ sex ∗ subspecies 32 0.140 0.010 0.059 2.187 0.03 Total 35 0.160 The interactive model is a significantly better fit than the smaller additive model, as denoted by the significant (<0.05) p -value. Download: Download high-res image (134KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 5 . PCA plot showing sex-adjusted shape differences between full-bred species. PC1 accounts for 25.2% variance and PC2 accounts for 13.0% variance. Full-bred Indian animals (0% Chinese ancestry) shown as red circles; full-bred Chinese animals (100% Chinese ancestry) shown as blue squares. This PCA shows the large degree of overlap in pelvic shape between the subspecies on the primary axes of variation. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) PCA, principal component analysis. Download: Download high-res image (417KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 6 . Regression score plot showing the relationship between sex-adjusted shape associated with subspecies designation and subspecies designation. Jitter is used to improve the visibility of separate points. Full-bred Indian (0% Chinese ancestry) animals shown in red; full-bred Chinese (100% Chinese ancestry) animals shown in blue. Wireframes below graph show mean Indian shape (in red) and mean Chinese shape (in blue). Note that this differs from Figure 4 , where the wireframes model the extremes of regression scores. As in Figure 4 , displacement is magnified by two to aid visualization. Views shown (left to right) are ventral, cranial, caudal, and right lateral. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Figure 6 shows the relationship between regression scores summarizing the proportion of sex-adjusted shape associated with subspecies designation and subspecies designation itself. As with the full sample, there is a difference in pelvic shape associated with Chinese ancestry. Chinese individuals generally have higher regression scores than Indian individuals, showing that they inhabit a different region of the shape space. Compared with the Chinese mean shape, the Indian mean shape is characterized by dorsoventrally and mediolaterally broader iliac blades, which are more angled across the top, running from high ventrally to low dorsally, whereas the tops of the mean Chinese iliac blades are more level. The mean Indian sacrum is more dorsocaudally placed between the ilia, and the sacral alae are shorter craniocaudally. The acetabulae of the mean Indian shape are placed more ventrolaterally, and the pubic symphysis of the mean Indian shape is more dorsally orientated. Finally, the ischial tuberosities of the mean Indian shape extend more caudomedially than those of the mean Chinese shape. These shape differences echo what are seen in Figure 4 and suggest that more Chinese ancestry leads to a pelvis that more closely approaches the mean Chinese shape.
The effect of admixture on sex-adjusted pelvic shape in the complete sample is small, as emphasized by the comparison with baseline interindividual variation within a sex and ancestry category ( Fig. 3 ). Our analyses show, however, that there is a significant relationship between Chinese ancestry and shape and suggest that this is relationship is broadly additive. To examine this possibility further, we created a vector of shape variation using only the sex-adjusted full-bred Indian and Chinese individuals ( n = 36) and projected the sex-adjusted admixed individuals ( n = 102) onto this vector ( Fig. 7 ). This figure shows an idealized, linear relationship between Chinese ancestry and sex-adjusted pelvic shape. Comparison of Figure 4 , Figure 7 shows there is very little difference between the modeled relationship and that obtained with the actual data, supporting the assertion that the proportion of Chinese ancestry affects pelvic shape in a predictable, proportional manner. Download: Download high-res image (238KB) Download: Download full-size image Figure 7 . Regression score plot showing the relationship between sex-adjusted shape associated with Chinese ancestry and Chinese ancestry. Shapes of admixed individuals are projected onto a vector constructed using full-bred shape only. Jitter is used to improve the visibility of separate points. Full-bred Indian (0% Chinese ancestry) animals in red; Full-bred Chinese (100% Chinese ancestry) animals in dark blue; all other admixture percentages correspond to a color scale between the two extremes, as shown to the right of the graph. Compare with Figure 4 . (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

Section: Discussion

The effect of admixture on pelvic shape variation in Indian and Chinese M. mulatta is very slight. To put this into context, shape variation between individuals from different Chinese ancestry categories is no greater than intracategory (within sex) variation ( Fig. 3 ). The latter shape variation probably results from multiple variables including age, weight, and stochastic variation. This is in clear contrast to the strong effect of sex on pelvic shape, which cuts across all Chinese ancestry categories.
The low levels of pelvic shape differentiation between members of different Chinese ancestry categories are not surprising, given the relatively small differences we found between the full-bred subspecies ( Fig. 5 ). Given the research discussed earlier (see Introduction ) suggesting that there are noticeable gross phenotypic differences between Indian and Chinese M. mulatta ( Clarke and O'Neil, 1999 ; Fooden, 2000 ; Hamada et al., 2005 ), it is possible that the similarity we see in the pelvic data is particular to that region. Skeletal regions display different degrees of canalization and variation ( Buck et al., 2010 ), and the strong selective pressures resulting from the requirements of parturition and locomotion might be expected to lead to stabilizing selection acting on the pelvis. The macaque fit between fetus and birth canal is relatively tight during birth, comparable to that seen in extant humans, and there is evidence in M. mulatta of selection on the pelvis to reduce cephalopelvic dystocia ( Kawada et al., 2020 ). The present study is the first analysis of hybrid pelvic morphology. In fact, to the best of our knowledge, it is the first study of any postcranial shape in known hybrids where skeletal shape has been analyzed directly, rather than through the use of proxy measurements taken by palpating bones through soft tissue in live animals (e.g., Kelaita and Cortés-Ortiz, 2013 ; Fuzessy et al., 2014 ). Thus, the effects of admixture more widely in human and nonhuman primate pelvic shape remain unknown, and the possibility of regional anatomical differences in admixture signature will be examined in forthcoming work on the crania and other bones from the same sample. If the phenotypic similarity between Chinese and Indian M. mulatta is replicated in other regions of the skeleton , these taxa may be relatively phenotypically undifferentiated (skeletally), despite clear genetic differences between them ( Zhang and Shi, 1993 ; Smith and Mcdonough, 2005 ; Ferguson et al., 2007 ; Hernandez et al., 2007 ; Kanthaswamy et al., 2009 ).
Morphological research on hybrids between Japanese ( M. fuscata ) and Taiwanese ( M. cyclopis ) macaques shows results comparable with those presented here ( Hamada et al., 2012 ; Ito et al., 2015 ; Boel et al., 2019 ). In particular, hybridization between M. fuscata and M. cyclopis results in a linear correspondence between relative tail length and degree of admixture, with no extreme phenotypes recorded ( Hamada et al., 2012 ), contrary to what is seen for many other nonhuman primate hybrids (refer following paragraphs). M. fuscata and M. cyclopsis are estimated to have a divergence time of ∼170 ka ( Chu et al., 2007 ), close to the ∼162 ka estimated for Indian and Chinese M. mulatta ( Hernandez et al., 2007 ). GMM-based cranial analyses of these hybrids show no greater levels of variation in hybrids than in parent species and no clear effects of hybrid status on the frequency of anomalous nonmetric traits ( Boel et al., 2019 ). Qualitative comparison of PCAs of the morphospace inhabited by the two full-bred samples, however, does seem to indicate a greater degree of separation between M. fuscata and M. cyclopis than between the M. mulatta subspecies and a tendency of all hybrids toward M. fuscata shape, rather than the linear relationship with admixture we describe for our sample ( Boel et al., 2019 ; refer also analysis of linear measurements in; Ito et al., 2015 ). The Japanese-Taiwanese hybrids were wild caught in Japan ( Ito et al., 2015 ; Boel et al., 2019 ), at a higher latitude and in a more temperate climate than Taiwan. Therefore, there may be some adaptive advantage in M. fuscata morphology leading to the dominance of M. fuscata -like morphology in hybrids and also potentially selection for greater phenotypic divergence between the parent taxa after their separation in the Pleistocene, if their habitats are less similar than those of Indian and Chinese M. mulatta .
In contrast to much of the previous research on nonhuman primates ( Ackermann et al., 2006 , 2014 ; Kelaita and Cortés-Ortiz, 2013 ; Fuzessy et al., 2014 ) with the exception of other macaque studies (refer previous paragraphs), in this study, we found no increased shape variation and no heterosis or transgressive size in the hybrid sample. There are several possible factors that may contribute to this difference from earlier work, including the methods used, the range of admixture of the hybrids making up each sample and the degree of similarity (phenotypic or genetic) between the parent taxa in each study.
In the present study, we used landmark-based GMM to compare overall pelvic shape, while by contrast, most studies of hybrid morphology in nonhuman primates (e.g., Ackermann et al., 2006 , 2014 ; Kelaita and Cortés-Ortiz, 2013 ; Fuzessy et al., 2014 ; Ito et al., 2015 ) have used traditional morphometrics and nonmetric traits. This may, in part, account for differences in results between studies, as analysis of individual nonmetric traits or measurements can emphasize greater difference between specific regions that may be averaged out by analyses of overall shape using GMM. Similar GMM used to analyze shape in hybrid mouse crania show patterns of increased variation and extreme phenotypes similar to those seen in baboons ( Warren et al., 2018 ), however, suggesting that GMM is not entirely responsible for the differences in results between studies.
Hybridization in the baboon colony studied by Ackermann et al. (2006 , 2014) was only a few generations deep, and many transgressive or anomalous morphologies characterized as the products of hybridization are most likely to occur in the F1 generation or in generations close to the interbreeding event ( Prentis et al., 2008 ). This likely contributes to our lack of such a signal in the current sample, which contains fewer early generation hybrids and only one F1 individual. More subtle manifestations of expected hybrid morphology, however, such as some individuals of transgressive size/shape and greater variation within admixed samples, have also been documented in naturally hybridizing populations of marmosets and howler monkeys, where far fewer individuals are likely to be early generation hybrids ( Kelaita and Cortés-Ortiz, 2013 ; Fuzessy et al., 2014 ). This suggests that the admixture proportions sampled here may not completely explain the more linear relationship between admixture and pelvic morphology in our results.
A final possible reason for the novelty of our results, in relation to the majority of nonhuman primate hybrid research, may be relatively short divergence time between the M. mulatta parent taxa compared with the parent taxa investigated in previous work. Baboon taxonomy is much debated, but a recent article by Rogers et al. (2019) suggests that the lineages of the olive and yellow baboon allotaxa studied by Ackermann and colleagues ( Ackermann et al., 2006 , 2014 ) diverged about 1.4 Ma. Black ( Alouatta pigra ) and mantled ( A. palliata ) howler monkeys, as studied by Kelaita and Cortés-Ortiz (2013) , are still more phylogenetically divergent, with a split time of ∼3 Ma ( Cortés-Ortiz et al., 2003 ), while Callithrix is a fairly young genus and the black-tufted and white-headed marmosets ( C . penicillata and C. geoffroyi , respectively), whose hybrids have been studied by Fuzessy et al. (2014) , split ∼700 ka ( Malukiewicz et al., 2017 ). Based on these dates, the genetic distance between Indian and Chinese M. mulatta , estimated to have diverged ∼162 ka ( Hernandez et al., 2007 ), is considerably less than that between these other taxa. There also remains the possibility that the rhesus macaques are less differentiated morphologically relative to their genetic distance, perhaps due to stabilizing selection (refer also to section 4.4 ). This is an interesting possibility, which has not yet been investigated and which should be followed up by the comparison of further nonhuman primate taxa pairs with similar phylogenetic divergence times.
The differences between results presented here and previous work on nonhuman primate hybrids, as well as between previous studies, demonstrate the complex relationship between taxonomic divergence and hybrid morphology, which is not yet fully understood. Similarly, these differences indicate the need for further investigation to better understand which nonhuman primate species make the best models for hominin hybridization. It has been shown that more genetically divergent taxa lead to more transgressive hybrids, due to increasing fixation of different alleles in each parent taxon over time (i.e., fixed differences in alleles as opposed to differences in allele frequencies), which may lead to complementary gene action or epistasis in hybrid offspring ( Stelkens and Seehausen, 2009 ; Stelkens et al., 2009 ; Comeault and Matute, 2018 ; Allen et al., 2020 ). The relationship between phenotypic divergence and transgressive phenotypes is less clear, however ( Stelkens and Seehausen, 2009 ; Stelkens et al., 2009 ), and relationships among divergence time and genetic and phenotypic differentiation appear to differ between groups of organisms ( Stelkens and Seehausen, 2009 ; McGee et al., 2016 ). Most vertebrate research on these relationships to date has been in fish ( Stelkens and Seehausen, 2009 ; Stelkens et al., 2009 ; McGee et al., 2016 ). Thus, it is also unclear how well these results translate to primates, making this area ripe for further investigation.
From a paleoanthropological point of view, it is relevant that there appears to be considerably less variation in pelvic shape between Indian and Chinese M. mulatta than between Neanderthals and H. sapiens , a hybridizing taxon pair with reasonably comparable levels of genetic relatedness (see Introduction ) . Further examination of other aspects of the M. mulatta skeleton and other pairs of nonhuman primate taxa will be required to determine whether, given their genetic distance, Indian and Chinese rhesus macaques are relatively phenotypically similar or whether H. sapiens and Neanderthals are more divergent than would be expected within the context of the primate order. If shown to be present throughout the skeleton, low levels of phenotypic differentiation between Chinese and Indian M. mulatta might suggest stabilizing selection, while the mechanism leading to relatively high differentiation between the hominin taxa could be either directional selection or neutral evolution. If stabilizing selection has played a lesser role in the evolutionary history of the hominin pelvis than that of macaques, this could reflect a wider trend. For example, Schroeder and von Cramon Taubadel (2017) have shown that across all sampled extant hominoid taxa, hominoid cranial evolution is characterized by stabilizing selection with very few exceptions, one of which is marked directional selection in the hominin lineage after its split with the chimpanzee lineage. The pelvic evidence from the present study may suggest that this pattern holds throughout the skeleton. The presence of unusually high levels of phenotypic differentiation in hominins ( Lynch, 1990 ) is supported by comparison of rates of cranial evolution in the Pan clade versus the Neanderthal/ H. sapiens clade ( Weaver, 2014 ) and by comparisons between Neanderthal/ H. sapiens morphological divergence and that between other catarrhine pairs ( Harvati et al., 2004 ). It has been suggested that a unique human ecological niche, typified by cultural adaptation, has allowed the build-up of uncommonly great neutral variation in our lineage due to reduced selection (including stabilizing selection) compared with other organisms ( Ackermann and Cheverud, 2004 ; Wells and Stock, 2007 ; Weaver and Stringer, 2015 ; Buck et al., 2019 ).
There is, however, also a strong argument for selection leading to greater pelvic variation between H. sapiens and Neanderthals than between Indian and Chinese M. mulatta . Indian- and Chinese-derived M. mulatta are likely phenotypically similar, at least in part because they have inhabited similar habitats since their divergence ( Hamada et al., 2005 ). This is in contrast to H. sapiens and Neanderthals, which adapted for hundreds of thousands of years to the disparate climates and habitats of Africa and Western Eurasia, respectively ( Holliday, 1997a , b ). Climate has played a role in extant human pelvic shape variation ( Betti et al., 2014 ), and it is also thought to have affected pelvic morphology in extinct hominins ( Ruff, 1993 ; Weaver, 2009 ). In addition to, or as an alternative to the effects of climate, directional selection leading to cranial vault expansion in the hominin lineage, as reported by Schroeder and von Cramon Taubadel (2017) , could play a role in pelvic change via the requirement for congruence during parturition. If this is the case, the simultaneous cranial expansion but divergent cranial shapes in the H. sapiens and Neanderthal lineages could have contributed to their differences in pelvic morphology.
The seeds of relatively great divergence in pelvic shape between hominin species may lie still deeper in hominin evolution. It has been suggested that integration has been relaxed in the human pelvis relative to other hominids, allowing for greater evolvability and selection for bipedal morphology ( Grabowski et al., 2011 ). This possibility is borne out by the high levels of intraspecific geographic variation in human pelvic morphology compared with other skeletal regions ( Betti and Manica, 2018 ). A breakdown in integration is likely governed by changes to the underlying genetic architecture controlling pelvic development and evidence that distinctive hominin pelvis shape results from a unique growth trajectory emerging relatively early in development also suggests modification of genetically determined pathways ( Zirkle and Lovejoy, 2019 ). Different genetic underpinning and levels of integration in macaques and hominins could mean that similar degrees of genetic difference could affect phenotypic outcomes in different ways. This scenario could facilitate the potential development of adaptive differences in one group (e.g., Neanderthals/ H. sapiens ) but neutral divergence in the other (e.g., Indian/Chinese M. mulatta ). We note that the possibilities of directional selection and unusually high neutral variation are not mutually exclusive and could have combined to produce particularly phenotypically divergent taxa in H. sapiens and Neanderthals.
One could argue that, owing to their lower levels of phenotypic disparity relative to the time depth of their divergence, Indian/Chinese M. mulatta pelves are not a good model for the phenotypic effects of hybridization in hominins. It may, however, be difficult to find a pair of primate taxa with a similar divergence time to H. sapiens /Neanderthals and similar morphological disparity, highlighting the peculiarity of these hominin sister taxa. Most of the taxon pairs in the nonhuman primate hybrid literature have greater phylogenetic split times, and, although there is no way of directly comparing parent taxon phenotypic disparity between studies, the stronger admixture effects seen in previous studies may in part be related to greater phenotypic differentiation between parent taxa (see section 4.3 ).
Although weak, the linear nature of the relationship between admixture and pelvic shape we find here is nonetheless informative. Greater Chinese ancestry leads to a pelvic shape which is closer to the mean shape for full-bred Chinese individuals, and the difference in Chinese ancestry is proportional to the difference in pelvic shape. If further investigation bears out the suggestion of the results we present here—that the morphology of hybrids between closely related primate taxa is proportional to the input of each parent taxon—this information can be used to further investigate the expected morphology of hominin hybrids. Models of expected hominin hybrid morphology can be constructed with the known morphology of parent taxa; for example, Neanderthal and H. sapiens crania as the endpoints of the hypothetical shape vector along which all admixed individuals would fall. Thus, the magnitude of disparity between parental shapes would not affect the pattern of the hybrids that fall between them, if the pattern of variation is a valid analog.

Section: Conclusion

From a large sample of multigenerational hybrids and full-bred Indian and Chinese M. mulatta , we find the effects of admixture on pelvic shape to be very small, albeit significant, comparable with interindividual differences between members of the same sex and admixture category. The admixture signal we identify is linear, with greater Chinese ancestry resulting in a pelvic shape that more closely approximates that of full-bred Chinese M. mulatta . We find no evidence for an increase in size or shape variation nor transgressive morphologies in hybrids. Taken in the context of the existing nonhuman primate hybrid literature, the small effect and additive nature of the admixture signal in M. mulatta pelvic shape is likely affected by a combination of factors, including the phylogenetic closeness of the parent taxa relative to that between previously studied taxon pairs ( Ackermann et al., 2006 , 2014 ; Kelaita and Cortés-Ortiz, 2013 ; Fuzessy et al., 2014 ), the similarity of Indian and Chinese M. mulatta habitat and ecological niche since their divergence ( Hamada et al., 2005 ), and the low number of early generation hybrids in the present study. Despite the interesting disparity in phenotypic divergence between the Indian and Chinese M. mulatta and Neanderthals/ H. sapiens , which deserves further investigation, the relative similarity in phylogenetic closeness (refer also Allen et al., 2020 ) and the multiple generations of hybridization in the current sample of M. mulatta have resulted in a useful analog for hominin hybridization. Models of hypothetical outcomes of hybridization between Neanderthals and H. sapiens , using the pattern revealed by these M. mulatta results, can now be tested against the fossil record to increase our understanding of the impacts of interbreeding on human evolution.

Section: Acknowledgements

This research was funded by the National Science Foundation (BCS 1623366 , 1720128 ) and the Leakey Foundation , with further support to R.R.A. from the National Research Foundation of South Africa . The authors thank the Editor, Associate Editor, and three anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments, which have much improved this article. The authors thank Mark Grote for his substantial statistical assistance. The authors are grateful to CNPRC staff, including Alice Tarantal for overseeing CT scanning, and Paul-Michael Sosa, Daniel Quiros Molina, Jennifer Short, and Sarah Davis for their extensive help with data collection. The authors thank Irene Englis and staff at the University of California Davis Museum of Wildlife and Fish Biology, for skeletonizing remains involved in this study. L.T.B. is grateful to Alex Cantó Pastor, Austin Reynolds, Mark Grabowski, Aurélien Mounier, and Florent Détroit for help with coding, and the authors thank Amber Parks and Sara Jhanjar for all their help with segmenting CT scans.
