Title: Mobility and Alterity in Iberian Late Prehistoric Archaeology: Current Research on the Neolithic–Early Bronze Age (6000–1500 BCE)


Section: 


Section: ABSTRACT

Archaeological investigations of late prehistoric Iberia between the Neolithic and Bronze Age (6000–1500 BCE) have long been a battleground between indigenist and exogenous models, and understandings of mobility and alterity have played an important role in these debates. Prior to the development of radiocarbon dating, key cultural transformations, such as megaliths, copper metallurgy, fortified hilltop settlements, and Beakers, were generally associated with nonlocal peoples, migrants, or colonizers. With the incorporation of radiocarbon dating to Iberian archaeological contexts in the 1980s and the determination of the antiquity of many of these cultural changes, the pendulum swung in the other direction, with a marked shift toward viewing autochthonous origins for these watershed transitions. In recent years, developments in strontium isotope analyses, genetics, and raw material characterization studies have provided new evidence for the mobility of peoples and things, and diffusionist models, sometimes without critical theorization, have once again reemerged.

Section: INTRODUCTION

Archaeology is a particular kind of dialogue between the material traces of the past and the people engaged with that past. What remains of this past, the result of environmental and cultural phenomena, shapes the narratives that are constructed. Yet the concerns, relationships, and histories of those individuals engaging with these material traces also play a potent role in the ultimate form of these narratives. This premise lies at the heart of contemporary archaeology. This article explores the forms this dialogue can take through an examination of recent developments in late prehistoric archaeology of the Iberian Peninsula, 1 the modern nations of Portugal and Spain.
Traces of the Iberian prehistoric past span more than one million years, and this deep and rich past has been the object of scholarly study for about 300 years. Particularly dramatic transformations occurred after the mid-1970s, following the end of the dictatorships of Francisco Franco and António de Oliveira Salazar and the entry of Portugal and Spain into the European Union in 1986. The expansion of cultural resource management, generated in large part by new cultural heritage laws, the Valletta Treaty of 1992, and infrastructural developments, led to the discovery of thousands of new sites and the creation of large data sets (radiometric, isotopic, archaeometric, genetic). Iberianists have marshaled these new data to elucidate pivotal anthropological concerns, such as the emergence of social inequality and the relationship between climate change and culture change.
The peninsular configuration of Iberia, surrounded by water on its three borders and mountains along its fourth, creates some coherence in its archaeology. This coherence was noted in the nineteenth century, when archaeologists sympathetic to the ideals of pan-Iberian nationalism, an ideology that gained popularity following the unification of Italy and Germany in 1870 and 1871, respectively, emphasized the geographic unity of the peninsula. These scholars included Augusto Filippe Simões, who wrote the first textbook on the archaeology of the peninsula, entitled Introducção á Archeologia da Peninsula Ibérica ( Simões 1878 ). In 1892, Spanish prehistorians Juan Vilanova y Piera and Juan de Dios de la Rada y Delgado also noted that Spain and Portugal were
territories which, while they unfortunately constitute two politically separate nationalities, in terms of their primitive history should form a single unit, as no natural boundary separates them, and as has been said, both their geological structure and the peoples who since ancient time have inhabited them are the same. (Vilanova y Piera & de Dios de la Rada y Delgado 1892 , p. 22, cited in Diaz-Andreu 1997 , p. 15)

The shared histories of the two nations have contributed to similarities in archaeological discourses and practices and in their reception by archaeologists from other countries. Both were territories of Al-Andalus (711–1492 CE) and colonizers of the Americas, Africa, and Asia. Both can be viewed as peripheral, politically and economically, with respect to northern European hegemony, at least during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Both experienced dictatorships until the 1970s. The extracentrality of Spain and Portugal meant, for example, that some discoveries of Paleolithic art, such as Altamira in the nineteenth century ( Cartailhac 1902 ) and the Côa Valley in the twentieth century ( Bednarik 1995 ), were initially thought to be fakes or recent works ( Figure 1 ).

Figure 1 Click to view


Iberia's prehistory resists a synthetic reading, however, owing to a host of environmental and historical factors. Ecologically, the Iberian Peninsula is a miniature continent characterized by marked differences between the Atlantic North and West regions (also known as the Euro-Siberian Zone) and the Eastern and Southern Mediterranean regions. Its biodiversity is remarkably high for its size ( Araújo et al. 2007 , p. 1424), in large part because it was relatively ice free during the Pleistocene and served as a refugium for animal and plant life from more northerly and glaciated parts of Europe. These diverse ecologies have constrained and shaped, in variable ways, opportunities for agriculture, trade, communication, defense, travel, production, and community building in the ancient past. Cross-cutting the peninsula's geographic regions and creating additional variability to environmental differences are national and regional borders, with their associated differences in languages and traditions. The territorial border of Portugal and Spain, one of the oldest national borders in the world, was stabilized at the end of the Reconquista, between the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries, thus paving the way for different national histories and archaeologies. Pronounced regionalism is particularly characteristic of Spain, where, following the political decentralization that occurred post-Franco, archaeological research and cultural heritage in general have been managed and funded in distinctive ways by each of the country's 17 autonomous governments ( Martínez Navarrete 1997 – 1998 ).
Emerging out of the tensions between the peninsula's geographic coherence, regional diversity, and enduring cross-cultural interactions have been two key themes: mobility and alterity. Since the nineteenth century, archaeologists have engaged in identifying the presence of local and nonlocal individuals and goods and in determining the role of indigenous or exogenous factors in driving social change and innovation, particularly from the Neolithic through the Bronze Age. Prior to the development and incorporation of radiocarbon dating to the Iberian archaeological record, the colonization of non-Iberian peoples was viewed as the mechanism for many key transformations. These include the emergence of farming, the construction of megaliths, the emergence of copper metallurgy, the construction of fortified hilltop settlements, the appearance of Beaker ceramics, and the marked cultural changes and discontinuities associated with the Bronze Age. With the widespread application of radiocarbon dating in the 1980s, it was revealed that many of these cultural changes predated or were contemporary with their supposed precursors, and autochthonous models increasingly replaced earlier models. The pendulum has swung again, however, as recent developments in strontium isotope analyses, genetics, and raw material characterization studies have provided new evidence for the mobility of peoples and things. Much current work emphasizes the connectivity of societies of the fourth through the second millennia BCE ( García Alfonso 2014 ), in the form of possible stimuli or diffusion from the Eastern Mediterranean ( Lull et al. 2014 ) or of less transformative trade or demographic links with peoples in North Africa, the Central Mediterranean, or even Scandinavia ( Morgado et al. 2014 ).
Figure 1 Click to view

Section: THE NEOLITHIC AND FIRST FARMERS

Studies of the Iberian Neolithic have long been a battleground between indigenist and exogenous models, and understandings of mobility and alterity have played an important role in these debates. Archaeologists of the mid-twentieth century tended to emphasize the unity of the Iberian Neolithic and that of the “foreign” package, which included Cardial ware decorated with impressions of the Cardium edule shell, as well as discontinuities between hunting/gathering and farming. Migration and acculturation were viewed as the main pathways to agriculture, with the origins of this new lifeway debated. For some, such as Bosch Gimpera, the Capsian tradition of North Africa was the source for the Iberian Neolithic ( Bosch Gimpera 1932 ). Later investigators working in the Spanish Levante (eastern coast of Spain) at sites such as Cova de l'Or noted similarities between the Cardial ware found there and that found at other Mediterranean sites ( Schubart & Pascual Peréz 1966 ), and thus the African source for the Iberian Neolithic was dismantled. The dual theory was proposed and developed ( Jordá Cerdá & Alcácer Grau 1949 , Martí Oliver 1977 , Vicent García 1997 ), which envisioned two distinct population groups. One was a pure Neolithic group composed of outsiders (represented at Cova de l'Or, Sarsa, and Cendres), who used pottery and had animal and plant domesticates. The second was a local Epipaleolithic indigenous group who continued with their geometric lithics, such as proposed for Cueva de la Cocina. This tidy model was challenged, however, by the recovery of domesticated ovicaprids from Epipaleolithic contexts at Cova Fosca dated to the seventh millennium cal BCE. Furthermore, in southern Spain, Cardial ceramics do not dominate Early Neolithic contexts, in contrast with the Spanish Levante, where ceramics include non-Cardial impressed ware, ceramics decorated in relief, and almagra ware (with red-colored slip).
In recent years, archaeologists have emphasized the agency of hunting-gathering peoples in their engagements with farming peoples and agricultural practices. Lewthwaite proposed the island filter model, which argued that foraging groups in southern Europe took on what they wanted of the farming package as it spread from east to west and abandoned other practices ( Lewthwaite 1986 ). Indeed, there is wide variability in Early Neolithic ceramic design and manufacturing technologies in the Iberian Peninsula, with some traits widely shared and others more locally produced ( Bernabeu Aubán et al. 2017 ). Vicent García (1997) proposed a similar model, known as the capillary diffusion model, in which the adoption of agriculture was linked to the social dynamics of hunter-gatherers.
These indigenist/gradualist models involving local agency find some support in the archaeological record. For example, at Vale Pincel I, in coastal Portugal, in a level dated to 5500 cal BCE, microliths of the local Mesolithic tradition were found associated with Neolithic objects, including impressed ceramics and polished stone axes ( Soares & Tavares da Silva 2003 ). At other sites in coastal Portugal, Neolithic levels with domestic animals and Cardial ceramics are found with wild animals, such as boar ( Sus scrofa ) and red deer ( Cervus elaphus ) ( Carvalho 2008 ). Craniometric studies of Mesolithic and Early Neolithic samples from central and southern Portugal, which show demographic continuity over time, have also been used to support an indigenist or gradualist model ( Jackes et al. 1997 ).
A critical analysis of the radiocarbon dates documenting the neolithization process in the Western Mediterranean, including Iberia, challenged the gradualist model ( Zilhão 2001 ). Investigators found that when only short-life samples (bones of humans and animals, or seeds of domestic plants) are selected for analysis, their dates cluster at ∼5500 cal BCE, and this result is statistically identical to the dates for early farming in central-northern Italy. This finding suggests a more dominant role of population movement and a quicker process for the uptake of agriculture than previously argued. Echoing the older work of Bosch Gimpera, new evidence also supports population movements along the Southern Mediterranean and across the Strait of Gibraltar, in particular. Parallels have been noted, for example, between Cardial ceramics in southern Iberia and North Africa, such as at Caf Taht el Ghar ( Linstädter 2008 ). Genetic studies also point to demographic movements across the Strait of Gibraltar during this time, with evidence for an Iberian intrusion into the Maghreb ( Fregel et al. 2018 ).

Section: MEGALITHS

The megaliths of the Iberian Peninsula have long held a central place in archaeological inquiry given their abundance, variety, and antiquity. An estimated 8,000 megaliths have been identified, and they are concentrated in the northwest, southwest, and south (P. Bueno, personal communication, 2018). The earliest Iberian megaliths—menhirs—are roughly contemporary with the oldest ones in Brittany and Europe, as a whole, dating to the sixth millennium cal BCE ( Scarre et al. 2003 ). As part of a broader European phenomenon, Iberian megaliths were folded into diffusionist explanations from the eighteenth to the twentieth centuries. These models involved population movements or contacts that emanated from Iberia, Northern Europe, or the Eastern Mediterranean (summarized in Chapman 1981 , Scarre 2018 ). As part of their efforts in tracing the history of Iberian megaliths, these early archaeologists also documented, classified, and attempted to chronologically order the Iberian megaliths. Siret, for example, published meticulous drawings of the tombs known at the time, which included dolmens, rock-cut tombs, and vaulted chamber tombs ( tholoi ) ( Siret 1893 ). Others proposed evolutionary schema, with menhirs and simple chambered tombs thought to predate larger and more complex tombs ( Cartailhac 1886 , Åberg 1921 , Bosch Gimpera 1932 ). The foundational investigations and seminal monographs of the Leisners provided a wealth of information from which archaeologists can draw ( Leisner 1938 ; Leisner & Leisner 1943 , 1951 , 1955 , 1956 , 1959 ; Márquez et al. 1952 ; Leisner 1965 , 1998 ).
The development of radiocarbon dating and its calibration profoundly transformed discussions of Iberian prehistory, including the development of megaliths. Most significantly, these dates made clear that the oldest Iberian megaliths predated their presumed ancestors in the Eastern Mediterranean ( Renfrew 1973 , pp. 128–29). The first megaliths in Iberia were menhirs, or standing stones, and they dated to the sixth millennium cal BCE. For example, shells recovered from the menhir of Padrão, in the Portuguese Algarve, returned dates between 5500 and 5300 cal BCE (ICEN-645; ICEN-873) ( Soares & Tavares da Silva 2003 ). Around 4800 BCE, communities in Western Iberia began erecting the first megalithic tombs on the peninsula. These took the form of simple chamber tombs [for example, Outeiro de Ante 3 (Gif 4857: 5780±80 BP; 4810–4450 cal BCE) ( Jorge 1980 )]. In general, these smaller chamber tombs predated the larger tombs with long passages, which began to be constructed ∼3800 cal BCE, although the construction and use of the larger passage graves overlap in time with the smaller chamber tombs.
With the establishment of a general chronological scheme, while recognizing the long biographies of megaliths, archaeologists have turned their attention more recently to the factors in the emergence of megaliths and to addressing the lifeways and social identities of the peoples interred within them. Carrying out bioarchaeological studies of individuals found in Iberian megaliths, however, is challenging. Megaliths are found primarily in regions with acidic soils, so human remains do not generally preserve well. Furthermore, burial practices were collective and skeletal remains found in the tombs are often found highly commingled and fragmented, making it difficult to discern individual bodies and to relate individuals to grave goods. In some exceptional cases where the local geology preserves osteological remains, tantalizing insights into questions of mobility and identity become possible ( Waterman et al. 2014a , b ; Díaz-Zorita Bonilla 2017 ; Díaz-del-Río et al. 2017 ). In general, these studies tend to show largely local populations. Some sites, however, present significant numbers of nonlocal individuals, such as megaliths (and other tombs) associated with the ditched enclosure of Valencina-Castilleja, dated to the third millennium cal BCE; this finding suggests that these sites served as places of aggregation for diverse populations or at least for individuals coming from different geological landscapes ( Díaz-Zorita Bonilla 2017 ). Other clues on the mobility of the peoples come from dental morphological studies, which suggest that some people living in southwest Iberia during the third millennium BCE had ancestries in North Africa. This notion is consistent with what is known archaeologically about the movement of goods, such as ivory and ostrich eggshells, across the Strait of Gibraltar ( Harrison & Gilman 1977 , Schuhmacher & Banerjee 2012 , Irish et al. 2017 ).
To determine whether there was any significant patterning in age, sex, diet, or mobility among individuals found in different burial structures, Díaz-Zorita Bonilla conducted a major bioarchaeological study of the human remains recovered at Valencina-Castilleja and La Pijotilla and compared these to 44 other Copper Age sites in southwest Iberia ( Díaz-Zorita Bonilla 2017 ). Although Díaz-Zorita Bonilla found no significant differences in the age, sex, and diet of individuals, interesting distinctions were noted in the health status and diet of individuals found in megalithic versus nonmegalithic structures. Megalithic tombs housed individuals who consumed a higher protein diet than did individuals in nonmegalithic tombs. Hypoplasia was also more prevalent in individuals housed in megalithic tombs, which could be seen as an illustration of the osteological paradox, in which higher-status individuals were able (through their diet and social support) to withstand stresses and survive. This notion may suggest that the more significant labor involved in megalithic tombs materialized some levels of social distinction.
The recent excavations and finds of the passage grave of Montelirio, in southern Iberia ( Guilaine 2018 ), have rekindled discussions of exogenous influences on Iberia during the third millennium BC. Montelirio is one of the most impressive megaliths in the Iberian Peninsula (if not in Europe), and it is situated in the Valencina-Castilleja archaeological complex, which overlooks what was, during the third millennium BC, a marine gulf created by the Guadalquivir River ( García Sanjuán et al. 2017 ). Montelirio is a giant tomb, with a passage 39 m long, and its monumentality is matched by an abundance and variety of grave goods rarely seen in prehistoric Europe. For example, the largest assemblage of amber objects known in Iberia was recovered at the site: 250 beads and pendants. The site in Iberia with the next largest assemblage of amber is Los Millares, with 10 objects. These amber items were derived from a source in Sicily. Eighteen embossed gold sheets were recovered, some with the same ocular motif found on ceramics and the engraved plaques. An estimated 250,000 beads, made of shell and stone, were found in close association with the individuals in the large chamber. They were most likely sewn into burial clothing or shrouds, which did not survive. Another indicator of the sumptuousness of this burial are the 200 exquisitely flaked hollow-based arrowheads made of flint and rock crystal, which, like most of the other flaked lithics at the site, show no signs of use. These represent a technical skill and artistry rarely found in lithic production. The large number (100+) of animal figurines, combs, and other items made from African ivory further attests to the social distinctiveness and regional connections enjoyed by the Montelirio community. Perhaps most intriguing is the fact that the ∼20 individuals in the tomb's main chamber were all women. Much remains to be known about the site and the role it played in the larger complex of Valencina-Castilleja and the social landscape of southern Iberia.

Section: COPPER METALLURGY

Although Childe is often credited for proposing that metallurgy in Europe must have been derived from Asia ( ex oriente lux ) ( Childe 1939 ), the earliest copper goods in Iberia inspired imaginative discussions of nonlocal peoples even before Childe. In Les Ages Préhistoriques de L'Espagne et du Portugal , the first synthesis of Iberian archaeology, Cartailhac argued that the presence of copper is not obvious and that it would have taken a genius to discover and mine it ( Cartailhac 1886 , pp. 201–2). He clearly did not think such geniuses existed in Iberia and argued that a “civilizing current” in the form of “colporteurs” or itinerant traders from the Eastern Mediterranean brought the knowledge of copper (and bronze) metallurgical skills to the peninsula (p. 232).
As with the study of Iberian megaliths, radiocarbon dating profoundly shaped discussions of copper metallurgy. The earliest copper metallurgy in Iberia has now been shown to date to the early third millennium BCE ( Gauss 2013 ). Some earlier cases date to the early fifth millennium BCE ( Ruiz-Taboada & Montero-Ruiz 1999 ), although they are not universally accepted. What is clear is that Iberian copper metallurgy predates the arrival of Beaker ceramics. Metallurgical production has been documented through the presence of crucibles, prill, slag, and ore at walled settlements in southern Iberia, including Zambujal, Penedo, Fórnea, Leceia, Cabezo Juré, and Vila Nova de São Pedro ( Nocete 2006 , Müller et al. 2007 , Müller & Cardoso 2008 , Müller & Soares 2008 ). At Zambujal, all domestic spaces excavated at the site included copper prills and crucible fragments, suggesting the metallurgy was not confined to just one place in the community ( Gauss 2013 ). That copper objects can occur late in the sequence of fortified settlements or that the production was small scale and of low skill level suggests that the production (and consumption) of metal objects was the result of social and economic changes in the third millennium BCE rather than a catalyst for these changes ( Müller & Cardoso 2008 , p. 66). Although discussions of itinerant metalsmiths from the Eastern Mediterranean are no longer part of archaeological narratives for the Iberian Peninsula, a new technology, such as metallurgy, must have contributed to shaping the social world of ancient Iberians by creating new social identities for those who had access to the raw materials and finished products and for those who had the knowledge to process them.

Section: THE FORTIFIED SETTLEMENTS OF THE LATE NEOLITHIC–COPPER AGE

The characteristic settlement type of the Late Neolithic and Copper Age of Iberia is the walled hilltop settlement, made up of thick walls and circular bastions. They are best known along the river valleys of west-central Portugal and southeast Spain. Their defensive qualities have long been explained by exogenous influences. Siret, for example, argued that these sites, such as Los Millares, were Phoenician trading posts ( Siret 1913 , p. 39). Do Paço & Jalhay (1942) , who excavated Vila Nova de São Pedro between 1937 and 1967, discerned similarities between Vila Nova and other sites in southeast Iberia (such as Los Millares) and, like Siret, were sympathetic to the idea that Vila Nova was inspired by cultures and colonists from the Mediterranean Levant.
Since the first excavations at Los Millares and Vila Nova de São Pedro, many hilltop settlements have been discovered and excavated, including Leceia ( Cardoso 1994 , 1997 , 1999 / 2000 , 2008 , 2012 ), Zambujal ( Sangmeister & Schubart 1981 ; Kunst 1987 , 1995 ; Sangmeister & de la Cruz Jiménez Gomez 1995 ; Uerpmann & Uerpmann 2003 ), Monte da Tumba ( Tavares da Silva & Soares 1987 ), San Blas ( Hurtado Pérez 2004 ), and Cabezo Juré ( Nocete et al. 2004 ). New excavations are also under way at Vila Nova de São Pedro ( Arnaud et al. 2014–2015 ). Given the dismantling of colonialist models to understand the third millennium BCE of Iberia, these sites are now understood to be central places where a range of economic and ritual practices were enacted, in addition to copper metallurgy ( Kunst 1995 ). The presence of blanks or unfinished tools made from amphibolite, basalt, and other stones at Leceia, Pragança, and Zambujal attests to the manufacture of polished stone tools at these sites, with amphibolite being the favored raw material, despite the availability of other stones ( Lillios 2000 ). The closest source for amphibolite is the Ossa-Morena Zone in the Alentejo, in south-central Portugal, where copper ores were also likely obtained for metallurgical production. Textile production is evidenced through loom weights and spindle whorls. Loom weights can be subquadrangular in form and decorated (as typically found in sites of the Lisbon area) or crescent or subrectangular and undecorated (as in the Alentejo) ( Cardito Rollán 1996 ; Boaventura 2011 , pp. 211–12). Boaventura (2011) noted that the forms and designs of loom weights (as well as ceramics) are different in the Estremadura and Alentejo, while the typologies of flint arrowheads and polished stone tools are shared. He proposed that this finding may reflect gendered mobility patterns, such that women who made the ceramics and loom weights stayed closer to home and men were more involved in trading and mobility between the two regions.

Section: DITCHED ENCLOSURES

One of the most significant developments in the archaeology of late prehistoric Iberia is the discovery, excavation, and analyses of ditched enclosure sites. During the 1980s, this new site type was discovered in central and southern Iberia. Since then, more than 30 of these sites have been discovered (often using remote sensing) as part of research projects, agricultural expansion, and mitigation work, such as for the Alqueva Dam in the Alentejo. These negative earthworks are generally made up of concentric rings of ditches (of U- or V-shaped cross-section) and scattered pits, which are rare or absent in walled hilltop sites ( Márquez-Romero & Jiménez-Jáimez 2010 , 2013 ; Jiménez-Jáimez 2015 ). Most ditched enclosures were established ∼3500 cal BCE, reached their apogee ∼2500 cal BCE, and were abandoned ∼2250 cal BCE ( Valera 2014a ). In general, ditched enclosures were in use for a longer span of time than were stone-walled settlements, and their earliest construction appears to predate these settlements ( Risch 2017 , p. 210).
Because their discovery postdated the period during which colonialist and diffusionist models were standard practice in archaeology, ditched enclosures have generally been understood from primarily indigenist perspectives, although interregional entanglements are recognized (as discussed for Valencina-Castilleja, above). More significantly, however, ditched enclosures have challenged Iberian archaeologists to think in new ways about the spatial dimensions of domestic and mortuary activities during the third millennium BCE, as metallurgy, food consumption, and the deposition of broken artifacts, animal bones, soil, and human remains are often found in close association at these sites ( Valera & Costa 2013 ). How the enclosures themselves functioned is unclear, and, indeed, they may have served different purposes at different sites and at different times. Researchers have argued that the ditches at Marroquíes Bajos were used for irrigation and water management ( Hornos Mata et al. 1998 , Zafra de la Torre et al. 2003 ). The location of other enclosures, such as La Pijotilla and Porto Torrão, near streams may support their role in controlling water or flooding ( Márquez-Romero & Jiménez-Jáimez 2013 , p. 450). Valera (2014b) argued that the features, artifacts, and human and animal remains from Perdigões suggest that the site functioned as a space of aggregation and interregional interactions and not as a place of habitation. A large number of objects related to ritual practice were recovered in the different sectors of the site, though primarily in funerary contexts. These included figurines (some made of ivory), phalanx idols, stone vessels, lunulae, betyls, and engraved slate plaques. The frequency and diversity of these items increased over the site's history, which has been interpreted as an expression of the development of social complexity and interregional interactions at the site.

Section: BELL BEAKERS

The appearance of Beaker ceramics in Iberia has been a major focus of archaeological research, beginning in the nineteenth century when the first Beakers were recovered in Iberia ( Gonçalves 1971 , pp. 54–61; Belchior da Cruz 1906 ). Following these first discoveries and a recognition that similar ceramics and associated objects were being found over much of Western Europe, scholars of the twentieth century sought to find the Beaker homeland and developed models to explain the spread of Beaker culture. Schmidt (1913) proposed an Iberian origin for the Beaker “people,” and this model was adopted by Bosch Gimpera ( Jeunesse 2014 ). Del Castillo proposed a “great Hispanic culture” that originated in central Iberia (i.e., Spain) and spread throughout Western and Central Europe ( del Castillo Yurrita 1928 , Díaz-Andreu 2009 , Garrido Pena 2014 ). The cause and mechanism for the spread of the Beaker culture were related to the search for copper, he argued. Del Castillo Yurrita did not believe, unlike Childe, that the anthropological remains associated with the Beaker finds suggested an ethnic unity or Beaker folk. Other archaeologists continued this quest for Iberian Beaker origins, including Sangmeister (1957 , 1963 , 1964 , 1976 ) and Harrison (1977 , 1980 ).
Beginning in the 1970s, dating programs began to contribute insights into the Beaker phenomenon in Iberia; the first Beakers were dated from the settlement of Zambujal ( Sangmeister 1976 , Sangmeister & Schubart 1981 , Kunst 1987 ). Maritime Beakers were determined to be the earliest, and then ∼2300–2200 cal BCE, regional varieties (e.g., Palmela, Ciempozuelos) emerged. This time period also saw the rise of processual approaches to European and Iberian archaeology, and archaeologists have largely shifted away from seeking the origins of Beakers toward understanding the functions, social contexts, and mechanisms for their spread (for example, see Cardoso 2014 ).
Monolithic understandings of Beaker ceramics have largely given way to analyses of the variability of Iberian Beakers in their forms, functions, chronologies, and contexts using statistical and archaeometric techniques, such as paste analysis and residue studies ( Salanova et al. 2016 ). Petrological studies demonstrated that most Iberian Beakers seem to be made from geologically local materials and were not part of wide-ranging exchange networks ( Millán & Arribas 1994 ). Residue analyses showed that, while Beaker ceramics are associated with high-status graves, co-occurring with other high-status goods, these objects were employed for a wide range of uses, including the consumption of beer, mead, fruit wines, and animal fats, copper smelting, and receptacles for cremated remains ( Guerra-Doce 2006 , 2014 ; Rojo-Guerra et al. 2006 , 2008 ; Delibes de Castro et al. 2009 ).
With DNA studies, more nuanced and complex narratives of the Beaker period in Iberia (and Europe in general) have emerged. In one large study focusing on Iberian sites, a significant genetic contribution of males of Steppic ancestry was discerned in samples dated to 2000 cal BCE ( Olalde et al. 2019 ). At a double burial from the ceremonial site of Castillejo del Bonete, a male with Steppic ancestry was found with a female whose genetic ancestry matched that of Copper Age Iberians. These results have revived old debates over whether a demographic shift (a “Beaker Folk”) was instrumental in the spread of Beaker ceramics and associated material goods in Europe. Although it is difficult for most archaeologists to assess the genetic evidence, biological anthropologists have long argued that there is no necessary correlation between genetic ancestry and cultural (or linguistic) behaviors. For example, there is no reason to assume that people with Steppic ancestry who may have ended up in Iberia after many generations maintained a distinctive identity or set of cultural practices or that they expressed a visibly distinctive phenotype. Indeed, as Olalde et al. (2019 , p. 1231) state, “Although ancient DNA can document that sex-biased admixture occurred, archaeological and anthropological research will be needed to understand the processes that generated it.”

Section: THE EARLY BRONZE AGE

The Iberian Early Bronze Age, dated to ∼2200 cal BCE, saw profound shifts in settlement patterns, burial practices, and material culture, which have occasioned speculation and consideration regarding the role of nonlocal peoples and, specifically, contact with Eastern Mediterranean groups ( Aranda Jiménez 2013 ). Most of the fortified settlements and ditched enclosures established in the late fourth/early third millennium BCE were abandoned, and new settlements were established. Burials shifted from collective to individual inhumations, which, in the southeast, were often intramural ( Aranda Jiménez et al. 2015 ). The dazzling array of figurative and geometric representations that were found in figurines and Bell Beaker ceramics of the third millennium BCE gave way to aniconity; pottery was undecorated, and small-scale figurines were no longer produced. There is significant regional variability, however ( Lillios et al. 2016 , Blanco-González et al. 2018 ), which was noted even by the Siret brothers more than 100 years ago. The Sirets wrote, for example, “We do not find in Lusitania (Portugal) the wonderful civilization of villages that is known in Fuente Alamo, El Argar, etc…” ( Siret & Siret 1887 , p. 241). The Bronze Age, according to the Sirets, was the result of an invasion of Proto-Celts from Northern Europe.
This dynamic social world is now recognized to have occurred against a backdrop of climatic and environmental instabilities, which have received increased attention in recent years. Around 2200 cal BCE, an abrupt oscillation known as Bond event 3 (or the 4.2–ky BP event) took place. In the Iberian Peninsula, multiproxy analyses point to significant degradation and aridification during this event, particularly in the Meseta, the southwest, and the southeast ( Castro et al. 2000 , Fábregas Valcarce et al. 2003 , Fabián García et al. 2006 , Lillios et al. 2016 , Blanco-González et al. 2018 ). However, settlement diminution and an apparent demographic shift from the southwest to the southeast occurred prior to 2200 cal BCE. Thus, the precise relationship between cultural practices and possible climatic triggers remains to be fully elucidated.
The possibility of influences from the Mediterranean, however, still constitutes some archaeological narratives, particularly for southeast Spain. Coincident with the abandonment of many settlements around 2200 BCE was the establishment of new fortified settlements, particularly in the southeast (known as the Argaric culture), and these have been the object of important systematic excavations in recent years. Two of the most significant sites are La Almoloya and La Bastida de la Totana. Preservation at La Almoloya was particularly high owing to intense fires during the site's final phase (c. 1750–1550 BC) ( Lull et al. 2015a , b , c ). The settlement was made up of nine domestic compounds connected by narrow passageways. These compounds contained houses with rich intramural burials, workshops, and household stores. Within one of the central complexes was a large (127 m 2 ) rectangular building divided into two plastered rooms. The smaller room had painted walls, and the main hall (which lacked domestic or craftwork items) had a long bench that could seat 55–60 people and a podium. This room has been interpreted as a reception hall, similar to Eastern Mediterranean palaces. Defense appears to have been prioritized when La Bastida was established, as evidenced by its imposing fortifications. The excavators of the site argue that its earliest settlers may have drawn from non-Iberian siege tactics and innovative fortification strategies (such as solid square towers), which have parallels in some Middle–Late Bronze Age settlements in the Aegean, Anatolia, and the Levant ( Lull et al. 2014 , p. 405).
Alterity during the Argaric has also been explored from the perspective of more local engagements. For example, Aranda Jiménez recently reassessed the use of typical third millennium BCE burial contexts, such as megaliths and caves, and showed, through radiocarbon dating of associated human remains, that their continued use into the Argaric period was fairly common ( Aranda Jiménez 2013 ). He argued that instead of seeing intramural burials as the Argaric norm, and the use of megaliths as atypical or nonnormative, we should view the Argaric social landscape as heterogeneous and contentious. He suggested that those who buried their dead in the older megaliths did so to maintain ancestral ties to a less hierarchical world and that they materially resisted the practices of the hierarchical Argaric world. Alterity, from this perspective, is not inherent to a group's place of origin, as in traditional colonialist models, but is instead the outcome of interaction and engagement.

Section: IBERIAN ARCHAEOLOGY: FINAL THOUGHTS

The archaeology of late prehistoric Iberia has been profoundly shaped by understandings of mobile Others, in the form of colonizers, traders, or ancient versions of social influencers. During the nineteenth century and much of the twentieth, these Others brought agriculture, knowledge of megalith building, copper metallurgy, Beakers, and new forms of architecture. Beginning in the 1970s, the development of radiocarbon dating and calibration and their application to the Iberian record challenged many of these models, and autochthonous and evolutionary interpretations replaced them (or many of them). In recent years, new analytical technologies, such as strontium isotope analyses and archaeogenetics, as well as the discovery of sites and material culture with parallels or sources in distant regions (North Africa, Central and Eastern Mediterranean) have led to the reemergence of diffusionist models. These models, however, often lack critical theorization.
Moving toward a definition of identity that is situational and flexible allows for more nuanced and contextual understandings of human behaviors and their attendant material practices ( Gardner 2011 ). Which frameworks emerge when identity is not exclusively defined by pots, genes, or the geological landscape of one's place of origin? How can we reframe mobility as a practice inherent in social and material life, as philosopher Thomas Nail suggests ( Nail 2015 ), and interrogate the nature of this mobility? These are the challenges that await archaeologists of the Iberian Peninsula.

Section: disclosure statement

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

Section: literature cited

