Section: Abstract

The academic literature on taboo language is flourishing not only in fields such as linguistic anthropology or sociolinguistics, but also in disciplines that usually target language itself as the object of study. Although there is more than a century of scholarly writing on taboo language, new and neglected areas and directions continue to provide valuable insights on a universal linguistic behavior. This review tracks four sometimes overlapping clusters: naming and linguistic avoidance behaviors, taboo language and transgression, taboo language in language contact situations, and taboo language in educational settings and other contexts. The discussion in this review includes examples of how taboo language is inextricably meshed with the relationships found among kinship circles, subcultural group members, generational cohorts, and other social groupings. New areas of research that are proving to be attractive to scholars include taboo language in global media translation, subtitling or scalation, language contact situations, and the teaching of taboo terms in second language instruction.

Section: Introduction

News articles remind us that some terms have a taboo status in most contexts and should be avoided or prohibited no matter how they might be prefaced or framed. In 2020, a white professor at Duquesne University was put on leave for using a word that should not be used in a university lecture ( Acevedo & Gostanian 2020 ). The case highlighted the white privilege and cluelessness of faculty who ignore eminent offensiveness. The taboo language arena in the United States extends beyond straightforward cases such as this. Another white professor at the University of Southern California angered students in his business communication class when he used a Chinese word ( nèige , literally “that” but used as a discourse marker and floor holder) because the non-English word sounds similar to the English racial slur. He was also removed from his teaching duties ( Flaherty 2020 ). These cases bring attention to issues of language and power and language and social context: Who is given laxity in using taboo language, and in which settings or occasions it is acceptable (such as when spoken by a former US president; see Baker 2019 )? Countless instances of taboo language use arise each day in the daily lives of people everywhere.
Many of the examples provided in this review will bring attention to how the context, as well as speaker and recipient relationships, will create the tabooness of words or expressions. The occasions for use of taboo language or avoidance of taboo language extend beyond obvious utterances of obscenity and will encompass issues of sexuality politics, second language instruction, and loanword borrowing. Much of the prior research on taboo language focused on the nature of cursing, which does not figure prominently in this review. Past scholars were interested in categorizing types of cursing and found that it typically reflected cultural concern with realms such as body effluvia and excretions, sex and sexual organs, and language that draws heat or energy from religious prohibitions ( Osborne 2021 , Stapleton 2010 ). The discussion here considers instances that do not always reflect simple interpretations of intentionality and acceptability of taboo language and offers a few new or unusual cases from this complex realm.
Taboo language figures in research on groups of people described by anthropologists and other writers for more than a century. Scholars have different reasons for wanting to study taboo language. In some cases, the fieldworker discovers that learning the names or words that are not permissible for use in social interaction is a behavior norm that is unavoidable. Other researchers realize that linguistic taboos aid understanding of kinship structures and religious beliefs. In my case, it was irritation with countless scholarly books and articles that asserted that “the Japanese language does not include obscenity.” I learned that this notion was not true while living in Japan in the late 1970s. Outside most academic writing (literary studies and folklore research are notable exceptions) and the confines of formal language instruction, irreverent nonacademic writers such as Constantine (1993) gleefully share taboo Japanese words with readers. In other spaces, linguistic ideology continues to dominate descriptions. For studies of Chinese, Jing-Schmidt (2019 , p. 397) observes a similar prim distance from the taboo in anthropology, linguistics, and cultural history: “First, it might be due to the assumption, especially among early Western anthropologists whose work primarily focused on indigenous societies in Oceania where the word taboo originated, that taboo is a phenomenon typical of, if not specific to, ‘primitive’ societies characterized by simplicity and illiteracy.” We might add to her critique that linguistic ideologies underpin representations of language and shape how they are portrayed in published works. In recent decades, anthropologists and other scholars have documented taboo language for a range of linguistic groups, often related to studies of gendered language, youth subcultures, naming, and in-law avoidance. There is analytical merit in exploring taboo language as a way to map local kinship relations, moral and religious ideology, and social identity. Areas of linguistic prohibition or avoidance reflect critical notions about personhood and one's place in the social matrix, whether it is in a punk subcultural scene to signal membership or on political yard signs that announce affiliation or when it comes to the naming of a child as a callout for one's nonconformity.
The taboo language arena provides clues to cultural values of appropriateness, but beyond that, it encodes or reflects social relationships, marks identity, or serves specific sociocultural functions. Interest in taboo language, which in this review is inclusive of both spoken and written forms, extends to other aspects of linguistic life. The case of the Chinese word nèige mentioned above touches on a newly emerging research domain: taboo language in multilinguistic, interlanguage, and other contact situations. Because work on taboo and transgressive language is an expanding area of scholarship, this article is organized as a review of topics rather than by theoretical stance or methodology. The clusters explored are the following: naming and linguistic avoidance behaviors, taboo language and transgression, taboo language in language contact situations, and taboo language in educational settings and other contexts. I include some eclectic sources that are undertheorized or marginal because they teach something useful about taboo language and might serve as research inspiration for others. There are numerous overviews of the taboo language arena as well as a scholarly body of work with examples from many cultural contexts. Two excellent encyclopedia essays look at cursing ( Osborne 2021 ) and obscenity ( McIntosh 2021 ), while a special issue of Anthropological Quarterly entitled “Beyond Bad Words” includes an insightful overview ( Fleming & Lempert 2011 ; see also Brandes 2019 ). In addition to reviewing some older material, this article includes vibrant and innovative studies found in unexpected pockets published after 2010. Aside from the long-standing anthropological interest in name taboos and derogatory terms, we find a new stream of research on topics such as prohibited words in film subtitling, debates about teaching taboo words to second language learners, interlanguage word avoidance, and offensive English loanwords borrowed into other languages.

Section: Literature Review, Methodology, Results, Discussion

Third-century ethnohistorians from the Chinese Wei court were the first to describe the people of the Japanese islands who lived in a country named Wa in Japanese (Wo in Chinese). The name was written with a Chinese character that had the pejorative meaning of “hunchbacked dwarf.” Centuries later when the Yamato imperial court in Japan adopted the Chinese writing system, they tried to avoid this graph by substituting a more auspicious one, but the scribes in China appreciated the linguistic joke and continued to use the original character. In 945 CE, the Yamato simply changed the name of their country and the Chinese characters used for it altogether ( Carr 1992 ). This early substitution of a “bad” Chinese character may have failed, but the practice continues for other problematic or stigmatized graphs. More recently, writers of Chinese replace taboo Chinese characters with less contaminated ones. Jing-Schmidt (2019 , p. 401) described some contemporary homophone-based character substitutions for terms such as “shit” or “cunt.” But, as happens to taboo language elsewhere, the new characters in turn become taboo and new replacement characters are put into service.
Avoidance of taboo, obscene, or pejorative words (or writing system graphs) appears to be universal. Language that should be avoided by certain people or used in certain contexts, often those related to the deceased, in-laws, and other kinspeople, has served as a familiar topic in anthropology for more than 100 years, and the ethnographic literature contains comprehensive descriptions of what is now referred to as the “avoidance register.” Conceptualizing avoidance language as a type of linguistic register was theorized decades ago by Haviland (1979) , who described language avoidance once used by Guugu Yimidhirr speakers of Australia (his informant was apparently one of the last people who used it). The register was used with all in-laws, but Haviland named it “brother-in-law language” because they were the kinspeople most often present in interactions that necessitated its use. The register included lexical replacements of numerous ordinary words used with those who were not in-laws and also the total exclusion of some words such as names for sexual organs or words related to sexual behaviors.
Cross-cultural and cross-linguistic comparisons of in-law avoidance registers have been studied by others, the majority of these comparisons centered on languages spoken by linguistic groups in Australia, Austronesia, or Africa. Storch (2017) presents an overview of the different typologies used to classify avoidance registers, and Fleming's (2014) study of comparative data suggests that the Australian mother-in-law speech register deviates from generalizations that are made for several other language cases. More focused research includes Stasch (2011) , who investigates the relation-making indexicality of name avoidance among the Korowai of New Guinea. Mitchell (2015) looks at linguistic avoidance in Datooga, a Nilotic language of Tanzania. She finds that many linguistic strategies, including lexical borrowing and vowel replacement, are devised by female speakers to sidestep words that are not to be used when speaking to in-laws. In their overview of name and homophone avoidance registers in Africa, Fleming et al. (2019 , p. 176) include a table with examples from 12 different languages. Taboos related to naming reflect the community embeddedness and interconnectedness of individuals. As stated by Bodenhorn & vom Bruck (2009 , p. 3), “individual lives thus become entangled—through the name—in the life histories of others.”
A well-known type of linguistic avoidance is related to names for individuals. In ancient Japan, the personal names of rulers were never to be used by others. The Female Emperor Kōken (718 to 770 CE) issued an edict prohibiting the use of her name and also demanded that a professional group change their name because it was similar to her own ( Plutschow 1995 , p. 37). Name taboos might be in place for only a short duration, especially during times of abnormal ritual status. Among Andaman islanders, Radcliffe-Brown (1972) noted name avoidance for young people during life transition rituals and also for newly married people. In his study of name avoidance among Wauja speakers of Brazil, Ball (2015 , p. 337) notes that names are “inalienable possessions passed down across generations that, like gifts, confer essential ties between those who share them.” His description applies to many other linguistic settings, where names are strongly linked to personhood and lineage and are imbued with spiritual or religious meaning. Examples of name taboos are plentiful in the ethnographic literature, and historians have documented it for global cultures in all historic periods. Many early anthropologists discussed the taboo against using the name of a deceased person. Parsons (1916 , p. 254) recorded that Zuni will say “He who was” or “He who has gone” rather than the dead person's name. Recent health and human services scholarship counsels about the taboo of using a deceased person's names with Native American patients and family members ( Cacciatore 2009 , Colclough 2017 ), but some news reporting resulted in complaints that the name of the dead person was aired insensitively ( Cameron 2013 , Shepard 2010 ).
Fleming (2011) offers numerous examples of name avoidance on a continuum of weakly evaded to strongly prohibited and links them to social functions in addition to cultural schema. A detailed description of name taboos—their morphology, phonology, relationship to ideas about the sacredness of ancestors, and use in interaction—is presented by Keesing & Fifi'i (1969) in their analysis of taboo language among the Kwaio of the Solomon Islands. In some cultural contexts, there are serious consequences if the rules about name avoidance are not followed. Describing one outcome of using the name of the deceased person among the Yolngu of Australia, Tamisari (2002 , p. 91) wrote, “If in the first instance the speaking of a name is said to cause swelling of the speaker's lips, in the second the recently deceased person is said to be summoned among the living as a duplicate of his/her body.” Waldram (2004) notes that Navajo avoid using the deceased person's name because of worry that the dead person's ghost will hear their name and return, resulting in illness. Allan & Burridge (2009 , p. 128) specify sickness and madness as potential misfortune that will befall speakers of Nguni in southern Africa who violate name taboos.
Naming in small-group cultural settings is weighted by the force of community tradition and supernatural pressure, whereas naming practices in modern nation-states are regulated not only by religious or cultural norms, but also through formal codes and laws. Taboo names may be prohibited through the mechanism of legally classifying them as “obscenity.” Naming restrictions in the United States vary by state, with some having no restrictions while others enforce a range of name prohibitions. State laws can be straightforward or else be a reflection of feeble logic. First names such as Cash Whoredom, Cholera, Toilet Queen, and Satan ( Sherrod & Rayback 2008 ) may be socially taboo yet are nevertheless legal. Many states claim technical justifications for restrictions on the number of characters, non-Latin alphabets, and nonlinguistic graphs. California allows hyphens and apostrophes yet bans the use of foreign language diacritics such as the umlaut, macron, tilde, or accent grave. One justification is that it would result in administrative difficulties, such as computer entry. Names such as O'Reilly or O'Connor are permitted, while first names such as Teófila or Tomás are prohibited. The idea that data entry personnel have control over which names are legal is absurd to begin with, but it also suggests that people are using computers from the 1980s that lack font pull-down menus, which is unlikely. As Larson (2011 , p. 189) notes, “This argument, although surely sufficient under a rational basis test, is quite unpersuasive under strict scrutiny.” Names are core properties of cultural identity, yet state societies violate individuals by imposing changes or alterations to their names. During the period of annexation (1910–1945), Korean subjects of the Japanese empire faced intense pressure to adopt Japanese names, and today their descendants born in Japan continue to struggle with having both Korean and Japanese names ( Sugiyama 2016 ). The potency that naming has for an individual and the stripping of that potential was masterfully evoked in an autobiography about growing up as a subject of imperial Japan in occupied Korea ( Kim 1988 ).
Names may acquire a uniquely taboo status that is greeted lightly with social derision or more severely with fines or other punishment. For example, innovative naming practices among African Americans have been socially stigmatized, yet they are moderated by normative linguistic constraints and are a recognized part of the American naming landscape ( Lieberson & Mikelson 1995 ). In comparison, Japan has only a few naming laws. Most rules are related to the number of names used (no middle name is legally allowed), surnames after marriage (the couple must both have the same surname), and the use of nonstandard Chinese characters instead of possible taboo meanings of the name. Even so, some naming practices are nevertheless harshly criticized. Unser-Schutz (2016) tracks trends in Japanese naming since 2007 and the discourse surrounding unconventional names. Although not strictly taboo, some newly coined names are publicly branded with derogatory terms such as DQN (dokyun) nēmu (idiotic name) for those thought to lack common sense, and shiwashiwa nēmu (wrinkled name) or mīra nēmu (mummy name) for names that are old-fashioned or outdated. More extreme are current naming laws in China, which are intended to forcibly assimilate non-Han people, especially Muslim ethnic minorities ( Wyatt 2019 ). Since 2017, laws have dictated that certain public spaces, such as street names and signs, may not display Arabic script elements or even the Chinese character that is used for “Islam.” Noncompliance results in fines and business closures. [Details on Chinese use of proper names, kinship terms, nicknames, and pronouns in interaction are found in Blum (1997) .]
The source for what constructs language as taboo might arise from a number of concerns, including religious prohibition, gendered expectations, cultural beliefs, and expected social roles. A powerful assertion is that the central focus of linguistic anthropology over the last 40 years has been the ethnographic analysis of indexicality and that such a focus turns attention away from studying language itself as an autonomous object ( Nakassis 2016 ). Whether accurate or not, when it comes to the taboo language arena, there was a productive shift away from seeing the badness or the taboo nature of certain words as intrinsic to the words themselves. Instead, scholars began with taboo instances found within interactions and traced how they pointed to sociocultural assumptions, fields, ideologies, and understandings. As put forward by Irvine (2011 , p. 34), linguistic anthropologists must go beyond merely descriptive, symptomatic analyses of the “denotational semantics” of language. Taboo words allow for expressive uses in many communicative contexts where they are exploited for pragmatic potential. Much of the research on transgressive language references the social and discursive context and the possible functions addressed through obscene or taboo language use. Taboo language may appear in unexpected situations in order to do the cultural or social work of resisting models of proper gender performance, to reflect ethnic identity in multilingual contexts, or to put forward as a feminist art project. Among the subcultural Japanese girls described by Miller (2004) , their use of explicitly taboo language and their derisive nicknames for older men were transgressions that challenged models of adolescent femininity and also signaled resistance to class-based social norms.
The social use of taboo words to indicate a rejection of normative gender norms has been an especially fruitful avenue of research. Among the young Latinas in Northern California described by Mendoza-Denton (2008) , use of taboo words may be part of ritual insulting or clowning. Taboo words are also evidence of being macha : strong, resilient, and self-respecting. Galindo (1999) looked at Chicana subculture in Texas and noted the use of a mixed English, Spanish, and Chicano Caló to transgress gender expectations and to convey familiarity and closeness. Muehlmann (2008) describes the subversive functions of swear words ( groseriıas ) among young people who navigate identities as speakers of Spanish and Cucapá in Mexico. Young people may not be completely fluent in Cucapá but will covertly use swear words in interactions with outsiders, thereby making fun of the outsider's assumptions. Deliberate linguistic transgressions effectively convey a speaker's attitude or stance. In her study of Hijra transgender speakers in India, Hall (1997) found that they used obscene language that transgressed gendered language expectations, and in so doing they displayed a degree of agency. Female linguistic transgression may have various negative consequences. A study by Cruz (2019) centered on one woman's creative proficiency at cursing in public settings and on how her performances had local repercussions. Even in cultural settings where taboo language is ideologically associated with masculinity, conversational data show that the use of expletives and taboo words is equally common among girls and women ( Bayard & Krishnayya 2001 ). For example, De Klerk (1992) studied the speech of young women in South Africa and found that they also use a range of taboo language, challenging stereotypes and assumptions. Thus, ethnographically informed research continues to be valuable as a check or counter to linguistic ideology.
Numerous studies are specifically concerned with sexuality politics and the derogatory and taboo terms used to categorize or describe sexual minorities. In Japan, some of these terms are appropriated and repurposed as positive identifiers ( Abe 2010 , Valentine 1997 ). One example is self-identifying as okama, which is pejorative slang for “faggot” or “poofter” (the literal meaning is “pot”). Maree (2020) tracks the use of transgender and gay speech styles in media and how it subverts, contests, and reproduces linguistic stereotypes. On one television program, the speech of the transgender comedian is deliberately and frequently marked as sexually explicit and taboo through excessive bleeping or onscreen text overlay boxes.
Some forms of linguistic transgression create and maintain subcultural identity, such as Furman's (2018) study of the linguistic genre in Russian called mat (swear words) used among female members of the punk subculture. The long-established mat register rests on heavy use of four taboo words. Mat is banned from use in media and in public, where one can be fined for using it. It is associated with the working class and male-oriented occupations such as the police, the military, and organized crime gangs. Mat is valued in the punk scene in Saint Petersburg, and women transgress femininity norms through using it while simultaneously earning subcultural capital.
A notable instance of female linguistic transgression that received global media attention was the case of the Japanese artist Igarashi Megumi, who adopted the professional name Rokudenashiko, or Good for Nothing Girl. Igarashi began making vagina-themed art projects and openly used the highly taboo word manko (“cunt,” often softened with the addition of the honorific prefix -o as omanko or “pussy”). Igarashi was arrested twice in 2014 on obscenity charges and eventually found guilty and fined ( McLelland 2018 ). The -man morpheme in manko appears in novel English–Japanese hybrid compounds. Igarashi created words for her art projects that incorporated it, such as jioraman (diorama cunt) and rimoman (remote-controlled cunt). Her 2014 art installation entitled Fukushiman (combining the morpheme - man with the name Fukushima) represented a diorama of the Fukushima nuclear power plant, which experienced a meltdown in 2011 owing to the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami. In her doubly taboo art piece, the power plant rests on a vagina mound with toy emergency works gathered around it. One motivation for her vagina art is to destigmatize the taboo word, and many feminists appreciated Igarashi's attempts to destigmatize the word manko . For example, Igarashi was invited to create a short manga featuring her character Manko-chan (Little Miss Cunt) for an edited volume on female icons ( Rokudenashiko 2018 ).
There is a long history of research on the development of pidgins and creoles, language shift, language death, and other subjects related to contact between speakers of different languages. Much of the research in this dense literature and the professional journals devoted to it are concerned with issues of typology and change ( Hickey 2010 ). Because language contact may also include phenomena such as word borrowing from one language to another, code-switching between languages, bilingualism, and multilingualism, we also find interest in the adoption of taboo language forms from one language to another or in the creation of hybrid linguistic forms that are obscene or become taboo. A new focus is on translanguaging, a concept used for cases in which multilingual speakers use their repertoire of languages as one integrated system ( Garcia & Wei 2014 ). The notion builds on the work of Ortiz (1995) , who drew attention to situations of cultural syncretism, such as that of Cuba. Scholars who use the concept are careful to distinguish it from “code-switching,” which is viewed as an outsider's appraisal of discrete linguistic forms.
Using taboo language in multilingual contexts may be a form of cultural capital that also allows for the expression of creativity and pleasure. For example, Auckle (2017) looks at multilingual conversations among young people in Mauritius in which the use of taboo words from different languages is one mechanism for establishing group identity, competence, and also creative linguistic abilities. Tetreault (2015) describes a strategy to deflect authorship of “bad words” among teenagers of North African descent in a French language context through uttering the formulate Arabic term hashek . Their use of hashek allows impolite or taboo speech and marks their identities as both Arab Muslims and French youth. Reminiscent of feminists who created a magazine entitled Bitch: Feminist Response to Pop Culture , Zhu (2020) examines the appropriation of the racist Trumpian term, the “Chinese virus,” for the coronavirus disease 2019. It was recontextualized and challenged in Chinese social media discourse through Chinese–English translanguage swearing. Weibo social media users blurred the boundary between English and Chinese in their creative use of profanity that mocked and rebuked Trump's racist expression.
Loanwords are eagerly conscripted to do the work of taboo language avoidance. Loanword substitution for sensitive vocabulary is found in most languages and is frequently seen when the topics have to do with sex, death, the body, and disease. The reentextualization of borrowed taboo terms through language contact is the subject of long research traditions and a dense scholarship. Nadel (1954) described the use of euphemisms and other strategies, including Arabic-derived words, among the Nupe of West Africa. Miller (1997) described the extensive use of Japan-created English for sex industry offerings, such as fingā sābisu (finger service) and fasshon masāji (fashion massage) for perfunctory masturbation services.
One of the most common words borrowed from English is “fuck,” and thus language scholars have become especially interested in its globalization. Vatvedt Fjeld et al. (2019) describe the use of this loanword in several language settings, primarily in Norway, Denmark, and Iceland. “Fuck” is now represented in many writing systems, including Cyrillic in Russia, Devanāgarī in India, and Ge'ez script in Ethiopia, where it is often correlated with class and generation. Jaffe (2017) looked at “fuck” in Francophone contexts, such as expressions like fucker le chien (fuck the dog). Drawing from online discussions and blogs as well as visual displays on items such as T-shirts, Jaffe analyzes the meanings and functions of the word for speakers of French in Québec and France. She finds that a degree of nativization for bilingual speakers in Québec renders it less taboo, whereas in France it functions more often to mark an oppositional stance. The English word “fuck” also has wide distribution in a range of Japanese contexts, including youth media, popular music, and books. There is even a Japanese guide on How to Use Fuck Correctly (Madosaki & Eigo Hy gen Kenky kai 2014 ). It is borrowed primarily in its nonsexual connotations and functions, while still retaining its status as a marker of transgressive speech ( Miller 2015 ). Similar to its use in English, it functions as a discourse marker to indicate angry, impassioned, or intense sentiment.
Some cases of word avoidance rest on phonetic similarity with taboo words in another language. The classic study by Haas (1951) provides examples from speakers of Muskogee (Creek) and Thai when they are in English language spaces. She notes that with increased bilingualism among Creek speakers, a taboo arose of avoiding the use of Creek words that have similar phonological profiles as taboo English words. She provided the example of fákki (soil, earth, clay), which apparently is close enough to the English word “fuck” to cause discomfort. It is interesting that through circumlocution and other strategies Hass completely avoids ever using the taboo English words in the article, thereby perfectly substantiating her argument about linguistic avoidance. In a more recent example, a university in Japan changed its English name because of phonological similarity. Kinki University (named after the Kinki region around Osaka, Kyoto, and Nara) became Kindai University in English language marketing after 2014 because of its association with the English term “kinky.” An extension of this idea might take the form of extreme linguistic avoidance in which speakers avoid using a language altogether. Webster (2012) describes the uneasiness that some Navajo experience using Navajo English, so they self-censor their use of English, pretending to be monolingual in Navajo.
Linguistic anthropologists generally prefer to study language within a specific speech community (or linguistic community of practice), where the focus is on the speakers rather than on the linguistic code itself. However, language itself as an object of study still has value for scholars interested in how people use and modify both written and spoken language. New research from various disciplines inspires thinking and potential research paths relevant to the taboo arena in contemporary life.
Scholars and instructors began asking tough yet critical questions about the use of taboo language in the classroom, as well as the teaching of taboo words in second language education. As the above examples of the two professors booted out of the classroom illustrate, using specific types of taboo language in classrooms and in on-campus events, although protected by academic freedom, is not without peril. And yet, in his essay on “Using Bad Language in the Classroom,” Suslak (2013) says that the use of expletives is not always used with the intention of offending, but rather to reinforce intimacy. Bad language in a classroom might be focused in any number of ways: on the relationship of the bad word and its referent, on the intentions of the person who uses the bad word, or on the historical context in which the word is found. Some studies have also considered the gendered use of taboo language in educational settings. Pérez (2015) found that although taboo words retain their association with masculinity in Puerto Rico, women challenge and transgress social convention by also using them.
Second language learning materials up through the 1980s generally presented a cleaned-up portrait of the prestige dialect of the target language. Books, articles, and materials about “bad” words were available but were considered auxiliary to the formal classroom context. But some scholars of second language acquisition have been debating whether students should be taught taboo words and expressions as part of formal instruction in the target language. Several arguments have been made that teaching taboo language is one aspect of teaching authentic communication situations ( Liyanage et al. 2015 , Mercury 1995 ). Taboo language is part of many global working-class cultures, it is often a part of a casual or private register used by many people. Desai (2017) advocates for allowing taboo language in spoken word poetry activities in the classroom, which affords young people of color an avenue for resisting oppression through imaginative and creative expression.
Global media is an established part of culture for the majority of the world's populations and is an area of cultural competence for most people. I use Japanese TV dramas in my teaching, and because most of the students do not understand Japanese, we must rely on media products that are subtitled. The majority of these are badly translated to begin with, but invective and taboo words are almost always spectacularly mangled. One energized area of research is the problem of translating, dubbing, and subtitling taboo language. Scholars are asking how taboo words or expressions are dubbed or subtitled in film and TV and how these terms are being translated by enthusiasts in fansubbing. Related to this issue is the increase in global fans who participate in online scanlation and fansubbing of taboo language or content, which they illegally disseminate ( Freedman 2017 ). Nguyen (2015) analyzed how taboo English words and expressions are eliminated or toned down in Dutch subtitles; Slamia (2020) focused on subtitling of English-language films for an Arabic-speaking audience, where the English words are also eliminated or defused in the translations; and Trupej (2019) looked at taboo deletion, substitution, and modification in English-language films subtitled in Slovenian. In contrast, other scholars have found a certain joy in the putatively offensive language contained in English-language media. Khoshsaligheh et al. (2018) discovered that fans who subtitle taboo language from English language films into Persian try to retain as much taboo language as possible as a form of resistance to conservative ideology. Valdeón (2020) found an increase in the number of taboo words dubbed into Spanish from English-language media through addition, replacement of neutral words and expressions with swear words, and intensification of taboo words.
The taboo language arena also allows for the possibility of humor, creativity, and pleasure. One setting for research looks at American Sign Language (ASL). Mirus et al. (2012) analyzed the creation of often humorous and clever signs for “fuck” and “bastard” in ASL and found that these terms allow for creative innovation, especially by male teenagers. The use of taboo language by comedians is well documented; one example is the work of Seizer (2011) on stand-up comedy in the US Midwest. Comedians rely on obscenities to define the setting as one that allows them to speak off the record and create a sense of intimacy. Haviland (2011) also explores the entertainment aspects of foulmouthed Mexican barkers who produce taboo-laden spiels to crowds in the plaza. The barker is a specific type of merolicos (street vendor) who uses rudely clownish and raunchy comments to entice financial contributions from onlookers. Haviland argues that the street seller's engaging performance, no matter how offensive, constructs onlookers as fellow everyday folks.

Section: Conclusion

Taboo words are part of our global visual and media world and are found not only in film, TV, and printed texts, but also in public spaces on yard signs and signs carried by protesters, in graffiti, and in hashtags on social media. The euphemisms FFS (for fuck's sake) and WTF (what the fuck) are ubiquitous on tweets, Facebook posts, memes, T-shirts, and more. At Black Lives Matter protests, I saw signs with “Fuck 12” (12 is a word for police). Yet, some taboo words remain contentious sites of public or community debate and legal action. A Trump supporter in New Jersey faced charges of violating local ordinances that prohibit public obscenity because of her “Fuck Biden” yard signs ( Levine 2021 ). The charges were later dropped. “Fuck” on political posters is nothing new. In their collection of antiwar posters, the Imperial War Museums include an anti–Vietnam War poster from 1970 that says “Fuck W * r,” the asterisk serving to mark the true obscenity ( Gimbo 1970 ). Unsanctioned transgression in using taboo language in public spaces is still commonly reserved for people in power ( Hodges 2019 , McIntosh 2020 ).
The eclectic research outlined above barely does justice to the dense research on the taboo arena. Even so, these few selected topics illustrate several overlapping themes. We see that taboo language is often an aspect of intimacy and group identity construction and that global avoidance of certain names is patterned and derived from cultural belief systems and cosmologies. The proliferation of taboo loanwords is clearly a common strategy for avoiding taboo words in the borrower's language. We find that there are many instances of linguistic transgression that willfully flout cultural expectations, often by female speakers who reject, modify, or play with gender norms. Other linked and overlapping topics such as hate speech ( Chetty & Alathur 2018 , Franck 2013 , Wilson 2019 ), trigger warnings ( McCarthy 2020 ), racist speech and slurs ( Hill 2008 ), and censorship ( Doostdar 2004 ) also deserve further inquiry.
All studies of taboo and transgressive language are worthy of our interest regardless of their starting point, be it yard signs or taboo language use in the context of a barker's spiel. A focus on the linguistic element itself rather than on the interaction reveals trends in global use of loanwords and local differences in functions. Work that considers taboo language use as part of a specific cultural context explores transgression through the use of taboo words and points to linguistic ideology and gendered language expectations. Although a focus on semantic or referential meanings is nearly taboo in much current linguistic anthropology, pursuing potential paths of inquiry by beginning with the taboo word has also generated excellent and constructive research.

Section: Acknowledgements

For their wonderful comments and suggestions, I am most grateful to Shalini Shankar and Bambi Schieffelin.
