Title: Introduction: Fake News, Science, and the Growing Multiplicity and Duplicity of Information Sources


Section: 


Section: 

Evidence-based policy and practice are founded on scientific information. It is critical for accurate information to reach the public and policy makers. We face a crossroads that juxtaposes scientific information with “alternative facts.” The growing use of open-source data collection to identify and calculate health and environmental risks, and for scientists to learn about the public's understanding, attitudes, and behavior, is losing a race with multiple alternative open sources of dubious health information and disinformation for public and policy-related consumption.
In this volume, Swire-Thompson & Lazer have examined the challenges of misinformation and how it is multiplied by the reach and anonymity of the Internet. They explore how individuals and groups—organized or anonymously masked—absorb and retransmit spurious and specious arguments, often as “news.” These frequently contain ominous warnings of health threats or inflated promises of health and beauty benefits. The rapid dissemination of such disinformation, fabricated stories, and deceptions can cause widespread panic, as seen historically even before the advent of the Internet, with Orson Welles's 1938 “War of the Worlds” radio broadcast. Today's most salient public health example might be the mass movement of parents in some school districts and regions to boycott immunizations, with consequent outbreaks and even epidemics of vaccine-preventable diseases. This movement followed the publication of a Lancet article that contained falsified data; its lead author was subsequently barred from practicing medicine.
The phenomena of political uses of misinformation and trumped-up stories have ancient political and sociological roots in collective behavior following word-of-mouth rumors spread by enemies, factions, or competitors. But recent accelerations with the Internet have found new health consequences, as in the spread of false information about autism and the measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccination in children.
Swire-Thompson & Lazar explore the forms of misinformation and disinformation, but they acknowledge the difficulties of defining them “as information that is contrary to the epistemic consensus of the scientific community.” It poses the problem of a constantly changing definition of what is true or false “as new evidence comes to light and as techniques and methods are advanced” (p. 434).
Their further exploration of the population's engagement with health (mis)information explores the roles of Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, and YouTube. Such widely accepted Web-based frameworks for sharing information have limitations in their correctives for misinformation. Swire-Thompson & Lazar apply their epidemiological expertise to the issues of “how misinformation spreads,” “who is spreading misinformation,” “personal access to health information,” and “trustworthiness in institutions that provide health information.” They also note that while the public generally trusts and has confidence in science, the trust in government and the media has declined consistently over time and is nuanced (e.g., What is “media”? Which part of government?).
A companion article (though the authors of reviews in Annual Review of Public Health volumes are not put into direct debate or interaction by the Editorial Committee) narrows and focuses the scope of the subject in their analysis of the assault on science and the environment to focus on deregulation as a major culprit. Samet & Burke open their review with a tabular analysis of the major environmental laws in the United States, identifying the specific regulations by initial year of Congressional passage since 1970 and providing a brief description of the agency authorized, or aspect of the environment to be regulated (e.g., air, water, workplace, pollutant, pesticides, a “superfund” to clean up uncontrolled or abandoned pollution sites, and other hazardous wastes). The authors then outline steps for moving from research to policy and describe how each of these has been undermined by special interests' lobbying, administrative deregulatory fiat, and Congressional amendments to the laws and regulations.
Samet & Burke itemize international and US national deregulatory actions amending policies and rules, including research cuts, scientific peer-review changes, restrictions on the use of scientific findings, and revision of guidelines for threshold levels and risk assessment. They devote a section to ways that the Trump administration and its Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have cut and, in some cases, eliminated sponsored research, removed peer review, restricted the scope of the evidence base, revised the scientific methods for assessing environmental and health risks, and limited the use of cost-benefit analysis to quantify and compare environmental and health risks. The authors further offer case studies of how these strategies have been applied, for example, in the National Ambient Air Quality Standards in the article's section titled Climate Change and the Denial of Science.
Together, these reviews present a composite of approaches to disinformation coming particularly from entrenched economic and political interests who use the media to sow doubt and uncertainty, and that playbook remains active when comparing tobacco and cancer with deniers of vaccine effectiveness. Fake news is often disseminated at a much faster rate than are scientifically valid findings and then goes upstream to highlight the politically motivated efforts to reduce the capacity to do good science (e.g., EPA deregulation; see also Tables 1 and 2 in Samet & Burke) and to bless inaccurate pronouncements or at least obfuscate the truth by packing advisory groups with individuals who represent private rather than public interests. Unfortunately, once unscientific (or even anti-scientific) information surfaces (e.g., regarding vaccines and autism), it can stay entrenched in ways that cause irreversible harm.
While these national-level efforts to deregulate and undermine environmental science are widespread and alarming, they have, to a degree, reinforced the adage that “all public health is local” by spurring some states and cities to address environmental threats in light of federal malpractice.
