Title: Valuing patient engagement: Reflexive learning in evidence generation practices for health technology assessment


Abstract: Abstract

Much attention in health technology assessment (HTA), a health system governance mechanism used for determining the value of health technologies , is being paid to improving the quality and patient-relevance of the evidence used in assessment pratices. Whilst the direct involvement of patient actors throughout HTA processes has become a more routine element of institutional practice, the ‘impacts’ of patient engagement (PE) initiatives have proven difficult to determine and enhance. In reflexive governance theories, reflexive learning is a critical mechanism of multi-stakeholder arrangements that better handles the complexities of technologies and how they are understood through governance practices. This paper explores how reflexive learning can be used to build a richer conceptualisation of PE in HTA, in order to generate suggestions for enhancing PE practices and their impact. We critically apply reflexive learning insights on qualitative data derived from the co-creation process of a PE evaluation framework, organised through an EU project focused on strengthening PE practices across medicines development (2018–2020), including 24 interactive case studies , 3 multi-stakeholder workshops, and our observations throughout the project. The findings characterise two dimensions of reflexive learning in PE: First, reflexive learning refers to the adaptive reorganisation of evidence generating practices, including the revision of medicines' evaluation criteria and the conditions under which evidence ‘relevant’ to HTA is constructed. Second, reflexive learning spotlights the sociopolitics which shape technology evaluation. Four themes affecting meaningful and sustained PE in medicines development were analysed: institutional boundaries due to established evaluation criteria; timing of engagements; network relations between institutional actors; and the politics of patient representation. Extending beyond discrete PE activities and their reported impacts, reflexive forms of learning are crucial to yielding more ‘meaningful’ PE for HTA and medicines development, facilitating a HTA practice that more meaningfully deals with the complexities of medicines evidence generation.

Section: 1. Introduction

A recent definition of Health technology assessment (HTA) emphasises a multi-disciplinary process that uses ‘explicit methods’ to ‘determine the value of a health technology at different points in its lifecycle.’ ( INAHTA, 2020 : 0). Whilst patient engagement (PE) has grown into normal HTA practices internationally ( Hailey et al., 2013 ), how PE is best organised, and how PE makes a difference remains a focus of debate in HTA ( Abelson, 2018 ; Boothe, 2019 ; Gagnon et al., 2021 ). In reflexive governance theory, meanings of reflexive learning relate to processes that enable the identification and critical examination of the preanalytic assumptions ( Wynne, 1993 ) that frame the institutional knowledge commitments of science and technology governance practices ( Stirling, 2006 ). Reflexive learning is considered crucial to meaningful stakeholder engagement practices, because it recognises the intimate relations between the social setting and the learning outcomes of governance arrangements ( Feindt and Weiland, 2018 ). Applying reflexive learning insights to data generated in an EU project focused on strengthening PE practice across medicines development, we sought to build a richer conceptualisation of PE in HTA, addressing the following questions: How can we use reflexive learning in building a richer understanding of the value of patient engagement in HTA? And, how can we enhance patient engagement practices and their impacts by drawing on this new conceptualisation?
For new medicines to be reimbursed within national healthcare insurance packages, they must first be rendered as sufficiently valuable through governance practice. Determining the value of health technologies to healthcare systems - which we distinguish from the safety and benefit-risk assessments that influence marketing authorisation - is often informed by health technology assessment (HTA). HTA, a form of systematic evidence-based policy analysis of the ‘impacts’ of health technologies, has grown into an institutional ‘regulatory science’ ( Lehoux, 2006 ) across a wide range of national and regional healthcare jurisdictions. Whilst methodological applications vary, HTA analysis typically involves comparative evaluations of health technologies against current best available treatments, drawing on syntheses and analyses of evidence relating to a wide range of criteria including (cost-)effectiveness, safety, efficacy, and ethical and legal aspects ( Hoffman et al., 2016 ; Lehoux, 2006 ). Appraisal meetings, which consider the evidence base and the societal and health system implications of a technology's introduction, typically follow these assessments ( Facey, 2017 ). Whilst HTA approaches a plethora of health technologies, the data informing this paper focuses on the context of pharmaceutical products, or medicines.
HTA medicines assessments appraise mostly existing bodies of evidence. However, the quality and relevance of this evidence base have been questioned both in the social science and HTA literatures. For instance, in an ethnographic study of three HTA appraisals of expensive medicines in England, Brown et al. ( 2016 : 94) question the appropriateness of cost-effectiveness data extrapolated from clinical trials designed ‘many years’ prior to the appraisal process. Others highlight the complexities of medicines' impact in ‘real-world’ contexts that are not usually captured in the production of experimental, clinical evidence (see Will and Moreira, 2010 ). For example, clinical studies often use standardized outcomes of success (see Lehoux, 2006 : 103; Zuiderent-Jerak, 2015 ), and surrogate endpoints as predictors of a treatment's outcomes ( Davis and Abraham, 2013 : 53) rather than the ‘real-world’ outcomes that patients experience. Methodological challenges in HTA also vary between the condition or technology under study: Moreira (2011) discusses the challenges faced in categorising the impactful effects that dementia drugs had on both Alzheimer patients and their caregivers. Ultimately, these issues risk creating a “distorted image” of technology through HTA methods ( Van der Wilt et al., 2019 , van Mierlo et al., 2010 : 264), influencing HTA's production of credible and legitimate recommendations for health policy ( Facey, 2017 ).
Recent interactive practices have been developed to address these evidence-generation issues. These include the feedback and input of stakeholders on redesigning the techniques of evidence-generating practices to make them more adept at capturing the ‘real-world’ and 'patient-relevant' significance of medicines' effects ( Hoffmann et al., 2016 ). Additionally, at the request of developers, several HTA agencies offer ‘early dialogues’ that provide feedback and advice to aid the development of “ evidence that demonstrates the value of a product” for upcoming HTA evaluations ( NICE, n.d. : 0). These practices imply a more dynamic relationship between HTA and medicines development stakeholders than previously discussed ( Blume, 2009 ), in the interests of developing better evidence for the later assessment of technologies ( Huserau et al., 2016 ). Specifically, the changing roles of patient actors in this process forms a focus of ongoing debates. Whilst engagement practices are expanding, conceptualising how PE makes a difference to HTA remains a challenge in the field ( Gagnon et al., 2021 ). Before setting out to bridge this conceptual gap, we first summarise the state of PE across the HTA process.
Since the mobilization of patient knowledge as a credentialed expertise within health technology governance ( Epstein, 1995 ; Moreira, 2011 ), the contribution of patient actors to HTA has received significant attention in the field (e.g., Facey et al., 2017 ). Under the umbrella of ‘patient engagement’ (PE), two overlapping elements are typically distinguished: one concerned with adding ‘patient-based evidence’ to HTA's overall evidence base, the other with direct patient input to and/or participation in HTA processes ( Facey, 2017 ). A 2013 survey of an international HTA network found that over two thirds of respondents directly involved patients in their processes ( Hailey et al., 2013 ). Facey and Single (2017) outline the diversity of PE in HTA which we briefly summarise here. In England and Canada, for example, the HTA bodies encourage written submissions to advisory group or appraisal committee meetings. Open calls for public or patient input are in place in Taiwanese and Australian assessments. Written submissions typically attempt to describe patient experiences with conditions and current treatments as well as experiences and expectations for the treatment under review. Health Technology Assessment International (HTAi) developed a Patient Group Submission Template that has been adapted and utilised in various country contexts. ‘Face-to-face’ patient contributions may occur in various committee or advisory group meetings at different stages of HTA. For example, Germany and Australia hold ‘hearings’ where committee members can ask specific questions to patients, whilst patient advocates or expert patients give testimony within appraisal meetings in England.
Engagement practitioners and social scientists have shown recent interest in analysing and strengthening PE practices within HTA ( Löblová et al., 2020 ), including attempts at categorising the ‘outcomes’ of engagement (e.g., Gauvin et al., 2010 ; Gagnon et al., 2021 ) such as increases in the consideration of social values in HTA analysis ( Gagnon et al., 2021 ). However, the HTA literature stresses the difficulties in identifying clear engagement outcomes ( Single et al., 2019 ; Gagnon et al., 2021 ). In a recent review of PE in HTA, Gagnon et al. ( 2021 : 14) highlight the lack of defined evaluation concepts for understanding and determining PE's ‘impact’, admitting that evaluation of PE “remains a major methodological challenge because of the various dimensions that should be considered”. In the context of medicines development, Faulkner et al. ( 2021 : 601) note that HTA bodies needed ‘better rationale for patient engagement’ both to undertake PE and evaluate its impact.
Abelson ( 2018 : 2) notes that ‘meaningful’ engagement in HTA is when patients add ‘relevant’ contributions to the HTA process and when organisational visions are established that enable effective and legitimate processes of participation. Abelson rightly emphasises the implications of this latter dimension for conceptualising how ‘meaningful’ engagement in HTA might be assessed. The intimate connection of stakeholder engagement processes to complex evidence generating practices render their ‘effects’ difficult to isolate from the sociotechnical contexts in which they are entangled ( Chilvers, 2013 ). This makes PE's ‘impact’ on HTA difficult to establish within evaluation frameworks ( Gauvin et al., 2010 ; Vat et al., 2021 ). These sentiments are echoed in the reflexive governance literature, where reflexive learning is introduced as a potential solution that serves in building a richer conceptualisation of stakeholder engagement practices ( Chilvers, 2013 ). Here, reflexive learning is theorised as a critical mechanism of governance practices which include stakeholder engagement. By recognising the connection of the social setting to the learning outcomes of governance arrangements, reflexive learning better deals with the complexities of both the objects of governance and the practices that bring those objects into being ( Feindt and Weiland, 2018 ; Stirling, 2006 ). Before we set out to build a richer conceptualisation of PE in HTA using reflexive learning, to generate suggestions for enhancing more ‘meaningful’ PE practices ( Abelson, 2018 ), the next section elaborates on the concept and its relation to stakeholder engagement in technology governance settings.
The impact or ‘performance’ of public participation in science and technology governance enjoys a wealth of debate amongst practitioners and social scientists ( Rayner, 2003 ). Whilst many studies in this domain have focused on the relationship between learning and participation, Chilvers (2013) argues a healthy majority tend to focus on instrumental forms of individual and collective learning resulting from discrete engagement events. This resulted in far less attention being paid to learning ‘at the level of organisations and wider governance networks’ ( Chilvers, 2013 : 295).
In addition to accounts of organisational learning ( Argyris and Schön, 1996 ), recent contributions emphasise more relational and reflexive forms of learning ( Felt and Wynne, 2007 ) which extend beyond an instrumental relationship with public participation activities and their outcomes (see Chilvers, 2013 ). In relation to Beck's (1992) reflexive modernization theory, contributions from science and technology studies focused on ‘institutional reflexivity’ ( Wynne, 1993 ) and reflexive governance ( Feindt and Weiland, 2018 ) were developed in attempts that sought to handle the co-evolutionary relationship of science, technology, and society more effectively. The reflexive governance tradition developed in the 1990's occurred in parallel to discussions around sustainability governance (see Voβ et al., 2006 ).
Whilst reflexive governance covers a wide spectrum of theoretical and practical contributions, many of these are tied to notions of reflexive learning as a means of critically examining the ‘preanalytic assumptions’ ( Wynne, 1993 : 324) that frame governance's routine workings, methods, (knowledge) commitments and how these framings may constitute and condition complex socio-technical developments ( Smith and Stirling, 2007 , Stirling, 2006 ). It is such a critical self-awareness which ties reflexive learning to an appreciation of other perspectives and sources of knowledge and their legitimacy ( Wynne, 1993 ). The generation of institutional arrangements that involve actors from diverse epistemic backgrounds is considered vital to achieving reflexive learning. Reflexive governance is thus “based on the assumption that reflexive mechanisms could improve both legitimacy and efficiency of governance if they manage to involve all the concerned actors in a collective learning process” ( Feindt and Weiland, 2018 : 665, emphasis added ). These approaches emphasise the role of those actors directly affected by technology developments ( Grin and van de Graaf, 1996 ; Loeber, 2004 ) in “affect[ing] the construction of the objects of governance” ( Feindt and Weiland. 2018 : 663), for instance the value of health technology depicted in HTA. Collective learning processes build governance's ‘reflexive capacity’ ( Hendriks et al., 2007 ), enabling ways ‘that acknowledge alternative understandings of governance problems’ and ‘integrate multiple approaches to problem solutions’ ( Feindt and Weiland, 2018 : 665). Reflexive learning is defined as a key coordinating mechanism of reflexive governance by McNutt and Rayner ( 2018 : 777), who characterise reflexive learning as a shared exploration of problems and solutions in deliberative settings, ‘rather than being imposed’ by certain perspectives over others.
Stirling (2006) makes an important distinction between the meanings of reflectiveness and reflexivity within science and technology governance. Reflectiveness relates to the consideration of a broader range of factors and attributes deemed salient to the governance object in question (i.e., gaining a ‘fuller’ representation of the value of technologies throughout the development and evaluation process). Reflexivity means explicit examination of how the system of governance (which includes the norms and values of all actors involved in HTA for instance) conditions the representations of the governance object ( Stirling, 2006 : 227). Reflectiveness refers thus to the cognitive representation of technology in governance settings, whilst reflexivity relates to the socio-political dimensions of governance that influence the representation itself. Such a conceptual distinction “enables an analysis of the relation between the social setting, the cognitive representation and the learning outcomes of specific governance arrangements” ( Feindt and Weiland, 2018 : 665).
Institutional processes that construct health technology's value are always evolving. Today they are involving a multitude of perspectives more regularly - yet the ‘impact’ of these processes remains somewhat elusive and difficult to separate from specific contexts ( Gagnon et al., 2021 ). We thus sought to explore the potential of reflexive learning in filling this conceptual gap. We critically apply these conceptual insights to analyse data from a participatory EU project about PE in medicines development (described next), guided by the following questions: - What can be drawn from reflexive learning in understanding the value of patient engagement to HTA and medicines development? - How could meaningful patient engagement be supported and enhanced by drawing on this new conceptualisation?

Section: 2. Material and methods

This research took place in the context of the IMI-PARADIGM (2018–2020) project. PARADIGM (a project funded by the Innovative Medicines Initiative, a public-private partnership between European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme and the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations, EFPIA) focused on PE throughout the medicines development lifecycle. Project partners include representatives of the pharmaceutical industry, regulatory/HTA and payers organisations; patient organisations; and academia. PARADIGM aims to develop tools and resources for organisations within medicines development to support PE practices, including monitoring and evaluation. Work Package 3 (WP3), led by a research team including the first and last authors, co-developed a monitoring and evaluation framework of metrics for measuring PE impact ( Vat et al., 2021 ), which aims to facilitate organisations in developing PE (evaluation) strategies. To develop this framework, WP3 collated and analysed a range of PE initiative ‘case studies’ (n = 24) as well as organising two multi-stakeholder workshops (March 2019, April 2020) which focused on PE in three distinct but interlinked ‘stages’ of medicines development – 1) research priority setting, 2) design of clinical trials , and 3) early dialogues between medicines developers and HTA and regulatory agencies.
WP3 contributors consisted of representatives from 11 pharmaceutical companies, 3 EU patient organisations (patient partners were engaged in project activities through their affiliations to these patient organisations), 2 HTA/health governance organisations, and 2 academic institutes (in science and technology studies/health sciences fields). Vat et al. describe more specifically the work package activities taken to build the monitoring and evaluation framework, as well as the contents of the final framework. The variety of work package activities enabled us to collect a rich body of data regarding stakeholders’ conceptions of PE and its value to medicines development and HTA.
Multiple sources of material were collated and assimilated using a grounded approach to the dataset ( Creswell and Poth, 2016 ) composed of the following:
PE initiatives (n = 24, organised/led by patient organisations, n = 6, pharmaceutical companies, n = 14, and health governance/HTA bodies, n = 4) were analysed in WP3 as case studies between March 2019 and May 2020. Case studies were collectively analysed prior to a multi-stakeholder workshop in April 2020. PE initiatives analysed were conducted in European and North American settings within several ‘chronic’ and life-threatening disease contexts, including diabetes, dementia, HIV/AIDS, oncology , and rare diseases , as well as more general organisational PE programmes.
Case study analyses consisted of the following activities: review of PE documents, (individual and group) interviews and reflection meetings with organisers of PE initiatives, and participant observation of PE initiatives, under reflexive monitoring principles ( van Mierlo et al., 2010 ): case study inputs were analysed by a member of the research team with findings fed-back to PE organisers to support ongoing reflection on and adjustments of initiative activities. Interviews and reflection meetings focused on how initiative organisers and participants valued PE and their perspectives on PE evaluation practices. Reviewed documents included agendas and reports of PE activities, guidance documents, (conference) presentations and organisational/conference reports, website and blog posts of relevant organisations and networks, all of which elicited insights into the discourse around PE in medicines development. Observations of PE practices included attendance of patient community advisory board meetings, organised by patient organisations with invited pharmaceutical companies which focused on the design of clinical trials (3 case studies , 4 observations in total).
Three interactive workshops, that supported the development of the WP3 evaluation framework, elicited diverse stakeholder perspectives on conceptions of PE and its value in medicines development. The 2018 workshop (co-organised by the 2nd author) focused specifically on PE amongst HTA agencies in the context of HTA early dialogues, whilst the 2019 and 2020 WP3 workshops served to integrate the case study findings. All workshops involved interactive activities conducted in smaller break-out groups, each facilitated by members of the research team (cf. Vat et al., 2021 ). An overview of the workshops and their participants is found in Table 1 . Table 1 . Overview of project workshops. Workshop (date) Scope/aim Participant overview Workshop 1 (October 2018) Explore current rationales, practices, needs and challenges of organising and conducting PE in early dialogues 11 representatives of 7 national/regional HTA agencies (+4 observers from patient organisations and academia) Workshop 2 (March 2019) Test and refine WP3 metrics framework using case study examples 14 Pharmaceutical industry representatives 12 patient organisation/network representatives 6 academic facilitators Workshop 3 (April 2020) WP3 metrics framework: Final consensus building workshop 14 Pharmaceutical industry representatives 7 patient organisation/network representatives 2 HTA/regulatory representatives
All case study interviews and reflection meetings were recorded to prepare interim case study reports that were sent to initiative organisers for discussion and validation. Observational notes were also taken during case studies as well as the workshops. All workshops were recorded and transcribed with exception of the HTA workshop, at the request of the participants (see note at the end of the analysis section) where thorough notes were made. Summary reports were written for each workshop. Alongside the activities of WP3, involvement in PARADIGM and its meetings, including the Patient Engagement Open Forum series, helped to build researcher understanding of stakeholder interpretations of the value of PE. Data were gathered between September 2018 and September 2020.
Analysis was conducted in two phases: the first involved a descriptive, cross case analysis ( Yin, 2018 ) where findings from case studies were validated through discussions of the research team and WP3 partners. During the initial framework discussions and analysis, the relationship of PE and reflexive learning emerged as a key theme requiring further exploration. The second analytical phase achieved this by revisiting the dataset using key concepts related to reflexive governance as a critical analytical framework.
The second analysis involved a reflexive revisiting of the dataset (case study and workshop notes, case study reports, workshop summary reports, workshop transcripts, and PE documents), combining inductive and deductive coding ( Miles and Huberman, 1994 ) to relate different stakeholders' conceptions of PE with reflexive learning and governance concepts. We thus sought to explore how reflexive learning could be characterised in the context of PE, HTA, and medicines development, considering the salient contextual conditions that drive or hinder ‘meaningful’, ‘reflexive’ forms of engagement. Member check was performed through discussions with project partners, and themes were developed during critical discussions among the research team. We ensured conceptual saturation through the comparison of multiple data sources using different collection methods, and a review of the developed themes' presence across the different data sources ( Denzin, 2009 ). Atlas.ti facilitated the data analysis.
It is important to note here that the significant sensitivities of medicines development practices posed several challenges to the reporting of this study. Namely, as the evidence plans of medicine developers reveal current and future strategies, meetings between developers and HTA agencies are considered commercially sensitive and highly confidential. HTA practitioners are thus to the most part unable to externally discuss direct examples of engaging patients in specific early dialogues projects due to strict confidentiality agreements . Workshop 1 was therefore not recorded for similar reasons; however, thorough notes were made throughout that sufficiently captured the details of the workshop discussions. All procedures relating to data management and confidentiality as agreed upon by partners in the signed grant agreement of the IMI-PARADIGM project were followed. The informed consent of non-vulnerable participants and anonymisation of their responses meant that no further ethical approval was deemed necessary for this study by the research ethics review committee at VU University Amsterdam. Direct quotations of individuals from discussions or observational notes have been omitted, in line with the consent of the relevant participants, with paraphrasing employed where necessary.

Section: 3. Results: PE and reflexive learning

The findings characterise two dimensions of reflexive learning in PE – on the adaptation of evidence generation practices, and on the sociopolitics of medicines evaluation. The first relates to the evidence generating practices of medicines evaluation which become opened up to revision and adaptation through the interaction of patients with other actors. A more relational form of reflexive learning highlights the sociopolitics of HTA and medicines development, where institutional contexts shape and condition the production of medicines evidence, including the organisation of PE for HTA. Extending beyond discrete PE activities and their learning outcomes, this conceptualisation demonstrates the importance of reflexive forms of learning in understanding and yielding more ‘meaningful’ PE (cf. Abelson, 2018 ) for HTA and medicines development.
Project participants consider early encounters of stakeholders, before evidence generation plans for a medicine have been determined, as offering great potential for patient input to stimulate ‘meaningful’ changes within medicines' development programmes. For HTA early dialogues, Workshop 1 participants noted the value of patient inputs coming a point ‘early’ enough to influence the design of evidence generation programmes, compared with HTA assessments for marketed therapies that typically occur at the end of the proverbial development pipeline, leaving PE at this later timepoint with no influence on the evidence submitted to evaluate technologies. In Workshop 1, HTA practitioners formulated the value of PE as an opportunity for patient input to actively ‘shape the future development programs of companies’ that would eventually be assessed in HTA , generating processes which ‘include those directly affected by the potential therapies under consideration in the dialogue’ ( HTAi, 2019 : 14).
Several key aspects of evidence generation relevant to HTA are opened up for revision through this early engagement with patients. In particular, the indicators used for capturing and evaluating a medicine's effects were highlighted - these include outcome measures, endpoints, and so-called ‘health-related quality of life’ measures. In Workshop 3, a patient organisation representative discussed an example related to the revision of clinical trial outcome measures: “[PE] has a core, at the level of the design of the outcome measure. We have an example from the duchenne community: in duchenne trials, it's the 6 min walking test, that measures the ability to walk, but many of the patients are already in a wheelchair [during the trial], so it leaves out a part of the population, plus for patients it's important to keep the mobility in their hands to be able to move the wheelchair, for young patients it's important to be connected with friends through the computer, so the duchenne community co-developed a measure, which was the movement of the upper limbs. So that module, it's a patient relevant outcome measure; patients were involved in its design, so the needs and the preferences of the community was there.”
In addition to the design of evaluation criteria, the conditions of evidence generating practices may be examined through PE. This includes consideration of the practical challenges of participating in clinical studies arising from their proposed design and methodologies. An example discussed at workshop 2 is summarised in the observational notes below: “An industry representative shared an example of PE where patients gave feedback on a clinical trial protocol. The patient input highlighted the foreseen burden of participating in the trial: to come to the site on an empty stomach, conduct 3.5 h of tests and then going to the lab to ‘get blood’ (a necessary blood transfusion). The patient suggested ordering the day differently, by getting blood first and then doing the study tests. When elaborating the value of the patient input, the industry representative claimed that no one else involved in designing the trial protocol had thought about the issue before, because ‘that's just how we've always done it.’”
Similar inputs help to interrogate trial procedures regarding their necessity to the development of meaningful and responsible evidence. HTA and industry practitioners told us that patients' framing of study design issues is valued highly: Because study designs likely follow routine or established study protocol practices, drug developers or evaluators may be less likely to pick up on issues created by a study's design (observations workshops 1/2). Other examples noted include the quality and readability of patient information and communication materials such as informed consent study recruitment documentation.
PE thus examines how patient needs and experiences are reflected in medicines' evidence generation plans. This has two main aspects: the first relates to the extent to which evidence of a medicine's value aligns with what patients consider as meaningful effects of a treatment; whilst the second refers the conditions under which evidence is constructed, responding to the practical realities of patients taking part in evidence-generating studies.
Project participants speak about the impact of PE as opening up the possibilities of evidence generation practices. For instance, where clinical data is produced, as well as the profile and diversity of clinical trial participants, and the extent to which these are reflective of the communities for whom the medicines are considered valuable: “the impact [of PE] regarding trials; It is not only about inclusion of underrepresented communities, but also about diversification of trial sites for example. The inclusion of underrepresented country sites” (Patient representative, case study 3)
We thus noted that “This illustrates the intertwined interests of producing more ‘appropriate’ evidence for HTA evaluations on the one hand and increasing patient access to emerging treatments through participation in clinical trials on the other.” (observational notes, case study 4)
This dimension of learning is more intimately tied to considerations of the legitimacy of different knowledges and actor perspectives in the medicines evaluation process. These considerations certainly include those perspectives steering the evaluation (and engagement) process. A HTA practitioner noted how PE tests prevailing assumptions held by HTA regarding what patients’ needs and expectations are: Rather than considering engagement inputs as representative of broader patient populations, engagement is seen as a means of exposing medicines evaluation practices to the diversities of patient experience, and the range of patient preferences for defining the value of new treatments. This translates into a confidence that medicines evaluation practices legitimately reflect the diverse sets of values and experiences of patient populations (observational notes, case study 5, 9). Whilst acknowledging that not all of these diversities can be fully addressed in evidence generation procedures, the industry representative below speaks of sustained engagement as a form of reflexive steering, continually examining how the procedures of medicines development and evaluation reflect the needs of patient communities. “we need to be all the time saying, 'Okay, we think we're going in that direction because [the patient community] told us, but please check, double check, double check.' And the discrepancy should be minimum. If there is some discrepancy, fine, perfect alignment is maybe not possible” (industry representative, case study 4)
One of the workshop participants explained how the integration of different perspectives can arise in deliberative settings. Here, the participant noted how patient and HTA perspectives could together interrogate industry's evidence generation plans regarding their relevance to patient experience. As well as providing feedback on how to produce more legitimate (relevant, appropriate) medicines evidence, the convergence of different framings in these communicative practices can lead to feedback considered to be more ‘robust’ (cf. Nowotny, 2003 ). This in turn ties to the confidence practitioners hold in the legitimacy of their own evaluations (workshop 1 observations).
Reflexive learning emphasises the dissolution of the roles of teachers and learners in favour of shared exploration of problems and solutions in deliberative settings. Whilst it does not represent a total revision of medicines development's extant power differentials, the patient (organisation) ‘ownership’ of engagement practice was seen as particularly valuable by some, summarised by an industry representative during a reflection meeting on the subject of an advisory board owned and run by the patient community: “The CAB [Community (patient) Advisory Board] has another pulse [compared to company run advisory boards] because it's not set up by us. I need that element - it's not us sitting in the driving seat, where we go out and reach where we should, it's different when you have it once or twice a year and you have to go and update. I think this is something that the CAB can achieve much more than a normal advisory board” (industry representative, case study 3)
The nature of our dataset restricts us from examining the extent to which current PE practices stimulate reflexive forms of learning in medicines development and evaluation. However, to continue the analysis, we consolidate the main drivers and obstacles to ‘meaningful’ PE practice with these considerations of reflexive learning in medicines development and evaluation contexts. In doing so, we build on the conceptual linkage of PE and reflexive learning.
A reflexive conceptualisation of learning allows us to consider ‘the relation between the social setting and the learning outcomes’ ( Feindt and Weiland, 2018 ) of PE arrangements. This section thus considers key landscape factors to sustained, meaningful reflexive learning in PE. We do not attempt to present a comprehensive overview of all contextual factors and disentangle their relations with PE. Rather, we provide some “thick descriptions” of the most salient circumstantial factors interpreted from our dataset as conditional to reflexive learning and ‘meaningful’ PE. These findings are developed through our general participation in the case studies, workshops, and other project activities.
PE may indeed articulate a novel understanding of health problems in comparison to ‘established’ framings in medicines development and evaluation. This sets the scene for alternative solutions to be explored in evidence generation practices which better reflect these. However, certain institutional boundaries determine the extent to which it is possible to translate diverse patient experiences, expectations and so on, into conventional evidence generation and evaluation practices. This includes, for instance, those drawn in the interests of practicing ‘rigorous’ regulatory science. Whilst PE may propose alternative or new evaluation criteria, such as the ‘patient-relevant’ outcome measures discussed earlier, clinical trial designers may feel obliged to use established, validated outcome measures and endpoints considered most relevant by regulatory authorities for assessing medicines' effects. Furthermore, whilst PE may highlight underrepresented patient populations and suggest their inclusion in evidence generating research, these suggestions may be impeded by intertwined regulatory notions of safety and quality: risk of participation of potentially vulnerable groups on one hand, and the potential confounding effect of ‘co-morbidities’ on the production of robust cause-and-effect treatment evidence on the other.
Debates in the field have now turned to the how engagement insights can navigate the boundaries drawn by ‘regulatory paradigms’ (cf. Davis and Abraham, 2011 ) to achieve more ‘meaningful’ impact on medicines development and HTA: “there is a significant impact of an ongoing dialogue with the community on CT [clinical trial] design, on inclusion criteria or what kind of endpoints … I think there's a lot of discussion right now on, can patient-relevant outcomes be better captured, more meaningfully, utilised afterwards, for access or for registration?” (Patient representative, case study 4)
The positioning of PE in relation to the medicines development process is considered crucial to its capacity to instigate revision and adaptation of evidence generating practices. This includes, for example, whether study protocols have already been approved for use and/or if trials have already been initiated. Early dialogues initiatives may also vary in their positioning within a medicines development trajectory. It is important to note here that HTA early dialogue is not a mandatory regulatory decision-making point, but rather a consultation service which developers can request from HTA bodies (see NICE, n.d. ). To be sure, some HTA agencies encourage developers to request early dialogues “prior to initiation of the pivotal trials for which advice is being sought”, so that “adjustments can still be made to trial protocols based on the feedback received” ( CADTH, n.d. )
The obstructive effects of engagement contexts can form the basis for further organisational reflection. This produces an opportunity for ‘double-loop’ forms of learning (cf. Argyris and Schön, 1996 ) in relation to PE initiatives and their value to medicines development, as discussed in this exchange (workshop 3): “I was thinking on the timing: the advice [from PE] was too late to be implemented. And then you do it earlier next time, and then you can implement it, so it gives you valuable information …” (Patient organisation representative) “for me it's part of the process of how you reach the implementation. You will have [patient] insight, you recognise those that can be implemented, you do them. And maybe there are things that at the moment cannot be implemented." (Industry representative) “and I think the exercise an organisation should have to do here is, if there are many recommendations (from PE) but only very few implemented, is an analysis to say, ‘okay what has happened with that, why are there so few recommendations implemented?’” (HTA representative)
Others suggest that patient critique of specific evidence generation procedures can contribute to a broader appreciation of patient needs within organisational networks responsible for producing and evaluating medicines evidence. “when you work together to improve the quality of evidence, the pharma mindset changes about patient needs, and the same for patients about pharma processes. So, it improves globally the process of learning … but it's a bit indirect: It's not directly about the quality of [evidence] you have achieved, but probably it gives more quality to what you are going to do later on” (industry representative, workshop 3)
This suggests a longer-term, organisational form of learning based on a sustained dialogue between patient- and other actors. In this way, the consideration of PE (and its learning outcomes) extends beyond discrete engagement ‘events’. A sustained dialogue reflects the strength of a relationship between certain governance actors.
The enrolment of actors within an organisational network is crucial for the construction of engagement practices. Engagement networks are contingent on how interests are mobilised or transformed to produce forms of social order (cf. Callon and Law, 1982 ) around specific disease areas and technologies.
The role of the patient organisation has therefore become a mediating one: they work to find suitable individuals to participate in engagement activities or organise PE initiatives themselves. This is where discrepancies are found between different disease contexts: Whilst longer term relations have been constructed around some disease networks (an obvious example in Europe/North America is the HIV/AIDS advocacy movement, which has led to the growth of patient organisations such as the European AIDS Treatment Group – EATG), many other disease areas are less likely to have existing patient organisations to mediate this interaction between patient communities and those conducting engagement activities.
In HTA, the recruitment of patients deemed ‘suitable’ for an engagement process is more difficult without existing relationships with relevant patient groups ( HTAi, 2019 : 10). Others suggest too that the ‘depth’ of PE's learnings could be affected by the maturity of organisational relationships (workshop 3 observations). The more established, longer-term relationships are naturally linked with sustained, organisational level learning. Furthermore, jurisdictional boundaries, such as those which define the scope of pharmaceutical technologies , also lead to divergent institutional arrangements which may impact on collective learning processes . Generic drugs , biosimilars , and preventive vaccines are ineligible for early dialogue with HTA agencies in some jurisdictions (see CADTH, n.d. ), for instance, which limits the possibility of instilling patient input within these particular streams of medical innovation.
Whose voices are deemed relevant and articulate enough for the engagement process? How are engaged patient actors considered as representative of wider patient communities? The inclusion of patients in the construction of medicines’ evidence raises questions related to how medicines users become performed in innovation and governance practices, and the implications of such for the trajectories of medicines development.
These questions reflect two interrelated problems of patient participation that the field concerns itself with. The first is about the extent to which engagement, involving relatively small numbers of individuals, can produce a well-formed representation of wider patient populations with invariably heterogenous experiences with illness and treatments. The second, a political problem, relates to the inclusion and acknowledgement of specific patient perspectives over others within innovation and governance processes. How engagement participants tend to represent more highly educated and affluent social groups – which reflects the mechanisms of their recruitment – was problematised by many in various case study meetings and workshop activities.
There are many strategies to address this. Some practices prioritise engaging with patient actors who have knowledge of the perspectives of wider patient communities, or in-depth knowledge of medicines development ( HTAi, 2019 : 32), others focus on inputs from individuals with deep first-hand disease experience.
Not only what they know, but how patients know can be the focus of critical reflection in PE. Here, the patient representative reflects on how their knowledge relates to other forms of expertise, and how this may be conditional to the engagement process and its learning outcomes: “we exchange a lot with different kind of people: scientists, academics, local branches of pharma, and we come to [PE] with already a sort-of background and culture … it's like my knowledge that I'm bringing to the meeting” (patient representative, case study 4)
When considering impact of PE, this points towards the contingency of the learnings and subsequent effects that arrangements, involving specific ‘patient frames’, are capable of producing.
Confidentiality also affects learning in PE. Whilst the extreme commercial sensitivities associated with medicines development processes challenge the recruitment of ‘suitable’ patients to participate in engagement practices ( HTAi, 2019 : 10), these sensitivities also delimit the discussion of direct examples of patients being engaged in specific early dialogues projects. Concurrently, rules of engagements may hinder the distribution of PE learnings across wider patient communities. “Before each meeting we sign a confidentiality agreement . And when you look at [PE's] impacts, I wonder if the confidentiality agreement that we all sign and respect (hopefully) is not a hurdle in what we want to achieve with communicating to our communities” (Patient organisation representative, case study 3)

Section: 4. Discussion

Trends in institutional HTA practice are moving towards more ‘upstream’ inputs of stakeholders to revise and refine the criteria for assessing health technologies ( Husereau et al., 2016 ). This means a more explicit focus of governance practices in reflexively steering technological development ( Webster, 2004 ) through shaping the organisation of evidence generation practices. Our findings show that whilst learning in PE serves to revise the cognitive representation of medicines' value within evaluation practices ( Stirling, 2006 ), a second dimension of reflexive learning involves critical examinations of the way institutional contexts frame the ways through which medicines come to be rendered as valuable. Analyses drawing from an analytical model of PE and reflexive learning can thus spotlight how entrenched, culturally bounded notions of legitimacy affect the way that PE can ‘meaningfully’ contribute to health technology innovation and governance. Whilst our analysis identified salient dimensions of reflexive learning in relation to the given dataset, we did not aim to propose a polished, prescriptive framework for assessing PE in HTA and medicines development. Rather, the analysis sets the tone for enquiry that effectively considers the relationship between the social setting and the learning outcomes of particular governance arrangements ( Feindt and Weiland, 2018 ). This includes PE as a situated activity within broader sociomaterial arrangements in a way that gives rise to the value of a technology as defined within institutional mechanisms such as HTA.
Contributions from science and technology studies ( Wynne, 1993 ) and reflexive governance ( Schot and Rip, 1997 ) call for upstream engagement and dialogue during the design of emerging technologies that instil a reflexive examining of their alignment with societal interests and values. Whilst practices that adapt and revise HTA's evidence base happen far more ‘downstream’ in the technology development process, a reflexive learning framework can support a richer conceptualisation of PE and HTA practice. By recognising the socio-political contexts in which HTA and PE are entangled, a reflexive learning framework extends beyond discrete engagement events and the characterisation of their specific impacts. Such a conceptualisation can serve in the organisation of PE practices that yield reflexive forms of learning needed to deliver meaningful engagements ( Abelson, 2018 ) and more value to HTA and health technology development.
Webster ( 2007 : 612) notes that social science critique highlighted ‘the paradox of HTA’, which ‘makes explicit the criteria used to review new technologies yet hides how such criteria are themselves rooted in methodological choices that privilege certain ways of seeing and knowing’ (see also Grin, 2004 ) . The development of initiatives that seek to revise and adapt HTA's evidence base implies some appreciation of these dominant frames' limited capacity in adequately representing health technologies through HTA. To reap the rewards of engagement arrangements in these contexts, reflexive forms of learning, as we outline here, are needed to organise the collective examination of how certain ways of seeing and knowing health technologies condition the production of evidence submitted to HTA and its assessment.
Whilst reflexive learning serves to open-up the design of criteria for evaluation, alternative solutions may still run into institutional boundaries drawn in the interests of producing rigorous regulatory science ( Lehoux, 2006 ; McNutt and Rayner, 2018 ). To better handle the complexities involved in valuing technologies, flexibility and experimentality need to be inscribed within institutional structures - this approach is called for in adaptive and reflexive governance literatures (see Voβ et al., 2006 ). These institutional contexts are always shifting. For example, recent collaborative initiatives between different HTA jurisdictions are also changing the ways that companies can gain feedback on evidence generation plans with perspectives from different healthcare markets (see CADTH, 2019 ).

Section: 5. Conclusion

Various social scientific accounts have emphasised the normative political dimensions of knowledge production and evaluation in medical technology development and HTA ( Lehoux and Blume, 2000 ; May, 2006 ; Williams et al., 2003 ). In this context, medicines evaluation and HTA are proposed as tools for ongoing reflection on how medical innovations meet the needs of future users in what Webster (2004) framed as a system of ‘reflexive innovation’. Here, reflexive learning mobilises the examining of legitimacy of developing technologies, plus HTA's agency in steering their development. As the co-shaping of evidence will become more prominent in the HTA paradigm, social scientists would do well to investigate how the techniques and materialities of health technology governance practices contribute to that process. The organisation of PE toward achieving reflexive forms of learning, outlined here, will surely contribute to facilitating a more critical, reflexive and engaged HTA that deals with the complexities of medicines evidence generation.

Section: Credit author statement

Callum Gunn: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing; Neil Bertelsen: Validation, Writing - Review & Editing; Barbara Regeer: Methodology, Supervision, Writing - Review & Editing; Tjerk Jan Schuitmaker-Warnaar: Conceptualization, Supervision, Investigation, Methodology, Writing - Review & Editing, Funding acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgements

This work has been financed by the IMI-PARADIGM project. PARADIGM (Patients Active in Research and Dialogues for an Improved Generation of Medicines) received funding from the Innovative Medicines Initiative 2 Joint Undertaking under grant agreement No 777450 . We thank the WP3 research team (Lea Darvey, Teresa Finlay, Sevgi Fruytier, Nicole Goedhart, Laiba Husain, and Lidewij Vat) and all WP3 partners for their contributions to the PARADIGM project. We are grateful to Ann Single and Jetske Erisman for their insightful comments on the drafts, and for the efforts taken by three anonymous reviewers and the editors in providing constructive and valuable feedback.
