Title: Aging workforce with reduced work capacity: From organizational challenges to successful accommodations sustaining productivity and well-being


Abstract: Abstract

Israel is experiencing accelerated workforce aging and increasing retirement age that began in the last two decades. Aging workers suffer from increased illness and impairment rates, challenging employing organizations with reduced work capacity. Occupational health practitioners often assist employers in accommodating these challenges. However, insufficient evidence on prognostic factors, organizational practices, and age management tools hamper successful accommodation. Research on the organizational perceptions of aging workers is also limited.
Our study aims to (1) identify the domains in which the aging workforce challenges Israeli organizations according to a multi-level theoretical model we developed, and (2) assess the practices employed by organizations to address the declines in work capacity from employers' and workers’ perspectives.
Our qualitative study employed semi-structured interviews of 26 employers and workers' representatives from eight Israeli organizations sampled by maximum variation according to organizational characteristics. Thematic framework analysis of organizational perceptions on challenges, facilitators, and practices in use, via aging workers’ cases was utilized.
We identified organizational challenges on five levels: individual worker, work environment , interpersonal team relationships, organization, and community relationships, stemming from the aging workers' reduced capacity to meet job demands and conditions. Time adjustments, work environment changes, and job task changes were common accommodations practices used by the organizations. Successful accommodations from the employers' perspective preserved workers' and teams' productivity, and from the workers’ perspective, those that lowered demand and improved job control without damaging earnings or job status.
Taken together, organizations from all economic sectors should prepare for the increasing need to accommodate work conditions for aging workers with limitations to preserve their health and safety. Balancing employers' and workers' perspectives when accommodating workers with reduced work capacity is imperative to promote healthy aging at the workplace. Government intervention is advised to encourage continued job participation to reduce employment termination.

Section: 1. Introduction

According to the OECD , labor force participation rates of workers aged 50 to 64 in EU countries increased from 36% in 2000 to 63% in 2020 ( OECD, 2020 ) ( Fig. 1 ). The increase in the participation of aging workers forces organizations to deal with the age-related increase in chronic health conditions and impairments, leading to higher disability rates and reduced work capacity. However, the impact of these conditions on work capacity ranges from minimal to incapacitating health problems, depending on job requirements and characteristics (J. Ilmarinen et al., 1997 ; Koolhaas et al., 2013 ). Reduced capacity to meet job demands often catalyzes premature exclusion from the job market, which results in adverse health and economic implications and increased dependency on social and disability benefits ( Van Rijn et al., 2014 ). Moreover, work conditions incongruent with reduced physical and mental abilities can further harm aging workers' health. Tertiary prevention level practices in occupational health focus on rehabilitation and accommodating the disability while preventing further health consequences. Organizations employ work accommodations practices, often assisted by occupational health clinicians' advice. Those practices aim to alleviate the mismatch between the reduced work capacity and the job tasks or conditions, accounting for the worker's physical and mental health state ( Palmer et al., 2007 ). Nevertheless, the consideration set in selecting the accommodation practices is broader than just health and safety considerations. Download: Download high-res image (279KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Labor force participation rate , in different countries among age group 55–64, % in same age group. Source: generated from OECD data ( https://data.oecd.org/emp/labour-force-participation-rate.htm ) ( OECD, 2020 ).
Organizations play a key role in promoting healthy continued work participation of the aging workforce. However, employers’ attitudes and concerns are not adequately covered in the scientific literature. . Moreover, despite the ongoing workforce aging, there is insufficient evidence in the literature regarding prognostic factors, organizational practices, and age management tools to preserve the work capacity of older workers, while maintaining their health. Therefore, our study explores the organizational perspectives, encompassing both employers' and workers' representatives' perspectives on the continued work participation of aging workers using qualitative tools. A qualitative approach was chosen as organizations are complex constructs requiring a multidimensional investigation. Secondly, the qualitative approach is suitable for our study, which attempts to answer what the challenging contexts are in which different practices are being employed and why and by whom they are regarded as less or more successful. Seeking an in-depth understanding of the organizational perceptions from a multi-level lens and revealing new viewpoints are beyond what quantitative methods can detect.
Only a few studies utilize qualitative tools to study the participation of aging workers with impairments and reduced work capacity, and they focus on the individual worker's perspective on his or her self-adaptations used ( Boot et al., 2016 ; Leijten et al., 2013 ; E. S. Ng and Law, 2014 ; Sanders, 2018 ). Durand and colleagues studied the broader organizational point of view, and included four heterogeneous focus groups with workers: employers, health insurers, health professionals, and union representatives. They found that the capacity of aging workers to meet job demands, along with personal and economic considerations, were perceived as the main factors that motivated aging workers to return/stay at work after a prolonged sickness absence ( Durand et al., 2021 ). That study, however, overlooked the employers' perspectives on that process and did not discuss the successes or policies at the organizational level besides the need to reduce work tasks and allow more pace control.
Israel is a modern economy with a growing service sector (∼80%), a declining industrial sector (∼20), medium unionization rates (25–30% of workers), protective labor laws , a developed welfare system, and a designated retirement age. This is comparable to other OECD countries, such as the Netherlands, the UK, Canada, and Australia. Nevertheless, the Israeli workforce has faced an accelerated demographic age increase during the past decades, with a higher participation rate of older cohorts than in the US and Europe ( OECD, 2020 ). According to Israeli law, every worker and employer is entitled to occupational health services in community-based clinics, with no copay, as part of the general universal healthcare system ( Rinsky-Halivni et al., 2019 ). Therefore, occupational physicians are widely involved in assisting employers in accommodating work conditions for workers with functional limitations. The universal occupational health system serves a diversity of populations and industries , and the aging workforce, makes Israel ideal for research evaluating the clinical and occupational interphase of the aged workers.
The socio-ecological model ( Bronfenbrenner, 1992 ), modified to the work environment and characteristics, and based on clinical knowledge and literature review, was used as a guiding conceptual framework ( Fig. 2 ). The model depicts the multi-level domains in which the aging workforce presents challenges to the organizations. It incorporates the challenges related to reduced work capacity in several nested levels. The individual level of health and psychology of the aging worker is nested within his or her work environment and demands, as well as the wider team relationships context. The organization is at the macro level, focused on economic and social characteristics. Finally, the relationships with occupational medicine are at the community level, also encompassing larger societal aspects. Download: Download high-res image (567KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Modified Socio-ecological conceptual model: the multi-level domains which challenge organizations with an aging workforce experiencing reduced work capacity.
The study objectives are to: (1) gain insight into the challenges organizations face with the aging workforce regarding declines in work capacity; (2) explore the tertiary prevention workplace practices employed by various organizations to accommodate the work environment of these workers; and (3) understand why some practices are perceived as more successful than others, either by organizations or workers. Our conceptual model guided our in-depth understanding of the multi-level dynamics of challenges and practices evaluated. Our overall aim is to establish policy and practice recommendations to accommodate age disabilities that organizations and occupational health practitioners can use to promote continued work participation.

Section: 2. Methods

We employed a qualitative approach based on thematic framework analysis that allows for pre-designed themes to derive from research questions and conceptual framework. This method is also flexible in generating inductive interview-driven new themes and patterns. Moreover, this method is ideal for describing and interpreting a particular setting while translating the deep understanding gained to other contexts ( Ritchie and Spencer, 2002 ; Srivastava and Thomson, 2009 ). The consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ) were adhered to in the analysis and in reporting the findings ( Tong et al., 2007 ).
In-depth interviews were conducted with eight organizations in Israel employing at least 100 workers from varied ownership, industry sectors, and geographical distribution (local and national). The central offices of most of the organizations were in Jerusalem or Tel-Aviv, the two biggest cities in Israel, which are the central business centers. Were interviewed 26 employer's and employees' representatives employed in various locations: central offices or company branches in peripheral regions.
Workers' representatives in our research are employees of an organization whose fellow workers elect through democratic elections, and volunteer to represent the worker's interests, often under the auspices of the trade union. Workers' representatives play a critical link between the workers, supervisors, and management.
The employer representatives were either human resources (HR) personnel or senior management representative, both have a dual role. On the one hand, they are committed to the employer, considering financial, service, product quality, timeline, streaming aspects, etc. On the other hand, they are responsible for the health and safety of their workers and the disability act (“The Labor Inspection law, 1954” and “Equal Rights for Persons with Disabilities Law, 1998”, respectively).
We selected organizations with ≥100 employees by purposive sampling from a list of organizations serviced by the Israeli public occupational medicine system (includes most medium and big companies in Israel). We selected larger organizations to raise the probability of encountering enough cases of challenged work capacity of aging workers (age 50 and above), while allowing higher confidential and anonymous discussion of workers' cases. For maximal variation, the organizations chosen were from a variety of ownerships (public, non-profit organizations (NPO), and private), geographical dispersion (local, national), economic sectors (according to Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities), and size (small- <500 employees, medium- 500–999, large- ≥1000).
Two companies declined to participate, without indicating why. Following the researchers' perception after interviewing six organizations that saturation would be impaired due to a possible lack of representation, two other organizations were added according to the selection criteria to reach eight participating organizations overall.
Data were collected through semi-structured open-ended interviews. The interview guide was based on a literature review and the clinical experience of the research team. The preliminary interview guide was adjusted following a pilot interview in a non-participating company and discussions with organizational researchers. For a translated short version of the interview guide, see the appendix. Employers (HRs or management) and workers' representatives' (union stewards or local representatives) were interviewed separately in each organization. The PI held the interviews. All interviews were conducted in Hebrew, either in person in the workplace or via Zoom at home or the workplace (according to interviewees' choice) during the summer of 2021. The median duration was 60 min (range 43–85 min). The interviews were audio-recorded, transcribed, and de-identified. The interviewer quality assured transcription by random sampling short segments from a quarter of the interviews. Code saturation was reached after interviewing 21 participants as 90% of all emergent themes had been identified or developed with few changes in the codebook thereafter.
Transcribed data were analyzed in the language of the interviews, Hebrew. Framework thematic analysis was performed using ATLAS.ti22 software to facilitate data and code management. Both employers and workers transcripts were analyzed individually under the same project. After data familiarization, broad categories pre-defined by the topic guide and conceptual framework were created. Inductive themes emerged from data that did not fit the initial categories.
Several steps were undertaken to ensure the trustworthiness of the research. Purposive sampling of a range of participants in various roles employed in varied organizations was used to ensure the representation of diverse players in the aging workers' scene in organizations. At the analysis level, after harmonizing the coding method, two co-coders applied the initial codebook, built iteratively by the PI, independently to four transcribed interviews each. A consensus refined codebook was achieved through discussions, including colleagues external to the study. Intercoder reliability was performed using the refined codebook to ensure coding consistency. The research team analyzed the texts, continuously developing the scheme both independently and jointly. Data were then charted and sorted according to the key issues emerging from the research question and interviews. Data were mapped and interpreted to find associations. Selected quotes in Hebrew were translated to English, and their accuracy was validated. The findings’ summary was shared with the participants for their remarks.
Multidisciplinary research team members maintain different positions and backgrounds. All researchers have training in qualitative studies. The PI is an occupational medicine specialist in the Israeli public system and a subject matter expert in accommodations for workers. The other research team members included a health policy economist, an occupational medicine specialist and researcher, a health management researcher, and an educational psychologist. The data analysis stage was performed jointly by the research group.
Ethics approval for the study was obtained from the research ethics committee of the Faculty of Medicine at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Organizational consent was obtained before setting up the interviews. Informed consent was obtained from all interviewees, who were assured confidentiality and anonymization. Transcripts were also anonymized regarding organizations' identities.

Section: 3. Results

Table 1 presents the participants’ characteristics. The organizations varied in ownership (3 public, 2 non-profits, 3 private), geographical dispersion (4 local, 3 nationals, 1 international), size (3 small, 2 medium and 3 large), economic sector (health, manufacturing, entertainment, and public administration), and the extent of the aging workforce. Our interviewees ( Table 2 ) included two managers, 16 HR personnel, and eight workers' representatives (most serving as official union stewards). Table 1 . Organization's characteristics. Organization Characteristics No. of Organizations (n = 8) Employer type (Ownership) Public 3 Non-Profit-Organization 2 Private 3 Geographical dispersion Local 4 National 3 International a 1 Organization Size (no. of employees) <500 3 500-999 2 >1000 3 Economic Sector (CBS coding) Health 2 Manufacturing 2 Art and entertainment 2 Public administration 2 Proportion of employees over 50 y (12–38%) <20% 1 20–30% 2 >30% 4 a Israeli branches only. Table 2 . Participant's characteristics. Interviewer Characteristics No. of Participants (n = 26) Age 30-40 1 40-50 12 50-60 12 60-70 1 Gender Female 21 Male 5 Role Manager 2 Human Resource (HR) 16 Worker's representative 8
Cases of aging workers with a reduced work capacity and their management in the organizational context were analyzed to evaluate their success from the employers' and workers' perspectives. Fig. 3 depicts the themes, sub-themes, and categories arising from the aging workers' cases described by the employers and workers’ representatives. The figure illustrates how the identified challenges (Panel A) drive the organization to employ practices (Panel B) to address the reduced work capacity and the (Panel C) evaluation of these actions from the employer and worker perspectives. Download: Download high-res image (743KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Challenges, accommodation practices, and outcome evaluation . Identified challenges related to reduced work capacity of aging workers, organizational accommodation practices employed, and their evaluation from different perspectives.
Organizations experience challenges in the form of various conditions that lead to reduced work capacity and its consequences and necessitate accommodations. We adapted our nested five-level conceptual model ( Fig. 2 ) to deductively guide our thematic analysis to identify the domains in which the aging workforce challenges the organizations. The five sub-themes included individual worker level, work environment , interpersonal relationships , organization level, and community level relationships. Fig. 3 (panel A) extracts the inductively obtained categories from the cases discussed, according to the pre-defined challenge domains from the theoretical model. (1) Individual worker level
Health problems subthemes included chronic health conditions, cognitive declines, circadian rhythm disorders, fatigue, and reduced endurance. Musculoskeletal and mental health disorders were the most common specific health conditions described as affecting the work capacity of the aging workforce. Endocrine disorders were correlated with circadian rhythm imbalance, which often followed time-related accommodations such as reduced night shifts. Cognitive decline was mentioned differently from the usual clinical context of a severe disorder (“dementia”). It was described as a subtle, gradual physiological age-related decrease in functioning in white-collar jobs with high cognitive demands, those that require high concentration, learning abilities, and memory. “ At age 50, you see a significant cognitive decline in managing large volumes of data … " (Worker's representative, public sector).
Though not exclusive to older workers, burnout is considered a major challenge, described in job contexts as stagnation and monotonous work over the years, high psychological pressure (even “post-trauma”), and effort-reward imbalance. Moreover, burnout was accompanied by negative attitudes such as dissatisfaction and frustration related to low self-efficacy and poor motivation to fulfill job duties. “There is mental burnout which in some of the older employees is very significant … difficulty in regulating emotions and bearing the personal, familial, and professional loads … Eventually, we retain highly dissatisfied workers" (HR, NPO).
Burnout was correlated with cumulative exposure to stressors related to the long-term work-life imbalance mentioned among female workers: “ We are an organization with a female majority … You get into it from a very young age, so when the kids arrive … you sleep just 4 h. You sleep very little, work a lot, juggle … sometimes husbands are less available … a careerist woman knows well that she goes to a place like this. But it has the prices … future burnout” (HR, NPO). (2) Work environment
A mismatch between the reduced work capacity of aged workers and their job tasks dictates the accommodation of working conditions or job demands. Organizations experience this mismatch as reduced ability to cope with physical demands, work schedule (night shifts or overtime), psychological demands (stress, workload, and trauma), changes (e.g., in work practices and demands), and hazardous work environments. In addition, organizations perceive the technological changes that modern labor markets are going through as a significant challenge that reduces aging workers' productivity. “I think the core of the productivity problem is attributed to the technological aspect. They are good at decision-making, but some professions don't need it, and the technological aspect is crucial” (Worker's representative, public sector). (3) Interpersonal relationships at the team level
Interpersonal relationships occur at the workers' department or team level. Aging workers' reduced work capacity was often linked to an increased burden on co-workers and supervisors, a consequence of efforts at the unit level to compensate for the reduced productivity. “The worker does not do some of the work. We're just loading up on another worker … we fail to retain our young workers because their workload is higher than it should be …“ (HR, NPO). Likewise, burnout associated with negative attitudes was related to demoralization effects on co-workers.
Under the relational spectrum, intergenerational conflicts between the aging workers and supervisors, especially if younger, were linked to psychological strain and further declines in work capacity. (4) Organizational level
At the organizational level, health conditions and age impairments were reflected as indirect and direct costs. Indirect costs were the primary costs. They included the workers' reduced productivity, sickness absence , lowered service orientation, and the inability to backfill positions ( e.g. , an underutilized position of a worker on disability absence that cannot be filled). Productivity loss could also extend to the team level because of the burden on co-workers or demoralization related to the individual case. Direct costs include hiring an extra worker (rare), organizational expenditures for tangible accommodations, and worker's training when needed. High wages related to seniority and reduced work capacity constitute another monetary concern among certain organizations. “For us, it is expressed in terms of outputs. That means the average person does X per hour, so with fatigue, it can be X minus Y" (Manager, private sector).
Transparent disability is reflected as an indirect cost. It stands for overlooked work disability that is not accommodated and damages either the employer or the aging worker's health (if the worker remains in the same harmful conditions). “The issue is resolved at the lower level, at the district level. Because the manager does not demand and the employee cannot perform, he does not [fulfill the job task]." (HR, public sector).
Safety issues are regarded as a red line in the organization's risk management that must be addressed. “Often, the supervisor notices that they are confused at night, with a decrease in concentration that becomes dangerous … several such cases the night shifts were discontinued” (HR, private sector).
Work accidents were mentioned in the context of aging workers who were highly motivated to perform work tasks and even beyond, but disregarded their decline in physical capabilities. Workers' representatives also noted a long recovery time from such injuries. (5) Community level relationships
The interviews demonstrated the influential effect of the occupational physician's recommendation on the type of adjustments needed and their implementation by the organization. “Supervisors say: I cannot take on the responsibility - I need a doctor to tell me what the worker is allowed and what he is not allowed to do.” (HR, private sector).
Nevertheless, criticisms of the occupational medicine-employer relationships were a repeated theme, as many organizations and workers in Israel rely on the public occupational medicine service, which is external to the organization. HR gave examples in which occupational physicians' recommendations for accommodations were perceived as unreasonable, detached from the organizational context, and challenging to implement. In some cases, the physician's recommendation was criticized as too detailed and therefore limited the flexibility of the organization's carry it out, exposing the worker to termination of employment. The need for improved communication between parties was also emphasized. “To retain workers adequately, a physician needs to understand the needs of the worker and the needs of the employer … it will be easier for us to have a real dialogue between us and the occupational physician to find the right solutions” (HR, NPO).
Interviewees also reflected on the advantages of employing aging workers: experience and knowledge were a common theme to all interviewees; loyalty to the organization; job engagement; diversity and intergenerational collaboration; and work flexibility due to less working time constraints. However, these perceived advantages were modest in magnitude relative to the challenges described above.
The organizations employed time-related, work environment , and job task accommodations: • Time-related accommodations include reducing working hours, overtime, shift work (especially night shifts), a flexible work schedule, and frequent breaks. • Changes in the work environment include ergonomics or assistive aids and changes in workplace constructions (“tangible changes”), as well as working from home (teleworking). • Organizations frequently used job task alternation by modifying existing job duties or allocating the worker to another job which suits or adjusted to the worker's limitations. Modifications of job duties, meaning allowing the worker to skip some of the job demands, were commonly involved with task take-over by co-workers and were often initiated at the local supervisor level.
Many practices were used to accommodate various health conditions and age impairments, with the general aim of alleviating physical and/or psychosocial strain. However, practices, such as night shift exemption, specific job task reduction, or ergonomic aids, were employed to address a specific challenge. Combinations of different accommodations were often used when one practice failed.
Despite the emphasis on accommodation practices to retain aging workers with reduced work capacity, there were cases where employment termination was the preferred practice. Employment termination is considered a legitimate practice when there is a significant mismatch between work capacity and demand, and barriers to alternative job allocation exist. Whether through dismissal or early retirement schemes, termination methods depend on work agreements, pension schemes, social benefits , and diverse organizational considerations. “[The physician] from the occupational medicine clinic said, “He can't lift weights” and he had to lift significant weights … it was like saying that this person cannot work at the warehouse … There are situations where we cannot make the work accommodations”( HR, private sector).
From the employer's standpoint, successful accommodation was related chiefly to restoring work productivity or maintaining it at an acceptable level. Therefore, employers positively evaluated practices of an alternative job or substituting job duties that utilized existing knowledge and experience. Nevertheless, there is sometimes a discrepancy between the employer's and the worker's perceptions of what is regarded as a successful accommodation. For example, a field worker was allocated to a successful administrative alternative job that accommodated his health problem and preserved productivity by utilizing his experience and knowledge. However, his dissatisfaction (“He is doing great, but his soul wasn't in the job”) led to his injury and subsequent productivity loss (workers' representative, public sector).
Employers also positively perceived accommodations related to a flexible schedule, rest periods, and work environment, which often preserved productivity. In contrast, accommodations that help the worker function at lower levels, such as reducing work hours or job duties, were perceived as manageable, mainly if temporary or to a minor extent. “The workload falls on the co-worker because the work needs to be done … When it is for a short period and temporary, there is a greater capacity to tolerate that accommodation” (HR, public sector).
Moreover, such accommodations were typically regarded as highly undesirable if associated with a high burden on co-workers and supervisors, further exhausting them and potentially affecting the team's productivity and retention at the workplace.
Most accommodations used in cases of de-motivated workers related to burnout, negative attitudes, and lower mental well-being were regarded as less successful. These cases, involving reduced productivity that occasionally extended to the team level due to co-workers’ demoralization, often led to employment termination. “It ruined the department. … It strongly affects the environment. They got reduced night shifts; work breaks as needed …” (HR, private sector). However, interpersonal team relationships can also play a positive role, as most organizations argue that the supervisors successfully accommodated challenges less formally, at the team level, with the assistance of co-workers.
Allocating an aging worker to an alternative job is a challenging practice for the employer and often perceived as unsuccessful, especially if an appropriate alternative job matching the worker's skills and health limitations is not in hand. “ We have the headcount issue because every employer has a designated number of employees … I can only allow these accommodations if I have a vacancy that can fit the employee's skills and abilities” (HR, public sector).
From the worker's standpoint, as interpreted by the employer and workers' representatives, less successful accommodation reduces earnings, job status and prestige (demotion) and involve a significant change to adapt or accompany low self-efficacy to learn the new job requirements. “It is not obvious that a worker will agree (to an alternative position). A worker, from a high-rank position, thinks - I was in charge of the department … and now who am I?“ (HR, public sector).
From the worker's perspective, a successful practice reduces workload/job demands with minimal implications on income, promotes job control latitude, enhances enthusiasm, improves the quality of life and well-being, and maintains social work-life and health.
“Instead of an early-retirement scheme desired by the managers, as union tenders, we try to help a burned-out (aging) employee with reduced productivity by re-allocation to an alternative job, to keep employment. There are lonely people. We see that being alone at home is unhealthy”. (Worker's representative, public sector).
Workers’ perceptions of reduced working hours (a part-time position) were equivocal. They were perceived as a success only if they were economically compensated.
“(The worker) for his part will be content … He gets (paid sick leave), or he has private insurance for partial disability (covering reduced work hours accommodation) … At these levels of tenure, the salary is high. So, even if he loses some benefits, nothing will happen" . (Worker's representative, public sector).
Early retirement and dismissal were mainly perceived as reducing earnings and less desirable.

Section: 4. Discussion

Our qualitative study fills the gap in the organizational perceptions of employers and workers’ representatives on (1) what challenges they face with their aging workforce related to declines in work capacity and (2) why certain practices employed to accommodate these challenges are viewed as more successful, and from whose perspective.
Challenges experienced in the Israeli organizations ranged in context from the individual worker, the work environment, interpersonal team relations, the organization macro-level, and their external relations with the occupational medicine professionals. In many cases, the challenges outweigh the advantages, leading to employment termination by dismissal or early retirement.
Perceived successful accommodations from the employers' perspective preserve workers' and team's productivity. From the workers‘ perspective, they lower demand and improve job control, without damaging earnings or job status.
Incongruence between employers' and workers' perspectives can compromise the accommodation process. Furthermore, it can place the organization at risk of productivity loss and demotivation extending to the team level, and reduce the worker's satisfaction and well-being. Therefore, it is imperative for the occupational physician to consider both the employer's and the worker's needs when making recommendations, and for the organization to modify practices to promote healthy aging at the workplace.
The literature indicates that employers occasionally perceive the efforts and costs imposed on organizations by aging workers with reduced work capacity to exceed the benefits of retaining them ( Durand et al., 2021 ). Accordingly, the organizational support to accommodate the work disability challenges among aging workers may be hindered. Our study classified the challenges related to reduced work capacity according to a five-level theoretical framework ( Fig. 2 ), allowing for between-level dynamics.
At the individual level, the organizational discourse on challenges rarely focused on an exact clinical diagnosis of a health problem. Instead, it focused on general symptoms, such as fatigue, perceived as either a “natural” aging process of reduced endurance or accompanying chronic health conditions or various functional limitations (“difficulty in prolonged standing”). This ambiguity is related to the employee's right by law to medical confidentiality, often preventing disclosure of the specific illness to the employer. Hence, at the community level , the crucial role of the occupational physician with access to clinical data, is to explain to the employer the functional work limitations and health risks resulting from the worker's medical condition and the working condition adjustments required. Additionally, this discourse reflects the paradigm shift in work capacity assessments from the medical model towards the integrative ICF (International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health) model incorporating the different work and societal demands ( Bickenbach et al., 2015 ; J. E. Ilmarinen, 2001 ).
Though not exclusive to aging workers, burnout was perceived as a major challenge with aging. This corroborates research relating burnout to longer time on the job and reduced tolerance to stress associated with aging ( Durand et al., 2021 ; T. W. Ng and Feldman, 2010 ) and to aging workers' retirement ( Jacobs and Piyapromdee, 2016 ). At the work environment level, burnout is explained by prolonged exposure to work stressors without adequate work environment attention to reducing these stressors. In addition, we found a persistent link between burnout, negative attitudes , reduced work motivation , and adverse accommodations outcomes, also supported by Knafer et al. ( Kanfer et al., 2013 ). An intriguing sub-theme raised by female workers representatives from both the public and private sectors was burnout among the female workers . They related burnout to long-standing exposure to stressors such as work-home imbalance and lower salaries for women. Both are associated with social norms represented at the community level: the women's responsibility for children and/or aging parents (often associated with fewer working hours resulting in lower salaries) ( Durand et al., 2021 ) and the gender wage gap ( Grimshaw and Rubery, 2015 ). Specifically, childcare is a stressor that often eases with aging, as interviewees highlighted fewer time constraints as an advantage of the aging workforce. However, research is inconsistent regarding the gender distribution of burnout, probably explained by gender-related work contexts that need to be accounted for ( Maslach et al., 2001 ; Quinn and Smith, 2018 ). Our findings warrant further research focusing on gender inequity among the aging workforces.
Unlike the classic literature demonstrating that declining workability with age is apparent in physically demanding work contexts (J. Ilmarinen et al., 1997 ), we found that age challenges at the work environment level are being experienced across job and industry sectors: labor-intensive jobs due to mismatch of capabilities to high physical demands, accompanied by increased risks for work accidents and safety issues; white-collar jobs requiring lifelong learning due to mismatch of capabilities to high cognitive demands; and all sectors in the modern labor market are challenged with burnout and difficulties coping with novel technological demands. Accordingly, researchers argue that implementing new technology often leads to more challenges for the aging workforce than advantages (J. E. Ilmarinen, 2001 ). However, technology can sometimes compensate for the reduced work capacity ( Sheng et al., 2022 ).
Reciprocity exists between the individual and team levels : inter-generational conflicts can reduce the individual's productivity and motivation; the individual's reduced work capacity and burnout can place a burden on co-workers. Accordingly, the literature described “burnout infection” in healthcare teams ( Bakker et al., 2005 ; Maslach et al., 2001 ). The US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) recognizes the need for supportive work culture for multi-generations through education to reduce ageism and promote intergenerational collaboration, and age management training for supervisors (J. E. Ilmarinen, 2001 ; Schulte et al., 2018 ). At the organization level , in accordance with safety concerns we reported, the literature demonstrated more severe work-related injuries among aging than younger workers, affected the organization with longer sickness absence, healthcare costs, and overload consequences on co-workers ( Silverstein, 2008 ; Stoesz et al., 2020 ). At the community level , the literature also points to insufficient communication between the occupational physicians and the organizations regarding recommended accommodations ( Halonen et al., 2017 ; Schmidt et al., 2015 ).
Individual-team level spectrum -employers evaluate accommodations outcomes along a spectrum ranging from the individual worker to the team level. For example, loss of productivity, highly ranked among employers' considerations, is perceived as more severe if extended to the team level rather than confined to individual loss. Likewise, is the spectrum of workers’ negative motivation to team level demoralization. Accordingly, accommodations that negatively affect co-workers due to burden or demoralization are perceived as less successful and associated with high turnover and risk for their health and well-being. The literature that has examined the team effects of sickness absence demonstrated larger peer effects of absenteeism spillover among high workload occupations ( Godøy and Dale-Olsen, 2018 ).
Direct costs - The direct costs of certain accommodations appear to be a less significant factor in their evaluation. Hence, the direct cost of the rarely used practice of hiring a replacement worker to compensate for reduced productivity (reduced work hours or tasks) should be weighed against the consequences of co-workers’ overload.
Multiple factors affect the perceived success of work accommodations from the workers' perspective. Therefore, accommodation should underline not only the worker's economic considerations but also job status (prestige), demands (workload), socialization vs. loneliness (e.g., working from home), job interest and enthusiasm, and job control and flexibility. These findings are aligned with the literature indicating that non-monetary benefits of work (satisfaction, interest, significance, and social connections) are valued as 40% higher among aging compared to younger workers ( Axelrad et al., 2016 ). Nevertheless, preserving earnings was highly prioritized, often overweighing quality-of-life considerations, explained by economic security concerns after retirement. Workers weighed the dynamic interplay between outcome characteristics: job demands versus control (autonomy, flexibility) and effort (reflected as reduced workload/demands and new job learning efforts) versus reward (income) balance, underlying Karaseks' and Siegrist's models for job stress, respectively ( Karasek et al., 1981 ; Siegrist et al., 2004 ). Though perceived as a lower priority for workers in the literature, autonomy is consistently related to aging workers' retention and successful work accommodations ( Boot et al., 2016 ; Koolhaas et al., 2013 ; Leijten et al., 2013 ). Self-efficacy was described as the workers' perceived ability to perform the new tasks or job they were allocated following an accommodation. As supported in the literature, we demonstrated an association of self-efficacy with motivation level and attitudes toward the role ( Kanfer et al., 2013 ). The worker's attitude spectrum ranged from job enthusiasm - encouraging adopting an accommodation despite prominent drawbacks, to dissatisfaction-discouraging an advantaged one. However, dissatisfaction was also viewed as a background worker characteristic, regardless of the accommodation. A qualitative study in the Netherlands evaluating adjustments from the workers' lens supported the latter, linked low job satisfaction with failure to regain productivity, irrespective of whether accommodation was undertaken ( Leijten et al., 2013 ). Our study found loneliness as consideration for accepting accommodations to keep working. Loneliness, a consequence of social isolation , is a recurring motif in old age associated with adverse health outcomes ( Hawkley and Cacioppo, 2007 ). The importance of work for social relations and support was confirmed among older workers with health conditions ( Boot et al., 2016 ; Koolhaas et al., 2013 ; E. S. Ng and Law, 2014 ; Sanders, 2018 ).
Work environment changes , which were hardly used for tertiary prevention, are regarded as positive for both employer and worker despite some costs. Improving the workplace ergonomic environment in the office and manual work context promotes health and productivity. It can compensate for age impairments and prevent further declines in productivity and costs related to work injuries ( LaDou and Harrison, 2021 ; Roper and Yeh, 2007 ).
Telework (working from home) was advantageous to the worker (high autonomy in working time and location), and for employers (reporting increased productivity and workers satisfaction and decreased absenteeism). Nevertheless, an impression of reluctance toward teleworking was raised among some aging workers due to social isolation and technological difficulties. Teleworking practice use has arisen following the COVID-19 pandemic. However, this practice is limited in the service sector to white-collar workers without in-person public reception or certain office-based professions in the industry and organizations with established frameworks and arrangements for remote work ( Belzunegui-Eraso and Erro-Garcés, 2020 ).
Time-related practices elevating schedule flexibility were mostly successful for the employer (maintaining productivity) and worker (promoting control and quality of life), aligned with HR literature linking those practices with productivity maintenance ( Kooij et al., 2014 ).
Reduced working hours practice was often unfavorable for both parties: employers because of individual and potentially team level productivity loss and workers if accompanied by reduced earnings. If compensated, it resulted in significant incongruence between employers' and workers’ perspectives. Nevertheless, part-time arrangements were positively perceived after retirement age, when a worker is financially secured with old-age allowance, and in the context of unique skill or profession, alleviating the productivity issues, as supported by the literature ( Sewdas et al., 2017 ).
Alternative job allocation inherently involves the efforts of several stakeholders higher in the organizational hierarchy and is rarely accomplished at the team level. Employers' appraisal ranged from successful productivity maintenance by utilizing the worker's existing experience and knowledge, to challenging training processes and unavailability of jobs compatible with skills and health status, frequently leading to employment termination.
Utilizing the aging worker's experience to guide younger workers was suggested, although this is not used much in practice despite literature describing its potential to restore productivity ( Kooij et al., 2014 ). Training challenges stem from reporting on workers' reluctance to accommodations requiring much learning, which was linked to reduced learning capabilities and low self-efficacy. Older age was negatively associated with training performance and interests ( Truxillo et al., 2015 ). Therefore, the development of training programs adjusted to older workers' needs should be researched. Unavailability of an alternative job was more frequent among low-skilled manual workers and less related to the severity of the age impairment. This implies that early prevention stage could address this challenge, via lifelong development practices such as career development and training opportunities.
The successful aging concept, conceptualized from case studies of the elderly, models individual-level traits associated with sustaining abilities longer throughout life ( Truxillo et al., 2015 ). Similarly, we modeled solutions for successful workplace aging from examples of how organizations experience, respond and adjust to the age-related declines in work capacity. We found no one-size-fits-all solution. Instead, successful outcomes were achieved by tailoring accommodations to address a challenge in context, while balancing workers’ and employers' needs. Such customized solutions require effective collaboration between organization participants (HR, managers, supervisors, and union representatives) and advising occupational health clinicians, as previously emphasized ( Halonen et al., 2017 ; Schmidt et al., 2015 ). Understanding the organizational standpoint is a prerequisite to such a collaboration.
Additionally, organizational perceptions of potentially successful accommodations included leveraging the advantages of aging workers for the organization's benefit, such as the underused mentoring roles for young employees, hence preserving individual and departmental-level productivity and organizational memory while respecting employee job status and knowledge and experience gained over the years.
A novel multi-level conceptual framework was presented that facilitates understanding and managing challenges. Context-customized, practical implications were formulated that balance workers' and employers' needs without compromising health and safety. The qualitative design allows one to identify complex contexts and understand motivations from several perspectives on under-researched phenomena. Rigorous qualitative methodology –using COREQ guidelines, data saturation, iterative code process involving several coders, sampling verity of organizations characteristics and work environments, provided a rich sample that reached theme saturation, triangulation of researcher's discipline and participants.
First, inferences and generalizations should be made cautiously, considering the Israeli workforce context. Nevertheless, comparable OECD countries share similar labor economy characteristics. Second, while focusing the interviews on the challenges, we might have missed easy solutions in some situations, and underestimated the perceived advantages of aging workers. Third, the PI served as an interviewer, raising the risk of social desirability bias while interviewing. However, the PI is not an in-house physician employed by the organizations where interviews took place. Moreover, interviewees were of high rank/upper management level. Forth, the participating HR professionals may miss other less formal types of accommodations used, though most of them shared cases that were solved at the team level.

Section: 5. Practical implications

Our findings have several practical implications for organizations and occupational health practitioners, and directions for future research . 1. Our multi-level integrated framework ( Fig. 2 ) can assist in understanding and accommodating challenges with the aging workforce. 2. Once health and safety concerns are addressed, designing effective accommodations requires attention to the workers' and employers' needs. Adopting underused practices that maintain their mutual benefit, such as utilizing aging workers' mentoring roles, is recommended. 3. Collaboration between occupational health practitioners and organizations is crucial for their shared goal of healthy, productive aging at the workplace. Therefore, health practitioners must increase their communication efforts and comprehension of organizational views to meet workers' and employers' needs. 4. Aging preparedness: The aging of the workforce and the challenges this presents in the workplace heightens organizations' accountability for workers' health and safety. Therefore, organizations should prepare for the increasing need to accommodate working conditions for aging workers with impairments and to incur the related costs of preserving aging workers' productivity, health, and well-being. 5. Age management: We anticipate that age management will become a part of every organizational inclusion and diversity effort. As workers' dismissal increases societal costs (retirement and disability benefits, health service coverage), state intervention is advised to encourage accommodation and promotion of a supportive work environment. 6. Further research: This qualitative study generated new hypotheses about the organizational challenges and considerations in accommodating them, demonstrating that one-size does not fit all, and individual, work environment, and organizational differences should be considered. Therefore, large-scale studies focusing on specific economic sectors and work conditions, involving other players in the organization (e.g., supervisors and co-workers, individual aging workers) and include economic evaluations, are warranted to test our hypotheses empirically. This would contribute to providing evidence to formulate tailored policy and practice recommendations. In addition, this study focused on tertiary prevention practices, which failed in particular contexts. Hence future research should explore the primary and secondary prevention of long-term organizational policies and unmet needs in creating a supportive work environment for the anticipated aging of the workforce to prolong the working life.

Section: Credit authors statment

Lilah Rinsky-Halivni : PI, Conceptualization, Investigation (data collection and Validation), Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Boaz Hovav : Methodology, Formal analysis, Visualization, Reviewing and Editing. David C. Christiani : Supervision, Reviewing and Editing. Shuli Brammli-Grinberg : Conceptualization, Supervision, Reviewing and Editing.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Section: Acknowledgment

The PI's (LRH) work on this study was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Israel. The authors are also grateful to the organizations that agreed to participate and their managers, HR, and workers' representatives for sharing their experiences and knowledge. The authors would also like to acknowledge the dedicated research team enthusiastically promoting the study and Prof. Rafael Carel (of Blessed Memory) for promoting the industry linkage. Special thanks to Dina Halivni for her valuable insights in improving the codebook, Prof Aisha Yusufzai for excellent methodological guidance and knowledgeable advice, Prof. Richard Tresch for his helpful editorial assistance, and Dr. Preethi John for her insights on human resources and organizations.
