Title: Strategies of inclusion: The tradeoffs of pursuing “baked in” diversity through place-based recruitment


Abstract: Abstract

US funding agencies have begun to institutionalize expectations that biomedical studies achieve defined thresholds for diversity among research participants, including in precision medicine research (PMR). In this paper, we examine how practices of recruitment have unfolded in the wake of these diversity mandates. We find that a very common approach to seeking diverse participants leverages understandings of spatial, geographic, and site diversity as proxies and access points for participant diversity. That is, PMR investigators recruit from a diverse sampling of geographic areas, neighborhoods, sites, and institutional settings as both opportunistic but also meaningful ways to “bake in” participant diversity. In this way, logics of geographic and institutional diversity shift the question from who to recruit, to where . However, despite seeing geographic and site diversity as social and scientific ‘goods’ in the abstract and as key to getting diverse participants, PMR teams told us that working with diverse sites was often difficult in practice due to constraints in funding, time, and personnel, and inadequate research infrastructures and capacity. Thus, the ways in which these geographic and institutional diversity strategies were implemented resulted ultimately in limiting the meaningful inclusion of populations and organizations that had not previously participated in biomedical research and reproduced the inclusion of institutions that are already represented. These prevailing assumptions about and practices of “baked-in” diversity in fact exacerbate and produce other forms of inequity, in research capacity and research representation. These findings underscore how structural inequities in research resources must be addressed for diversity to be achieved in both research sites and research participants.

Section: 1. Introduction

“Diversity” and “inclusion” are now ubiquitous terms in the lexicon of biomedical research , as in so many other institutional domains of social life. Funding agencies, research institutions, and scientific and professional organizations have all repeatedly called for greater inclusion of underrepresented individuals in biomedical research, participants who embody diversity in multiple ways, for example by race and ethnicity, healthcare access, income or socioeconomic status, and age. Such efforts by investigators and funders to enroll greater numbers of underrepresented populations in biomedical studies are part of a movement that is at least three decades old ( Epstein, 2007 ).
But more recently, US 1 funding agencies have begun to institutionalize expectations that studies achieve defined thresholds for diversity in enrollment, escalating the potential impact that calls for inclusion can have on remedying underrepresentation in biomedical research. These more specific diversity mandates have focused particularly on precision medicine research (PMR), which studies the relationships among genes, behaviors, and environmental exposures, in order to produce targeted diagnostics and therapies for individuals and groups. Because tailoring biomedical interventions to different biologies and bodies is a core mission and the raison d'etre of precision medicine research, it is a particularly active space for scientific efforts and public accountability to ensure that research participation is more diverse along multiple dimensions.
In this paper, we examine how practices of recruitment have unfolded in the wake of US mandates to measurably increase the diversity of PMR participants across a range of axes (see Table 1 ). In so doing, we are following on Steven Epstein's (2007) tracing of the rise, since the mid-1980s, of a new paradigm in medical research that advocated for wider inclusion in order to investigate the health impacts of human differences. This paradigm brought with it a renewed focus on recruitment, countering previous research practices that had favored study populations that were (constructed as) more homogeneous (see also Shim et al., 2014 ) and confronting historically uneven and unequal participation rates in biomedical research across different populations. Epstein argued that these social and scientific rationales for diversity and inclusion and their sharpened focus on recruitment gave rise to a new applied science that he termed recruitmentology , that examined the efficacy of various enrollment strategies and ways to appeal to and increase the ‘yield’ from different populations and groups being targeted. Undergirding Epstein's analysis is the concern that recruitmentology's instrumental focus on recruitment techniques results in a methodological formalism that often sidelines the need to ascertain the underlying reasons why some groups might be reluctant to participate or to address the politics of trust and power relations between researchers and participants. Table 1 . Language Used in Funding Announcement Mandates for Diversity ( Lee et al., 2022 ). Descriptions of diversity "ethnic diversity"" patients who come from racial or ethnic minority populations"" ancestrally diverse populations"" sex"" gender identity"" sexual orientation"" education"" access to care"" income"" age"" disabilities"" geographic diversity"" diverse cadre of volunteers"" the broad diversity of America"" sufficient numbers of diverse populations and individuals"" underrepresented in biomedical research"" underserved populations"" spectrum of clinical conditions and healthcare settings" Descriptions of recruitment thresholds "Applicants to this FOA are expected to recruit a minimum of 60% of patients who come from racial or ethnic minority populations, underserved populations, or populations who experience poorer medical outcomes."" Describe how the HPO will plan to enroll at least 10,000 participants in year 1 from diverse populations … Plans to continue enrolling and consenting at least 35,000 study participants from diverse populations in each of years 2–4." Descriptions of recruitment strategies "… achieve impactful and inclusive engagement and retention strategies for diverse participants at all stages of the program, recognizing that different participants may require varying levels of engagement …"
Our ethnographic project picks up after where Epstein left off and in a specific part of the biomedical research landscape: since 2018, we have been following multiple PMR studies from their conceptualization and design, through the selection and recruitment of participants, their efforts to engage communities and stakeholders, data collection and measurement, and interpretations and applications of study findings. Through these different stages or the “lifecourse” of research, we aim to account for how diversity is conceptualized and operationalized. We find that a very common approach to increasing diversity among research participants leverages understandings of spatial, geographic, and site diversity as proxies and access points for participant diversity. That is, PMR investigators across our study sites recruit from a diverse sampling of geographic areas, neighborhoods, sites, and institutional settings as both opportunistic but also meaningful ways to recruit a diverse sample. Their belief in the legitimacy and efficacy of this strategy rests on their assumption that geographic and institutional diversity “bakes in” participant diversity. Below, we describe contemporary strategies of inclusion in and across areas of PMR, and show how prevailing assumptions about and practices of “baked-in” diversity in fact exacerbate and produce other forms of inequity, in research capacity and research representation.
We therefore see that the methodological formalism that Epstein observed—a focus on how to recruit diverse populations—and the work this does to defuse and displace questions of why underrepresented individuals and groups may be resistant to participation, continue in the context of PMR. But in addition, we trace how the recruitment strategies that are common in PMR today result in sedimenting institutional inequities in research infrastructures and capacities, because of competing demands and tradeoffs. Our data show how these recruitment decisions are incentivized and constrained by the research ecosystem that structures, organizes, and funds precision medicine research. Through our analysis of PMR recruitment strategies, as they are practiced on the ground and in the current moment, we reveal how the existing research ecosystem in the US shapes activities to fulfill diversity and inclusion mandates in ways that tend to reproduce extant power relations among research institutions, and in turn between researchers and the communities they aim to serve.

Section: 2. Background

This paper sits at the intersection of several bodies of literature. First, a significant body of literature calls attention to a lack of diversity in PMR and human genomics projects and the scientific and ethical imperative for a diversity of participants to achieve an equitable translation of research findings ( Hindorff et al., 2018 ; Oh et al., 2015 ). Some have cautioned that a Eurocentric bias of PMR datasets threatens the portability of study findings across populations categorized in terms of genetic ancestry ( Popejoy and Fullerton, 2016 ), and called specifically for greater genomic diversity, defined as “variation in alleles and allele frequency” ( Hindorff et al., 2018 ). The 2020 National Human Genome Research Institute's Strategic Vision emphasized the next stage of genomics research should “prioritiz[e] the generation of genomic and corresponding phenotypic data from ancestrally diverse populations” ( Green et al., 2020 ). At the same time, some of these same authors have called for the inclusion of participants characterized by non-genetic components of diversity, such as diversity in terms of “physical and social environments in which they [participants] live and receive healthcare” ( Green et al., 2020 ) and race/ethnicity, as a means of investigating “the complex relationship of ancestral influences , environmental exposures, and social factors” ( Oh et al., 2015 ). Others have critiqued a perceived over-reliance on race/ethnicity as a primary axis of diversity and asserted that PMR's definition of diversity must be expanded to also include, for example, sexual and gender minorities (e.g., Quinn et al., 2018 ). In the literature, then, there are multiple conceptions of diversity; as we show below, this is also reflected in current practice in PMR, where there is wide variability in how ‘diversity’ is operationalized and implemented.
As Epstein (2007) noted, this greater interest in diversity in biomedical research has motivated burgeoning research that describes strategies to enhance the recruitment of underrepresented participants. Altogether, this body of work emphasizes numerous approaches to bolster the diversity of research cohorts that loosely can be characterized as a series of outreach efforts, on multiple fronts, to multiple sets of actors. These range from analyses that examine the effects on recruitment of dedicated funding support ( Hindorff et al., 2018 ) and the use of targeted, flexible, and/or plain-language consent and recruitment materials (e.g., Ewing et al., 2015 ; James et al., 2008 ; Kraft and Doerr, 2018 ; Regnante et al., 2020 ). There is also significant literature on the importance of team composition, specifically including staff whose characteristics reflect those of potential or desired participants, and/or whose skills and practices are considered culturally sensitive and appropriate (e.g., Ewing et al., 2015 ; Hindorff et al., 2018 ; Johnson et al., 2011 ).
Other extant works invoke some of the rationales that we hear about why place-based recruitment makes sense. For example, trust—and the ability to address distrust—between study sites, investigators, stakeholders, and participants, which takes time and effort to build, figures strongly in the ability to recruit participants from underrepresented racial/ethnic groups (e.g., Regnante et al., 2020 ). Similarly, recruitment can be facilitated by engagement with physicians, nursing directors, and other clinicians who have access to and working relationships with participants ( Ewing et al., 2015 ; Horowitz et al., 2019 ; James et al., 2008 ; Olaitan et al., 2014 ; Regnante et al., 2020 ). And for those participants who might be otherwise difficult to contact in a clinic setting, recruitment efforts that take place outside of the clinic and/or in community settings such as libraries and health fairs can bolster the diversity of research cohorts ( Kuehn, 2018 ; Patel et al., 2012 ).
Especially germane to our findings below, key cohort studies have employed the strategy of locating study and recruitment sites in particular places, thought to be peopled by particular populations, to ensure the inclusion of desired cohort characteristics. There is a long history of this approach in biomedical research, often anchored by the Framingham Heart Study that began in 1948 in the town of Framingham, MA, considered to represent “a typical economically stable US community” ( Andersson et al., 2019 :687). Other significant place-based cohort studies included the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults study, initiated in 1984, to investigate the factors that influence coronary heart disease risk factors in Black and white young adults. Each of the four sites—Birmingham, AL, Chicago, IL, Minneapolis, MN, and Oakland, CA—was selected for their explicit ability to contribute to an overall cohort that was racially and socioeconomically diverse ( Friedman et al., 1988 ). The Strong Heart Study, begun in 1988, recruited participants from American Indians communities in Arizona, Oklahoma, and North and South Dakota ( Lee et al., 1990 ). One final example of a study aiming to access diversity through place is the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis , initiated in 2000 to investigate measures and predictors of subclinical cardiovascular disease among white, African American, Hispanic, and Asian American participants, across six study sites expected to produce different distributions of race/ethnicity ( Bild et al., 2002 ).
Finally, multiple social scientists and bioethicists have grappled with tensions and ironies that arise in the confluence of the need for human subjects in biomedical research, the accelerated desire for participants who are seen to be diverse in particular ways, and the impact of structural factors and constraints on differences in participation across populations. Fisher and Kalbaugh (2011) argue that while it is well known that racial/ethnic minoritized individuals participate in phase III clinical trials (that demonstrate drug efficacy) at lower rates than their white counterparts, this may be due not to a lack of trust in biomedical research (see also Katz et al., 2008 ), but to a lack of access to healthcare services where study recruitment often occurs, compounded by lower rates of referral to trials on the part of healthcare providers due to biased assumptions, for example, about adherence. Such stratified patterns also obscure the disproportionately greater involvement of underrepresented groups in higher-risk phase I clinical trials (that test for drug safety), because they offer financial incentives and access to valued resources, including health services ( Fisher, 2007 ; 2020 ; Fisher and Kalbaugh, 2011 ; Timmermans and McKay, 2009 ). Such dynamics, Fisher (2007 ; 2020) argues, exploit socioeconomic disadvantage, distributing risk to marginalized populations for the benefit of the privileged. Joseph and Dohan (2009 ; 2012) found that multiple institutional-level barriers hampered cancer clinical trials’ efforts to recruit ethnic and racial minorities, even in safety-net clinics where many underserved patients received care. These organizational obstacles included the competing demands of providing care with recruiting for research, a lack of provider knowledge about research, and inadequate resources for clinic personnel to translate the research materials they were given (which were in English , at a high literacy level) in ways that would be understandable and appealing to their patients. Notably, Joseph and Dohan show how these recruitment constraints stem from inequities in research infrastructures and the US healthcare system more broadly. This critical body of scholarship shows the force of structural determinants, operating both within and outside of the clinical research setting, to shape the uneven inclusion of underrepresented individuals and groups.
The existing literature thus reveals the continued salience of studies of inclusion practices in health and biomedical research and, in particular, discussions of how participation by underrepresented populations can be strategically enhanced through varied recruitment tactics and choices about where to locate studies. Additionally, the social science and bioethics literature directs our attention to the consequences of such strategies, alerting us to the ironies and inequities produced when diversity is pursued as an end unto itself. These works critique inclusion practices for maldistributing risk and benefit across the spectrum of clinical research and neglecting the effects of institutional constraints on limiting full inclusion. The findings we describe below add to these ongoing conversations, by showing how, in the expanding and high-stakes domain of contemporary precision medicine research, study teams commonly respond to structural and funding constraints on research by relying on site, geographic, and institutional diversity as stand-ins for and ways to “bake in” participant diversity, with the unintended consequence of also sedimenting other forms of inequity, in institutions’ research capacity and resources.

Section: 3. Methods

The findings reported here come from a large, multi-sited qualitative project that investigates how commitments to diversity and inclusion are interpreted and operationalized, and working definitions of diversity impact practices such as enrollment, retention, engagement, data collection and analysis, and return of results in PMR. We followed five PMR studies across three consortia funded by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH); these consortia were selected because of their geographic diversity, federal funding, and their expressed commitment to recruiting and engaging diverse participant populations. The five individual studies were selected because they were located in geographically diverse areas and used heterogeneous strategies to engage, recruit, and retain underrepresented individuals as research participants. We negotiated with study leadership (and in some cases, with consortia leadership) to obtain entrée to conduct interviews and observations as studies progressed. Institutional review board approval was obtained from the University of California, San Francisco and Columbia University.
The primary sources of data collected for our study include: a content analysis of 76 documents, including study materials and funding announcements issued by the NIH; approximately 450 hours of observations of study activities, including site and consortium working group calls, and in-person or virtual meetings; and 125 in-depth interviews (lasting 60–90 min) with a purposive sample of 102 funders, investigators, research team members, and community advisory board members. We obtained verbal consent for all observations and written consent for all interviews. Interviews followed a semi-structured, open-ended format. During these interviews, we principally explored the engagement, recruitment, and retention of underrepresented participants, as well as how study teams were operationalizing diversity mandates in their research. Interview guides were tailored, to ensure that questions were appropriate for each given participant. Interviewees were offered a $50 gift card for each interview.
Our qualitative data were analyzed using the principles of constructivist grounded theory ( Charmaz, 2014 ). All interviews were recorded and professionally transcribed verbatim. The research team generated an initial codebook based on study aims, the existing literature, and issues that had arisen repeatedly throughout data collection. Using the qualitative analysis software, Dedoose, the research team coded a small sample of documents, interview transcripts , and observation fieldnotes with this initial codebook to test its effectiveness and to generate inductively additional codes to include in the codebook. Through consecutive waves of independent and joint coding, followed by discussion and reconciliation, we finalized a codebook of 75 codes (some of which also have between 2 and 14 sub-codes). For this analysis, we extracted a subset of data using several specific codes related to dimensions of diversity (e.g., codes such as “operationalizing diversity,” “SES (as a dimension of diversity),” “underrepresented in biomedical research,” and “institutional diversity”), and then memoed on these data. To develop this manuscript, we focused our memoing on recruitment and enrollment strategies, and in particular, how researchers defined dimensions of “diversity” and then sought to enroll participants along those dimensions in their studies. The authors met continually to discuss our coding and memoing process, and to compare these strategies of inclusion across our sample.

Section: 4. Baking in participant diversity

Elsewhere ( Lee et al., 2022 ), we analyzed the funding announcements issued to support the PMR consortia we follow in our study, and show how “diversity” is framed as a key priority: that greater participation by underrepresented individuals in precision medicine research studies is paramount to making such research useful. However, these funding announcements largely avoided giving specific definitions of diversity, and instead, offered long lists of qualities and characteristics, from “ethnic diversity” to “access to care” and “underserved populations,” to “disabilities,” “gender identity,” and “sexual orientation” (see Table 1 for summary). Faced with this lack of specificity, PMR investigators applying for these funding calls took up multiple, wide-ranging, and often different definitions of participant diversity in their studies, while at the same time utilizing similar strategies of population sampling and recruitment to achieve that diversity. One very common way that PMR studies sought to recruit participants they defined as being ‘diverse’ was through spatially and geographically focused and tailored enrollment strategies.
Multiple respondents shared their view that they were well situated to be responsive to the funding announcements, that their geographic location allowed them to not just meet, but exceed, specified targets for racial/ethnic and other dimensions of diversity. For example, researchers told us, “We're lucky to have a diverse population” and described their respective settings as “just … incredibly diverse,” “naturally situated for diversity,” and that “it's probably as good as it gets.” One funding officer recounted expressing surprise that consortium grantees were able to continue recruiting underrepresented participants through the pandemic, only to be reminded by them that they had designed their applications, their studies, to really recruit … where the large quantities of patients were underserved … They really baked that into the study design. And so it wasn't a surprise to [the awardees] that we were exceeding the minimum for the RFA … We certainly met and exceeded our goals … serving populations that haven't traditionally been part of genomic research.
Across our study sites, research teams regularly accessed participants from and in places viewed to be enriched by different kinds of diversity, and populated by different sorts of people. The often explicitly articulated argument underlying this set of strategies is that recruitment from diverse kinds of communities, geographic locations, and settings will, almost by default, bring in underrepresented participants. The PMR investigators we followed thus targeted different regions and parts of the United States, urban and rural communities, areas with distinctive social histories, and a spatially distributed range of organizations with varying missions and workforce demographics. They understood geographic regions—ranging from neighborhoods to cities to states—to be proxies for or themselves dimensions of diversity with scientifically useful variations in who lived in them. In this way, geographic and spatial diversity are seen to “bake in” the participant diversity mandated by funders.
What dimensions of diversity were understood to be accessible through spatial and geographic logics of inclusion? In our interviews, investigators offered accounts of the kinds of diversity that they sought. In particular, researchers were eager to recruit individuals who had less access to healthcare, who were “less served … not just simply people who are walking into academic medical centers,” but instead those who “lived more than 50 miles from the hospital” and others “coming six to eight hours away to get care here.” They also sought participants of varying socioeconomic status, which they operationalized as those “covered through Medicaid coverage,” and individuals who are “underinsured or uninsured altogether.” Another investigator talked about seeing the range of extremely well-to-do families as well as others who have “no papers” and “are undocumented” and indeed able to access care only within a circumscribed geographic area because “there's a checkpoint 100 miles up from the border across the United States.” Investigators described the importance of distributed representation of families living in different geographic contexts, for example, areas characterized by “density” and “infrastructure,” “big cities with tertiary care centers” contrasting with farms, agricultural towns, and regions with “hours and hours of rurality , where there's just no tertiary care,” and “people that probably have never been outside their county.”
Geographic and spatial diversity was also framed as building in heterogeneity by “lifestyle” and “dietary patterns” that differ by, for example, “what people choose [to eat]” and their access to “food stores, restaurants, [and] recreational facilities.” PMR investigators also understood that recruiting from varied places allowed for enrolling individuals from a range of socioeconomic status, variations across “all the other social determinants ,” and different types of “exposures” such as “environmental exposure and occupational exposure.”
Precision medicine researchers also understood geographic diversity to bring in participants who lived in areas that had distinct historical contexts. They cited legacies of racism, institutional neglect, and political economic histories that shaped present-day realities for groups in ways that seemed important to represent. Investigators sought to consider the connections between these histories and the contemporary ways in which they affect health by incorporating into their analyses “things like racial residential segregation … [and] redlining maps.” In particular, several researchers told us that even though racism “is prevalent in many parts of the country,” there was a particular need to include those living in the South because of the “historical racism” that occurred there, including “this very long history” of “terrible atrocities against African Americans who were brought to this country without their consent.” Another investigator added that “in the South, there are also immigrant populations that are disadvantaged. There are white populations that are historically disadvantaged.” Another noted, “There's the whole dynamic of race in the South, which has its own history, and then also SES.” Thus, our interviewees understood a geographic approach to recruitment to allow for the deliberate inclusion of individuals who might speak to and embody the effects of social, economic, political, and environmental determinants of health produced by racial segregation. However, this understanding fell short of an explicit realization that the very utility of a spatial logic of inclusion is in part dependent on, and made possible by, past and continued practices of racial and economic segregation .
Beyond the access to underrepresented participants that geographic diversity was understood to provide, all of the PMR projects we studied purposively selected multiple but different kinds of organizations in which to conduct enrollment. Investigators conceptualized such an approach as networks or hub-and-spoke webs of recruitment, referring to, for example, having “a network of … players,” “other sites … and the hub,” “networks of partners,” and “a network that fully represented all of the communities.” These webs were understood to not only expand spatial and geographic reach, but also allow for strategic locating of enrollment nodes in communities and among populations that would add to the diversity of their participants. Our interviewees especially noted that they had “extremely diverse enrollment sites” or could “add on” sites in other locations. One explicitly said, “We did intentionally expand our study to other sites, trying to increase diversity but also increase different types of diversity.”
Those involved in PMR appreciated institutional or site diversity on its own terms. They understood different kinds of institutions to have other forms of diversity baked in—for example, tertiary and quaternary medical centers were different from community hospitals, community-based organizations from healthcare facilities. Layering in site diversity was viewed to have the added advantage of bringing in different organizational cultures, missions, and workforce demographics, that in turn were understood to serve diverse populations who could be potential participants. Funders spoke about this connection between diverse sites and underrepresented participants explicitly, about the need for PMR to “incorporat [e] diverse populations as well as diverse settings.” As one funder told us, instead of typical “academic institutions or academic hospitals,” there's a need to “actually see[] what works in settings that don't have the infrastructure and the resources … We're not just making the rich richer … [but] making sure that … other … patients are able to have access.” Others talked about how “a huge academic center … is just worlds different than a smaller clinical site somewhere else … in more rural [areas].”
But researchers we spoke with also emphasized how site diversity had additional side benefits for study recruitment. They pointed out that local institutions and providers understand the local context and often had “existing community relationships and partnerships.” These relationships and knowledge could then be leveraged not only to aid in developing and iterating enrollment strategies and participant engagement ( Jeske et al., 2021 ), but also for research funding that sometimes was contingent on maintaining relationships with community-based organizations. These considerations of site and institutional diversity thus reflect some of the concerns about the instrumentalist cast of recruitmentology.
Investigators used geographic and institutional logics of inclusion in heterogeneous combinations and sequences. But overall, we found that PMR teams adopted a two-step process of ensuring diversity in recruitment locales and types of institutions, and then offering “the opportunity [to participate in research] to everybody.” By distributing enrollment across geographic regions, neighborhoods, and sites, diversity was seen to be “baked in.” While research staff commonly told us the selection of the organizations and locations to conduct recruitment must be purposeful, after this step, they could then take all comers interested in joining the PMR study and be assured diversity among the recruited participants.
Many researchers talked about the relative ease of this two-step strategy; some described it as “almost like a non-decision” to leverage a network of enrollment sites, that then “we wouldn't have a hard time” to recruit cohorts that included those from underrepresented racial and ethnic groups. When we asked one investigator how they thought about recruiting for diversity, they said, We certainly didn't really change [our] recruitment strategy. That was baked in … Once we settled on the [sites] that we partnered with, [anyone] that's eligible … is eligible. And that has been consistently true. So we didn't change any of those criteria to try to enrich or deplete for any one measure of diversity. Again, we chose those [sites] in large part because of … the patients' demographics that they just naturally serve.
The confidence in the baked-in approach to diversity is exemplified in one interviewee's description of how initial challenges with enrolling underrepresented participants for a previous study led their team not to pivot to another strategy for recruitment, but rather to double-down on geographic and institutional logics of inclusion: this participant told us that “we were noticing that we weren't doing a particularly good job at having diverse enrollment” in that earlier study, even though “we should be … because we're here, because that's our community.” They solved this by partnering with other sites, something that wasn't necessarily challenging to do: “it's not like we went out of our way to partner with [other sites] … I mean these hospitals are basically in our backyards, and these are folks that we have been talking to anyway.”
In sum, the narrative and rationale for recruitment and data collection shifted from questions about who —what individuals and populations to recruit, to where —the locations and sites to recruit from. In this way, logics of spatial, geographic, and institutional diversity seemed to (mostly) stand in for the inclusion of participant diversity. Among the PMR projects we observed, then, a prevailing belief was that once the ‘right’ places and sites were selected, their recruitment strategies were essentially done and they could enroll a diverse pool of individuals almost by default, because they were in effect “baked in.”
However, the assumption of a location “being naturally situated” for diversity, having a broad network of enrollment sites, and then “taking all comers” sidestepped a number of caveats and issues. Some of our interviewees were careful to point out that it is not always automatic that conducting recruitment in areas of dense diversity would produce participant diversity in PMR. One funder talked about the need for reviewers and the funding agency to assess whether researchers' “engagement plans would allow them to recruit [from] that catchment area in a way that brought in the diversity numbers … What's their credibility to actually recruit those groups … successfully?” Along similar lines, a research team member related that even when the communities in which they were located were “naturally diverse,” a collaborator led them to think about and invest in explicitly developing communication strategies to enroll and retain people from underrepresented backgrounds.
Another respondent stressed that recruitment via site and geographic diversity does not address differences in retention rates. She cautioned that issues with retaining participants over the life of a study could decrease the diversity of initially enrolled participants: those “from affluent backgrounds” stayed active during data collection while others recruited from less-resourced neighborhoods were “particularly challenging to retain.” So while enrolling from a diversity of sites was “still much better than a single study at a single location with pretty much a homogeneous population, …we still need to solve the retention problem otherwise … Diversity will be good at the baseline, then going forward they'll be all very much a homogeneous population.”
A few other researchers countered the baked-in diversity approach in another way, arguing that rather than simply trying to collect a multitude of different sites, what was actually needed was attention to and identification of the specific kinds of differences driving health outcomes of interest, and then recruiting expressly for those dimensions of diversity. For instance, one investigator explained that while racial/ethnic diversity can serve as “kind of a quick check to see if you have a serious diversity problem … if you really want to explore the layers of issues that affect whether people have access to care, whether they have access to research … that's also much more complicated and requires a different approach.” In part because of this reasoning, a few PMR studies chose to focus on fewer or even single communities, opting for deeper data collection to elucidate differences often emerging from social, environmental, and place-based dynamics within groups that were typically seen or treated as more homogeneous. One program officer talked about a single community study having the advantage of being able to look at “the lower socioeconomic level … the type of jobs … the environment that they live in … What they have on their corner … the access to the healthy foods and all of that.” This line of thinking was offered as both a justification for the single community approach as well as a critique of how PMR conventionally defines diversity in terms of race, ethnicity, and/or ancestry , to the neglect of other dimensions of diversity that are no less significant for health.
However, we note that these concerns, rather than mitigating against geographic and site diversity as general approaches to achieving participant diversity, actually often boosted their perceived utility. In much the same way as the site we described above, whose experience of lower-than-anticipated enrollment of underrepresented participants in another study led them to double-down on both spatial and institutional logics of inclusion, the stakeholders whose reservations we note here ended up paying more attention to geographic and site diversity in recruitment. They did so in order to enroll participants from less resourced communities, who embody dimensions of diversity beyond surface attributions of racial and ethnic differences, and whose social experiences were thought to drive health outcomes. For the most part, then, PMR investigators did not spend a great deal of time justifying or rationalizing the scientific ‘good’ of seeking the baked-in diversity they assumed came with geographic and institutional diversity, and so engaged in only cursory discussions of whether and why to use site diversity approaches, while providing lots of details about where they decided to recruit and how . But, as we explore below, the seeming ease and convenience of the baked-in diversity approach belies a more complex reality, with important ramifications for reproducing inequities in research capacity and representation.

Section: 5. Upstream-downstream tradeoffs: infrastructure matters & networks of power

Despite geographic and site diversity being seen as social and scientific ‘goods’ in the abstract and as key to getting underrepresented participants, these strategies often operated to reinforce collaborations with sites and institutions that were better funded and with existing infrastructure for and experience with research. Study teams did not make such decisions in a vacuum; they were often pragmatic and sometimes convenient responses to constraints in funding, timelines, and existing infrastructures that influenced significantly what was possible and what was not. Ultimately, the ways in which these geographic and institutional diversity strategies were implemented resulted in limiting the inclusion of populations and organizations that had not participated in biomedical research previously, and reproduced the inclusion of institutions that are already represented.
Practical considerations featured prominently in researchers' accounts of how they implemented their site diversity-driven approaches. These approaches were often anchored on preexisting connections, based in part on investigators’ perceptions that funders rewarded applicants who had “already created this network … already have a pack” of collaborators and partner institutions and sites, that funders “wanted organizations that had some established components already, rather than creating things fresh once the award started.”
PMR teams told us that working with sites located in neighborhoods of higher diversity was often difficult in practice. Notably, researchers reported looking for sites that had some amount of biomedical research infrastructure already present. Such infrastructure includes dedicated research staff, an IRB, clinicians who would promote research participation to their patients, and staff experienced with electronic health records (EHR). All of these elements are critical to the basic operation and success of PMR (and indeed, most all biomedical) studies. Investigators noted frequently that constrained funding forced them to choose between locating study enrollment in communities they hoped would participate, versus conserving study resources including time and personnel, and preserving data quality. Insufficient resources to compensate for lack of established research infrastructure resulted in investigators postponing or canceling plans to bring in new sites in communities not previously participating in PMR. Or they let go of some sites because of logistic infeasibility and insufficient resources, or made do with dampened recruitment from other sites. Thus, one significant tradeoff to the strategy of site diversity was to rely on institutions whose research infrastructure was more established and required less support and time to mobilize. In many cases, sites with existing collaborative relationships overlapped with those with research infrastructure, pointing to the compound effects of pragmatic considerations.
In a few cases, partnering with sites seen to have baked-in diversity required building relationships and infrastructure de novo, and training staff and healthcare providers about precision medicine and biomedical research. Investigators found this work to be extremely time-consuming, the costs of which were largely or wholly unsupported by the current structure of the PMR enterprise . Our participants spoke at length about the challenges of working with sites that were under-resourced and less experienced with research, the myriad ways a lack of resources and experiences manifested and resulted in delays, and the often surprisingly minutiae-level problem-solving and ad hoc trouble-shooting that were needed. One specific set of frequently encountered challenges involved sites that did not have or were less familiar working with EHR information as research data. While sites with already established EHR systems “can flip a switch,” investigators talked about having to do “a lot of handholding” for other sites, “just a lot of effort that gets made to ensure that we can get that information” needed for the research study. These involved issues related to data quality and consistency of documentation, and also barriers to collecting data from patients and health systems efficiently and in digital formats that could be easily uploaded versus requiring separate data entry. A lack of personnel was also a challenge: one investigator told us that while “we have a pretty extensive clinical research infrastructure and people are both really expert and motivated to do it … there's some redundancy in the system … We could have some of them here all of the time, more or less … whereas at the outside sites that are collaborating, its research might be less well resourced.”
An investigator recalled that A lot of the clinics that are not tied to academic centers just don't have the expertise and the resources to do the research. We've had people propose to use a clinic that has not primarily done research but then there were problems of hiring a program coordinator that had the expertise to actually implement the study and those kinds of things. Do they have the space?... How will we then get the samples? Those kinds of things that they've never done.
One of our respondents told us that for enrollment sites that “are research-naive, actually getting them on board and how best to do that” is itself a major challenge. She continued, Whenever you actually implement the study, once it's funded … if it's taking longer for those [sites] to get on board, you generally move to the clinics that are already ready to start, because you still are going against this time window of you need to complete your study … You just don't have time to wait for these to get on board … It's not that they're not willing and wanting, it's just … getting all of that worked out, takes a while.
Once these patterns of funding and partnership are set in motion, they tend to self-perpetuate because of restrictions on research funding being spent on capacity building and because of the time limits imposed by grant funding. As one investigator told us, “there's so much infrastructure cost to setting up something and building relationships and everything else. And not everyone's going to be able to do that, quite frankly.” These kinds of institutional inequities and the ways they cascade into decisions about which sites can realistically be partners meant that sites that might have leveraged these new opportunities to develop research capacity were not able to do so. One funder we spoke with acknowledged that grants and awards needed to cover the actual costs for infrastructure-building: what would be required is allowing for more funds to actually set up these centers … Travel and the time to actually for the people with that expertise to go there and spend time at the clinic in setting up and identifying the areas that they need to address before they are on board … All of that in the beginning, I think would help.
But, as this funder eventually acknowledged, we usually do not have a lot of funding that's just setting up infrastructure. We want to actually see the science done. And in order for the science to be done, you need that infrastructure … If there was unlimited funding, maybe they would allow us to put more money into infrastructure, but infrastructure actually does not give us results.
Moreover, even when additional funding was available, participants told us that a bigger budget doesn't solve everything. It solves lots of things, but not everything … PIs … would flat out tell me, ‘It's not the money. We have the money to pay them. But there's just nobody at the institution who can devote the time to this’ … Or they're stretched or they hoped to hire somebody but it was just taking a long time or that person ended up leaving.
As a result, subsequent and future precision medicine and biomedical researchers are left facing much the same uneven playing field and research ecosystems as before. One interviewee pointed out that what she called “the mom and pop start up” clinics all started because health and human services were not serving our communities. So a lot of that same infrastructure that decades ago wasn't serving our communities are still the systems and still the same folks we turn to run major research enterprises … It's going to be the same outcome. So for me, it's really a matter of changing who we go to, who we're working with, and how we're working with communities. In order for the change to happen, you can't keep doing everything the same way with the same partners and expect something … different.
This funder makes the key point that the maldistribution of research capacity we see is no historical accident, but rather the product of segregation in healthcare ( Byrd and Clayton, 2002 ; Smedley et al., 2003 ). Efforts to promote “scientific medicine” greatly accelerated these research inequities. The Flexner Report of 1910 sought to standardize medical education by linking medical schools with hospitals, prioritizing both the laboratory facilities that could analyze and produce clinical evidence, as well as broad access to patient populations who could serve as research subjects. The 1946 Hill-Burton Act, the 1964 passage of Medicare, and escalating private investments all further cemented the role of the large hospital as the center for technologically advanced medicine and a site for cutting-edge clinical research, while replicating segregated medical facilities and racial inequities in health care ( Chowkwanyun, 2019 ; Stevens, 1999 ).
In short, geographic and institutional logics of inclusion that seek to diversify PMR through partnerships with sites located in settings where diversity is seen to be baked in, actually in part serve to bake in the reliance on sites and institutions that are more well-resourced, experienced, and research-ready. That is, such strategies of inclusion often (though not always) reinforce, and even exacerbate, the phenomenon where research capital begets more research capital, where the already-funded and advantaged institutions and researchers continue to be most able to compete for additional research resources and opportunities. As one funder told us, biomedical research more generally and PMR is an echo chamber. Who's at the table? [Large universities and academic medical centers] … are at the table. And yes, they have different demographics associated with their patient population, but it's still missing very large portions of the population.

Section: 6. Conclusion

We described above how mandates to increase diversity in PMR led many investigators and funders to emphasize diversity of research settings and recruitment sites, as a means to access underrepresented participants. The utility of these place-based strategies of inclusion are, of course, no accident, but rather an artifact of historical, social, economic, and political processes of racial residential segregation , the spatial concentration of poverty, and racist state disinvestment from geographically defined areas where poor and working-class communities of color resided (e.g., Massey and Denton, 1993 ; Rothstein, 2017 ).
While the strategy of pursuing participant diversity that was assumed to be baked into geographic and site diversity made a lot of scientific and social sense to the researchers we spoke to, their ability to partner with different institutions for recruitment is highly variable and uneven. They described a research ecosystem that compelled constant decisions and tradeoffs between research resources, time, and data quality; this led to perceptions that getting the science and research done, versus partnering with sites that are newer to research but have the desired participant diversity, were goals often directly at odds with one another. These tradeoffs and the structural conditions shaping research we surface ultimately result in replicating the inclusion of well-resourced institutions and the exclusion of communities and organizations that have not participated in biomedical research previously. This maldistribution of research capacity is also historically patterned and sedimented, as we noted above. And importantly, our interviewees told us that the COVID-19 pandemic deepened the divide between institutions with greater and fewer resources, between the healthcare haves and have-nots, rendering the tradeoffs between recruiting from sites with more versus less research capacity even steeper. The stark inequities in who was affected most by COVID-19 versus where healthcare resources are located, and the urgent prioritization of clinical care all cascaded to exacerbate existing inequalities in research infrastructure.
We elaborate on findings by Fisher (2007 ; 2020) and Joseph and Dohan (2009 ; 2012) , who found that clinical trials recruitment reproduced extant inequities in the distribution of risks and benefits and institutional research capacity, by extending these questions into precision medicine research. By detailing the consequences for where PMR enrollment occurs, which populations are included, and what researchers are able and not able to do, we show the ways in which diversity mandates—as important as they are—are limited in their ability to impact the unequal distribution of research resources and capacity, in ways that impinge on inclusion in precision medicine and biomedical research. We argue that the spatial and site diversity approach that PMR studies implemented has downstream effects on where the data are from, with the potential to narrow or broaden sources of diversity in important and consequential ways. This then has direct, interacting effects on the question of who is included and who the data are collected from, as studies develop recruitment strategies and decisions about which populations will be sampled. Such decisions bear on goals of diversity and on the subsequent potential for the data to be used to support potential health interventions, and whether these advance health equity.
The instrumental and technocratic approaches to achieving diverse recruitment that we observed function to elide the focus from who to partner with and who to recruit, to where and how. Things could be otherwise, however: an alternative, equity-forward strategy could be to proactively and explicitly fund and support sites that are not well resourced—in essence, to ‘over-sample’ for sites that are less research-ready. That is, to substantially boost the inclusion of historically underrepresented participants may require a fundamental redistribution of resources and opportunities among research sites . We both highlight the utility of identifying the tradeoffs realized in decisions to implement spatial, geographic, and institutional diversity in particular ways, and also point out that the consequences of choosing one set of tradeoffs over others are not neutral, especially when it comes to the inclusion of and equity for historically underrepresented communities.
We do not intend to downplay the impact of on-the-ground constraints of resources, time, funding, and capacity that influence the everyday decisions to pursue baked-in diversity that is seen to be ‘accessible’ to PMR teams; these are real obstacles (and often much lamented by researchers themselves) to making alternate choices using different logics of inclusion. But as we describe above, the ways in which the research enterprise is structured, organized, and funded impel research teams to take paths that truncate and thwart the potential for that research to contribute to goals of equity. Funders' and researchers' inclinations to involve institutions with robust resources to spare underscored how uneven the existing playing field is with respect to institutional capacity to participate in research. Structural inequities in resources stratify biomedical and healthcare institutions as well as the communities that they serve. These inequities must be addressed in order for diversity to be achieved in both research sites and research participants.
Our findings reveal that the infrastructures and the ecosystem within which PMR studies operate make the meaningful inclusion of underrepresented communities as well as underrepresented research sites, institutions, and indeed researchers, an uphill struggle. This battle is often waged investigator by investigator, study by study, where the onus remains on individual researchers and projects to try to make choices that could serve middle- and longer-term goals of deeper and more varied dimensions of diversity and inclusion. In light of this, the pragmatic acknowledgements as well as laments of the investigators we spoke to are telling, about the lack of funding for infrastructure building, and the tough choices they faced when resources and timelines could not accommodate hiring challenges, technical assistance, slow starts, and troubleshooting needed to bring collaborators newer to research along. The potential risks, in terms of meeting recruitment, data collection, and budgetary targets, were deemed too great. Changing this calculus therefore means identifying the ways in which the risks of bringing new research partners onboard are more evenly distributed, even shared—or more radically, that incurring such risks is in fact rewarded, in recognition of the social and scientific benefits of more equitable involvement among research institutions as well as the harms of continuing the status quo. It requires tilting the playing field and the whole ecosystem so that the meaningful inclusion of underrepresented research institutions and participants—rather than being an uphill battle—can be more of a downhill flow.

Section: Acknowledgments

We are grateful to our study participants for sharing their time, perspectives, and experiences with us during observations and interviews. Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Human Genome Research Institute of the National Institutes of Health under award number R01HG010330 . The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
