Title: Comparing the regulation and incentivization of e-cigarettes across 97 countries


Abstract: Abstract

E-cigarette use continues to increase globally despite uncertainty regarding their long-term health impacts and around their effectiveness for tobacco smoking cessation . This uncertainty creates unique challenges for governments as they attempt to optimally regulate and positively or negatively incentivize these products in a way that maximizes the public's health . Current approaches to e-cigarette regulation and incentivization fall within a spectrum of options ranging from a singular focus on health protection, whereby policies intend to prevent the dangers of e-cigarettes, to a singular focus on using e-cigarettes for harm reduction, whereby policies intend to reduce the more harmful effects of smoking tobacco. Regulation options include prohibition, component ban, and regulation as medicinal products, poisons, tobacco products, consumer products, and/or unique products. Incentivization options include taxation, subsidization, and providing a financial reward. Through comparative public policy analysis, this study describes, compares and assesses the variety of approaches that 97 countries have taken to regulate and incentivize e-cigarettes. The goal is to inform future decisions by governments on how they approach the public health challenge posed by e-cigarettes, building on a nuanced understanding of the complexities of this challenge and what other jurisdictions have already implemented and learned.

Section: 1. Introduction

Electronic cigarette (e-cigarette) use continues to increase globally despite uncertainty regarding their long-term health impacts and around their effectiveness for tobacco smoking cessation . This uncertainty creates unique challenges for governments as they attempt to optimally regulate and (positively or negatively) incentivize these products in a way that maximizes the public's health . For the purpose of this article, regulation is defined in a narrow and traditional sense that excludes broader forms of government influence. Here, it “involves the promulgation of a binding set of rules” which are primarily explicit and compulsory directives of the “command-and-control” style, but may also include mandatory disclosure requirements ( Baldwin et al., 2011 ). In contrast, we use incentivization to describe market-based instruments employed to influence consumer behaviour through extrinsic economic incentives ( Baldwin et al., 2011 ; Hepburn ).
A simplified view suggests that approaches to e-cigarette regulation and incentivization fall within a spectrum of options, framed by contrasting conceptual lenses at either pole. The spectrum ranges from a singular focus on health protection at one end, to a singular focus on using e-cigarettes for harm reduction at the other end. The health protection lens is based upon the principle that policies ought to prevent the dangers of e-cigarettes. At the other end of the spectrum, the harm reduction lens argues that policies ought to reduce the more harmful toxicological effects of smoking tobacco cigarettes. Harm reduction acknowledges that cigarette users become addicted to nicotine and cannot easily stop smoking; it is therefore desirable to reduce the harms associated with the use of combustible cigarettes, by encouraging users to switch to a less harmful product (e.g., e-cigarettes).
Countries that are more worried about minimizing the number of new users who become addicted to nicotine (i.e., health protection) may choose to enact prohibitive regulations that restrict supply and impose higher taxes that reduce demand, especially among non-smokers and youth. Countries that are more worried about reducing harms from conventional tobacco cigarettes (i.e., harm reduction) may choose to enact less restrictive regulations and impose positive financial incentives to encourage smokers to switch to a less harmful product.
To simplify, proponents of health protection often argue that e-cigarettes are harmful, normalize smoking behavior, and serve as a gateway to nicotine addiction and even more harmful tobacco consumption for non-smokers and youth. Rather than aiding in smoking cessation, they may believe the sale of e-cigarettes will encourage continued use of conventional cigarettes resulting in the dual use of both products, consequently inhibiting complete cessation ( Hall et al., 2015 ; Kaufman and Mahoney, 2015 ; Kenkel, 2016 ). At the other end of the spectrum, proponents of harm reduction often argue that people will always use harmful products such that the goal should be to divert people to use less harmful alternatives. They may believe e-cigarettes can help reduce some of the negative health impacts of smoking ( Fairchild and Bayer, 2015 ), by helping tobacco smokers minimize their cigarette use. However, advocates of harm reduction do not always share the same views regarding the ultimate goals of e-cigarette use; some advocates argue that the goal should be to quit these harmful products entirely, whereas others believe risk minimization is sufficient ( Fairchild and Bayer, 2015 ; Fairchild and Colgrove, 2004 ).
One main difference between these two camps is the population on which they are focused. The health protection camp generally focuses on the relatively smaller health hazards e-cigarettes pose to the relatively larger population of non-smokers, especially non-smoking youth. The harm reduction camp generally focuses on the relatively larger health hazards that tobacco poses to the relatively smaller population of conventional cigarette smokers.
Many different approaches have been generated for regulating and incentivizing e-cigarettes. Among jurisdictions that regulate e-cigarettes, some ban the product altogether, while others regulate them as medicinal products, poisons, tobacco products, consumer products, and/or unique products. These regulatory classifications are not mutually exclusive, as some countries use hybrid approaches where e-cigarettes fall under several regulatory schemes. The incentivization of e-cigarettes also differs depending on a jurisdiction's priorities and objectives. Governments have three options for financially incentivizing e-cigarettes for consumers: 1) tax e-cigarettes; 2) subsidize e-cigarettes; or 3) provide a reward for using e-cigarettes (see Fig. 1 ). Download: Download high-res image (241KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . A Simplified Spectrum of E-Cigarette Regulation and Incentivization This figure displays the landscape of options available to governments to regulate and incentivize e-cigarettes on a simplified spectrum ranging from health protection to harm reduction. The option to regulate e-cigarettes as a unique product has been left out of the figure, since this regulatory option can take on features that place it anywhere on the spectrum.
From a purely public health perspective, optimal regulation and incentivization is likely achieved by synergistically calibrating these policies, implementing them in targeted ways so that they have different effects on different populations, adapting them based on the unique circumstances encountered at any given time and in any given jurisdiction, and continually updating the precise balance of policy instruments deployed as circumstances change and as new research evidence emerges. Succeeding in this attempt at precision public health depends on a deep understanding of the available policy options, their interactions, and what we have learned from countries around the world as these policies have been differentially deployed.
Through comparative public policy analysis, this study describes, compares and assesses the variety of approaches 97 countries have taken to regulate and incentivize e-cigarettes as of May 2020. It provides a thick description of the full range of policy options available at the country level. Country-level data and regulatory classifications were drawn from the Institute for Global Tobacco Control's e-cigarette policy scan, housed at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). Sub-national regulations will not be discussed, as these regulations complicate the regulatory environment beyond the scope of this work. We do not seek to synthesize the evidence of effectiveness of these policies, or to provide in-depth case studies on specific jurisdictions; rather, we aim to open up the idea space and provide a full understanding of the options available for regulating and incentivizing e-cigarettes at the country level. The goal is to inform future decisions by governments on how they approach the public health challenge posed by e-cigarettes, building on a nuanced understanding of the complexities of this area and what other jurisdictions have already implemented and learned.

Section: 2. Regulation of E-Cigarettes

Governments’ efforts to regulate e-cigarettes are complicated by the variety of forms these devices come in, as well as the variety of names associated with this product (including e-cigarettes, electronic nicotine delivery systems, vape pens, personal vaporizers) and many brands under which they are sold ( Lempert et al., 2016 ). Added complexities include whether e-cigarettes contain nicotine, whether manufacturers make therapeutic claims and whether they are designed to mimic a tobacco product ( Yong et al., 2015 ). Moreover, the regulatory environment adopted by a country affects the availability and use of e-cigarettes for smoking cessation , as well as the perceived harmfulness of e-cigarettes among citizens. Similarly, the perceived harmfulness of e-cigarettes among policymakers and citizens may affect the choice of regulatory framework adopted in a given jurisdiction. The use of e-cigarettes during a smoking quit attempt has been shown to facilitate short-term sustained abstinence in less restrictive regulatory environments, whereas restrictive regulatory environments may inhibit abstinence ( Yong et al., 2017a ). Moreover, the correct perception that e-cigarettes are less harmful than conventional cigarettes is significantly higher in less restrictive regulatory environments (e.g., United Kingdom; New Zealand) than in more restrictive regulatory environments (e.g., Australia). ( Erku et al., 2020 ; Yong et al., 2017b ).
How government policymakers perceive and classify e-cigarettes will influence the applicable regulatory framework and affect decisions about whether e-cigarettes should be included under existing legislation or whether new legislation is needed. This section provides an overview of seven ways governments can regulate e-cigarettes to manage access to these products (see Table 1 ) and which governments around the world have adopted each approach (see Table 2 ). Table 1 . Overview of approaches to the regulation of e-cigarettes. Framework Logic Mechanisms Advantages Disadvantages Prohibition • Block all legal access to e-cigarettes to prevent harm from them and gateway to more harm • Ban the possession of e-cigarettes • Ban the manufacture, export, import and sale of e-cigarettes • Discourages e-cigarette initiation and use by limiting supply to illegal sources • Clear public messaging about e-cigarette harms • Blocks access to e-cigarettes for smoking cessation • E-cigarettes from illegal sources may be more harmful than quality-assured products • Inconsistent with drug control trends Regulation as Medicinal Products • Block legal access to e-cigarettes except for smoking cessation therapy • Restrict e-cigarettes to patients with a medical prescription • Restrict sales to pharmacies • Ban unsubstantiated health claims • Enforce medicinal product standards • Discourages e-cigarette initiation among non-smokers • Ensures accurate product labelling • E-cigarettes may be covered under health insurance plans • Requiring a medical prescription creates a barrier to access e-cigarettes for smoking cessation • E-cigarettes from illegal sources may be more harmful than quality-assured products Component Ban • Prevent the worst risks of e-cigarettes like addiction and youth use • Ban e-liquids that contain nicotine • Restrict nicotine concentrations in e-liquids • Ban e-liquid flavours that may appeal to youth • Nicotine restrictions can reduce the addictiveness of e-cigarettes • Flavour restrictions can deter non-smokers and youth from e-cigarette initiation • May discourage smokers from switching to e-cigarettes • Banned e-liquid flavours from illegal sources may be more harmful than quality-assured products • Does not stop youth possession of e-cigarettes obtained by adults Regulation as Poisons • Prevent overdose or accidental use of a harmful substance • Ban e-cigarettes that contain nicotine • Restrict nicotine concentrations in e-liquids • Require warning labels • Discourages e-cigarette initiation and use • May prevent nicotine overdose • May encourage continued use of cigarettes • Banned nicotine e-liquids from illegal sources may be more harmful than quality-assured products • Does not address non- nicotine e-liquids • Does not stop youth possession of e-cigarettes obtained by adults Regulation as Tobacco Products • Treat e-cigarettes the same as the most comparable existing product • Ban sale of e-cigarettes to youth • Restrict marketing and promotion activities • Restrict sale and use to designated locations • Require warning labels • Fits into already well-established tobacco regulations • Discourages e-cigarette initiation and use among youth • May be considered overly restrictive, since e-cigarettes likely do not pose equal health risk as tobacco products • Does not stop youth possession of e-cigarettes obtained by adults Regulation as Consumer Products • Reduce harm from product defects or misuse • Mandate quality control standards for e-cigarettes • Require packaging standards, such as nicotine concentration indicators and tamper-proof containers • Promotes consumer protection • Enables widespread accessibility to a less harmful alternative for current smokers • May unintentionally depict e-cigarettes as safe or healthy • Increases accessibility for youth • Does not stop youth possession of e-cigarettes obtained by adults Regulation as Unique Products • Allows for the creation of legislation that pertains specifically to e-cigarettes • New regulatory mechanisms specifically created for e-cigarettes, depending on a jurisdiction's priorities • Acknowledges that existing regulatory frameworks may not be suitable for e-cigarettes • Enables policymakers to tailor e-cigarette legislation to unique needs • Lengthy process to develop and implement new legislation and regulation • Does not stop youth possession of e-cigarettes obtained by adults Table 2 . How 97 countries have approached the regulation of e-cigarettes. Approach Number Countries Prohibition 30 countries Argentina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Colombia, Egypt, The Gambia, India, Iran, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Mauritius, Mexico, Nepal, Nicaragua, Oman, Panama, Qatar, Seychelles, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syria, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uruguay Medicinal Products 20 countries Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Iceland, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Norway, Philippines, South Africa, Sweden, Thailand, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela Component Ban 36 countries Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, The Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom Poisons or Hazardous Substances 4 countries Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, Brunei Darussalam Tobacco Products 54 countries Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Nepal, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela, Vietnam Consumer Products 15 countries Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Moldova, South Korea, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela Unique Products 68 countries Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Nepal, The Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, Uruguay Data ( Institute for Global Tobacco Control, 2020 ).
As the strictest approach, prohibiting all legal access to e-cigarettes is often motivated by the precautionary principle and a desire to avoid all possible risks, whether or not those risks are scientifically substantiated ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ). Prohibition is usually implemented by banning the manufacture, export, import, sale and/or possession of e-cigarettes. 30 countries around the world have prohibited the sale of e-cigarettes, regardless of nicotine concentration ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). For example, in Lebanon , a decision of the Lebanese Republic Ministry of Public Health (Decision No. 1/207) prohibits the importing and trading of e-cigarettes, and the Lebanese government ordered that e-cigarettes be entirely removed from the country's market ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). Similarly, Singapore's Tobacco Control Act prohibits the sale, distribution, and importation of e-cigarettes in the country ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ).
As a regulatory approach, e-cigarette prohibition aligns with the health protection end of the spectrum. The decision to ban e-cigarettes prioritizes the goal of avoiding use by non-smokers, such as most youth and never smokers ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ). Prohibition would also address other important concerns, such as the health risks associated with dual use and the renormalization of smoking in public spaces ( Kaufman and Mahoney, 2015 ). However, e-cigarette prohibition raises several ethical issues. It infringes on smokers’ autonomy and may perpetuate harm by preventing tobacco smokers from accessing a less harmful product ( Hall et al., 2015 ; Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ). By prioritizing the wellbeing of non-smokers and youth, the policy option to ban e-cigarettes may pose harm to those who are looking for a less harmful smoking alternative, as it removes e-cigarettes from the market ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ). Finally, the decision to ban e-cigarettes would be inconsistent with current policy trends, as other countries begin to legalize certain narcotics such as cannabis ( Bahji and Stephenson, 2019 ).
Regulating e-cigarettes solely as medicinal products is the second strictest regulatory approach and is motivated by a desire to strictly limit e-cigarettes to those who will use them to quit smoking ( Hajek et al., 2019 ). On its own, this approach involves blocking all legal access to e-cigarettes except for use as smoking cessation therapy. Regulatory mechanisms under this classification aim to promote safety among those who use e-cigarettes for therapeutic purposes and to ensure accurate product labelling ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ), such as enforcing medicinal product standards and preventing companies from making false health claims about them ( Conference of the Parties, 2016 ). Additional implementation options include restricting e-cigarette purchases to accredited pharmacies, applying strict regulation of internet sales in order to ensure pharmaceutical standards are being met ( Caponnetto et al., 2015 ), and requiring a medical prescription for purchase. While regulating e-cigarettes solely as a medicinal product constitutes a very stringent approach, most jurisdictions that regulate e-cigarettes in this way have done so in conjunction with other regulatory schemes – providing multiple pathways for legally accessing these products. For instance, Norway regulates e-cigarettes as medicinal products, tobacco products, and as unique products ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). While regulating e-cigarettes solely as medicinal products restricts accessibility to these products, regulating e-cigarettes as a medicinal product on top of other regulatory approaches actually increases their accessibility by creating an additional pathway for accessing these products.
There are 20 countries that regulate e-cigarettes as medicinal products ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). For example, the Philippines classifies e-cigarettes as medicinal products and medical devices ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ), which means they must pass all quality, efficacy and safety evaluations conducted by the Food and Drug Authority of the Philippines before they can be sold ( Republic of the Philippines Department of Health, 2014 ). E-cigarette cartridges and devices must be childproof, and their use is prohibited in public spaces and on public transportation under the ‘Clear Air Laws’ in the Tobacco Regulation Act ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ).
Regulating e-cigarettes as medicinal products addresses some concerns at both ends of the health protection-harm reduction spectrum. This approach prevents non-smokers from legally accessing e-cigarettes, while allowing access to current smokers in order to reduce the harms associated with conventional tobacco smoking. A major advantage is that most jurisdictions already have well-established regulations for medicinal products ( Caponnetto et al., 2015 ). If regulated and prescribed as medicinal products, e-cigarettes and e-liquids could potentially be provided or reimbursed by health insurance plans. This insurance coverage could serve as a financial incentive for current smokers to completely switch from conventional cigarettes to e-cigarettes, as it would ideally decrease or eliminate the cost of e-cigarettes for users of the product.
Despite the numerous advantages of this approach, there are also a few drawbacks. Regulatory burdens and a lengthy pharmaceutical approval process could create an interim black market for unregulated e-cigarettes purchases ( Hall et al., 2015 ). If companies never go through the pharmaceutical approval process, the black market may consequently become permanent. Furthermore, the pharmaceutical approval process is likely to result in cost increases for e-cigarette manufacturers, raising prices and making these products less affordable to current smokers. Many e-cigarette and e-liquid manufacturers may also lack the necessary expertise or resources to register their products or comply with stringent medicinal regulatory standards ( Caponnetto et al., 2015 ).
Applying medicinal regulations to e-cigarettes also creates unique challenges regarding access to these products. Requiring a prescription to use e-cigarettes will limit their accessibility and may encourage potential users to continue smoking tobacco. It could also be seen as destructively paternalistic to require a prescription for a product similar to and less harmful than cigarettes, which are often sold legally on every street corner ( Hall et al., 2015 ).
Regulatory mechanisms that constitute a component ban include setting product standards such as banning e-cigarette liquids (e-liquids) that contain nicotine concentrations above a designated level, entirely banning e-liquids that contain nicotine, or selectively banning certain e-liquid flavours ( Conference of the Parties, 2016 ). E-liquids can be manufactured in a variety of flavours including menthol, fruit, candy, dessert, and tobacco ( Pesko et al., 2016 ). Four countries have banned the sale of nicotine-containing e-liquids, and 32 countries regulate the nicotine concentration of e-liquids ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ).
Finland is currently the only country to place a ban on flavoured e-liquids ( Ollila, 2019 ). In addition to a flavour ban, Finland has banned e-liquids that contain nicotine concentrations greater than 20 mg/ml ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). Israel has also implemented a component ban on e-cigarettes. The country has banned the manufacture, importation, and sale of e-cigarettes that have a nicotine concentration greater than 20 mg/ml ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ).
Imposing an e-cigarette component ban by prohibiting the sale of flavoured e-liquids may be a means to discourage youth (12–17 years old) and young adults (18–29 years old) from initiating e-cigarette use, because they tend to prefer flavoured e-cigarettes ( Harrell et al., 2017 ; Pesko et al., 2016 ). The most notable disadvantage of an e-cigarette component ban is that regulating the nicotine content of e-liquids, either by placing restrictions or banning nicotine-containing e-liquids entirely, may encourage continued use of conventional tobacco cigarettes among current tobacco smokers.
Also influenced by the precautionary principle ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ), regulating e-cigarettes as a poison or hazardous substance finds its basis in the poisonous and potentially fatal nature of high nicotine concentrations ( Kenkel, 2016 ). With the objective of preventing nicotine overdose, possible regulatory mechanisms include banning nicotine-containing e-cigarettes or placing restrictions on nicotine concentrations in e-liquids.
Four countries have adopted this regulatory approach: Australia, Belgium, Malaysia and Brunei Darussalam ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). In Australia, it is illegal to possess or use nicotine as a non-therapeutic good, since nicotine is considered to be a dangerous poison ( Douglas et al., 2015 ). This does not constitute a complete ban on nicotine-containing e-cigarettes, as these products can be purchased for therapeutic purposes with either a permit or prescription from a doctor ( Hall et al., 2015 ; Yong et al., 2017b ). Non-nicotine e-cigarettes do not face this regulatory hurdle in Australia, therefore they can be sold and used legally ( Yong et al., 2015 ). The regulation of e-cigarettes in Brunei Darussalam, on the other hand, focuses specifically on nicotine concentration. E-liquids with a nicotine concentration above 7.5% are classified as poison, whereas those with a nicotine concentration under this amount are classified as a tobacco product ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ).
Banning nicotine-containing e-liquids would help address the goal of preventing current non-smokers from developing an addiction to nicotine. However, this selective ban does not address the risk of non-nicotine e-liquids and may complicate the achievement of smoking cessation goals ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ). A more moderate approach under this regulatory classification may be to limit nicotine concentration in e-liquids, much like the approach adopted by Brunei Darussalam.
Tobacco products can be defined as “any product made or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, including any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product” ( U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2016 ). By this definition, the classification of e-cigarettes as tobacco products is legally justified by the fact that nicotine is derived from tobacco ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ). Many policymakers find it advantageous to classify e-cigarettes as tobacco products in order to include them in already well-established tobacco legislation. Under this approach, e-cigarettes would be available for purchase in the same manner and in the same places as conventional tobacco cigarettes ( Hall et al., 2015 ). They would be subject to the same policies as other tobacco products, including product labelling requirements, restrictions on advertising, minimum age requirements for purchase, and use restrictions in public places.
54 countries regulate e-cigarettes as tobacco products ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). In the United States, the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) has regulatory authority over all tobacco products, including e-cigarettes ( U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2016 ). The FDA classifies e-cigarettes as tobacco products, with an exception made for when they are marketed as drugs or combination products (i.e., to use as a smoking cessation tool) ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). Manufacturers, importers and retailers of e-cigarettes are subject to the applicable provisions in the Family Smoking Prevention & Tobacco Control Act and the Food, Drug & Cosmetic Act . The Tobacco Control Act permits the FDA to regulate e-cigarette manufacture, import, packaging, labeling, advertising, promotion, sale, and distribution ( Merrill et al., 2016 ). The FDA has established three restrictions on e-cigarettes under this authority related to minimum age of purchase, health warning labels, and where tobacco products may be sold ( Merrill et al., 2016 ), and has announced that more restrictions are forthcoming ( Food and Drug Administ, 2019 ).
The most notable benefit of regulating e-cigarettes as tobacco products is that tobacco legislation is already well defined in most jurisdictions. However, there are several notable disadvantages. From a harm reduction perspective, regulating e-cigarettes as restrictively as tobacco products (including conventional tobacco cigarettes, cigars, and smokeless tobacco) – despite unequal health risks – may discourage people from switching completely to a less harmful alternative. Moreover, this regulatory approach may not be suitable since e-cigarettes do not always contain nicotine ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ). From a health protection perspective, the same arguments motivating the strict regulation of tobacco products can be applied to e-cigarettes, in that the latter are also highly addictive products that cause harm and may serve as a gateway to even more harmful behaviours ( Hall et al., 2015 ).
Much like the motivation behind regulating e-cigarettes as tobacco products, countries can regulate e-cigarettes as consumer products in order to include them within existing legislation promoting consumer protection. Unless additionally regulated or otherwise specified, e-cigarettes would then be available like other consumer products – in convenience stores, specialty shops, and on the internet ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ). Regulating e-cigarettes as consumer products would generally address the risks of unsafe or faulty devices and e-liquids ( Caponnetto et al., 2015 ). As such, possible regulatory mechanisms include the creation of quality control standards for e-cigarette products ( Caponnetto et al., 2015 ), tamper-proof containers, labeling rules regarding nicotine concentrations ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ), as well as post-market surveillance and product recall systems. It is important to note that consumer protections vary substantially between different jurisdictions, so regulation as a consumer product will inevitably have different meanings in different places.
Fifteen countries currently regulate e-cigarettes as consumer products ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). In Hungary, e-cigarettes are regulated primarily as consumer products ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ), and are subject to Article 20 of the Tobacco Products Directive (2014/40/EU) ( European Commission, 2017 ). This directive establishes safety and quality requirements for e-cigarettes, packaging and labelling rules, as well as monitoring and reporting requirements for manufacturers and importers ( European Commission. Elec, 2017 ). By regulating the sale of e-cigarettes as consumer products, Hungary aims to achieve multiple competing objectives. The mandated use of warning labels, advising non-smokers to refrain from using e-cigarettes, and the prohibition of all e-cigarette promotion attempts to prevent non-smokers from adopting smoking behaviours, while still allowing current smokers to have relatively easy access to these products.
It has been argued that this regulatory approach fails to specifically address the issues surrounding nicotine concentrations and may potentially give the impression that e-cigarettes are safe for anyone to use ( Farsalinos and Le Houezec, 2015 ). Some countries have opted to regulate non-nicotine e-cigarettes as consumer products, while implementing stricter approaches for e-cigarettes that contain nicotine including prohibition, component bans, or regulating them as poisons or hazardous substances ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). Countries that have taken this bifurcated approach include Australia, France, Moldova , and Switzerland ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ).
Rather than situating them within existing regulatory frameworks, some jurisdictions have classified e-cigarettes as a unique product, enabling government policymakers to create new legislation that pertains specifically to e-cigarettes. 68 countries have regulated e-cigarettes as a unique product ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). In Denmark, e-cigarettes that are not considered medicines are regulated under the Electronic Cigarettes Act (Act No.426) ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). This Act regulates the sale, manufacture, import, packaging, labelling, advertising, and use of e-cigarettes ( Danish Ministry of Health, 2016 ). It allows the sale of e-liquids with a nicotine concentration of up to 20 mg/L ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ), and bans the sale of e-cigarettes to those under 18 years old ( Danish Ministry of Health, 2016 ). The Act requires manufacturers and importers to notify the Danish Safety Technology Authority before introducing a product containing nicotine to the market, and it has provisions for packaging, labelling, and health warnings ( Danish Ministry of Health, 2016 ). Advertising e-cigarettes is prohibited in Denmark and their use is forbidden in many public spaces ( Danish Ministry of Health, 2016 ).
Canada provides a similar example of how e-cigarettes can be regulated as a unique product. In Canada, e-cigarettes are regulated under the Tobacco & Vaping Products Act (TVPA) ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ), in addition to the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act , the Food & Drugs Act , and the Non-Smokers’ Health Act ( Government of Canada, 2019 ). The TVPA regulates the manufacture, sale, labelling, and promotion of e-cigarettes sold in Canada ( Government of Canada, 2018 ). The stated goal of the TVPA is to prevent youth from using tobacco and e-cigarettes (i.e., health protection), while allowing adult smokers to access e-cigarettes as a less harmful smoking alternative (i.e., harm reduction) ( Government of Canada, 1997 ). The TVPA prohibits the sale of e-cigarettes to anyone under 18 years of age, as well as the sale of e-cigarettes that may be appealing to youth in the way that they look or function ( Government of Canada, 2019 ). Canada has banned lifestyle advertising, advertising that is appealing to youth, and the use of testimonials and endorsements ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). Under the TVPA, certain additives have been banned, and restrictions have been placed on marketing flavoured e-liquids ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ).
While Canada and Denmark have both taken a relatively moderate approach to regulating e-cigarettes, other countries have opted for far more restrictive approaches, while still operating under a unique product framework. For example, Cambodia, which has also classified e-cigarettes as a unique product, has taken a more restrictive approach. In its Circular on Measures to Prevent & Terminate Consumption, Sales & Imports of Shisha and E-Cigarettes in the Kingdom of Cambodia , Cambodia's National Authority for Combatting Drugs banned the sale, importation, and use of e-cigarettes in the country ( Royal Government of Cambodia, 2014 ). This example constitutes a precautionary approach, reflecting the health protection perspective.
Regulation as a unique product acknowledges that no existing regulatory classification may be suitable for e-cigarettes in a given country. This approach enables government policymakers to tailor e-cigarette regulation to the unique needs, situations and goals of their citizens. As such, regulating e-cigarettes as a unique product can take on features that place it anywhere on the health protection-harm reduction spectrum. As demonstrated with the case of Canada, regulation as a unique product allows jurisdictions to pursue both health protection and harm reduction, potentially making e-cigarettes accessible to current smokers while restricting access to non-smokers and youth. Regulating vaping and tobacco products in this way also opens up the possibility of risk-proportionate regulation that would reflect the relative risks of each ( Cummings et al., 2020 ). In contrast, if countries view e-cigarettes as entirely harmful, regulating them as a unique product allows a precautionary approach, such as restricting access for the entire population. The drawback of this approach is the amount of time it takes to develop and adopt new legislation in some countries, and the considerable resources that must be dedicated to the process.

Section: 3. Incentivization of E-Cigarettes

Much like e-cigarette regulation, potential approaches to e-cigarette incentivization are influenced by judgments about the utility of e-cigarettes for smoking cessation and whether demand for them should be encouraged or discouraged in the marketplace. Positive incentives, such as subsidies and financial rewards, would encourage people to use e-cigarettes, whereas negative incentives, or disincentives, such as taxes and fines, would discourage people from using them. This section reviews the three ways governments can incentivize e-cigarettes (see Table 3 ) and which governments around the world have adopted each approach (see Table 4 ). Table 3 . Overview of approaches to the incentivization of e-cigarettes. Framework Logic Mechanisms Advantages Disadvantages Taxation • Financial disincentive to reduce demand for e-cigarettes • Health protection • Government imposes mandatory charge on e-cigarettes • Sales tax; value added tax (VAT); excise tax • Discourages e-cigarette initiation and use by making the product more expensive • Decreases affordability of a less harmful smoking alternative • May encourage continued use of tobacco cigarettes Subsidization • Financial incentive to increase demand for e-cigarettes among current smokers • Harm reduction • Government provides e-cigarettes to smokers for free or below market cost • Subsidy administered at the source, through a tax deduction, or by tax credit • Increases affordability of e-cigarettes for people who smoke • Diverts people who might start smoking to use e-cigarettes instead • May send confusing messages about safety of e-cigarettes • May attract public scrutiny for subsidizing a harmful behaviour Reward • Financial incentive to increase demand for e-cigarettes among current smokers • Harm reduction • Government not only funds the cost of e-cigarettes for smokers but also provides a monetary reward for completely switching to them • Increases demand for a less harmful alternative for current smokers • Increases accessibility of e-cigarettes for current smokers • Difficult to monitor program requirements • May attract public scrutiny for rewarding a harmful behaviour Table 4 . How 12 countries have approached the incentivization of e-cigarettes. Approach Number Countries Taxation 11 countries Ecuador, Indonesia, Italy, Latvia, Maldives, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, South Korea, Togo Subsidization 1 country United Kingdom Reward 0 countries Data ( Institute for Global Tobacco Control, 2020 ).
Taxation is a means by which governments can impose a mandatory charge on particular products in the marketplace ( Encyclopedia Britannica ). Although the main goal of taxation is typically to increase government revenue ( Encyclopedia Britannica ), it can also be used for specific products like e-cigarettes to financially disincentivize their purchase and reduce demand for them. When using taxation to disincentivize particular products, governments have a wide range of options in crafting its implementation, including the type of tax imposed, which components of the product to tax, how to tax the selected components, and the rate of tax applied. Jurisdictions can also tax e-cigarettes differently depending on the different ways they are regulated. Very few countries have applied a tax to e-cigarettes or e-liquids beyond a standard sales tax. In 2015, only two countries – South Korea and Togo – taxed e-cigarettes at the national level beyond their standard sales tax. By 2020, that number has increased to eleven countries ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ).
There are three types of taxes commonly applied to goods like e-cigarettes: sales tax, value added tax (VAT), and excise tax. Sales tax and VATs are imposed at the point of sale and are generally applied to a wide range of consumer products ( Encyclopedia Britannica., 2019 ), including food, clothing, and electronics. The sales tax or VAT rate remains constant across most products and services on the market. Applying the standard sales tax or VAT for consumer goods to e-cigarettes does not constitute a financial disincentive, as it is no different than most other consumer goods in the market. However, governments do have the option of levying a higher sales tax or VAT on specific items in order to disincentivize their use. For example, the standard sales tax in Paraguay is 10% ( Trading Economics, 2020 ), whereas a higher sales tax of 16% is imposed on e-cigarettes that are classified as tobacco products ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). This higher tax rate demonstrates one way in which a jurisdiction can negatively incentivize e-cigarettes by way of tax rate.
Excise tax, on the other hand, is a selective tax that can be imposed on goods at the point of manufacture or importation ( Cnossen, 2005 ; Encyclopedia Britannica., 2019 ). Unlike sales tax and VAT, consumers do not see how much excise tax is charged; rather, excise tax is incorporated into the final retail price of the product. Excise taxes have been applied to many harmful commodities in order to make them more expensive and less appealing, thereby reducing their use. They have consistently been demonstrated to work as effective negative incentives for reducing demand of unhealthy products ( Blecher, 2015 ). Prominent examples include alcohol, tobacco, and sugar-sweetened beverages ( Blecher, 2015 ). Countries that have imposed an excise tax on e-cigarettes include Ecuador, Indonesia, Italy, Latvia , Maldives, Poland, Portugal, South Korea, and Togo ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ).
As a negative incentive, the goal of taxing e-cigarettes would be to increase their price, decrease their affordability, and ultimately reduce consumer demand for and use of them ( Kenkel, 2016 ) – which aligns with the health protection perspective. Although taxing e-cigarettes can depress sales and even act as a deterrent to initiation, it can also make it more difficult for tobacco smokers to completely switch to this less harmful alternative ( Pesko et al., 2016 ). Minami and Teo (2019) found that current smokers are more likely to continue smoking conventional cigarettes when e-cigarettes undergo a price increase. Similarly, using data from 35,000 retailers across the United States, Cotti et al. found that every 10 percent increase in e-cigarette prices due to taxes reduced e-cigarette sales by 26 percent, but also increased traditional cigarette sales by 11 percent ( Cotti et al., 2020 ). Applying a tax to e-cigarettes will discourage their use – both among non-smokers and smokers alike ( Kenkel, 2016 ).
Subsidization is a form of financial aid whereby a government or organization pays a portion of a product's cost ( Cambridge Dictionary ). Government subsidies exist for numerous products including medication, medical devices , food, and energy-efficient products. As a positive financial incentive, the objective of an e-cigarette subsidy would be to increase the use of e-cigarettes as a smoking cessation tool by making them more affordable to smokers. Subsidization, therefore, falls near the harm reduction end of the spectrum. The target population includes people who currently smoke conventional cigarettes, those who are using e-cigarettes to quit smoking, and people who might be thinking of starting to smoke tobacco. By reducing the financial barriers associated with e-cigarette use, this form of incentivization would theoretically increase the demand for a less harmful alternative among smokers and divert people who might start smoking to use e-cigarettes instead. Positive incentives would also encourage people who have already switched to e-cigarettes to continue using them, rather than switching back to conventional cigarettes due to financial constraints. Governments often designate eligibility criteria related to income, need, age, or residency status that limits who can receive subsidies. In the case of e-cigarettes, policymakers would likely want to develop narrow criteria for eligibility if their tax system or service delivery model was sufficiently sophisticated to enable such targeting. Policymakers would also need to decide which part of the product should be subsidized – the e-cigarette device and/or e-liquids.
The United Kingdom provides a subsidy for e-cigarettes licensed as medicinal products ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). In the United Kingdom, the standard VAT rate for most goods and services is 20%( Government of the United Kingdom ); e-cigarettes that are regulated as consumer products in this jurisdiction are subject to this 20% VAT ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). However, e-cigarettes that are regulated as medicinal products are subject to a reduced VAT of 5% ( Institute for Global Toba, 2020 ). While this is an available option for e-cigarettes regulated as medicinal products in the United Kingdom, it should be noted that no e-cigarette on the market in the jurisdiction is currently licensed as a medicinal product ( Public Health England. Va, 2020 ). This reduced tax rate constitutes a subsidy and demonstrates one way in which a jurisdiction can incentivize e-cigarettes differently depending on the different ways they are regulated. In addition to subsidizing e-cigarettes that are regulated as medicinal products, the United Kingdom National Health Service offers a subsidy program for nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) products (e.g., transdermal patches , gum, inhalers, spray, lozenges) and smoking cessation prescription drugs ( Shahab et al., 2009 ; Song et al., 2019 ). Depending on income, this program permits people who smoke to obtain NRTs at a reduced or no cost ( Shahab et al., 2009 ). A 2018 study investigating the impact of this program in England found that it was responsible for 15.3% of the 10.8% reduction in smoking prevalence in the country between 2001 and 2016 ( Song et al., 2019 ).
A subsidization program for e-cigarettes could take a similar form, whereby eligible individuals would have access to e-cigarettes and/or e-liquids at a subsidized rate. The subsidized rate could range from a small subsidy, whereby a small portion of the product's price would be covered, to a total subsidy, whereby the entire cost of the product would be covered. In addition to how much of the product's price should be subsidized, governments can choose whether the subsidy should be targeted to specific groups (e.g., current smokers or those of low socio-economic status), or available to the entire population. Another option is to make subsidized e-cigarettes available only with a medical prescription. Finally, governments must decide how to dispense e-cigarette subsidies. They can be administered at the source, through a tax deduction, or by tax credit.
As an incentivization mechanism, subsidizing e-cigarettes falls closest to the harm reduction end of the spectrum. The most notable advantage of this approach is that it increases affordability of e-cigarettes for people who smoke, thus encouraging the use of a less harmful alternative. The same rationale applied to subsidies for approved smoking cessation aids (i.e., NRTs) can be used to support subsidizing e-cigarettes. In a randomized trial comparing the cessation properties of e-cigarettes and NRTs, Hajek et al. (2019) found that when paired with behavioural support, e-cigarettes were more effective than NRTs for smoking cessation ( Hajek et al., 2019 ). Despite this important finding, we still do not have a clear understanding of these products’ effectiveness as smoking cessation aids in varying contexts and populations, nor the potential long-term harms associated with e-cigarette use.
Providing a financial reward for using e-cigarettes represents an even more positive incentivization strategy than just subsidizing these products. The objective of a rewards program for e-cigarette use would be to encourage current tobacco smokers to switch to a less harmful smoking alternative by not only covering the costs of e-cigarettes but actually providing them with a monetary reward. Although there currently do not exist any government programs that reward people for using e-cigarettes, there is a large body of evidence suggesting that paying people to adopt certain behaviours is an effective means to achieve behaviour change. As a result, this approach could theoretically be used to reduce harm in target populations.
One of the most common types of government financial rewards programs for behaviour change are conditional cash transfers (CCTs). Often used as part of poverty alleviation strategies, CCTs are government programs that provide cash to low-income families for complying with a set of conditions or responsibilities ( Fernald et al., 2008 ). Families only receive the reward if they comply with the program requirements ( Fernald et al., 2008 ). CCT programs exist for school attendance, attending regular check-ups with primary-care physicians, and receiving vaccinations. The PROGRESA program in Mexico provides an example of a CCT that has been effective in increasing school enrollment among school-aged children in rural Mexico ( Dubois et al., 2012 ). To be eligible for PROGRESA, families must meet a set of requirements based on socio-economic status and the age of their children. The program consists of payments to families with children enrolled in primary and secondary school, and is conditional upon children attending at least 85% of school days ( Dubois et al., 2012 ).
A reward program for e-cigarette use could be modelled after existing CCT programs, whereby tobacco smokers would be given free e-cigarette supplies plus a monetary reward for switching to e-cigarettes. As part of a harm reduction strategy, the objective of such a program would be to reduce the harms associated with smoking conventional cigarettes by rewarding people who switch completely to a less harmful alternative. Eligibility requirements for participants as well as a reasonable reward structure could be creatively designed to narrowly target rewards to certain population groups and prevent people from being incentivized to take up tobacco smoking in order to become eligible for a possible switch-for-cash program. A monitoring structure would also need to be developed in order to ensure participants are only receiving the financial reward if they meet the program's conditional requirements.

Section: 4. Discussion

The optimal balance of e-cigarette policies adopted by countries will depend heavily on the unique needs, situations and goals of their citizens. In jurisdictions with a high smoking prevalence, an approach that promotes e-cigarettes as a harm reduction tool may be best suited to achieve smoking cessation goals. However, in jurisdictions with very few smokers, introducing e-cigarettes may perpetuate further harm. Further policy considerations depend on a jurisdiction's epidemiologic trajectories of tobacco and e-cigarette use. That is, how likely people are in a given jurisdiction to begin using tobacco cigarettes and/or e-cigarettes, continue using these products, switch among them, or stop using them, over time. How countries choose to regulate and incentivize e-cigarettes will also depend on contextual factors including a country's perceived regulatory capacity, and what is seen as the root problem for policies to address. The ideal objective of e-cigarette regulation and incentivization is to minimize use of these products (especially among those who have never smoked) while simultaneously maximizing their smoking cessation potential for current tobacco smokers. While this is a difficult balance to achieve, the situation is further complicated by the fact that long-term health impacts of e-cigarettes are currently unknown ( Henkler and Luch, 2014 ), and it will take many years to generate this scientific evidence ( Merrill et al., 2016 ).
Despite the lack of robust scientific evidence available, governments around the world are required to make policy decisions to regulate and incentivize e-cigarettes. Not making any decisions on e-cigarettes is a decision in itself. In approaching this matter, policymakers should determine how to weigh all of the factors involved, including which groups to prioritize within the larger population. Some policy options fall closer to the harm reduction end of the spectrum, thus prioritizing current smokers, whereas other policies fall closer to the health protection end of the spectrum, prioritizing non-smokers and youth.
Policymakers should be able to design comprehensive policy solutions that facilitate harm reduction for some parts of the population (i.e., smokers), while simultaneously facilitating health protection for other parts of the population (i.e., non-smoking adults and youth). It must be noted that targeting different messages at different segments of the population is difficult, and there is always the risk of getting messages crossed. Unfortunately, there is no one-size-fits-all solution, and it is likely impossible to achieve all competing objectives. The optimal balance of e-cigarette policies for each jurisdiction will necessarily mean that some competing objectives cannot be met. Nevertheless, policymakers must decide which objectives to prioritize, and which cannot be optimally pursued. There are enough potential options to choose from such that every jurisdiction – based on their unique epidemiological profile, how significant a problem smoking is for youth and adults, and what has been learned from other jurisdictions – should be able to determine a way to regulate and incentivize e-cigarettes that accommodates the specific needs, situation and goals of its citizens.
For some countries, the optimal combination of policies may include enacting more stringent regulations or imposing higher taxes on conventional cigarettes, since there now exists a substitute good (i.e., e-cigarettes) in the marketplace. Having a suitable alternative allows countries to re-examine existing tobacco control policies and adjust them in order to encourage the use of a less harmful alternative among current tobacco smokers. Although e-cigarettes do provide a less harmful alternative to conventional cigarettes, it is important to note that there are a variety of other even less harmful products available to aid with smoking cessation, including NRTs and smoking cessation prescription drugs. When adopting new policies, governments should take stock of all of the options available and make evidence-informed decisions based on the needs of their citizens. Achieving the optimal balance of policies that simultaneously achieve health protection and harm reduction will require countries to engage in a process of rigorous evaluation to determine what works best. As with any new intervention, it is critical that systems for policy evaluation are implemented, in order to ensure policies can be fine-tuned based on specific evidence from the population. In addition to evaluating a country's own e-cigarette policies, it is imperative that systems are put in place for international collaboration. Having only been invented in 2003, e-cigarettes are relatively new to the market and every country is currently in the process of determining the most effective policies; this means countries have a lot to learn from each other, and international organizations like the World Health Organization should work to facilitate cross-country learning related to e-cigarettes.
Additional research is needed to better inform government decisions, irrespective of their underlying objectives, values and priorities. There are four specific kinds of research that should be prioritized so that governments can make more evidence-informed decisions. First, further research is needed to better understand the epidemiologic trajectories of tobacco and e-cigarette use. We currently do not have enough information to estimate how many tobacco users will switch to e-cigarettes, how many non-smokers are susceptible to initiate smoking or vaping , and how these trajectories may vary by context. Second, there is a need to better understand how the various regulation and incentivization options may influence the epidemiologic trajectories of e-cigarette use. For instance, we do not currently know how regulation and incentivization options might change the likelihood of current tobacco smokers completely switching to e-cigarettes and how these options might change the likelihood of non-smokers and youth initiating smoking or vaping. Third, additional research on the long-term health impacts of e-cigarette use, and the implications of dually using both conventional tobacco and e-cigarettes, is needed in order to make policy decisions that maximize the public's health. Finally, there is a need for more research on the normative assumptions as well as the strategies and tactics of those who emphasize health protection and those who favour harm reduction and the effect they have on the policy choices of governments around the world.

Section: Funding

Steven J. Hoffman is funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Ontario Government's Ministry of Research, Innovation & Science .

Section: Credit author statement

Brooke Campus: Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Patrick Fafard: Writing – review & editing. Jessica St. Pierre: Writing – original draft. Steven J. Hoffman: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition

Section: Declaration of competing interest

Steven J. Hoffman is the Chair of the Government of Canada's Scientific Advisory Board on Vaping Products and Scientific Director of CIHR's Institute of Population and Public Health. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of CIHR or the Government of Canada.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors thank Adèle Cassola, Michèle Palkovits, Leah Watson, and Craig White for their valuable feedback on this manuscript.
