Title: A process of healing for the Labrador Innu: Improving health and wellbeing in the context of historical and contemporary colonialism


Abstract: Abstract

In light of the negative effects of historical and contemporary colonialism on the Labrador Innu, healing initiatives grounded in self-determination, renewal of cultural practices, and non-reliance on Western bio-medicine, are known, taught and widely practiced among the Innu. The value of Indigenous healing practices in the treatment of Indigenous people is well-recognized in Indigenous wellness literature, yet non-Indigenous health practitioners know little about healing processes. Moreover, to our knowledge, no studies have examined any contemporary Labrador Innu healing process. The main aim of this paper is to describe the process of healing among the Innu. Although there may be multiple processes of healing, we shed light on a major process that emerged from interviews and focus groups with 39 participants. Five stages of healing were described: being “under the blanket”; finding spiritual strength; extending hands out; finding strength and power; and helping others. Findings highlighted enablement of healing through spiritualities, support from Elders , return to culture, and resistance to negative stereotypes. We provide health professionals with valuable information for considering Innu healing as a model that expands their views for the benefit of Innu seeking mental health services . Implications for non-Innu health and social service providers are about broadening their understanding of the significant role of self-determination among Innu, learning Innu ways-of-knowing and being, recognizing one's own biases, and acknowledging the power imbalances between themselves and Innu people.

Section: 1. Introduction

Healing from the social suffering produced by historical and contemporary forms of colonialism for Indigenous peoples is rooted in the strength of their knowledge and culture. Indigenous perspectives on health and healing in Canada, the United States, Australia and New Zealand encompass spiritual, physical, mental, and emotional aspects of health ( Big-Canoe and Richmond, 2014 ; Butler et al., 2019 ; Panelli and Tipa, 2007 ). Even though earlier colonial policies in Canada and the United States outlawed some Indigenous healing practices such as tent ceremonies and the sun dance ( Waldram, 2013 ), remnants of these practices endure today ( Martin-Hill, 2003 ). Healing practices involve “a transformation from sickness to wellness that is enacted through culturally salient metaphorical actions” ( Kirmayer, 2004 , p. 34). Contemporary Indigenous healing practices are diverse and can involve traditional teachings, sweat lodges, ceremonies, community organized events ( Rowan et al., 2014 ), and other locally-developed practices specific to the culture of an Indigenous community.
Healing is understood by many Indigenous people as a process or “journey” ( Csordas, 2000 ; Waldram, 2013 ), explained as “transformations and accompanying shifts in collective identity, purpose, and meaning-making” ( Gone, 2013 , p. 697). Healing practices based on local Indigenous knowledge are being recognized for their value in alleviating Indigenous social suffering and improving Indigenous peoples’ health and wellbeing ( Gone and Looking Calf, 2011 ; Goodkind et al., 2015 ; Kendall et al., 2019 ; Kirmayer et al., 2011 ; TRC, 2015 ). While there is commonality in Indigenous knowledges, each community has its own local knowledge system upon which healing practices are built. These are grounded in the core values of community members, and are learned and lived in local worlds that reflect a coherent and well-integrated social system ( Kleinman, 1978 ). Thus, healing practices in one Indigenous group are specific to members of that group and may not be relevant to another group.
Salient to understanding healing and wellness among Indigenous people is the context of the healthcare system. Evidence suggests that Indigenous people face significant barriers to receiving appropriate mental healthcare ( McIntyre et al., 2017 ). The Indigenous mental health literature indicates that an emphasis on low healthcare utilization fails to recognize the important role of locally-resonant healing strategies ( Goodkind et al., 2015 ; McIntyre et al., 2017 ), the socio-political and historical context, and the asymmetry of power in healthcare transactions ( Boksa et al., 2015 ; Chatwood et al., 2017 ; Goodkind et al., 2015 ; McIntyre et al., 2017 ). Indigenous scholars draw attention to different understandings between Western health service providers and Indigenous patients in terms of meanings related to self, identity, personhood , emotion, social relations , spirituality, communicative norms, and interpersonal expectations ( Gone, 2008 ). These can arise due to epistemic racism (positioning one's knowledge as superior to another and passing judgement on what is knowledge) on the part of the health service provider ( Allan and Smylie, 2015 ). Racism and discrimination are identified as barriers to accessing healthcare for Indigenous peoples ( Allan and Smylie, 2015 ; McIntyre et al., 2017 ) particularly in mental health ( McIntyre et al., 2017 ). Discrimination has been linked to unmet health needs ( Kitching et al., 2020 ) among Indigenous clients. Hence, Indigenous peoples increasingly rely on local healing practices.
This paper focusses on healing practices among the Labrador Innu. The Innu are First Nations peoples indigenous to the Quebec-Labrador Peninsula, residing in the communities of Sheshatshiu and Natuashish, province of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. Although contemporary local healing views are intrinsically known and considered effective in improving wellness among the Innu, they have not been articulated for non-Innu researchers and for health and social service providers, nor are they built into a healing plan or health system for the benefit of the Innu communities. As such, Innu leaders partnered with academic researchers in a community-initiated study with the purpose of articulating local Indigenous healing. This study was authorized by the Innu Grand Chief, who specified that Innu ways-of-knowing and knowledge systems be employed as fully as possible. The team of Innu and non-Innu researchers aimed to address the following research question: What is the Innu process of healing?
To address this question, we use an Innu community-based participatory research (CBPR) framework for health research developed at the start of this research partnership, in which Innu and non-Innu researchers co-design and conduct the research, entering relational spaces built from a foundation of trust, mutual accountability, and acknowledgement of one's limitations ( Ward et al., 2020 ). This work contributes to the Indigenous healing literature by outlining stages in a process of healing and drawing attention to the importance of spiritualities as a key step for healing among the Innu, and among Indigenous people more generally, whose understanding of health and wellbeing do not separate the spiritual from the mind, body and emotional aspects of being human .

Section: 2. Contemporary views on indigenous healing

Healing practices have been conceptualized as cultural systems that provide control of the disease as well as meaning for the experience of illness ( Kleinman, 1978 ). They are tied to affliction models which in turn are nested in knowledge systems ( Kirmayer, 2004 ; Kleinman, 1978 ) that explain the cause and treatment of the affliction.
Indigenous knowledge systems are born out of the epistemologies (ways-of-knowing) and ontologies (ways-of-being) of Indigenous peoples, described as fundamentally “relational” by Indigenous philosophers ( Burkhart, 2019 ; Cajete, 2000 ; Wilson, 2008 ). Within these knowledge systems, reality is conceived as a permanent state of becoming, emerging from relations among people, stories, and non-human beings. Non-human beings are for example plants, animals, mountains, and rivers in “intertwining life-sustaining relationship” ( Burkhart, 2019 , p. 29) with humans. If a person is thought of as living within a cosmos that includes non-human beings and an ecological world with whom that person lives in permanent relationship, affliction models explain ‘suffering’ as originating from a rupture in the relationship among the person, non-human beings, and the ecological world ( Kirmayer, 2004 ; Waldram, 2013 ).
Using Indigenous knowledge systems, Indigenous scholars have theorized that contemporary “social suffering” ( Adelson, 2009 ) is a result of the loss of culture from colonization ( Brave Heart and DeBruyn, 1998 ; Wesley-Esquimaux and Smolewski, 2004 ). Culture loss is articulated as loss of relationship with the land and/or identity, including loss of language, heritage and spirituality, disconnection from family and community. This affliction model considers “culture” as the treatment modality ( Brady, 1995 ; Castellano, 2006 ; Gone, 2013 ; Gone and Looking Calf, 2011 ).
Alongside theorizing on social sufferings, Indigenous communities began to develop and revitalize local healing approaches. This became a “Pan-Indigenous” spiritual revitalizing movement also referred to as the “healing movement” ( Kirmayer et al., 2011 ; Tanner, 2009 ). Healing activities were developed at the local level, with community members organizing social events that exemplify local cultural and spiritual values; these activities were valued for strengthening and renewing culture, social relations , and “healing of the broken spirit caused by colonialism” ( Marquina-Marquez et al., 2016 , p. 21). The healing movement takes the position that the entire community needs “healing” ( Tanner, 2009 ), while not taking away responsibility from the individual. Local healing approaches are influenced by Pan-Indigenous healing traditions (such as Plains-Indian healing ceremonies, Medicine Wheel and others), Christian concepts of healing, New Age alternative and complementary therapies of popular culture ( Tanner, 2009 ; Waldram, 2013 ).
The healing movement typically does not include Western treatment approaches such as cognitive-behavioural therapy or medication; rather, treatment is participation in cultural practices that re-connect to a reinvigorated culture based on contact with nature and returning to spiritual roots ( Kirmayer and Valaskakis, 2009 ; Marquina-Marquez et al., 2016 ; Rowan et al., 2014 ). Indigenous people describe healing as a “journey” towards a destination ( Csordas, 2000 ; Waldram, 2013 ), and healing is explained as “transformations and accompanying shifts in collective identity, purpose, and meaning-making” ( Gone, 2013 , p. 697).
The Pan-Indigenous movement articulated common concerns and realities of Indigenous North Americans since the 1960s, producing a growing consciousness of a Pan-Indigenous identity. However, these common understandings across Indigenous cultures exist in tension with local realities and expressions ( Kim, 2015 ). For example, Health Canada sponsored the development of a renewed framework to address substance use in Indigenous communities founded on the Medicine Wheel symbol ( Health Canada, 2014 ). The development of this framework included Elders and was supported by the Assembly of First Nations (political umbrella organization of all First Nations Chiefs in Canada). However, the Medicine Wheel is a symbol of the Plains’ Cree. It does not represent understandings of wellness for all Indigenous peoples and is not traditionally used by the Innu. Hence, this framework homogenizes understandings of wellness, illustrating the need for emic understandings of healing and wellbeing ( Gone, 2008 ; Kleinman et al., 1997 ) based on local knowledges.
In Canada, the Aboriginal Healing Foundation ( Castellano, 2006 ) recognized that Indigenous communities would understand healing according to their needs, views and context. For example, the Esketemc First Nation in British Columbia succeeded in overcoming alcoholism, but the community did not stop there in their efforts, becoming awakened to other forms of dependency, and realized that healing processes continue ( Lane et al., 2002 ). For this community, healing efforts are centred on reviving traditional governance, language and traditions –adapted to contemporary contexts. For instance, preparation for hockey games transcends physical training, involving a spiritual sweat ceremony guided by Elders through drumming and prayer, and becoming instrumental in the healing of the hockey players ( Robidoux, 2012 ).
The spirituality of Indigenous peoples plays an important role in supporting healing and wellbeing. There is no one form of Indigenous spirituality shared by all Indigenous people, nor is there one spirituality equally shared by all members of any given community ( Adelson, 2009 ; Csordas, 2000 ; Tanner, 2009 ). Thus, we will refer to ‘spiritualities’ in the plural hereafter. Through spiritualities, Indigenous people access sacred force or power, and life ( Gone, 2016 ). This article notes the cultural specificity of Indigenous healing processes - Innu in this case ( Goodkind et al., 2015 ) - by highlighting the importance of Innu spiritualities ( Butler et al., 2019 ; Fleming and Ledogar, 2008 ), and by providing health and social services providers with information to begin considering alternative models of healing in their areas of practice ( Allen et al., 2020 ; Boksa et al., 2015 ).

Section: 3. The Innu: a historical overview

Until mid-twentieth century, the Innu lived as nomadic hunters travelling in small family groups that gathered a few times a year at trading posts. Traditional life ended abruptly by forced settlement through government policies that made hunting illegal and schooling mandatory. The aim was assimilation in an industrialized society through settlement and education ( Samson, 2009 ). The Sheshatshiu Innu were forced settled in the late 1960s. The Mushuau Innu (now in Natuashish) were first settled to Nutak in 1948, but went back to traditional life after which they were settled again – to Davis Inlet in 1967, where housing was poor and although there was plumbing, there was no running water. The Mushuau finally relocated to Natuashish in 2002, a place of their choice. In addition, Innu were affected by mining development, flooding for a hydroelectric project, and increased NATO military activity, all without consultation. The abrupt changes led to negative social ills but also to a rise of political consciousness and organization.
The growing political response included letter-writing and collective action, with extensive media coverage ( Alcantara, 2010 ). Protests included occupation of the military base at Goose Bay, which served to bring Innu together and gave them a sense that they were worthy of respect ( Gregoire, 2012 ). As public opinion shifted towards the Innu, the government committed to early settlement of land claims, putting controls over military activities and extending the Indian Act in 2002 1 . Innu writer Gregoire (2012) describes how the colonial practices introduced by government resulted in social illness which touched the entire community, including excessive use of alcohol causing drunkenness, violence, family breakdown, suicide, and accidents. The Innu began to experience large health disparities compared to other populations in Canada (e.g., Neuwelt et al., 1992 ; Pollock et al., 2016 ) which remain to this day.
In terms of the healthcare, Innu have access to primary healthcare clinics run by the province in each community. Sheshatshiu is 40 km by road from Happy Valley-Goose Bay (HVGB), a regional health hub. Natuashish is remote and isolated, accessible by air year-round and sea in summer. Clinics are permanently staffed by non-Innu nurses. Family physicians attend during restricted hours. Medical evacuations outside of the communities are common. Infrastructure for telemedicine is improving, however investments are not yet directed to the Innu.
Recognizing significant health disparities and negative experiences with non-Innu healthcare providers, the Innu advanced their self-determination in healthcare by gradually assuming control of health services. Since the 1980s, Innu have taken part in the “healing movement”, negotiating funding for community gatherings ( Gregoire, 2012 ) that take families back to the land to experience traditional life away from the settled communities. Innu have since created positions for mental health community counsellors staffed by Innu from the communities. In 2014, the Innu articulated the Healing Strategy ( Innu Nation, 2014 ) with a vision of culture as ‘medicine’ and the goal of advancing “Innu ways”. These are conceived not as a return to the past but a new way-of-being where Innu ways and ideas are maintained in their original meaning and practiced in a contemporary manner within Innu contexts.
Innu have indomitable spirit and great strength. Even though there are only 2200 Innu in Sheshatshiu and Natuashish, they have maintained their language (approximately 90% speak Innu-aimun) at considerably high rates ( Statistics Canada, 2016 ). Self-determination continues in many fronts, through activism, writing, filming, or hunting ( Penashue, 2019 ). As articulated in the Healing Strategy (2014), while it is important to recognize continued experiences of colonialism, racism and discrimination, Innu hope for improving their health and wellbeing is rooted in the strength of Innu knowledge and culture which they use in ‘healing’.

Section: 4. Methodology

The research approach was informed by an “ethical space of engagement” framework ( Ermine, 2007 ) wherein two different entities with differing worldviews engage in community-based participatory research or CBPR to co-develop a study. The research team includes Innu researchers (second and third authors), a non-Innu Indigenous scholar (fourth author), a researcher of mixed non-Innu Indigenous ancestry (first author - LW), researchers of non-Indigenous ancestry (fifth and sixth authors), and other Innu researchers. Tshenut 2 oversee and advise the research team. LW lived in Labrador, worked for the Innu, and maintains close relationships with Tshenut , leaders, and community members.
Through deep dialogue we established a research partnership that opened the way to understanding Innu knowledge ( Ward et al., 2020 ). In the process , non-Innu researchers became more aware of their own philosophical stances and values. This awareness made it evident that non-Innu researchers had to make conscious decisions that valorize Innu ways-of-doing and knowledges. For example, Innu researchers explained the spiritual relationships among Innu and non-humans (animals, plants), who bring knowledge to Innu. Contemporary colonialism includes destruction of knowledges and also exclusion of the manner to relating to others ( Santos, 2014 ). Hence, to include Innu perspectives, epistemology and ontology we arrived to the need to engage in a CBPR approach that illuminates epistemological alternatives to contemporary colonialist approaches that exclude non-humans.
Focusing efforts on establishing and maintaining relationships enabled our research team to negotiate a relational space for open discussion. The team was therefore able to derive the research question, and work was guided by OCAP™ (Ownership, Control, Access and Possession) principles ( FNIGC, 1998 ). Innu Nation, the Research Ethics Board of Newfoundland and Labrador, and affiliated academic institutions gave ethics approval. The ethics protocol included a mitigation plan for risks to participants of reliving trauma, with Tshenut and counsellors ready and available.
Decision-making was Innu-led and collaborative. A Core Research Team (CRT) guides and steers the research, including Tshenut , community representation, and members of the executive arm of Innu Nation—the Innu Round Table (IRT), an Innu-led and consensus-based governing body with federal and provincial representation. The CRT reports to a working group within the IRT, including sharing emerging and final results and recommendations. The IRT is responsible for taking the study's new knowledge and incorporating it into Innu health programming.
Data collection involved interviews and focus groups that explored Innu understandings of healing. Purposeful sampling was used to recruit participants 16 years of age and older who self-identified as Innu living in the communities. Recruitment was by Innu researchers and the Community Youth Coordinators (adults who coordinate activities), under oversight of the CRT. In total, 39 participants from the two communities were interviewed (23) or participated in focus groups (16) from January to June 2019, as detailed in Table 1 . The relational engagement with community members allowed for invited observations (secondary data sources) used to provide contextual information as per Table 2 . Table 1 . Primary data sources. Individual interviews (20 years and older) Males Females Subtotal Age 20 to 39 3 5 8 Age 40 to 69 6 7 13 Age 70 and older 0 2 2 Subtotal interview participants 9 14 23 Focus groups (ages 16 to 19) Males Females Subtotal Subtotal focus group participants 8 8 16 Total participants 17 22 39 Table 2 . Secondary data sources. Event/activity (description) Period Place Community Gathering (community living in tents sharing cultural activities for several weeks) Fall 2018 Gull Island Feast of the mokoshan (sacred communal meal) Fall 2018 Gull Island Visiting families in their tents Winter 2019 Close to Sheshatshiu Community prayer (led by Tshenut ) Winter 2019 Sheshatshiu Sweats (ceremonial tent led by Tshenut ) January–June 2019 Natuashish Smudging (ceremony involving prayer and the burning of sacred medicines) January–June 2019 Natuashish Women's sharing circles (moderated talking circle) January–June 2019 Natuashish Elders Gathering (from Innu communities in Quebec and Labrador) Fall 2018 Gull Island Note: Secondary sources provided contextual information. Attendance or participation was in all occasions by invitation.
We aimed to obtain depth and breadth of the information until data saturation was attained. The interview questions were discussed and approved by the CRT and Community Youth Coordinators. We did not use the words resilience , trauma , or healing in the questions because we were interested in eliciting the participants’ perspectives. Examples of questions asked include: “Can you tell me about a time in your life that you found difficult? How did you go through it?”
Individual face-to-face semi-structured interviews, each lasting between 35 and 75 min, were conducted in English by LW at a local community centre. Interview protocols and guiding questions were translated into Innu-aimun; an interpreter was available in all interviews, as needed. At the recommendation of the Youth Coordinators, youth aged 16 to 19 participated in the study through focus groups. Focus groups were conducted in English at the youth centre of each community by LW, each lasting approximately 2 h, with the Youth Coordinators acting as interpreters. Youth celebrated with a shared meal after their participation in the focus groups. All data were anonymized using Innu names assigned by Innu researchers. Gift cards ($30) were provided before initiating the interviews and focus groups. Honorariums were given to knowledge holders who participated in research meetings to demonstrate respect for their stories and thank them for their involvement ( Kovach, 2009 ). Interviews and focus groups were audio-recorded.
FA transcribed the audio-recording of all interviews and focus groups verbatim. Having agreed a priori to employing an Innu worldview, the research team members engaged in reciprocal learning in the analysis, with Innu voices, local knowledge, and ways-of-knowing as a foundational principle guiding research efforts ( Ward et al., 2020 ). The entire data set was reviewed many times by LW, who proposed early emerging inductive themes that captured important topics in relation to the research questions ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ). These themes were discussed and refined among all researchers on three occasions between June and November 2019. Intermediate documents, memoing and graphical representations facilitated the analytical process ( Langley, 1999 ; Miles et al., 2014 ).
Upon review of themes, Innu researchers noted that data gathered lacked sufficient detail regarding spiritual issues. They directed engagement in additional data collection which led to further interviewing of one new participant and clarifying questions to two participants. No new themes were found but existing themes were refined. Condensed data were visually displayed in matrices by systematically arranging answers pertaining to various themes ( Miles et al., 2014 ). For example, we arranged all the answers about events that influenced wellbeing negatively. We then organized the data by participant age to consider variations of understanding of healing according to age. We also organized the data of the most descriptive participants’ accounts (18 participants) temporally in a matrix ( Langley, 1999 ). Looking across the 18 accounts, we were able to appreciate the influence of local culture in the way actions were organized temporally. Accounts were underpinned by concepts of past, present, and future. When we looked outside the 18 most descriptive accounts, temporal patterns clearly emerged that were similar across the data set, implying that healing is a process that evolves over time within individuals. We used graphics (for example, squares for one stage, triangles for another, and so on) to identify “stages” in the healing process for individual participants. We found that five “stages” comprise a process of healing. Innu researchers named the stages and refined the analysis further, as described in the results. Results were shared with the CRT at several stages of the analysis; this allowed for guidance on the interpretation and organization of the results.

Section: 5. Results

We present the results by organizing them in two sections. The first section describes a process of Innu healing and its stages. The second describes the roles of Tshenut and spirituality in healing, both important themes that emerged.
Innu, like other Indigenous peoples, understand healing as a process they refer to as “journey of healing”. This journey has a destination that Innu call minuinniuin, which can be translated into the English word wellbeing . Minuinniuin is understood as an aspirational state of being associated with a “place” where Innu are together with family and community in intimate closeness with past and present generations, connecting to life around them with the sacred present in everyday life ( Ward et al., 2021 ). The social enactment of cultural actions borne of Innu knowledge allows people ‘to feel’ a sense of wellbeing closely associated with their Innu identity, as strong and free people. Innu achieve minuinniuin through healing which we explain further.
Our findings show that Innu individuals moved over time from a clearly-defined adverse, accidental, or tragic event that they experienced as harmful or threatening, outside their control, and negatively affecting their wellbeing. Healing was revealed as involving sense-making whereby they would navigate between moments of distress and strategies to build strength towards a more favorable outcome that is ultimately minuinniuin . We discovered common themes in participants' accounts of their experiences of healing, which denote stages in a process. Here, we describe the stages in the process of healing. While we articulate a general process of healing that reflects themes that emerged from the data, we acknowledge that the process of healing is different for each person and some people's experiences may not align with the model described below. To contextualize the need for healing, we first describe the most frequently mentioned events that participants considered as negative to their wellbeing, and the impacts of these experiences.
The most frequently described events were actions from authorities (represented by social services, police, priests and/or teachers in residential or day school), a suicide or accidental death of a family member or close friend, or racist behaviours experienced frequently in everyday situations. Innu participants recounted their stress, powerlessness, helplessness or feelings of being trespassed: “The priest came to our camp telling my grandfather that he was there to take me to school … I was quite terrified … The priest was quite loud, threatening that he would go to the RCMP [federal police] and social services.” ( Tshenu Pinip, age 60s) “There was sexual abuse starting when I was 4 years old … the priest was abusing us in school.” (Uapukun, age 50s) “I have scars in my face because a [non-Innu] boy threw a rock at me when I was trying to cross to North West River (the neighbouring community).” (Shanet, age 40) “At a bar, this guy started to call us bad names. I told him ‘You are a colonizer’ and he said ‘No, I am a developer, and you shouldn't be proud of being Innu, your goals in life should be to be a developer like us'. We are in a world that makes us think that we should not be proud to be Innu. I guess everyone experienced those things growing up, like going to a store and people think you are trying to steal .” (Napeu, age 19)
Participants described the impacts of these experiences, which included the dulling of pain by self-medication through drugs and/or alcohol and attempting suicide: “I was drinking … I only wanted to have fun and not to think about those things that happened to me.” (Uapukun, age 50s) “I started drinking and smoking [cannabis] but it didn't really comfort me.” (Aishen, age 32) “I didn't want to think about my pain anymore … I started to go on the wrong path and I even tried to kill myself.” (Puna, age 30s)
A pervasive theme throughout almost all interviews and focus groups were experiences of racism and discrimination. Although Innu participants seldom used the words “racism” or “discrimination” directly, contemporary events that negatively affect Innu wellbeing include everyday aggressions in everyday places. For example, Spastien (age 17) describes lunch time at school: “In the school cafeteria [outside the community] there is the ‘Indian table’, where only Innu sit. Lunch time is stressful because you are expected to sit at that table!” Nevertheless, the Innu do not want to focus on racism and discrimination but rather on advancing “Innu ways.”
The Healing Strategy (2014) develops an action plan stating that there is “a long-held view that healing must be built from the ground up, with Innu families as the focus” (page 5), and “looking forward to carrying out comprehensive, planned, sustained, and cumulative action” (page 48). This point demonstrates self-determination in that colonization is not the central focus of Innu healing; rather the focus is on finding their own ways of healing. Importantly, Innu people have found and continue finding ways of returning to wellbeing ( “I never experienced anything that did not make me strong”— Mani Shunin, age 60s) through “healing”. We describe the process of healing next.
Innu researchers named five stages in the process of healing: being “under the blanket”; finding spiritual strength; extending hands out; finding strength and power; and helping others. Not all participants described each of these five stages or experienced them in the order presented, and not all participants had arrived—at the time of interview—to the aspirational state of minuinniuin . Participants’ stories of healing recounted a tragic event that placed them “under a blanket” for a time, following which they found spiritual strength to extend their hands out to be helped or to recognize resources around them. Following this, healing stories described actions that helped participants find strength and power. Only a few participants helped others, but this was not necessarily seen as being required for healing. Below we describe each stage in more detail. a. Being under the blanket
This stage is described as one in which the Innu person feels as though they “ cannot move from under the blanket, seeing all dark around, only seeing what happened [to you], looking down and [having] hands down … feeling grief, sadness, anxiety … no hope, nothing to lean on ” (Uapukun, age 50s). Younger participants described this stage as, “ your hood is up … don't want to see or be seen ” (Shapatesh, age 19), and “feeling you have nobody that can listen to you” (Napeu, age 20s).
This stage is emotionally difficult. Some Innu participants indicated they were still “under the blanket” at the time of the interview: “it was the priest that was the teacher … they just made you feel so fearful and I know that still happens today that people are really living in fear … Some people overcome … not me. ” (Napeu, age 50s, reflecting on an experience that occurred at 9 years of age). b. Finding spiritual strength
This stage of finding spiritual strength is considered of paramount importance by Innu researchers. It is important to note that there is a spectrum of spiritualities among the Innu. We will explain the importance of this stage through the stories of two participants, Uapukun (age 50s) and Puna (age 30s). Uapukun holds traditional Innu views of spirituality, while Puna holds Christian spiritual views. This is Uapukun's story: “I was writing a suicidal letter to my sisters telling them who would have to look after my sons, then I looked at my boys and changed my mind … It made me feel stronger to look at them. That is when I started praying a simple prayer: “Dear God I need to know where my dad is because I don't know where my dad is.” I dreamed that night and my dad came to me and said “this is where I am” and he showed me where he was, and people were using tents … and everything was connected. ‘There is no sickness here, there is no sadness’, he said … ‘go home and look after my grandkids’ … I never thought again about suicide.”
Uapukun's dream enabled her to move forward, stop thinking about suicide and go for treatment . The importance of this dream is first, that Uapukun views it as providing insight through sacred knowledge; second, the content is about “being connected”. Uapukun learned through the dream that she is not alone, that she is connected to her father through spirit. Third, spirit directed Uapukun to do the good thing and go back to her children.
Spirituality was essential in traditional Innu life on the land, with the conception that humans and all creation are connected, with Innu heaven as a gathering of all generations in tents, and dreams as valid and eternal sources of sacred knowledge. Colonial policies attempted to remove spirituality, branding it “heathenism”, and to some degree Innu spirituality diminished as a consequence. For the Innu, healing involves re-discovering or regaining the prominence of spiritualities in their lives, as is the case of Uapukun: “I looked at this smudge … I had never seen it … I went to my mother and said ‘I heard that bad spirits don't like the smell [of smudge] and they leave, it is like cleaning the house’ … [Mother] said ‘We used to do that [smudging] a long time ago … we used to know that there is something else there … and we forgot.’”
There are other Innu spiritualities that are essential for healing. The following is the case of Puna, who practices Christianity and whose experience includes what she described as a “spiritual fight” that she had to “win”: “I would suffer from anxiety … I would see these black things … I could not sleep. I would call my parents to come and pray for me … One day my sister came and my children were terrified and told her [that] there were black dogs trying to get me. The children were ‘seeing’ what I was ‘seeing’ … I had told them nothing! … I realized [my stopping drinking] was a spiritual fight … I had to win … God was helping me; my parents were helping me … I realized God loves me … I have been sober since then.”
Both Uapukun and Puna experienced a realization of being helped, needed, and loved through a spiritual experience at the start of their healing journey, enabling them to move forward in their healing. Innu view this stage as a condition for healing. If they do not use the strength the spirit provides, they cannot advance in their healing. Uapukun, for example, said that, “ When the person is unable to see the spirit trying to help, they get stuck … It was only after [I saw the spirit] that I talked to the Tshenut [traditional counselling/treatment] and things started to come up” .
Overall, the importance of spirituality in Innu healing cannot be overstated. c. Extending hands out
Once participants were able to find spiritual strength, they entered the next stage in the process of healing. This stage was described by Innu researchers in contrast to “being under the blanket” as one in which the person is not “looking down”, “is able to see others around” who can help. In this stage, the person seeks help, finding resources for their journey towards healing: “My parents and friends were my big support … a healing workshop came into Davis [the community] in 1993. It was a workshop on women finding healing for themselves … it left a powerful impact on me … I realized I was hungry for healing, for looking after me … I started to get stronger emotionally and mentally … I started thinking towards my future. Education was one thing … I stopped going to school in grade 8. I went back to school … I became stronger .” (Mani, age 50s) “I was feeling very lonely when I stopped using [drugs] … I had to make new friends to find my healing. I heard there were women circles, so I started going … I got new friends … At some point I stopped feeling lonely.” (Shanet, age 40s) d. Finding strength and power
This stage is characterized by approaches that participants took as they constructed understandings of the events that negatively influenced their wellbeing. We found two approaches, often used together: practicing Innu culture on the land, and resisting negative Innu stereotypes. Practicing Innu culture often involved referring to grandparents' or parents’ teaching, and/or stories and legends. Being on the land is the place where culture is learned and practiced. In cases where participants were not exposed to traditional Innu teachings, there were concrete efforts to “find culture”. For example, many participants indicated that as teenagers or adults, they deliberately chose to participate in cultural activities that were new to them. Exposure to cultural teachings as a child or discovered later in life would allow a person to re-examine the negative events or situations outside their control, and over time, reframe them towards a positive outcome. Innu culture and values become a vehicle through which individual and community meanings are re-instilled. Through enactment of culture and listening to stories and legends (the way values are taught) Innu begin to understand who they are as individuals and their continuity with ancestors, and gain a positive sense of self, which in turn helps them find strength and power.
Participants consistently referred to the strength of a parent or grandparent who motivated them to find healing through culture. For example, Maniakat (age 30s) recounts her story of healing after attempting suicide, referring to the strength of her grandmother (“ I thought ‘if my grandmother was able to do that as an orphan, working for the families that raised her and raising her own grandchildren, I can do that too’. So I decided to work on my healing” ).
Strength and healing from going to the land was also frequently reported as an awakened desire to experience the land ( “[the] stories created a desire to have an experience in the land ”). Maniakat recounts in the interview, ten years after her decision to work on her healing, a ‘moment’ when she found strength and power on the land, “ touching the cold water I realized how strong and powerful Innu are … my ancestors were here, we are strong people able to survive on the land ”, realizing a renewed Innu identity.
Actions associated with healing also involved resistance to negative stereotypes, since they help develop and strengthen positive Innu identity. In the case of Shanet (age 40s), healing was needed due to a negative Innu identity she had developed since childhood (“ as a child I was confused about being Innu … it was like a cut that just got deeper over time ”). This was reinforced by stereotypes presented by the national broadcaster and “ things people were saying ” about Innu at the time of the NATO protests. Shanet stated: “I was a teenager during the NATO protests. I was proud of being Innu because we were telling the government "we are here". I was also embarrassed and ashamed because of the things that people and CBC [national broadcaster] were saying.”
Shanet reclaimed her language, as a way of finding her culture (“ I picked up the language over time ”) and reinforcing her identity ( “I have a very strong sense of who I am now, I speak it well. Language and pride are part of being Innu.” ). Shanet refers to taking on a positive Innu identity as an epiphany: “ When I turned 25 … a switch came on, I matured. I always felt I had to prove myself, [then] I felt I didn't have to prove myself anymore .”
Finding and practicing Innu culture and resisting Innu negative stereotypes provided Innu participants with strength and power to work on their healing. e. Helping others
In this stage, participants helped others in their healing process. Some participants noted that they derive meaning and Innu identity from helping others. This helped them in their own healing journeys: “Helping others helped my own healing. It gives me a purpose, it lets me realize that I have something to contribute … with drugs and all those things you become selfish and you are only aware of your own needs. When you come out of that you become self-aware. When I became self-less, not selfish anymore, that added to my self-worth. Then you can look at the bigger picture, that [picture] is about being Innu and being what we were always before” (Inushkueu, age 40s).
Sharing personal stories of overcoming was one way of helping others: “ Now I go to the school and tell young people my story and how the teacher abused us … It is important to young people to learn to be proud of being Innu” (Nashtish, age 50s). Other participants talked about their involvement in programs as a way of helping other Innu in their healing: “I organize walks for young women and girls, and this way they learn how strong they are” (Mani, age 50s) and, “I take boys in canoe expeditions, and many of them stopped sniffing [gas] after that [canoe expedition] … they are happy now” ( Tshenu Nuk, age 60s).
Tshenut have a traditional role of teaching Innu knowledge and sharing wisdom through stories and through counselling. Spiritual Tshenut and kakushapatak (sometimes translated as “shaman” although the Innu do not use this word) are recognized for their ability to communicate with and act as intermediaries between animal spirits and ancestors’ spirits. Their roles as counsellors, spiritual advisors and intermediaries continue in contemporary Innu healing.
Counselling occurs naturally in the social exchange of home visits: “The old people are the ones I like to talk to when I am struggling … they have been out there and they can help me … they will make sure that you look at the things that are happening” (Shunin, age 50s).
Tshenut play an important role in contemporary Innu spiritualities. For example, Innu-designed treatment programs use the ceremonial sweat lodge. Tshenut teach during treatment; “ Whenever we run a treatment program, Tshenut come to teach the legends and how to pick medicines” ( Uapukun, age 50s). During the sweats, spirits are invited to the ceremony: “ When we go to the sweat we usually go with a Tshenu and take the spirit of the ancestors with us to the sweat” (Uapukun, age 50s). There are other forms of ceremony as well. For example, Aishen (age 30s) explains her experience of forgiving a person that “did wrong” to her in a ceremony facilitated by Tshenut ; “[Tshenu] said “Would you like to say something?’ … I said I wanted and they invited me in the middle of the circle [around the fire] … [Participants] were asked to pray for me [while I talked]. There is this guy … he did wrong to me. So I closed my eyes and I [imagined that I] invited him to come to the fire [in the middle of the circle]. I started saying, why did you do this to me, what is wrong with you? … And he would respond back, he would say sorry that I did that, and that he didn't mean to do it. This really helped me. I forgave him.”
In the account of Aishen, even though the person who wronged her was not physically there, the spiritual environment is such that she is able to invite him, and receive a response back. The spiritual process at work allows Aishen to forgive and feel helped. It is important to note the role of Tshenut in helping Innu practice the Innu value of forgiveness through ceremony.
Tshenut understand that Innu knowledge and culture are dynamic, and that each generation builds on previous knowledge without “starting from scratch” all the time. For example, Tshenu Nishapet (age 70s) considers that , "One way you find wellbeing is to go back into the country ". She notes the challenges young people face in particular and how Tshenut can help them to understand their Innu identity: “Young people have to find a way of getting back to their culture while having jobs and going to school … We cannot do it for them, but we can be there ”. Tshenu Pinip (age 60s) similarly considers that younger Innu need their culture while also getting a non-Innu education: “ Nowadays, it is like walking between two parallel lines. Outside one line is only Innu and outside the other line is only akenashau [non-Innu]. Younger people have to walk in the middle ”. Moreover, Tshenu Nuk (age 60s) joyfully commented on the new words created by young Innu and the role of social media in helping spread the new words: “I see on Facebook new words coming up, like “chipcha” for fries! We did not have a word for that before but now we do! ” Hence, the Innu notion of healing includes Tshenut having an active role in teaching cultural knowledge and supporting healing efforts through counselling and support, and “being there” for the younger generations as they expand the knowledge entrusted to them. As knowledge holders, Tshenut have an important role in aiding younger Innu alleviate the tensions they experience in the adaptation of traditional Innu culture on the land to contemporary life.
We derived a figure to represent the Innu process of healing. It was developed in a two-day meeting among Innu and non-Innu researchers, Tshenut and community members. The meeting was conducted in Innu-aimun and, at the request of the participants, was not recorded. The drawings were by an Innu artist.
The process of healing is shown ( Fig. 1 ) as a journey towards a destination ( minuinniuin ) represented by the sun rising in a specific part of Innu ancestral lands known in English as the Mealy Mountains. The sojourner is helped by four winds provided by Creator (spiritual, emotional, mental and physical winds). The spiritual wind comes first, because without it, it is impossible to walk successfully; simply put, the wind of the spirit is first enabled in the healing journey. The sojourner walks on snowshoes which is appropriate to the terrain and the season, and represents the family and community. The strength of Innu youth (the raised arm) and support of Tshenut (the walking stick) are essential. The snowshoes signify that personal healing must be supported by family and community. Download: Download high-res image (785KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Innu healing.
All tools and provisions required are contained in the hunting bag. With new tools for new challenges, it represents ancient Innu knowledge and the newer knowledge generated by each generation. It also represents the adaptive view of Innu people, which indicates that healing includes maintaining the distinctiveness of “Innu ways”. This is represented by the sojourner walking towards the future in traditional clothing. There is an overall progression towards wellbeing, while at the same time some steps are intertwined and yet ongoing. For example, the wind of the spirit enables journeying, while talking to Tshenut and finding strength and power takes place while journeying.
The figure represents an Innu individual walking a healing journey. However, this too relates to the healing of the communities, because as the Healing Strategy indicates, healthy communities and healthy families are comprised of healthy individuals. It is necessary to explain Innu understandings of journeying that occurred following the caribou, or to meet family. Through relationship with atiku (caribou understood as non-human – Blaser, 2018 ), Innu know where to find atiku . Hence, Innu worldview links journeying to spiritual enablement. When journeying to meet family, fathers and mothers would find the meshkanau (trail) of the ancestors to return to the gathering places. Thus, Innu concepts of journey are underpinned by spirituality (knowing where and when to go in relationship to non-humans) and by ancient paths ( meshkanau of ancestors) in intertwined manner. Other Indigenous North American cultures have developed similar representations of healing. For example, the Lakota concept of Red Road of Healing is conceived as a migration ( Weaver, 2002 ).

Section: 6. Discussion and conclusion

To our knowledge, this is the first exploration of healing among the Labrador Innu, a group for whom colonial subjugation happened abruptly and recently. Members and leaders of the Innu communities of Sheshatshiu and Natuashish conceived a research originating in the belief that all Innu are affected by historical and contemporary colonialism and that, hence, all Innu need healing. They see that government efforts to improve their health and wellbeing have failed. They initiated a journey towards self-determination which includes the use of traditional Innu ways of healing in contemporary contexts. Since the 1980s, they have developed local healing initiatives that clearly do not involve Western bio-medical approaches. These initiatives are intrinsically known, taught and practiced, and deemed effective within the communities.
Participants contextualized their need of healing within stories of pain, strength and survival in light of contemporary colonialism that is engrained in everyday life . They found strength and power to further healing by resisting negative stereotypes and practicing Innu culture steeped in spirituality. Our findings indicate that the Innu are profoundly spiritual people, and that their spiritualities need to be mobilized to enable healing. They see the material, mental and emotional components working together with the spiritual. We also highlight the importance of Innu Tshenut and Indigenous Elders in general, in healing and in ceremony. This finding emphasizes the role of Elders in navigating a contemporary return to cultural practices. It also accentuates the dynamism of culture and the confluence of tradition and contemporary ways-of-doing. It is likely that the processes of healing will continue to change as new generations navigate their own histories and spiritualities. Many participants stated being helped by their own participation through sharing their experiences, and expressed hope that their narratives will initiate a broader understanding of the process of healing. We suggest that the process of Innu healing is a form of individual and collective self-determination.
The importance of spiritualities highlights the specificity of the process of healing with respect to the Innu, but these findings complement global research involving Indigenous peoples’ traditions and beliefs about healing. Other studies also highlight the importance of strengthening traditional and contemporary healing forms through Indigenous spiritualities ( Gone et al., 2020 ; Gone and Looking Calf, 2011 ; Goodkind et al., 2015 ; Kendall et al., 2019 ; Kirmayer et al., 2011 ; TRC, 2015 ). We suggest that the approach and process of healing described in this study may apply to other Indigenous communities seeking to uncover ways of healing based on their intrinsic knowledges.
While the process of healing outlined in this article may not represent every Innu's experience, we have given a general view that includes the experiences of those of different generations. We suggest future inquiry into the roles of spiritualities in Indigenous healing, giving consideration to other Indigenous groups and individuals who do not see spiritualities as part of their healing.
The worldviews of Innu researchers were core to the research approach and ensured that the self-determination goals of their communities were elucidated. We suggest that without relationality non-Innu researchers cannot engage Innu worldview, and we present our method as an example to researchers seeking to engage with different worldviews. Our analytical approach (e.g., organizing stories temporally and comparing across the data set) represents an intersection of worldviews and perspectives ( Gone, 2019 ), blending Innu/non-Western and non-Innu/Western methodologies and perspectives.
A limitation of this research is that interviews were conducted in English. Participation of mono-lingual Innu may have been deterred or lacked full engagement. To mitigate this, we familiarized the interpreters with the questions and maintained continuous dialogue among all researchers during the research.
There are implications that arise from our research for health and social service providers. Without necessarily sharing Indigenous spiritualities, it is vital for health and social service providers (especially non-Innu providers) to understand the importance of Indigenous spiritualities to appreciate Indigenous processes of healing. Those working with Innu clients need to learn about Innu ways-of-knowing and ways-of-being, critically recognize their own biases, and acknowledge the power imbalances between themselves and their clients. The importance of understanding and prioritizing self-determination among the Innu as they improve their own wellbeing through healing cannot be overstated.

Section: Credit author statement

Leonor M. Ward: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Visualization; Mary Janet Hill and Annie Picard: Conceptualization, Methodology; Anita Olsen Harper: Writing – review & editing; Samia Chreim: Methodology, Writing – review & editing of many manuscripts, Supervision; Samantha Wells: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Christine Poker, Alex Andrew and Nympha Byrne, community partners in this study, and the Innu Round Table (IRT) in supporting this study.
The study is funded by an operating grant of the Canadian Institute of Health Research ( FRN 145126 ) awarded to Dr. Samantha Wells, with ethics approval from the Innu Nation, the University of Ottawa (# H-08-18-769 ), and the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (# 121/2018 ) of the Province of Ontario, and the Health Research Ethics Authority of the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador in Canada (#2018.229).
