Title: The passivists: Managing risk through institutionalized ignorance in genomic medicine


Abstract: Abstract

As the era of big data transforms modern medicine, clinicians have access to more health data than ever. How do medical providers determine which data are relevant to patient care, which are irrelevant, and which may be inappropriately used to justify potentially harmful interventions? One of the most prominent medical fields to address these questions head on – clinical genomics – is actively debating how to assess the value of genomic data. In-depth interviews with clinicians and a content analysis of policy documents demonstrate that while many clinicians believe that collecting as much patient data as possible will lead to better patient care, a sizeable minority of clinicians preferred to collect less data. These clinicians worried that large genomic tests provided too much data, leading to confusion and inappropriate treatment. Clinical geneticists have also started developing the concept of “actionability” to assess which types of genomic data are worth collecting and interpreting. By classifying data as useful when it can or should lead to action, clinicians can formalize and institutionalize what types of data should be ignored. But achieving consensus about what counts as “actionable” has proven difficult and highlights the different values and risk philosophies of clinicians. At the same time, many clinicians are fighting against the ignorance arising from genomic databases predominantly filled with samples from European ancestry populations. Debates about how and when to institutionalize ignorance of health data are not unique to clinical genomics, but have spread throughout many fields of medicine. As the amount of health data available to clinicians and patients grows, social science research on the politics of knowledge and ignorance should inform debates about the value of data in medicine.

Section: 1. Introduction

Over the past few decades, the amount of health data collected from patients has skyrocketed, and our health systems are now faced with information overload. If one of the primary goals of health data collection is to improve patient health outcomes, how can clinicians turn this data into useful information and actionable insight? How do medical providers determine which data are relevant to patient care, which are irrelevant, and which may be used to justify potentially harmful interventions? The dominant narrative of big data and precision medicine rests on the idea that collecting the most patient data as possible, from as many sources as possible, will allow clinicians and researchers to individualize and improve healthcare plans for their patients. Researchers and policymakers argue that by triangulating data from multiple sources, precision medicine can revolutionize the treatment of cancer , cardiovascular disease, and the other major medical problems of the 21st century ( Collins and Varmus, 2015 ). But collecting lots of patient data requires tremendous amounts of coordination and interpretation, and some researchers and clinicians are concerned that more data can lead to unnecessary overtreatment ( Franks et al., 1992 ).
Take, for example, screening tests for cancers such as prostate cancer or breast cancer. As these tests get more popular and more sensitive, the number of people diagnosed with early-stage breast and prostate cancer has grown tremendously. But corresponding improvements in health outcomes and death rates have proven much slower, leading some researchers and policymakers to suggest that these screening tests are overused, often lead to overtreatment, and should not be recommended for some patient populations ( Esserman et al., 2013 ). This data collection and subsequent intervention may be driven by an impulse to control our fears and reduce uncertainty rather than an effort to improve health outcomes ( Aronowitz, 2015 ).
How clinicians prefer to draw the boundaries of responsible data collection depends in part on how they prefer to manage health risks for their patients. In classic theories of biomedicalization ( Clarke et al., 2003 ), modern medicine seeks to actively manage risk by ordering tests, collecting as much data as possible, and performing preventative interventions. But there is another form of risk management that may be growing in medicine: passive risk management. Drawing on a term from the passive investment movement in finance ( Berman and Heller, 2016 ), I call the clinicians who prefer to collect less data in the management of medical risk the “passivists.” “Passivists” believe that collecting data in the service of intervention and active risk mitigation can often backfire, leading to worse outcomes than doing nothing. They tend to order fewer and smaller medical tests, arguing that the push to collect as much data as possible serves the interests of the medical-industrial complex more than patients themselves, because large-scale patient data has tremendous monetary value for health systems. The rapid expansion of available patient data has highlighted the tensions between these two competing risk management philosophies, with advocates from both sides fighting to institutionalize their preferred strategy.
Debates on the value of health data include value judgments about both what should be known, and what should not be known. To help sort through available data, clinicians and researchers must also ask: what data can or should be ignored, in what circumstances? Clinical genomics is a particularly useful field to study this question, because clinicians and researchers are actively debating when genomic data is and is not useful for patient care. As policies about clinical genomics become standardized and institutionalized across the United States, the concept of “actionability” has emerged as a key place to debate what should and should not be known. How have these debates unfolded, and how are providers attempting to institutionalize ignorance as a way of managing the health risks of their patients?
Examining clinical genomics also provides an opportunity to understand how multiple processes of institutionalizing ignorance are unfolding in medicine. First, in policy debates about what types of genomic data should and should not be considered “actionable” and relevant to patients, many clinicians and researchers are seeking to institutionalize ignorance of certain kinds of genomic data as a means to ensure their accountability for potential negative health impacts of their interventions based on that data. At the same time, another form of ignorance has already become institutionalized due to genomics researchers' lack of awareness or concern for non-European populations. Widely-used genomic databases are disproportionately filled with samples from European ancestry populations, making the research and clinical practices based on that data of uncertain value for other populations. So while many clinicians and researchers are working to create policies to institutionalize ignorance of some kinds of genomic data, others are working to generate new public databases that will alleviate clinical genomics’ ignorance of data from many non-European ancestry populations (e.g All of Us Research Program, 2020 ). Analyzing debates about these two different but related forms of institutional ignorance provides an opportunity for social scientists to better understand how medical institutions conceptualize and operationalize the usefulness of health data.

Section: 2. Analytical perspective

One of the primary features of modern biomedicine is its emphasis on risk management and surveillance (e.g. Clarke et al., 2003 ). Symptoms of disease are no longer required for a person to be “ill”—risk of future disease is sufficient ( Fosket, 2010 ), making everyone a potential “patient-in-waiting” ( Timmermans and Buchbinder, 2010 ). The convergence of risk and disease is characterized by a rapid expansion of risk-based drugs and screening tests , both because of our desire to reduce uncertainty and the corporatization of biomedicine ( Aronowitz, 2009 ). We are urged to take personal responsibility for our health, relying on scientific and medical institutions to monitor our futures ( Rose, 2007 ). In the era of precision medicine, big data, and genomics, data collection is often seen as the key approach to risk management ( Kerr et al., 2019 ). But what happens when data collection as a means of controlling and managing risk is not improving outcomes? Over the past two decades, both expert and lay audiences in many areas of social life have argued that the information experts collect, and their professional judgment and intervention based on that information, often increases risk of future harm instead of mitigating it ( Owens, 2017 ). This is often true in medicine, where there is increasing concern that medical practitioners are performing too many diagnostic tests and interventions (e.g. Aronowitz, 2015 ). And, relatedly, there is increasing concern that the collection of medical data can be dangerous because clinicians are not good at interpreting patient data.
This trend challenges the idea that doing something is better than doing nothing. Sometimes, extra medical testing may lead to more harm than good. More radically, it challenges the idea that knowing something is better than not knowing something. These two points are related. The health “passivists” calling for the collection of less information about risks are, in essence, arguing that clinicians are misinterpreting health data so frequently that we should not even bother to collect the information in the first place. The experts can't be trusted with it. For most clinicians in my study, the collection of information becomes dangerous only because of how badly it can be interpreted. We are better off not knowing about some risks than trying to mitigate them.
Risk scholars may have anticipated this shift in our approach to managing risk. As Beck, Giddens, and Lash argue: … The horizon dims as risks grow. For risks tell us what should not be done but not what should be done. With risks, avoidance imperatives dominate. Someone who depicts the world as risk will ultimately become incapable of action. The salient point here is that the expansion and heightening of the intention of control ultimately ends up producing the opposite ( Beck et al., 1994 , pg. 9)
The COVID-19 pandemic makes this point even more clear—collecting data on the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection is not sufficient to inform individual or collection responses to the crisis. People have been left frustrated, confused, and mistrustful of public health institutions in their failings to effectively communicate about what to do , or not to do ( Cummins, 2021 ). If medical experts believe that their attempts to control the future have been leading to worse outcomes, they may end up viewing control as futile, or at least that current methods of control need to be revised. I explore this process by examining how the field of clinical genomics decides what information is useful to collect in the management of risk, and which information is dangerous or unhelpful.
In the emerging field of ignorance studies, scholars have argued that studying how ignorance is produced and institutionalized is just as important as studying the processes of knowledge production (eg. Proctor and Schiebinger, 2008 ; Gross and McGoey, 2015 ). These studies of institutional ignorance are similar to other types of institutional knowledge and non-knowledge production, such as institutional memory and institutional amnesia ( Heideman, 2016 ), as they all explore the processes by which institutions build or obscure knowledge. But theories in ignorance studies, including the institutional ignorance I describe, differ from other frameworks such as institutional amnesia because they focus on the intentional and strategic use of ignorance as a resource.
In particular, many of the studies in this field have explored how ignorance is used as a strategic resource by corporations (eg. McGoey, 2012 ) or as a mechanism of social control (eg. Jeon, 2019 ). This research often focuses on how ignorance can be used as a strategic resource for the purposes of deception or to abdicate responsibility. For example, Abby Kinchy has shown how shale gas extraction companies strategically fail to collect data on baseline environmental conditions so they can claim that degradation was a potentially pre-existing problem ( Kinchy, 2020 ). While this research is integral to understanding the politics of ignorance, ignorance studies scholars have also started examining the positive reframings of ignorance (eg. Salecl, 2020 ; McGoey, 2019 ; Beck and Wehling, 2012 ). In medicine, much of this literature has focused on a “right not to know” certain types of information, in cases such as genetic testing ( Wehling, 2015 ) or amniocentesis ( Rapp, 1999 ).
As biomedicalization and the turn towards big data continue to dominate medicine, the primary narrative suggests that the collection of health data is an inherent moral good and an ethical responsibility ( Clarke et al., 2003 ). But some of the clinical geneticists I spoke with for this study, whom I call the “passivists,” are making the opposite ethical and moral claim. They do not view data as an inherent moral good, nor do they seek to ignore health data for morally reprehensible reasons (as is often the case in classic studies of strategic ignorance, eg. Oreskes and Conway, 2010 ). They are advocating for policies that would abdicate them of the responsibility that comes with knowing a patient's genomic information, because they are worried that they will interpret that information incorrectly. While this could be seen as a way to prevent accountability, the underlying motivation of these providers is different in an important way. As health “passivists,” they are arguing that ignorance of some patient data will actually improve patient health outcomes. They are trying to reframe ignorance as an ethical obligation, and data collection as a potentially irresponsible act. As the amount of health data available to providers and patients continues to grow, it will be important for social scientists to continue exploring how the boundaries of responsible health data collection are managed and negotiated ( Owens, 2017 ). Researchers should not assume that more data and information is preferable, or that ignorance is ethically unjustified.
The turn towards managing risk through the collection of less information (or ignoring certain types of information) also involves a different approach to the relevance of experts and expertise. Medical data is held mostly in the hands of relevant experts, and it is up to experts in those fields to make judgments and interventions based on that data. While direct-to-consumer genetic testing is, in some sense, democratizing access to genomic data, interpretation about what counts as an abnormal result is still driven by scientific experts. Those who seek to collect less information as a way to mitigate risk are, in essence, arguing that experts are so bad at interpreting data and intervening based on that data that we do not even want them to collect information in the first place. This shift may have a critical impact on the role of experts in modern societies. Importantly, though, this criticism of medical experts does not necessarily lead to a criticism of medical expertise. As Eyal and Buchholz have argued, experts and expertise are two distinct phenomena ( Eyal and Buchholz, 2010 ). Or, as Nikolas Rose notes, “the social consequences of psychology are not the same as social consequences of psychologists” ( Rose, 1991 , p. 91–92). Debates about whether experts are good at their jobs, or whether the knowledge they generate is useful in mitigating risks, are still mainly taking place within established networks of expertise. In clinical genomics, debates about the proper role of clinical experts are taking place in Nature Genetics and Genetics in Medicine , spaces that value medical expertise and are invested in this expertise network (e.g. Burke et al., 2013 ). These spaces may allow for criticism of clinical judgment, but they still rely on health data, compiled by other medical experts, to make their claims.

Section: 3. Data and methods

This study is part of a larger research project working to assess how “actionability” came to be the primary framework for understanding the usefulness of genomic data, and to analyze differences in how this term is conceptualized and put into practice. Over the course of this research, I became particularly interested in how clinicians, researchers, and policymakers think about what types of genomic data they do not want to know. To examine this further, I conducted in-depth, semi-structured interviews with clinicians and performed an archival analysis of documents from genomics journals and policy briefs. First, I interviewed twenty clinical geneticists and genetic counselors across the United States. I identified potential participants through genetics clinic websites, personal contacts in the field, and snowball sampling. Because most clinical genomic testing occurs in academic medical centers, this is where the majority of participants were employed. Participants varied by age, race/ethnicity, and gender. Interviews lasted between 30 minutes and 1 hour. Each participant was asked about their views on when genetic testing was appropriate, the value of genomic data, and to describe interesting cases from their practice. The interviews also served as the basis for a study of uncertainty in cardiovascular genetics, so some interview questions were related particularly to cardiovascular genomics. I analyzed and coded the transcribed interviews with NVivo 12 software, using an iterative process to look for key themes and comparisons between providers. The interview protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board at The University of Pennsylvania.
Second, I analyzed published research papers and policy guidance on clinical genomics in academic journals such as Genetics in Medicine and Nature Genetics . Based on what I learned in the semi-structured interviews and my own immersion in clinical genomics clinics, I chose to focus on documents mentioning the terms “actionability” or “clinical utility” in their titles or abstracts, because these papers and policy documents tended to explicitly discuss the value of genomic data. I also analyzed documents from the Clinical Sequencing Evidence-Generating Research (CSER) Consortium, the Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) Actionability working groups, and the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) working groups on “Incidental Findings in Clinical Exome and Genome Sequencing” and “Secondary Findings Maintenance.” These documents allowed me to understand how different types of genomics experts weigh the benefits of genomic data, and when and how they believe genomic data should prompt action. Notably, these documents are specific to clinical genomics policy in the United States—other countries have varying approaches to defining the usefulness of genomic data (e.g. de Wert et al., 2020 ), which is outside of the scope of this particular article.
In the next section, I first provide some background on the history and mission of clinical genomics in the United States. I then present results and analysis on the collection of data and management of risk in clinical genomics. I find that many clinicians prefer collecting less genomic data as a risk management strategy. These clinicians are pushing back against the dominant narratives of medical risk management, which suggest that risks should be mitigated through increased monitoring and intervention. While debates about the usefulness of genomic data for health risk management are ongoing, I examine efforts by clinicians and researchers to institutionalize what types of data should be both known and unknown.
The primary goal of clinical genomics is to identify pathogenic and highly penetrant gene variants in patients, so that providers can suggest treatments or lifestyle interventions to help those patients manage their health risks and prevent poor health outcomes. There are two main factors that help clinicians and laboratories assess whether a patient has an increased risk of harm from an inherited health condition: the classification of the genetic variant and the penetrance of the gene/disease pair. If a test result shows that a patient has a variant in a gene known to cause a particular disease, there are five standardized ways that variant can be classified: Pathogenic, Likely Pathogenic, Variant of Uncertain Significance, Likely Benign, and Benign. Laboratories and clinicians make these determinations based on both biological and clinical evidence. Laboratories and clinicians often disagree regarding the classification of genetic variants, despite guidelines from professional organizations ( Owens, 2020 ). Providers also disagree about how results, particularly variants of uncertain significance, should be used to drive clinical decision-making.
The second main factor used to assess genetic predisposition for a health condition is the penetrance of the gene/disease pair. Penetrance refers to the proportion of people with a given variant (genotype) that express an associated health problem (phenotype). Many health conditions do not have full penetrance, meaning that some people with a pathogenic variant will not go on to experience symptoms of disease. Estimates of penetrance are debated and range widely, and clinicians acknowledge that it can be difficult to accurately estimate penetrance. As one of my research participants noted: As time goes on we identify more and more people who have fewer and fewer symptoms. And so the estimate that 50% of people with [a particular genetic variant] will get an event is probably a way overestimate now, probably more like 20%. – Clinical geneticist
Changing guidelines for variant classification and changing estimates of penetrance can make it difficult for providers to assess what a genetic test result means for their patients. The providers I spoke with rely more heavily on physical symptoms of disease than genetic testing to make decisions about how to manage patients’ risk of future health problems.
In the United States, clinical genetic testing is still most likely to occur in specialized genetics clinics, often academic medical centers. These programs are generally led by physicians with training in genetic and genomic medicine (clinical geneticists) who are certified by the American Board of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ABMGG). Genetic counselors are also a key part of genetics clinics, where they spend time taking detailed family histories, talking with patients about the risks and benefits of genetic testing, and often assisting in the ordering and interpretation of genetic tests. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) is the major professional organization of clinical genetics and genomics in the United States.
While most patients receiving clinical genomic testing today already have physical symptoms of disease, one of the broader goals of genomics and the big data movement in medicine is to identify health risks before symptoms arise, so that preventative measures can be taken. Some health systems in the United States, such as Geisinger in Pennsylvania, have recently adopted free genetic testing programs for all their primary care patients ( Geisinger, 2018 ). If clinical genomics continues to expand toward currently healthy patients with no pre-existing reason to expect a genetic predisposition to disease, it will become even more critical for clinicians and researchers to reach consensus about what types of data are actually useful to this population. In the following sections of empirical analysis, I explore how these debates are currently unfolding.

Section: 4. Empirical analysis

One of the first decisions clinicians face in genomics is whether ordering a genetic test for a patient is appropriate. The dominant narrative in clinical genomics, as in many medical fields, is that data is an inherently good thing to have. In this view, genetic testing can only be a positive addition to a patient's health record. As a clinical geneticist told me: I think that's just the way that the field is going, and medicine in general. I mean, just order a huge panel of tests, and then use those results to tell you what's going on rather than examining the patient, like what people used to do. – Clinical geneticist
But despite the impulse to collect as much data as possible, “passivist” clinicians are pushing back against this approach to medicine. For example: I think it is extremely difficult to actually prove that a variant is causing disease … unless [patients] have a definitive diagnosis, we generally don't offer them testing … Because if you have someone with an obscure phenotype, and then you're throwing on a test that can give you a lot of ambiguous answers, it just exponentially increases the chance of getting something uncertain or something that's not really going to help any clinical decision-making … So I think we're definitely more on the conservative side in terms of offering testing in the first place. – Clinical geneticist
Clinicians are pushing for less data collection mostly because they are concerned about how that data can be incorrectly interpreted: I think significant harm has been done to patients wherein they've been told that they have a positive [pathogenic] genetic result, and it later turned out to be a benign variant. – Clinical geneticist
This concern is primarily due to the frequency at which genes are reclassified based on new research, but also reflects concerns about the accuracy of testing technology. While most of the clinicians I spoke with raised concerns about inappropriate interpretation of results, many trusted themselves and their training to make the right call. But others worried that despite their expertise in the field, they, too, could make mistakes: I've made the mistake myself where I thought, ‘This variant seems to explain this person's condition, it must be pathogenic.’ And then, as conservative as I am, and I would put myself, probably, on the conservative end of the spectrum, I myself have been bitten by falsely calling a variant or assuming that a variant was pathogenic. – Clinical geneticist
In addition to differences in opinion about when genetic testing was appropriate, clinicians also expressed differences in what types of tests they preferred to order. Clinicians generally have the option to order small genetic tests, limited to a few genes heavily associated with a patient's clinical presentation, a large gene panel, which can sequence dozens of genes that may have some relation to the patient's condition, or potentially a whole exome or whole genome test. Some clinicians in this study, following the dominant narrative that more data is better, preferred expansive testing. A genetic counselor said, for example, that she liked to order large gene panels as long as the test could get covered by the patient's insurance: I think casting a wide net is good and just being aware that noise can show up, and you just have to be very careful how you deal with it. – Genetic counselor
But other clinicians preferred to sequence the smallest number of genes possible. A clinical geneticist explains his rationale for why he prefers small gene panels: The problem is that, I'm not sure that clinicians have a good enough understanding of the uncertainty inherent to [genetic testing] to be able to know that what they're getting may be uncertain or may be a false positive. I mean, the reason I would recommend as targeted a panel as possible is like, the larger panel you order, the more variants you're gonna find. The more genes you sequence, the more variants you're gonna find, and the more likely you're gonna find a variant that is just by chance and that's not associated with disease. – Clinical geneticist
Sequencing smaller numbers of genes reduces the likelihood that clinicians will err in their interpretations of available data. Thus, “passivist” providers like the one above would prefer to implement policies that limit the scope of genomic testing.
When clinicians and researchers discuss the value of genomic data, they are also discussing the relationship between that data and a set of potential actions. To debate the boundaries of responsible data collection and interpretation also requires thought about the subsequent action that a piece of data may set in motion. A lot of concepts in clinical genomics have been used to theorize this relationship, like “clinical utility.” But most recently, the concept of “actionability” has become the most used concept in the literature (see Fig. 1 ). Definitions of actionability vary, but generally involve some combination of the following factors: the level of evidence regarding pathogenicity and penetrance of a variant (which means: how confident are researchers that this gene variant is associated with disease, and how likely is someone with this gene variant to actually exhibit symptoms of disease); the efficacy, burden, and availability of interventions (for example, if the available intervention for a genetic predisposition is to remove the stomach, that would be less actionable than a case where someone should be put on a mild medication) and the severity of potential disease (a variant that increased your risk of something non-life-threatening would be less actionable than something that increased your risk of sudden cardiac death). The classic example of what many experts in the field would call not actionable is testing for genetic predisposition to Alzheimer's disease, because medicine does not currently offer any treatments or cures for Alzheimer's disease. Actionability directs particular attention, perhaps obviously, to whether genomic information warrants medical action as a key metric of whether it is useful. On the other side of the spectrum, genetic testing for predisposition to breast cancer is often considered one of the most actionable types of tests, both because the genetics of breast cancer are better understood than other areas of genetics, and because there are a range of available interventions at different levels of severity for people with a pathogenic variant in a gene such as BRCA1 or BRCA2 (for more on how genetic testing for breast cancer is entering mainstream healthcare, see Hallowell et al., 2019 ). Download: Download high-res image (467KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Published Articles Referencing Clinical Validity vs. Clinical Utility vs. Actionability.
But there is very little consensus, even among genetics experts and clinicians, about what actionability means, or about what makes genomic data useful more generally (e.g. Lázaro-Muñoz et al., 2017 ; Gornick et al., 2018 ). As some prior social scientists have demonstrated, interpretations of actionability are highly variable, and rely as much on social context as scientific theory ( Stivers and Timmermans, 2017 ; Nelson et al., 2013 ). For example, the clinicians below have diverging thoughts on what should count as an “actionable” result: If there's a diagnostic test or therapy I can provide to either you or a family member that will change the course of your disease, that's [what] I would consider [actionable] … If I find this in you, there's an action I can take based on the data I know. – Clinical geneticist I think that just about any true pathogenic variant, if identified, is actionable … the idea that there has to be some sort of very effective intervention to make something actionable, I don't quite understand. – Clinical geneticist
These differences are not uncommon. Some clinicians find value in information itself and are resentful of the idea that action needs to be tied to data for it to be useful. Actionability may be an essentially contested concept, where disputes “are perfectly genuine: which, although not resolvable by argument of any kind, are nevertheless sustained by perfectly respectable arguments … concepts the proper use of which inevitably involves endless disputes about their proper uses on the part of their users” ( Gallie, 1955 , p. 169). Given the lack of consensus on what actionability means, it is then important to look at the underlying values and assumptions that geneticists and clinicians bring to their differing understandings of actionability. By focusing on underlying values, it becomes easier to see what types of data clinicians think should be known, and which types of ignorance should be institutionalized.
For example, policy guidance from the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) usefully illustrates how conceptualizations of actionability have shifted over time. In 2013, an ACMG working group published guidelines on how to report what was, at the time, called incidental findings and would now be called secondary findings ( Green et al., 2013 ). Incidental or secondary findings are genetic results that are unrelated to the original reason a clinician would order a genomic test for a patient. For example, if a patient receives testing for genetic predisposition to breast cancer, but also has a result related to cardiovascular health, the cardiovascular result would be considered a secondary finding. These professional organization statements are the most useful in assessing conceptualizations of actionability because they discuss what types of results should and should not be returned to otherwise healthy patients . In the 2013 statement, the ACMG created a list of 56 genes that they thought were important enough that clinicians should report pathogenic variants in these genes if they find them. These genes were mostly related to either cancer or cardiovascular conditions . Most controversially, the report said: The Working Group did not favor offering the patient a preference as to whether or not to receive the minimum list of incidental findings described in these recommendations. We recognize that this may be seen to violate existing ethical norms regarding the patient's autonomy and “right not to know” genetic risk information. However … we felt that clinicians and laboratory personnel have a fiduciary duty to prevent harm by warning patients and their families about certain incidental findings and that this principle supersedes concerns about autonomy, just as it does in the reporting of incidental findings elsewhere in medical practice ( Green et al., 2013 ).
The working group decided that these select 56 gene/disease pairs are so highly actionable that clinicians have a responsibility to report them. The dominant ethical value, for this group, was the fiduciary duty of providers to patients. But this document proved quite controversial, particularly in the bioethics community. Almost immediately, a group of bioethics researchers and clinicians published a response refuting the idea that incidental findings should be returned without regard for patient preference , arguing that this was at odds with the rest of the field ( Burke et al., 2013 ). Many clinicians and bioethicists were also worried that these guidelines were premature, and that there was not enough evidence of the utility of returning secondary findings to recommend that they be returned to anyone.
Eventually, the ACMG revised these guidelines, and the guidance from 2016 includes a list of 59 actionable genes and greater respect for patient autonomy about return of results. In this revision, there is also a more rigorous method for determining what counts as an actionable gene for the list, called a “semi-quantitative metric for determining actionability” ( Kalia et al., 2016 ). This metric was developed by the ClinGen Actionability Working Group and assesses the following factors: severity and likelihood of the disease outcome, efficacy and burden of the available interventions, and knowledge base ( Berg et al., 2015 ). Each gene/disease pair gets a score from 0 to 15, with a higher score being more actionable. The metric was deemed “semi-quantitative” to recognize the subjective and qualitative underpinnings of assigning particular numeric scores related to topics such as severity of disease and burden of an intervention.
This document was received much more favorably, and the clinicians I interviewed referenced the “ACMG 59” frequently. The list seems to have become the standard set of genes that are relevant to return to patients after genomic sequencing . Perhaps unsurprisingly, for-profit and direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies have paid attention to this. In April 2019, genetic testing company Helix started offering a test called GenePrism: Actionable Insights, that sequences the 59 genes mentioned in the ACMG secondary findings guideline. The company called directly on the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics in their marketing for the test: Leading genetics experts with the ACMG determined that this list of health-related genes can provide important information today to help people and their families take action to positively impact health decisions. This means that if you learn of a genetic risk from this test, your risk is significantly increased over the general population, and there are actions you and your doctor can take to reduce your risks based on established medical recommendations ( Helix, 2019 ).
But the ACMG did not seem happy with this use of their guidelines. Shortly after Helix announced this product, they released their own statement: The ACMG [59] list of genes was not validated for general population screening. The use of ACMG [59] for purposes other than reporting incidental findings after clinical sequencing is not endorsed by ACMG … the medical ethical principle of nonmaleficence should dominate ( ACMG Board of Directors, 2019 , p. 1467).
This represents a shift in the values that underpin professional guidance on what is considered an actionable test result. The ACMG statement now suggests that there is reason to question whether a pathogenic result in some of the genes on the ACMG 59 list, in an otherwise healthy person, actually connotes any increased risk of disease. By suggesting that nonmaleficence is the most relevant ethical principle to consider when discussing general population screening for these 59 genes, the guidelines indicate a serious concern that direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies could be doing harm to people by telling them about potentially pathogenic variants in these genes. The Working Group is concerned that people could incorrectly interpret these results, leading to confusion or inappropriate treatment. Thus, their statement serves to guide genetic testing companies away from providing this type of testing or data in the first place, institutionalizing this form of ignorance in the name of public health . By 2020, Helix seems to have stopped marketing their GenePrism: Actionable Insights product ( Helix, 2020 ).
Concerns about overtreatment based on uncertain genetic testing results may be particularly pronounced in the United States in comparison to European countries. Multiple clinicians in this study suggested that genetic testing can be particularly risky for providers in the United States because once genetic testing has been done and the results are available, clinicians may feel pressure to do something based on those results so that they are protected from a malpractice lawsuit. A clinical geneticist thought this was particularly prominent in cardiovascular genomics, where clinicians often use genetic testing to assess patients’ risk of sudden cardiac arrest (and death): We have these discussions constantly because in the United States our practice is very different from what it is in Europe, and we are much more aggressive about putting [implantable defibrillator] devices in people whereas in Europe they're much less aggressive about putting devices in people. I think it's personally almost entirely provider-driven in terms of trying to push people to make certain decisions, and I think very, very heavily, because of our litigious environment. If someone drops dead and somehow that can be traced back to your decision, that comes back to you, and people want to avoid that situation even if it's low probability. – Clinical geneticist
As prior literature in ignorance studies has shown, institutions can be held responsible for damages if an aggrieved party can prove that institution had knowledge of a problem but did not act on it. This leads many institutions to intentionally ignore information so they cannot be held responsible for damages (e.g. McGoey, 2012 ). This incentive can be true in medicine as well, particularly in the United States, where clinicians may feel forced to act on patient data about genetic predisposition to disease so they do not leave themselves open to a future malpractice lawsuit for not acting quickly. But many of these providers feel, based on their reading of the clinical evidence, that while acting on uncertain genomic data may prevent lawsuits, it also increases inappropriate treatment and worsens patient outcomes. Thus, “passivist” providers are pushing for institutionalized policies calling for less data collection and the passive management of some health risks, so they can establish a standard of care and remove pressure to act unnecessarily based on new information ( Owens, 2017 ).
Perhaps in recognition of the pressure to act on new health data, ACMG professional guidance has shifted over time. While initially prioritizing a fiduciary duty to collect and disclose genomic data, the most recent statements from the ACMG prioritize less testing due to concerns of maleficence. Still, the push from some providers to institutionalize ignorance of genomic data is slow-moving and will face an uphill battle. American medicine has generally embraced big data, and providers I interviewed suggested it was difficult to push back against this current. But as the amount of health data grows exponentially, I expect that these conversations about when and how different data sources are valuable will only grow more common.
At the same time that clinical geneticists are actively debating what genomic information should be known and unknown, there is also wide-scale recognition that the field faces severely limited predictive ability for many patient populations. Common genomic databases that serve as a reference to determine whether patients have a pathogenic genetic variant are overwhelmingly filled with samples from European ancestry participants ( Landry et al., 2018 ). Genetic tests that use these databases can be fairly accurate for European populations, but are often inaccurate for other populations. For example, one way to assess pathogenicity of a gene variant is to ascertain whether it is rare. A variant may seem rare in a database full of samples from European ancestry populations, when it could be a common variant in other populations. This would make it more likely for non-European patients to be told they have a pathogenic variant because that variant is falsely assumed to be rare ( Sirugo et al., 2019 ). Research reports have shown that the lack of diversity in reference databases can have devastating effects for patients who are told they have a pathogenic variant when they do not. For example, patients with non-European ancestry have been incorrectly told they are genetically predisposed to develop hypertrophic cardiomyopathy , a condition that can lead to sudden cardiac death : Multiple patients, all of whom were of African or unspecified ancestry, received positive reports, with variants misclassified as pathogenic on the basis of the understanding at the time of testing. Subsequently, all reported variants were recategorized as benign … Simulations showed that the inclusion of even small numbers of black Americans in control cohorts probably would have prevented these misclassifications ( Manrai et al., 2016 , p. 655).
This misclassification can have significant negative effects, as clinicians would advise patients to make monitoring and lifestyle changes, or even recommend the implantation of a cardioverter-defibrillator.
Notably, the clinical geneticists I spoke with are aware of this problem, and may shift their clinical practice because of it: The majority of the [data] come from non-diverse European populations, right? So when you take a polygenic risk score for, let's say, prostate cancer that's built on white Europeans and apply it to Black people from Africa and, in the U.S. at least, African-Americans have a disproportionate burden of prostate cancer at an early age, you probably are doing them a disservice by applying that score, trying to interpret it because it was not built [for them] … I'd be very cautious about applying them in non-European patients. – Clinical geneticist
Initiatives like the National Institutes of Health's All of Us Research Program are explicitly designed to generate more diverse reference databases by enrolling more diverse groups of research participants ( All of Us Research Program, 2020 ). But due to both historical and contemporary racism and mistreatment in the U.S. healthcare system ( Osterheldt, 2020 ; Washington, 2007 ), members of some minoritized and disempowered communities, such as Native Americans and Black Americans, can be reluctant to trust health researchers ( Corbie-Smith et al., 2002 ), or may intentionally refuse to participate in the project of genomic medicine ( Benjamin, 2016 ).
This is another type of institutionalized ignorance in clinical genomics. At the same time that genetic testing is being rolled out widely across the United States, the results are only accurate for a part of the population. This inequity will serve to exacerbate health disparities for already minoritized and disempowered communities in the United States. The availability of genetic testing is expanding across the U.S. healthcare system before the field addresses the racism built into their practice.
At the moment, debates in genomics about actionability and improving ancestral diversity in genomic databases are quite separate. And, analytically, these debates represent two different types of institutionalized ignorance. When considering scenarios where genomic data is not viewed as useful or actionable, providers are seeking to institutionalize ignorance of genomic data in the name of patient health. They are making ethical claims to justify policies that limit genomic data collection, as seen in recent ACMG policies citing the ethical principle of nonmaleficence. The lack of ancestral diversity in genomic databases, and the resulting racial discrimination, represents a more insidious form of institutionalized ignorance. Clinicians in the field have started to recognize the damage this ignorance inflicts, and are instead making ethical claims to increase data collection in non-White populations with different ancestral backgrounds. Thus, while the first type of institutionalized ignorance is justified on ethical grounds of nonmaleficence, the second type is more widely accepted as morally reprehensible. In the first instance, clinicians are calling for less data collection. In the second, they are calling for more data collection. But while these are two different types of institutionalized ignorance, they cannot be fully separated. Debates about genomic actionability cannot ignore differences in which populations benefit most from genomic testing. A more comprehensive conversation about the usefulness of genomic data would include both types of ignorance. When is genomic data actionable, and for whom?

Section: 5. Conclusion

Growing calls to manage health risks “passively” is changing the way medical fields understand the value of data and information. Through the case of clinical genomics, I demonstrate how knowledge can be reframed as dangerous, and how “passivist” clinicians can resist the dominant tendency towards active management of risk. In discussing the actionability of genomic data, clinicians recognize that their ideas about proper clinical care and scientific research are coproduced alongside their values about how individuals ought to manage their health ( Jasanoff, 2004 ). Medicine may still place trust in numbers ( Porter, 1996 ) and in the promise of big data and precision medicine to transform clinical care ( Collins and Varmus, 2015 ), but many providers are losing faith in the experts who interpret those numbers (including themselves). While prior theories of biomedicalization suggest that medicine is driven by actively managing risks through data collection and intervention ( Clarke et al., 2003 ), there are subfields of medicine questioning this logic. While the field of ignorance studies has begun to explore the ways people choose not to know their health information ( Wehling, 2015 ), more research is needed on the ways ignorance can be framed as an ethical responsibility rather than morally reprehensible.
While some providers are fighting to institutionalize ignorance of “inactionable” genomic data, others are fighting against the institutionalized ignorance found in current genomics databases. The predominance of European ancestry samples in genomics databases makes many types of genomic results uninterpretable in other populations. To solve this problem, clinicians are arguing that they have an ethical responsibility to collect more genomic data from diverse populations. While these arguments are often separate from larger conversations about the actionability of genomic data, they are related and should be taken up together.
Sorting out the utility of health data, and the idea that some types of data may pose more harm than benefit, is not unique to clinical genomics. Clinical guidelines for many popular cancer screening tests, such as breast cancer screening , now suggest that patients undergo these tests less often and later in life (e.g. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2009 ). Similarly to genomic testing, these tests may be more likely to cause iatrogenic harm than benefit for some patient groups. The number of medical societies participating in Choosing Wisely , an initiative from the American Board of Internal Medicine designed to reduce overtesting and overtreatment, has grown from nine to seventy over the past five years ( ABIM Foundation, 2019 ). This is a phenomenon that deserves more attention from both medical researchers and social scientists. As the amount of available health data continues to grow, it will be crucial for clinicians to understand how debates about the utility of different types of data are intimately tied with social and political values. And, in the era of big data and precision medicine, it is critical for both social scientists and clinical researchers to develop better frameworks for understanding what types of data we can and cannot ignore.

Section: Credit author statement

Kellie Owens is responsible for the conceptualization, data curation, methodology, analysis, funding acquisition, writing, reviewing, and editing of this manuscript.

Section: Acknowledgements

Thank you to Pamela Sankar, Steve Joffe, and Reed Pyeritz for their valuable feedback in shaping this research. Thank you, also, to my colleagues in the Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy and the larger community of scholars in the Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications of Genetics (ELSI) who have provided crucial feedback as I presented early versions of this work.
Research reported in this manuscript was supported by the National Human Genome Research Institute of the National Institutes of Health under award numbers K99-HG010905 and T32-HG009496 , and a Dan David Prize scholarship in Bioethics. The content is solely the responsibility of the author and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
