Title: Expert or experiential knowledge? How knowledge informs situated action in childcare practices


Abstract: Abstract

The study examines how alternative health information affects the professional authority of doctors. Drawing on in-depth interviews with mothers in Hong Kong and focusing on child-rearing practices, we find that mothers glean expert knowledge from doctors and experiential knowledge from online resources, social networks, and direct observations. Despite the prevalence of information online and traditional Chinese remedies, mothers do not use experiential knowledge to challenge doctors. Instead, they self-interpret medical advice and set self-determined courses of action based on their own practical situations. Generally, they dichotomize child-rearing and caring issues into medical versus non-medical domains to which they apply expert and experiential knowledge, respectively. How a condition is categorized depends on whether their individualized experiential knowledge is adequate to allow them to manage the health of their child. This study concludes that mothers with alternative health information still respect professional authorities in clinical interactions, which accords with previous sociological studies, but mothers often consider expert knowledge overly generic, so they take initiative to translate generic health-related knowledge into individualized knowledge for their child and determine their own course of action. Our theoretical contribution is to bring situational concerns into the debate of professional authority by revealing how the accumulation of experiential knowledge informs situated action.

Section: 1. Introduction

Patients often consult the internet for health information, which empowers them to question prescriptions and promote patient-centered interaction care ( Murray et al., 2003 ; Sommerhalder et al., 2009 ). The rise in internet-informed patients has incited debates on whether and how alternative information challenges the professional authority of doctors ( Hardey, 1999 ; Dedding et al., 2011 ). Research has found that patients still respected doctors and intentionally cooperated with them ( Sommerhalder et al., 2009 ); however, chronically ill patients tended to bring embodied experiential knowledge to doctors and sometimes questioned that expert knowledge ( Peters et al., 1998 ; Haw et al., 2018 ). The findings are mixed with most focusing on how alternative information affects doctor-patient interactions. But how does alternative information inform healthcare actions in daily settings? What are the implications of alternative information on the professional authority of doctors?
We propose that the attitudes towards expert knowledge can be examined inside and outside of clinics (i.e., in actual day-to-day practice) in childcare. Here, we focus on the physical health management of children (such as medical intervention and feeding) in daily settings. Throughout its history, pediatrics has incorporated many mothering skills into its expertise, such as infant feeding, child-health monitoring, and child development and behavior management, which were once presupposed to be maternal competencies ( Reiger, 1986 ; Halpern, 1988 ). Apart from pediatricians and the internet, mothers in Hong Kong are exposed to offline sources of health-related information from their social networks, including advice from grandparents, relatives and friends with direct child-rearing experience. How does the proliferation of health information influence the professional authority of doctors in clinics? And, how is expert and alternative knowledge used to guide action outside of clinics?
To answer these questions, this study examined childcare practices situated in Hong Kong, a Chinese city with professional Western-oriented medical care as well as culturally-rooted traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Even though Western medicine is dominant in the formal medical system, TCM was professionalized in the 1990s as a formal medical profession and TCM has been influential among Hong Kong Chinese throughout the history of Hong Kong ( Lee, 1980 ; Chung et al., 2007 ; Chiu et al., 2005 ). Therefore, it is common for Hong Kong Chinese to self-medicate for illness or perform body maintenance by making decisions based on cultural beliefs around TCM ( Lee, 1980 ; Simpson, 2003 ).
Findings from 41 in-depth interviews with mothers who had at least one child under the age of six revealed that expert and experiential knowledge were applied to medical and non-medical domains, respectively. Although expert knowledge is considered most authoritative and respected in clinical interactions, the mothers usually considered this knowledge generic and unsuitable for the special situations of their child. Thus, in actual practice, the mothers needed to accumulate their individualized knowledge by observing the child's bodily changes and incorporating expert/experiential knowledge. This practical use of knowledge considered the particular situations of the child and the accumulation of experiential knowledge of the mothers over time, which blurred the boundaries between the medical and non-medical domains that they identified, and between expert and experiential knowledge. That is, mothers did not prioritize the authority of general expert knowledge, but the practicality of knowledge in a specific situation.
In the following, we will first review the literature on online health-seeking behaviors, expert and experiential knowledge, and challenges to professional authority, before introducing our methods and data. Subsequently, we will discuss how mothers in Hong Kong interact with doctors in clinics, use alternative health information, and accumulate individualized knowledge for actions in actual practice. We conclude by looking at the impact of alternative health information on the professional authority of doctors and the situation-mediated application of expert and experiential knowledge in child-rearing practices.
The internet is convenient and accessible for providing alternative information that may threaten the professional authority of doctors. Studies on using the internet to find health information have ranged from studying “who” asks health questions online ( Cotten and Gupta, 2004 ; Ybarra and Suman, 2008 ) and why they seek online information ( Gray et al., 2005 ; Ybarra and Suman, 2008 ) to online health-seeking behaviors ( Renahy and Chauvin, 2006 ; Jacobs et al., 2017 ). While advantages include a large volume of user-generated content, ease of access, anonymity, and social support ( Gray et al., 2005 ; Seale et al., 2006 ), the obtained information infuses lay beliefs with expert knowledge, which results in ambiguous authenticity. As such, users tended to assess the credibility of online information by comparing information sources , website design, and differentiating health content from advertising ( Kitchens et al., 2014 ; Zhang, 2014 ).
These findings were mainly from media and communication studies , whereas sociological studies tended to situate online information use in broader social contexts by elaborating how patients integrate online health information with offline healthcare services. Those holding lay beliefs and online medical knowledge become expert patients who critically reflect on the online and offline clinical recommendations for treatment ( Ziebland, 2004 ; Fox et al., 2005 ). Therefore, online health information complements, rather than substitutes, offline medical expertise, as patients still want physician consultation ( Sillence et al., 2007 ; Suziedelyte, 2012 ; Slauson-Blevins et al., 2013 ). When patients make treatment decisions, online and offline information are considered ( Sillence et al., 2007 ) and patients may exhaust numerous self-care strategies before resorting to medical clinic services ( Chrisman, 1977 ); thus, alternative information from the internet cannot replace physicians ( Slauson-Blevins et al., 2013 ). Nevertheless, how do patients interpret alternative information along with professional expertise, and how valued is alternative information in the decision-making process in daily contexts? As seeking online health information becomes increasingly commonplace, we need to account for this when examining the professional authority of medical professionals and turning different forms of knowledge (expert and experiential) into action.
Borkman (1976) first coined the term “experiential knowledge” and contrasted it against “professional knowledge” when analyzing self-help organizations. Derived from personal experience, experiential knowledge claims credibility through direct participation in solving a health problem. Compared to professional or expert knowledge, it is pragmatic, holistic, and targets current health issues (ibid). Abel and Browner (1998) dichotomized experiential knowledge into embodied (derived from sensory experience) and empathetic (derived from caregivers, such as family members; see also, d’Agincourt-Canning, 2005 ).
An important contribution to experiential knowledge is from self-help groups, through which members with a common diagnosis share knowledge. This collective knowledge empowers members through information shared over time. However, some self-help groups also seek professionals for advice ( Borkman, 1976 ). Therefore, experiential and professional knowledge can be co-utilized. The internet allows easy access to the opinions of patients and doctors, self-help groups that discuss how to self-manage physical ailments, and lay people who share personal experiences and medical advice (e.g., Campbell, 2021 ).
Experiential knowledge can sometimes be mobilized to resist medical control. When lay and expert knowledge clash in clinical encounters, experiential knowledge can be used to accept or challenge expert knowledge ( Peters et al., 1998 ; Haw et al., 2018 ). This might be explained by the fact that these two forms of knowledge are produced in different ways. Experiential knowledge is produced from embodied senses and direct observation, and is individualized for the health issues of each patient, which creates pragmatic solutions ( Borkman, 1976 ; Pols, 2014 ). By contrast, the prescriptions of doctors are mainly guided by evidence-based medicine (EBM), universal guidelines, and evidence reports from statistical analyses of large populations ( Fowler, 1997 ; Eddy, 2005 ). EBM, however, is generic and neglects the personal circumstances and lived experiences of patients ( Lambert, 2006 ; Knaapen, 2014 ). This gap between the generic instructions from experts and specific personal situations means that patients might question, partly adopt, or ignore physician advice ( Peters et al., 1998 ; Haw et al., 2018 ).
Some scholars reject this dichotomy and focus instead on knowledge produced through the synthesis of experiential and professional knowledge. Pols (2014) highlighted that patient knowledge develops from “knowing in action,” which sees patient knowledge as experience-based know-how that adapts medical knowledge for practicality (ibid). Similarly, France et al. (2011) showed that women wielded both types of knowledge in their decision-making process for antenatal diagnostic testing without prioritizing either one.
Thus, we need to consider how experiential knowledge is valued or integrated with expert knowledge. Accumulated experience can be considered a resource that increases in value over time and some conflicting experiences can be selectively prioritized according to the situation ( Boardman, 2017 ; Campbell, 2021 ). Daily personal experience also shapes the medical terms and expertise articulated by lay people in online forums, which demonstrates how the use of professional knowledge is contextually mediated ( Campbell, 2021 ). For example, expert knowledge obtained from professional prenatal counseling is partly absorbed and given meaning from the experiential knowledge of mothers-to-be during the decision-making process on prenatal screening ( Etchegary et al., 2008 ).
Similar to patient knowledge necessary for chronically ill patients ( Pols, 2014 ), mothers also needed practical knowledge to cope with health matters in daily child-rearing practices. It is generally unknown how mothers accumulate practical knowledge during daily childcare practices by using expert and experiential knowledge. We thus suggest that the discussion on whether professional authority is challenged by alternative knowledge be extended beyond clinical interactions, and reframed as how expert and experiential knowledge are used in daily childcare practices.

Section: 2. Challenges to professional authority

Sociologists have shown that the professional authority of doctors rests on their social acceptance as “experts” of health matters ( Freidson, 1970 ; Abbott, 1988 ). Traditionally, doctors exercised power over patients and patients deferred to doctors’ professional authority ( Parsons, 1951 ). Thus, authority rests on a monopoly of expert knowledge acquired through academic training that is not easily accessible to the public ( Moore, 1970 ; Turner, 1995 ). This notion has been challenged (e.g., Freidson, 1961 ; Twaddle, 1969 ; Segall, 1976 ) with the rise of a more educated consumer society ( Haug and Sussman, 1969 ; Hayes-Bautista, 1976 ; Ong et al., 1995 ). The emergent belief of a narrowed “knowledge gap” ( Parsons, 1975 ) between the patient and physician has been transforming that relationship from paternalistic to patient-centered ( Bensing, 2000 ; Mead et al., 2002 ). In recent decades, the internet and social media have further challenged this professional authority by facilitating access to information previously privy to doctors ( Ziebland, 2004 ; Conrad and Stults, 2010 ).
Existing research continues to investigate whether professional authority remains intact despite public access to medical information ( Boyer and Lutfey, 2010 ; Lee and Lin, 2010 ). For example, Bartlett and Coulson (2011) showed that alternative health information balances patient-doctor communication since informed and reflective patients can actively discuss treatments with doctors. In clinical encounters, alternative knowledge empowered patients to sometimes resist or challenge medical professionals ( Peters et al., 1998 ; Haw et al., 2018 ). These evolving clinical encounters could threaten professional authority.
However, the asymmetric power relationship between doctor and patient persists and whether patient-centered interactions benefit health outcomes remains controversial ( Pilnick and Dingwall, 2011 ). Patients may not openly challenge authority, but instead disclose health information carefully when consulting with doctors ( Stevenson et al., 2021 ). And while the internet might be eroding the medical knowledge monopoly, professional authority is rooted in the “epistemic status” of the doctor-patient relationship; that is, patients have the right to know about their bodily conditions and possible treatments while doctors have the responsibility to diagnose and advise ( Landmark et al., 2015 ; Stevenson et al., 2021 ). Thus, clinical encounters are a patient-doctor engagement that does not negate medical authority ( Nunes et al., 2014 ). Nevertheless, mixed findings in the literature suggested that more research is necessary to understand how alternative information influences professional authority and patient decisions.

Section: 3. Methods and data

Most related research is done in Western contexts with little mention of societies with different healing traditions. In Hong Kong , TCM still influences health-seeking behaviors ( Chung et al., 2007 ). For example, local pharmacies ubiquitously sell Chinese herbal remedies such as Infant Digestive Support Herbal Tea ( kai nai cha ) and Infant Calming Herbal Tea ( qi xing cha ) that claim to “increase appetite and calm down the body” of an infant. There is also evidence that many Hong Kong Chinese interpret their ailments through Chinese rather than Western medical concepts ( Koo, 1987 ; Lam, 2001 ). Here, we will discuss the self-use of TCM based on experiential knowledge . However, medical services in Hong Kong have long been dominated by Western medicine and takes precedence over TCM, such that Western medicine doctors enjoy a higher socioeconomic status ( Chiu et al., 2005 ; Yu, 2017 ). Therefore, here, professional authority refers to the authority of Western medicine doctors. Examining the doctor-mother relationship in Hong Kong will show how alternative medical traditions influence doctor-patient interactions and the professional authority of doctors.
The data comprised of in-depth interviews and content analysis of online forum discussions. We selected mothers who were Hong Kong permanent residents and ethnically Chinese with at least one child under the age of six because grandparents are more attentive to younger children and open to sharing their child-rearing experience. Grandparents are typically involved in child-rearing as Chinese cultural norms see it as primarily a family responsibility. Two-thirds of children in Hong Kong are under the care of or reside with grandparents ( Thang, 2012 ). Also, children under six do not attend school, which is an important note for child development.
A purposive, non-probability convenience sampling design was used to generate contacts. Respondents of different backgrounds were recruited, and the interview data used to identify influential factors that drove the health decisions of mothers. Respondents were publicly recruited. The first author contacted the public relations departments of major hospitals that provided pediatric services for permission to solicit patients. Flyers were posted at Maternal and Child Health Centers, which provide health-promotion and disease-prevention services for children up to five years old; Departments of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine at several public hospitals; and three kindergartens. Recruitment emails were also sent through the university bulk email system to reach the general public with about one-third of the respondents being recruited through this channel. Ethical approval was obtained from the University Human Research Ethics Committee.
The first author conducted face-to-face interviews with a research assistant in public spaces, such as coffee shops, between 2015 and 2017. The purpose of the research was explained and respondents gave their informed consent on paper. The interviews were audio recorded and transcribed by the research assistant. The questions focused on how medical information was sought online, whether online information was used to challenge doctors and if doctors’ advice were followed, and the contexts under which information and diagnoses were disputed. In total, 41 interviews of about 45–60 min in length were conducted in Chinese and translated into English by the author.
In addition, we conducted a content analysis of child healthcare websites and the most popular online parenting forum, Baby-Kingdom ( https://www.baby-kingdom.com/forum.php ), which was representative of the quality of childcare and health information available online in Hong Kong. We selected threads where parents were seeking health advice, such as whether they should take their child to see a doctor, if they followed particular advice from a doctor, and inquired about the credibility of folk remedies. We noted discussions on following or rejecting the advice of doctors, and the reasons for doing so.
Coding of the interview and online forum data was conducted by the two authors independently. We identified main themes from the transcripts separately and constantly compared notes and discussed them until reaching a consensus. We mainly used thematic analysis ( Guest et al., 2012 ) to capture the gist of information seeking and daily child-care practices, and how decisions were reached. We also applied abductive analyses ( Timmermans and Tavory, 2012 ) to find explanations for the reasoning of the mothers, especially when respondents shared conflicting accounts. For example, almost all the mothers considered doctors as having the highest authority, but many also admitted that they often rejected the suggestions of their doctors.
While the mothers were from diverse backgrounds, they have very similar health-related information-seeking patterns and attitudes towards the advice of doctors and the use of alternative knowledge, most of which was based on experience. They actively sought a range of information sources and applied learnings based on their situation, which the mothers differentiated as “medical” or “non-medical” in their own terms. After comparing our field findings with existing literature, we argue that mothers still granted expert knowledge the highest authority in managing medical issues, but that generic advice from doctors prevented individualized application. Therefore, the mothers used their experience from daily observations to transform generic medical knowledge into individualized experiential knowledge to guide their daily child-care practices.
The interviews showed that information from official sources was still considered the most trustworthy. Mothers gained expert knowledge from medical personnel at Maternal and Child Health Centers who deliver talks about child development or breastfeeding skills. Some mothers also obtained information by attending public hospital childcare courses, consulting with medical professionals, and reading leaflets distributed by the Department of Health in public hospitals. Many mothers also visited official websites, such as the Hong Kong Breastfeeding Mothers’ Association and Department of Health.
From our findings, doctors were given the most authority in providing medical diagnoses and treatments. Visits were mainly to diagnose health issues, treat diseases, or consult on issues beyond lay knowledge. As one mother put it, “I mainly [take my child to] see a doctor for treating a disease; I never consult the doctor regarding daily childcare issues, such as dieting, [since] their advice may not be practical (28, Bachelor's degree, social worker, HK$60,000/month household income). If a doctor specifically advised against a folk remedy, the mothers heeded that advice. However, they seldom sought the advice of their doctors for TCM remedies “because they are Western medicine doctors, [so] they do not know about TCM remedies” (37, Master's degree, administrative director, HK$25,000/month salary). The mothers worked to avoid epistemic tension between Western medicine and TCM to cooperate with doctors.
Since doctors are licensed health professionals, if there was conflicting information on the same medical issue from different sources, the mothers would seek their doctor's insights. Online information was therefore not used to refute their doctor but to obtain professional insight into the accuracy of that advice. Even if the doctor's advice was not what the mother hoped to hear, the doctor's advice was still considered authoritative and valid:
I agree that online advice might be more useful than my doctor's, but I didn't question my doctor's opinion based on online information. Even if my doctor's advice conflicts with the information online, I just sit and listen to my doctor. (38, Master's degree, teacher, HK$70,000/month household income).
The mothers rarely expressed overt criticism about clinics or disagreed with clinics, which accords with existing findings ( Lindström and Karlsson, 2016 ; Kennett and Payne, 2010 ; Peters et al., 1998 ). However, the mothers did find that the consultation time was too short and their doctor did not provide detailed explanations: I feel annoyed when doctors are vague and dismissive. Like when my doctor said that my daughter would recover naturally in 2 or 3 days … or that she should rest and drink more water. (35, Bachelor’s degree, clerk, HK$60,000/month household income)
The asymmetric power relationship between Western medicine-trained doctors and mothers was still common in clinical encounters in Hong Kong where the former has a higher socioeconomic status. Thus, they have a hegemonic role in healthcare, which might deprive patients of other treatment possibilities or involvement in other medical decision-making processes ( Yu, 2017 ). To sustain this medical hegemony , the supply of doctors in Hong Kong is limited (Ibid), which leads to long wait time for consultations. As one mother said:
I think the current doctors are very perfunctory, [because] there are many patients waiting. We go through those standard procedures with most of their responses [being] brief. For example, when I asked if [the child] needed antibiotics, he would only answer me “yes”. Doctors are too busy. Maybe an average of 2 or 3 min per patient. (34, Bachelor's degree, administrative officer, HK$60,000/month household income).
The findings show that consultations are doctor-centered and short. Consequently, the advice can be overly broad and mothers felt that they were not receiving adequate support.
Since detailed explanations from doctors were rare, the mothers responded by actively seeking alternative information. Mothers equipped with alternative information rarely directly challenged the advice or authority of their doctor in clinical encounters, but the authority of doctors did not necessarily lead to deference from mothers. The experiential knowledge of mothers facilitated deliberate defiance against some doctors’ recommendations, such as vaccinations and antibiotics. Some mothers questioned vaccines based on hearsay that infections still occurred despite vaccinations, and many pushed back against antibiotics, which are generally perceived as having harmful effects compared to other treatments. After being prescribed antibiotics, one mother even changed doctors. Outside information afforded self-interpretation and self-treatment, which enabled mothers to consider their specific circumstances and selectively adopt the generic recommendations of their doctor.
Most issues that warrant the attention of doctors are rather complex, such as persistent eczema and unexplainable symptoms. In contrast to the expert knowledge that the mothers apply to these “medical-related issues,” experiential knowledge is widely used for daily health issues that the mothers regard as “non-medical,” such as diet, sleep, healthy living, and common ailments, such as mild fevers, headaches, and colds. As one mother summarizes, If there is a drug or medical problem, I will trust the doctor's opinion; and when it comes to parenting matters, I will prefer the opinions of people with parenting experience. I would find it (expert knowledge) credible, but not as good as other people's experience … [which] is more practical. Maybe some doctors don't have children, and even if they do, they may not be taking care of their children by themselves. (36, Bachelor's degree, flight attendant, HK$60,000 household income)
Experiential knowledge comes from a wide range of sources, including online channels and social networks.
All the mothers interviewed frequently sought healthcare and child-rearing information online, particularly from Baby-Kingdom, which boasts 80,000 daily visitors. The content of Baby-Kingdom is mostly created by parents sharing their experiences. Moreover, search engines, blogs, and online forums are also used, including WhatsApp and Facebook groups organized by other mothers. As such, the mothers have an awareness of recommended doctors, suitable diets, alternative therapies, and products suitable for their children.
The dichotomy of the medical and non-medical domains was found in the health-seeking behaviors of mothers in this study. They usually searched online for alternative information for day-to-day childcare decisions and issues that they considered non-medical. Many mothers found valuable experiential knowledge shared within online parenting groups, and their discussions focused on non-medical issues, such as which brand of milk powder to use, when to quit milk, and timelines for milestones like walking.
In contrast, the mothers tended to be more cautious around medical matters, especially when such matters were beyond their daily experience. For instance, when some mothers asked about scalds, the consensus was that seeing a doctor immediately was better than referencing online information. Thus, serious and emergent medical problems compelled mothers to seek medical expertise as relying on experiential knowledge would be risky and could lead to exacerbating symptoms.
Online information can support mothers who find the expertise of doctors to be theoretically based or limited to their professional experience: Online information may not be as scientific as the doctor’s advice. But it’s more comprehensive and holistic. The doctor’s advice is usually limited by their own expertise. But I can read online about the opinions of others with different backgrounds in different places … [and if they] all have the same opinion, I’ll take their advice. (28, Master’s degree, teacher, HK$30,000/month salary)
Nevertheless, the quality of online information is also a concern, so the mothers have ways to validate the information. Credibility is grounded in actual experiences. If many have tried a remedy and offered similar feedback, then it is trustworthy, especially for what the mothers considered “non-medical” issues such as cough and common colds.
A way mothers validate online information is by discussing it with their doctor. For example, one mother searched online to determine the hydration needs of newborn babies and later confirmed it with her doctor: When I heard my doctor say, ‘No need,’ I was quite surprised because most people think that babies need fluids, and even let them drink milk tea and other drinks … I felt this contradicted what I knew, but I will follow [the doctor’s advice]. (27, Master’s degree, research assistant, HK$50,000/month household income)
Hence, the authority of doctors validated the credibility of online information.
When asked to compare advice from a layperson versus a doctor, the mothers indicated that they trusted their doctor more, even though they may not understand the doctor's rationale. Therefore, medical and non-medical distinctions are not clearly separated. How the medical and non-medical domains are mutually transformed will be discussed next.
Apart from the internet, mothers in this study also received experiential knowledge from their social networks whose direct child-rearing experience lends them credibility ( Borkman, 1976 ). In Hong Kong, grandparents, friends, and other relatives who have children have a say and are willing to share their experience, even if not all the suggestions are welcomed by the mothers. Their social network's suggestions often focused on “how to improve sleep problems, eating habits, solutions for sensitive skin, etc.” (42, Bachelor's degree, administrative officer, HK$ 70,000 household income). Mothers highly trusted those in their networks with both a medical background (e.g., working as a nurse or pharmacist) and childcare experience.
Most of the mothers appreciated the help from grandparents in addressing daily child-rearing issues. Comments from grandparents who have cared for other grandchildren recently are more respected and likely to be considered. Otherwise, if grandparents’ experience is limited to raising their own children decades ago, their advice is often criticized as “unscientific” or “outdated.” For instance, a mother rejected the ingestion of pearl powder ( zhen zhu fen ) as a remedy for her child to sleep better because she questioned the safety and efficacy of this treatment:
My mother suggested that my daughter take pearl powder, but I didn't agree to do that. My daughter is still very young and I am afraid that there might be heavy metals in it, but my mother said, “You took it when you were a kid, [so] it's safe for your daughter too.” (28, Master's degree, teacher, HK$30,000/month household income).
Additionally, friends or relatives in the medical profession and pharmaceutical industry are also seen as respected resources that offer practical advice. Due to their professional authority and child-rearing experience, they are consulted for medical issues such as how to inspect for ear infections and use certain medications. One mother felt comfortable enough to allow her mother-in-law, a retired nurse who specialized in obstetrics, to give input when her children were sick. She felt reassured after her mother-in-law carefully described the related procedures her newborn underwent at the NICU (41, high school diploma, housewife, HK$60,000/month household income). Detailed explanations from relatives with medical expertise also acted as a form of emotional support for the mothers, especially when the doctors only offered generic information.
However, professional knowledge is indispensable when situations are deemed severe or seemingly out of control. Therefore, the medical and non-medical domains described by the mothers are not strictly objectively differentiated, which means they are flexible to the context of when to apply expert/experiential knowledge in childcare practices. For example, one mother learned online that steamed onion juice could remedy her daughter's cold, but if the situation worsened after several days, to seek medical help (33, high school diploma, housewife, HK$30,000/month household income). The mothers took action based on expert/experiential knowledge by evaluating each situation in its fluidity, regardless of whether they categorized an issue as medical or non-medical. This is similar to negotiating expert/layperson boundaries in the case of online self-care practices ( Campbell, 2021 ). In most situations where members offer practical suggestions based on their bodily experiences and medical-related knowledge, the boundaries of expert/layperson knowledge vanish. However, when some questions cannot be answered by referring to personal experience, the users admit their lack of knowledge and recommend that one should “listen to the doctors,” so that the boundaries become clearer.
Childcare practice is not the only area showing the limits of expert knowledge as generic or impractical. For chronically ill patients, they must convert medical knowledge into individual body management through their sensory experiences ( Peters et al., 1998 ; Pols, 2014 ). This conversion is necessary because mothers view medical knowledge or the experiences of others as detached from their individualized childcare conditions. As a respondent pointed out, “the knowledge that I learned is generic and theoretical, and not applicable to … my child's special conditions” (38, Bachelor's degree, housewife, HK$50,000/month household income). Another respondent explained the limits of third-party advice:
The information from [grandparents] was based on their own views [but] doctors are professionals. In theory, they should be trusted. But their advice could be too generic. When you ask more questions, they avoid answering. So I take into consideration the experience of others but I can't tell whether the information is credible. That's when I rely on my own experience. (41, Bachelor's degree, clerk, HK$60,000/month household income).
The accumulation of self-experience is thus important for mothers to address the situational variations they face, which often do not fall neatly into the medical or non-medical domains. In actual practice, mothers need to translate medical knowledge and third-party advice into pragmatic and individualized solutions, so that the solution fits her child, unlike doctors’ universal guidelines and prescriptions ( Fowler, 1997 ; Eddy, 2005 ).
For example, to address the specific ailments of their child, mothers who used the expert/experiential knowledge of TCM would contextualize and tailor their use of TCM. Despite the co-existence of Western medicine and TCM in Hong Kong, few Western medicine doctors refer their patients to TCM practitioners ( Holliday, 2003 ; Chung et al., 2011 ). The referrals to TCM practitioners were mostly from the older generation, friends, or online channels. Equipped with a basic understanding of over-the-counter TCM products, such as Hou Tsao Powder for expelling phlegm, most mothers use TCM from local drugstores to supplement Western prescriptions during recovery, instead of visiting a TCM doctor. This hybrid use demonstrates how mothers self-interpret symptoms and determine self-treatment. Some of them give their child TCM remedies immediately when signs of an illness appear, but others prefer to wait until the symptoms increase in severity because they feel that the body can heal itself. These decisions are based on how mothers anticipate disease progression. Apart from TCM products, only a few mothers seek customized TCM recipes prescribed by TCM practitioners, which they then prepare at home.
The mothers believed that Western medicine cannot be used in the long-term due to its stronger side effects, while TCM can eradicate the root of illnesses (see also Lee, 1980 ; Lam, 2001 ). After a period of using Western medication, some mothers stopped and switched to TCM if symptoms persisted. Furthermore, mothers in this study did not use TCM and Western medicine at the same time for fear of adverse interaction. Some mothers only gave their children over-the-counter TCM products to “clear up their symptoms” after the final course of their Western medicine was completed or to suppress coughs before they increased in severity:
My daughter still had a slight cough, so I decided to use Chinese medicine. Two days after she stopped taking Western medication, she started taking Hou Tsao powder, because I was worried that using TCM and Western medicine together would have adverse effects. (39, Master's degree, administrative staff, HK$60,000/month household income).
Therefore, when mothers use Western medicine and TCM grounded in situational conditions and personal experience, their solutions are both pragmatic and integrative. The accumulation of personal experience increases the validity of individualized knowledge, since their long-time observations give them familiarity with most situations of their child, which is different from medical knowledge that is standardized ( Knaapen, 2014 ). Another example of this is the increased confidence and competence of mothers when raising their second child. After long-term accumulation of self-experience, the mothers would be familiar with children’ s bodily changes:
I can tell whether he will recover soon by seeing how he sleeps. If he sleeps soundly, that means his cough is gone. [If] he doesn't sleep well or can't stop coughing, I'll take him to the doctor. (38, Bachelor's degree, housewife, HK$50,000/month household income).
This shows how the mothers relied on their individualized, accumulated knowledge (both expert and experiential) to address the physical conditions of their child and disease progression. Seeing a doctor depended on whether their accumulated experiences could address the situation.
Individualized knowledge translated from expert/experiential knowledge and direct observation has enabled the mothers to create a personalized course of action, rather than simply following general expert advice. This individualized knowledge considers varying situations of individuals, such as bodily functions of children even if from the same family, ages, symptoms, progression, severity and duration of the illness. We found that the preexisting socioeconomic status of the mothers cannot explain how they categorized issues as medical or non-medical; these categorizations and resulting health-seeking behavior were mostly affected by situations and the accumulation of self-experience. In the mothers’ most-used term, “it depends.”

Section: 4. Discussion and conclusion

In response to continued debates on whether alternative information can challenge professional authority, this study finds that mothers who are armed with alternative information do not challenge the authority of doctors inside of clinics. Instead, they validate online information by asking their doctor and seeking professional input. This accords with existing research, which concludes that patients cooperate with doctors for diagnoses and treatments ( Murray et al., 2003 ; Sommerhalder et al., 2009 ). However, the prescriptions of doctors do not always guide the actions of the mothers, as doctor-centered consultation does not fully consider specific medical situations or give specific explanations given the lack of time for consultations. Alternative information enables mothers to act like “expert patients” ( Ziebland, 2004 ; Fox et al., 2005 ; Campbell, 2021 ) who are actively searching for information, analyzing that information, and critically reviewing the advice of doctors. The mothers then transcend the role of expert patients by developing self-experience as individualized knowledge (based on accumulated understanding). We describe this phenomenon by explaining how mothers put expert/experiential knowledge into child-rearing practices in daily contexts.
First, we find that mothers differentiate between medical and non-medical domains to apply expert and experiential knowledge accordingly, which shows the mothers’ respect for professional authority and the practical use of experiential knowledge. In most cases, experiential knowledge is helpful for managing daily matters, such as diet and sleep, and classed in the non-medical domain. By contrast, the mothers are cautious about medical issues and suggest that emergency situations, like scalding, deserve the attention of doctors. As in the existing literature ( Sillence et al., 2007 ; Suziedelyte, 2012 ), the mothers still value expert knowledge, especially for medical matters, because of their expectations around the functionality of institutionalized medicine ( Pilnick and Dingwall, 2011 ; Lindström and Karlsson, 2016 ). In contrast, for alternative information as a type of experiential knowledge (ranging from use of the internet to consulting their social networks), the mothers were concerned about credibility and validity ( Blume, 2017 ). They adopted various ways to validate alternative information (see also, Sillence et al., 2007 ), for instance, by checking if the information was recent and accumulated from the actual care of children.
Overall, the movement between the medical and non-medical domains shows the context-oriented attitude of the mothers. The actions taken in childcare practices are more influenced by the evolving physical conditions rather than the perceived credibility of the different forms of knowledge. Their categorization of health problems as medical or non-medical affected the choice of seeing a doctor, depending on whether the individualized knowledge was sufficient to manage the health of their child. As Menchik (2014) noted, in decision-making processes, the form of knowledge that informed decisions is not the most important; rather, it is the context within which the interpretation and decision is situated.
Second, the mothers accumulated self-experience by translating expert/layperson knowledge into their own individualized knowledge. For example, adding to their expert/layperson knowledge, the mothers looked to TCM to add to a repertoire of treatments. This involved a basic evaluation of ailments and learning a series of practical techniques, which often took changing physical conditions into consideration. TCM remedies facilitated individualized treatments and increased the medicinal understanding of the mothers. Thus, its advantage is supplementing the shortcomings of professional knowledge that normally followed the principles of evidence-based medicine (EBM). While EBM advocates for universal treatment guidelines based on evidence, it has been widely criticized for neglecting personal circumstances ( Knaapen, 2014 ). Individualized knowledge accounts for the changing physical situations and specificities, thus bridging the gap between professional knowledge and situational practices. This explains how alternative information empowers mothers to determine their own course of action when they are dissatisfied with general physician advice.
In childcare practices, we find that only through close observation and accumulating knowledge will the mothers increase their capability in dealing with daily challenges, which resonates with Pols (2014) discussion on “patient knowledge.” The mother's self-experience based on direct observation produced experiential knowledge that is different from the embodied knowledge that enables patients to challenge doctors in clinics using recent embodied senses ( Peters et al., 1998 ; Haw et al., 2018 ). This observation-based self-experience allowed the mothers to represent their child and express their feelings in clinics ( Tates and Meeuwesen, 2001 ).
The childcare practices of Hong Kong mothers are an atypical case under a specific context where Western medicine holds a dominant status and TCM is also influential. However, the findings of this study can be generalized to places where doctor-centered interactions and Western medicine are common and established. The case of Hong Kong medical practices shows that physician-led consultation often gives generic expert advice, even if the mothers ask for further explanation, which may neglect the individual situations of children. That's why mothers find experiential knowledge helpful. The findings indicate that alternative health information and alternative medical traditions (TCM in this study) empower the mothers to tailor medications and treatments to their children's situations. Expert knowledge is supplemented by self-use of TCM, which is mainly based on cultural beliefs and daily observation. Therefore, mothers increase their individualized knowledge. Similarly, patients can self-interpret health problems and locate practical solutions, resisting the biomedical model of Western medicine ( Fox et al., 2005 ).
This study was conducted prior to COVID-19. While not part of this reported study, our subsequent informal observations of and discussions with mothers in Hong Kong during the pandemic suggested similar health-seeking patterns. For example, it appeared that most people in Hong Kong preferred to adopt experiential knowledge to self-treat COVID-19 at home, as no effective drug was available and hospitals were overloaded. COVID-19 patients tended to contextualize the use of TCM products and/or Western medicine according to personal symptoms (such as virus-caused sore throat, headache, fever, and fatigue). Most believed that the recovery and disease progression depended on personal bodily functions, and standard treatments may not be applicable to individuals, which confirms that lay experience enables individualized treatments.
In conclusion, our study finds that alternative medical information does not negate professional authority or change the doctor-led interactions in Hong Kong; rather, alternative information encourages mothers to resolve health problems based on their own expertise, when expert advice is not practical for their children. Though professional knowledge is perceived as authoritative in medical domains, mothers still need to translate expert/experiential knowledge into their individualized knowledge, which is more helpful to deal with different situations. The accumulation of the mothers’ self-experience enables self-medication and the transfer of some medical issues into the non-medical domain.
The asymmetric power relations in clinical interactions have long been a concern in medical sociology . This study offers an alternative solution to doctor-led consultations, namely patients can enhance and validate their own authority by accumulating self-experience that allows them to translate medical knowledge into individualized treatment. Professional medical treatments are still needed when lay experience does not suffice, suggesting situational concerns be brought to the discussion of professional authority. The context-dependent attitudes towards knowledge-in-practice thus require that individual bodily conditions be considered in order to fill the gap from generic medical knowledge.

Section: Credit author statement

Xiaoli Tian , the first author, also the corresponding author: Funding acquisition, Conceptualization, Methodology, data collection, Formal analysis, writing (original draft and revision) Sai Zhang , the second author: literature review, Formal analysis, writing (original draft and revision).
