Title: Anishinabek sources of strength: Learning from First Nations people who have experienced mental health and substance use challenges


Abstract: Abstract

We report on the system of care and sources of strength and resilience for mental health among First Nations People experiencing the impacts of historical and contemporary colonization. Aamjiwnaang First Nation, a vibrant community of approximately 2400 members in southwestern Ontario , Canada, partnered in research to reveal sources of strength and resilience among community members with lived experiences (PWLE) with mental health and/or substance use challenges. A thematic content analysis was done using qualitative data collected as part of two complementary studies. In the first study called the “ Five Views on a Journey” study, interviews with PWLE and family members of PWLE were conducted to better understand strengths and deficits in the system of care for mental health and substance use. In the second study entitled “ A Strengths-Based Approach to Understanding How First Nations People Cope with Stress and Trauma ,” Photovoice was used to examine sources of strength and resilience among PWLE. Combined, these studies revealed that mental health supports and services that are trustworthy, open, and confidential are foundational to healing, helping PWLE find pathways to wellness by engendering feelings of hope, self-worth and pride. The integral roles of Anishinaabe culture and cultural identity as well as strong connections with family and community were key sources of strength and resilience. Our findings are discussed in the context of Aamjiwnaang's informal and formal systems of care, culture as wellness, inner strength, and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada's Calls to Action.

Section: 1. Introduction

The lives of Indigenous Peoples in North America are impacted by historical and contemporary events and practices stemming from colonization, including forced assimilation, discriminatory legal policies, interpersonal racism, land dispossession, ecologic degradation, cultural disruption, and systemic violence ( Adelson, 2005 ; Evans-Campbell, 2008 ; Greenwood et al., 2015 ; Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 2015 ; Health Canada, 2015 ). The trauma associated with these events and practices has resulted in a disproportionate burden of mental health and substance use challenges for many Indigenous Peoples ( Czyzewski, 2011 ; Health Canada, 2015 ; Nelson and Wilson, 2017 ; Walters et al., 2002 ). Nevertheless, Indigenous Peoples show strength and continue to thrive despite these adversities, demonstrating great perseverance in the face of health challenges associated with historic and ongoing colonialism ( Isbister-Bear et al., 2017 ; Kirmayer et al., 2000 ; Thomas et al., 2016 ).
For individuals facing mental health and substance use challenges, the provision of culturally congruent and trauma informed programs has been identified as a crucial component of healing ( Donovan et al., 2015 ; Gone, 2009 ; Prussing and Gone, 2011 ). Further, evidence-based research shows that mental health programming in Indigenous contexts must be based on relationships of trust to ensure equity in care ( Browne and Fiske, 2001 ; Kirmayer and Jarvis, 2019 ). The Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Health Canada, 2015 has identified these aforementioned attributes as integral components of the process of reconciliation within health care . However, when seeking help for mental health and substance use challenges, many First Nations, Inuit and Métis people in Canada are confronted by Western systems of care that are neither culturally competent nor trauma-informed, and where institutional and interpersonal racism are common ( Allan and Smylie, 2015 ; FenTurpel-Lafond, 2020 ; Kirmayer et al., 2009 ).
Historically, Indigenous ways of knowing, being, and doing in relation to health and healing have been largely omitted in research that was often initiated and conducted by non-Indigenous researchers ( Kovach, 2021 ; Nelson and Wilson, 2017 ; Waldram, 2004 ). Research concerning the health of Indigenous Peoples has often been undertaken using a biomedical lens which emphasizes personal traits and responsibilities for improving health while underestimating the role of social inequities sustained by social, political, and historical factors stemming from colonialism ( Johnson-Jennings et al., 2018 ; Nelson and Wilson, 2017 ; Hyett et al., 2019 ). Health and wellness systems are rooted in colonial structures, policies, and practices that rarely integrate conceptualizations of health that are culturally meaningful. Evidence suggests that most health care across Canada is inadequate for Indigenous Peoples who face discrimination, stigma, and harmful stereotypes ( Browne et al., 2005 ; De Leeuw et al., 2010 ; Horrill et al., 2018 ; Nelson and Wilson, 2017 ).
To better inform the effective provision of healthcare in diverse countries such as Canada, knowledge is needed that draws on diverse viewpoints of individuals in non-dominant social positions who need health services ( Kirmayer and Jarvis, 2019 ; Whitley et al., 2011 ). This is especially true for First Nations communities within Canada, which are increasingly exercising self-determination in the organization and provision of healthcare ( Richmond and Cook, 2016 ). The objective of this research is to identify the pathways through which healing is sought, realized, and sustained in a community setting, with the overarching goal of generating knowledge to better inform the provision of mental health care supports and services within Indigenous communities, generally. To address this objective, this article details findings from two complementary data sources collected within a First Nations community to better understand the system of care and sources of strength and resilience from the perspectives of individuals who have lived experiences with mental health and substance use challenges as well as family members of persons facing these challenges.
This paper reports on findings from a project entitled A Strengths-based Approach to Understanding How First Nations People Cope with Trauma and Stress (“Strengths Study”) that aimed to better understand how individual and community strengths and resources buffer the effects of trauma and stress. The Strengths Study was designed to include as many community voices as possible with both existing and new data to gain an in-depth understanding of sources of strength and resilience. Data from two sources were analyzed to offer important and complementary insights into the perspectives and experiences of people with lived experiences (PWLE) with mental health and/or substance use challenges ( Fig. 1 ). Download: Download high-res image (304KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Components of the Strengths Study, Five Views and Photovoice, with Aamjiwnaang First Nation members.
The first source of data was interviews conducted in 2013–2015 as part of Five Views on a Journey study (“Five Views”) ( George et al., 2017 ; Wells et al., 2014 ) which aimed to better understand how the existing system of services and informal supports worked for people who had mental health, substance use, and/or violence (MSV) challenges based on multiple perspectives, including the perspectives of PWLE with MSV challenges and family members of PWLE. Five Views helped to identify system strengths and challenges to the systems of care in several communities, including Aamjiwnaang First Nation. We conducted a secondary data analysis of qualitative interviews with 1) PWLE in Aamjiwnaang First Nation about their experiences accessing and receiving support for MSV challenges and 2) family members of PWLE to understand the experiences and roles of family members in the system of care. While these interviews did not specifically focus on sources of strengths and resilience, participants did occasionally describe stories, thoughts, and reflections – unprompted - that included accounts of positive and effective ways for dealing with challenging times and relationships.
The second source of data is a Photovoice sub-study with Aamjiwnaang First Nation members, conducted as part of the Strengths study, to identify perceived sources of strength and resilience in the face of MSV challenges. Photovoice involves participants taking photographs that reflect their lived experiences . Photos are then used in interviews and group discussions to generate rich narrative data oriented towards the perspectives of the participants ( Bennett et al., 2019 ; Tremblay et al., 2018 ; Wang and Burris, 1997 ).
The authors of this article include Anishinaabe health leaders from Aamjiwnaang First Nation [SP and TG] as well as Anishinaabe and non-Indigenous researchers from outside Aamjiwnaang First Nation who were involved as principal investigator [SW], co-investigator [KG], or were involved with interviews, writing and/or data analysis [MMN, LJB, NG, BT, LP, SB].
The studies discussed in this article were approved by the Aamjiwnaang First Nation Health Committee and by the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health Research Ethics Board (REB #120/2012 for Five Views and #068/2017 for Strengths Study). The Advisory Team that guided this study and brought the study protocol forward to the Health Committee are co-authors on this article [SP and TG]. As the Advisory Team and members of Aamjiwnaang First Nation, SP and TG were part of developing the research proposal, deciding how community members were invited, participated, honoured for participating, and determining how findings were shared.

Section: 2. Study 1: Five Views study

The Five Views study aimed to identify individual and community strengths/resilience resources, including how these resources contributed to coping with challenges; goals and desired outcomes; positive and negative experiences getting help; experiences with services/supports; and suggestions for service improvement. In the context of the Strengths Study, we conducted secondary analysis of the perspectives of people living with MSV and family members of people living with MSV in Aamjiwnaang First Nation. The following methods section describes the recruitment, data collection, and analysis process related only to the interview data included in the Strengths Study.
Adults aged 18 years and older from Aamjiwnaang First Nation were invited to participate in private, one-to-one interviews if they self-identified as being people with lived experience (PWLE) with mental health , substance use, and/or violence (MSV) challenges in the five years prior to recruitment or were a family member to a PWLE with MSV challenges. Recruitment involved convenience sampling using a) advertisements placed in the community and, b) snowball sampling by word of mouth. Forty-one community members participated, including 20 PWLEs (10 females and 10 males) and 21 family members of PWLE (11 females and 10 males).
Members of Aamjiwnaang First Nation were hired and trained to obtain informed consent and conduct the interviews. Participants were asked about the types of MSV challenges they had experienced; their experiences seeking help or support from people, services, or organizations; and their suggestions on how to improve the supports and outcomes for people in the community. The length of interviews ranged from 30 to 90 min. Participants received a $25 gift card in appreciation for their participation. Interviews were audio recorded and later transcribed for analysis. The analysis detailed in this article is a secondary analysis of the interview transcripts .
Although the Five Views study focused broadly on mental health services , previous analysis of the interview data revealed that a key benefit of these services was their influence in drawing from or promoting strengths and resilience of service clients. Thus, the secondary analysis detailed in the present article focused on those parts of the interview in which participants mention or describe sources of strength, support, and resilience. Two researchers analyzed the interview transcripts to identify themes specific to strengths and resilience, retaining relevant codes that had been identified in the previous analysis. Evidence and references to sources of strength and resilience throughout the interview transcripts were coded to identify emerging major themes and sub-themes. Reflections of positive influences or resilience factors in response to MSV challenges were also coded. During this secondary coding, the coding framework was refined iteratively to create a parsimonious framework that fit the data. Coding was done using NVivo 12.0 software.
Five broad themes related to strength and resilience emerged from the Five Views interviews: 1) formal supports that reinforce strength and resilience, 2) informal supports for strength and resilience, 3) individual practices and inner strengths, 4) beneficial effects of supports and practices, and 5) visions for the future - how services and supports could be improved as sources of strength and resilience.
Participants described helpful formal supports that they or their family member accessed when facing MSV challenges. Culturally-informed, Indigenous-led programs were mentioned as an especially important formal support. These included visits with Indigenous Elders , support from First Nations professionals such as a National Native Alcohol and Drug Abuse Program (NNADAP) worker, traditional healers, and healing circles. One benefit from culturally-informed supports was the strong bonds established with First Nations service providers who worked with participants in both traditional and non-traditional ways to help with their MSV challenges. One participant described the connection they felt with their support worker as familial: “ I can sit there and talk to [the NNADAP worker] because I think of him as a brother, so we have walked this walk and drum and sing together. He is concerned, so I feel openly to talk to him .”
First Nations community workers supported and connected people with cultural programming and were seen to have a holistic view of the participant.
Primary healthcare providers, including the family doctor, a local clinic or an off-reserve hospital provided a first point of access for support, a place where participants knew they could go to receive further referrals to other specialized supports. Although not significant sources of relational support for participants, healthcare providers were seen as a necessary stepping-stone to accessing other formal supports that better provided time and space for strong and meaningful relationship formation between the service user and provider.
Several participants reported that they or their family members had accessed counselling services as part of their healing journey. Dedicated counselling services were accessed through work, school, or a correctional facility. Participants mentioned this type of service often in terms of the trust and understanding they felt when speaking with their counsellor. Several participants mentioned that their counsellors made them feel safe and therefore comfortable talking about their experiences.
The importance of openness and trust when receiving help was also found in discussions of attendance at residential treatment centres (i.e., detoxification programs, drug rehabilitation programs , and other long-term stays in specialized facilities) and support groups accessed for MSV challenges; these formal supports were mentioned by some participants as safe spaces where they could talk about their experiences to people who did not know them or their past. Additionally, participants noted that within these supports they developed meaningful friendships with others who shared similar hardships, providing access to new informal supports. One family member noted: “ Getting help through AA has given him another community of people who abstain, so that was what was needed because he had to make a big break with a lot of his friends and what he used to do for fun .”
Overall, participants spoke of supports as being sources of strength and resilience when the service/support people demonstrated trustworthiness by respecting privacy and confidentiality, non-judgemental attitudes, and care through creating safe and comfortable environments that are conducive to honest talking.
Participants spoke of the importance and significance of drawing upon informal supports such as family members and friends as sources of strength and resilience. Family and friends were frequently mentioned for their relational support – someone they could and would turn to for emotional support and practical help. The support offered by family and friends could be grounded upon shared experiences facing MSV challenges: “ I have a good support system now, with my sisters, you know they are good supports and they lived it too, so it makes it you know, it just makes us stronger, together.”
Similarly, one participant noted: “ I was talking to a really close friend and she was having the same kind of issue so she told me to go talk to my doctor ”
In this vein, many participants noted that family and friends played a key role in encouraging or even facilitating access to formal services. Further, these supports provided material or logistical aid, including transportation, housing, childcare, and financial support. Beyond immediate friends and family, spirituality and spiritual practices, including both traditional Anishinaabe and Christian understandings of spirituality, were also sources of support.
Participants mentioned several individual practices that were key sources of strength and resilience in their healing journey. These included: self-education about mental health and substance use; employment and job training; helping others; physical activity ; and using positive self-talk that reinforces and affirms a positive worldview.
Participants also mentioned specific thoughts or feelings as sources of inner strength that encouraged them. For example, people shared how they found an internal sense of resolve or determination to make or maintain positive relationships in their family as helpful to initiating their healing journey, with one participant noting , “I knew I had to do something with my life because I didn't want to pass that onto my children.”
One participant shared their experience of healing through their determination to confront and resolve their challenges introspectively: “ I was trying to find a better me, trying to open up that door to violence, to look at it and then, you know, trying to whisk it away, trying to feel better with myself as I carry on my walk.”
Other sources of inner strength mentioned by participants included growing realization or self-awareness that they were facing an MSV challenge, and the importance of striving to forgive and love one's self and others. For example, one PWLE discussed finding the need to make a transformative change in their life: “ Well I just want to learn how to stop drinking, I want to learn how to stop drugging, how to feel right. I wanted to feel good about me, because I didn’t like me for a long time … I was always trying to get away from me you see. But once you realize that, you’re somebody, and it makes me feel better. ”
Participants benefitted from supports that ensured their privacy and confidentiality. These supports offered a safe, comfortable, and non-judgemental space in which participants could discuss their MSV challenges. Participants described gaining key insights, discoveries and realizations that were helpful to their recovery process, including: a better understanding of their unique challenges through education about MSV issues; realizing others had similar experiences and that they were “not alone” in dealing with MSV challenges; discovering a sense of purpose or self-worth and promoting self-esteem; clarifying or shifting their perspective in a positive manner; and finding forgiveness of self and realizing they were not at fault. One participant spoke about the insight they gained from a treatment program saying, “They taught you your triggers, and then they taught you why you did certain things in the past … they taught you it is not your fault.”
Suggestions were made regarding characteristics to be incorporated into new and existing services to improve their role as sources of strength and resilience. These included an emphasis on holistic and culturally-based services, as well as incorporation of spiritual components (First Nations and Christian) into service provision. Further, several recommendations focused on improving access, through implementing in person, door-to-door services (rather than over-the-phone) or through increased transportation options.
Participants indicated a need for improved community education and awareness regarding mental health issues, especially around decreasing stigma related to seeking help for mental health challenges. Suggestions for raising awareness included community workshops, poster campaigns, and training more community members to facilitate mental health awareness. Some participants suggested a need for greater confidentiality and client-empowerment by local service providers.
Finally, participants mentioned additional supports and services that were needed, including: consistent aftercare support; a local culturally-based treatment centre; a drop-in recreation centre for all ages; workshops on how to respond during a crisis (e.g., who to talk to/call); more mental health supports for children and youth; better transportation options for accessing supports; and more support groups and traditional healers.

Section: 3. Study 2: photovoice study

Photovoice is a participatory research methodology that often centres participant control, direction, and creativity in studies, with people whose voices are frequently excluded in research ( Wang and Burris, 1997 ). In Photovoice studies, participants are usually provided a camera to take photos reflecting their lived experiences, which are then shared and discussed in individual interviews and/or group settings to generate rich, narrative data. Research has shown that this method can offer a meaningful, creative, and helpful way to respect and highlight First Nations’ ways of knowing and inform policy development/changes ( Brooks and Poudrier, 2014 ; Castleden and Garvin, 2008 ).
Participants were recruited through public community information sessions and by word of mouth. Eligible participants included community members 18 years or older who were facing or previously faced a mental health and/or substance use challenge. Two community information sessions were held at the community centre on evenings during a women's and men's wellness group, respectively. Information about the study was circulated by the facilitators for the wellness groups who were also staff at the health centre; invitations were also sent to other community members not part of the wellness groups. The sessions included a meal provided by a local caterer, a presentation about the Photovoice study, a break for people to decide if they wanted to participate, and finally, detailed instructions about the research process including the photo consent process, photographing instructions, and interview process. Twenty-one people (11 females and 10 males) who chose to participate reviewed information about the study and signed consent forms, received a digital camera, a notebook, instructions and overview for Photovoice, and contact information for study staff. Of the 21 people who agreed to participate, 13 (7 females and 6 males) completed the Photovoice process. Participants were given an honorarium of $25 in gift certificates for attending the orientation session and for attending each of four interviews or group meetings after the orientation session.
Participants were invited to take photographs that reflected where and how they found strength, hope, and healing in the face of mental health and/or substance use challenges. Participants then met with a researcher two to three times to share and discuss the photos. This was an iterative process of reflection and interpretation, with participants often developing ideas for future photos and potential captions to accompany their favourite photos during the interviews. These one-to-one meetings were audio-recorded and transcribed.
The transcripts from individual interviews informed the initial coding by two non-participant qualitative researchers. To identify themes systematically, two researchers independently coded transcripts for three male and three female participants, using emergent coding. Codes were iteratively generated and refined to establish a codebook, which was then applied to all transcripts. Preliminary findings were drafted to share with participants, based on this initial analysis.
Two group gatherings were organized by one of the researchers who analyzed the transcripts, with guidance from both the Men's Wellness Group and Women's Wellness Group leaders. Over an evening of food and circle sharing, participants reviewed and discussed the preliminary findings with the researcher, shared their favourite photo, talked about the photo's significance, and finalized their photo captions. After everyone shared and spoke about their photo, there was a facilitated discussion about additional themes that emerged from within the group. No new themes were identified however, there was added nuance to the preliminary themes. These two meetings were audio recorded, transcribed, and incorporated into NVivo for additional analysis.
Each participant chose one photo to represent the most meaningful image of their sources of strength and resilience. Their chosen photo was printed on a large canvas with captions detailing their description of the photo engraved on metal plaques. An event with a private photo gallery and reception was held at the community centre for all participants and their family and friends the weekend before National Addictions Awareness Week. Participants informally showed family, friends, and visitors their photo installation, leading to shared storytelling, reminiscing, and reflections over the course of the reception evening. The photos remained on display for public viewing at the community centre for all of National Addictions Awareness Week to honour the work of the participants. Participants shared that they returned with additional friends and family in addition to community centre staff sharing that community members attending events at the community centre commented with interest and positive reflections on the displayed photos.
Photovoice Study participants highlighted numerous sources of strength and resilience in their lives, including the importance of their relationships, the role of positive individual practices, and the centrality of culture to wellness, as well as the benefits they found in drawing on their sources of strength and resilience.
Photovoice study participants made many references to drawing upon relationships as sources of strength on their healing journey. Most often this was a family member or friend whom they could draw on through meaningful interactions, memories, and shared traditions. For some, support came from a person the participant looked to as a role model or mentor. The support offered by family and friends could be both emotional and material; one participant spoke of the steadfast support he received from a friend who was patient and understanding as he struggled with alcohol problems: “ A friend of mine offered me a job, so I took it. The first week or two, it was off and on, I was still hitting the alcohol pretty good and I would show up to stuff, you know, and he stood by me … and he toughed it out with me, and would say ‘you’ll get there at some point. ”
For some, their children were an inspiration that influenced them to move on from substance use, with one participant noting, “I was a big drug user before, and the main thing that got me to stop was my kids.”
Participants drew upon the influence of non-human family members, as well: pets were mentioned as sources of joy and healing through companionship. Elsewhere, the strong relationships with family members who had passed on continued to sustain participants, with two women referencing departed family members who nevertheless remained with them spiritually as key sources of strength on their healing journey.
Participants spoke of the individual practices that sustained them. Many found strength in being in nature (see Photo 1 ) – one participant found hope in the endurance of the natural world, noting a symbolic tie between the long-lasting trees and sun and the endurance of First Nations Peoples in spite of colonialism . Another participant spoke of the strength of connection to the Creator that they had when near water: “ Water is always my go-to anytime, like if I’m feeling down or whatever, it’s kind of where I go sit and I actually talk to the Creator here at the water … that’s my strength, I think, where I go, or to get strength .” Download: Download high-res image (839KB) Download: Download full-size image Photo 1 . When I sit by the water, I reflect on the day. Plan for the future. Think of what things were good, what things were bad, and what I can do to help my family and my community.
For some participants, strength was found in moving forward through personal change. For instance, two men spoke of the motivational impacts of education on their lives, noting how learning in the classroom or on the job propelled them forward. Similarly, some participants found strength in accessing self-help resources to start themselves on their healing journey. Participants spoke of how they drew strength from their day-to-day activities. This could entail activities such as baking, going for walks, doing puzzles, or listening to music, which had calming effects. For some, giving back by helping others was an activity that they found rewarding and provided space to think and feel grateful. Participants harnessed strength through the influence of motivational sayings and philosophies, and through reference to meaningful concepts and mantras. These views centered participants in their world, helping them navigate the challenges they face in their lives. Participants drew upon metaphors such as bridges, puzzles, and “being in the moment” as sources of strength.
For many participants, practices that promoted their Anishnaabe cultural identity were a key source of strength and resilience. Practice of traditional ceremonies and use of traditional medicines were particularly important to participants (see Photo 2 ). Ceremonies such as smudging, water ceremonies, drumming groups, sweat lodges, and pow wow were significant sources of strength for many participants. One participant mentioned how practicing ceremony reinforced positive and meaningful beliefs that kept them on a good path: “Ceremony was a big thing in me keeping myself clean and sober and on that good path. So, listening to the speakers that we have here, you know, just reminded me of my lifestyle too, and we’ve all gone through it. But you know with that belief in our traditions, that belief in our culture, that belief in our ancestors and the belief in the Creator, we can be strong, we can always be strong and continue on. I mean, we’re not going to say that the bumps of life aren’t going to be there because they always will be there. It’s just your belief will keep you to be able to smooth out those bumps and keep on that good path .” Download: Download high-res image (650KB) Download: Download full-size image Photo 2 . This photo represents what gives me strength, as part of my bundle on my first fasting camp. The drum was gifted from my ceremonial sister. The turtle medicine pouch came from my younger brother. The medicines came from Creator and I had made the shaker. All are contributing factors.
Participation in ceremony was a way for participants to express their spirituality, though other avenues to draw upon spirituality as a source of strength were noted. For some, expression of spirituality entailed thoughtful reflection, prayer and meditation; one participant noted that their connection with the Creator led them to reflect on the teaching that the answer to challenges come from within.
Day-to-day practices were a way of connecting with traditional teachings; hunting , fishing, and braiding were examples of meaningful connections to First Nations identity and culture-based practice (see Photo 3 ). Download: Download high-res image (975KB) Download: Download full-size image Photo 3 . When my grandsons come over, I braid their hair. The braid for me represents resiliency . It is also in memory of my grandmother, who was taken from this place very early in her life. The braid also represents connection to my past, keeps me present in the present, and connects me to the future, all at the same time. The original teachings about braiding sweet grass and hair as a form of strength – I was once lost but I made my comeback. I am growing out my hair not only for myself but for my family and to embrace my own strength and resiliency, after everything I've come through in my life.
These sources of strength and resilience had a motivating impact, helping participants maintain healthy ways of living. Participants saw their supports as a source of passion in their lives, instilling feelings of happiness, emotional strength, and calmness. For some, supports were key to feeling a sense of balance in their health.
Supports buttressed positive views of self, offering a new outlook on life by providing a sense of orientation relative to all living things, and providing alternative perspectives on their lives and realities. The sources of strengths provided a sense of purpose and meaning to participant's lives, as well as a sense of pride in self.
Participants noted a profound appreciation for the supports they drew from. Participants identified supports, be they persons or things, as critical components of overcoming their mental health or substance use challenges, or as one participant noted, “a part of my healing”. For some, the act of discussing supports served as a reminder of something or someone special in their lives - a recognition that someone was there for them to help on their healing journey (see Photo 4 ). Download: Download high-res image (1MB) Download: Download full-size image Photo 4 . Gchi-Miigwech Gchi Manitou for your love, forgiveness, healing, and for helping me find my strength. Gchi-Miigwech for the sacred medicine lodges, ancestors, for your Grandfathers' teachings, help me to be mindful of them and keep them in my heart but also to share them. Gchi-Miigwech Gchi Manitou for my family, friends, community. I know now that all these gifts you have given me is where I get my strength to be who you've always meant for me to be.

Section: 4. Knowledge mobilization of findings

In addition to the Photovoice art gallery exhibit at the Community Centre, the findings and recommendations from the secondary analysis of Five Views data and Photovoice were shared and discussed in an Aamjiwnaang First Nation Health Committee meeting. During this meeting, the Health Committee suggested creating a summary report and video that highlights the key findings. A summary report and a 15-min video were collaboratively developed by SP, TG, MMN, and SW. The summary report and video highlight the study findings; recommendations; programs, services, and initiatives that have been implemented and those that are in progress in relation to the recommendations; and a viewing of all Photovoice images and captions. The video features SP, TG, and MMN and at the time of writing this paper, it is being shared through social media within Aamjiwnaang First Nation.

Section: 5. Discussion

In this article, we reported the findings of two complementary studies that examined the system of care and sources of strength and resilience in the face of mental health and substance use challenges among members of a First Nations community in southern Ontario . The objective of our analysis was to identify the pathways through which peoples living with MSV challenges seek, realize, and sustain healing to better inform the provision of services targeting individuals facing these challenges. In the following sections, we discuss the findings of the two studies together, linking common themes that demonstrate processes of strength and resilience in healing from MSV challenges.
Participants spoke of the strengths enabled by bonds with family and friends, and of others with whom they shared an identity as Anishinaabe peoples. Through these connections, avenues for healing that were based on principles of trust, openness, and confidentiality became available, reorienting people towards a path of wellness, and engendering feelings of hope, self-worth, and pride. For many participants, their Anishinaabe cultural identity was a central component of this process. Often, the support offered by family, community, and culture reverberated through the participants daily lives, affecting day-to day-practices, and promoting internal sources of strength.
In both the Five Views and Photovoice studies, people living with MSV issues reached out to close family members and friends and, occasionally, a trusted community member who they viewed as a role model. Individuals who leaned on close family and friends while accessing treatment shared how crucial family and friends were to their healing and aftercare. Likewise, Five View participants noted the strong and supportive connections that could be formed with First Nations service providers. In both studies, key traits of the aforementioned supports were that they were entrusted to maintain confidentiality, cared unconditionally for the participants, and were non-judgemental. Be they First Nations-led services or informal social connections, supports that were trustful, open, and confidential provided spaces for healing that were safe and comfortable.
Our findings suggest that kinship and other social supports operate in multiple and often intersecting ways with other sources of strength. Take, for example, the man who cited his children as an inspiration for moving on from substance use; the desire for a strong substance-free relationship with his children provided the inner strength that he needed to begin his healing journey. Likewise, informal supports such as family and friends were also key in enabling access to formal services, such as transitioning to and from treatment programs. This finding is consistent with previous research with Indigenous populations highlighting the important role that informal supports such as family can play in encouraging formal help seeking for health challenges ( Duran et al., 2005 ; Isaak et al., 2020 ; Roh et al., 2017 ). Our findings also suggest that this relationship is not unidirectional. For example, in the case of a young man accessing Alcohol Anonymous services in the Five Views study, participation in formal services facilitated the development of new informal social support networks that were drawn upon to sustain healing. Additionally, in some instances First Nations staff became viewed as family, blurring altogether the distinction between informal social supports and formal services.
Among the formal services discussed in the Five Views interviews, participants were notably enthusiastic about services led by Indigenous staff with whom they shared an Anishinaabe cultural identity, noting the strong bonds that could be established with these services providers. Regarding the provision of formal services more broadly, Five Views participants were emphatic about the need for trust, openness, and confidentiality in the provision of services. This finding is consistent with previous research that has noted distrust as being a notable barrier in accessing health services for Indigenous populations ( Browne and Fiske, 2001 ; Nelson and Wilson, 2018 ; Yashadhana et al., 2020 ). Issues of trust and distrust are especially pertinent for Indigenous Peoples accessing Western oriented health services. Indigenous Peoples may enter these healthcare services already distrustful of an institution seen as colonizing in nature, only to face instances of discrimination from healthcare providers whose views of Indigenous clients are shaped by colonizing narratives and stereotypes ( Allan and Smylie, 2015 ; FenTurpel-Lafond, 2020 ; Horrill et al., 2018 ; Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Health Canada, 2015 ).
Consistent with research and theory highlighting that Indigenous cultural resources are needed to improve mental wellness (e.g., Brady, 1995 ; Gone, 2009 ; Kirmayer et al., 2011 ), a common theme in both studies was the integral role of Anishinaabe culture and cultural identity as a source of strength and resilience. Participation in cultural practices such as traditional ceremonies and use of traditional medicines were frequently mentioned by participants of both studies as sources of strength and resilience. Historically, traditional ceremonies and medicines were targeted for suppression by the state as part of the attempts to assimilate Indigenous Peoples into settler society ( Brown et al., 2012 ; Waldram, 2014 ). Consequently, the reclamation of these practices and beliefs is thought to have an empowering effect, promoting the well-being of peoples and communities that once suffered disruption of their social identities ( Kral, 2019 ; Sasakamoose et al., 2017 ; Ward et al., 2021 ). Furthermore, formal services may benefit from the integration of culture-based approaches to treatment; such programs may be more congruent with Indigenous worldviews than strictly Western biomedical approaches, offering holistic approaches to care in ways that Western treatments cannot ( Johnson-Jennings et al., 2018 ; Lewis et al., 2018 ; Redvers et al., 2019 ; Woodbridge et al., 2020 ). The incorporation of spiritual and culture-based approaches into formal services for treating MSV challenges was a notable suggestion for system of service improvement by Five Views participants.
Participants spoke of the important role that individual practices and internal beliefs and motivations had as sources of strength and resilience. Often, these personal sources of strength and resilience arose from opportunities provided by family, community, and culture, which is consistent with the literature on Indigenous resilience that emphasizes these macrosocial areas as foundational sites for promoting resilience within individuals ( Kirmayer et al., 2009 ).
Participants of both studies showed that the impacts of kinship, community, and culture were often mediated through the minutiae of daily life. For example, references to day-to-day practice of braiding, hunting , and fishing as sources of strength made by Photovoice study participants connected aspects of daily life to their larger socio-cultural contexts; such daily practices were provided by shared identity as an Anishinaabe person, and became avenues through which this identity could be lived day-to-day in a manner that promoted wellness. In other instances, participants of both studies spoke of making assertive changes to the trajectory of their lives, often with their loved ones serving as inspiration for these changes; in these cases, the foundational support offered by family became the source through which participants began to seek healing.
Sometimes, this desire to move forward translated into seeking new opportunities that could enable further growth. Participants of both studies spoke of the beneficial impacts of taking part in education and employment opportunities. Promoting such opportunities, which compared with the general population lag for Indigenous Peoples in Canada ( Adelson, 2005 ; Reading and Wien, 2009 ; FNIGC, 2018 ) may accordingly be areas in which structural intervention can be made to promote wellness-oriented outcomes for Indigenous peoples and communities dealing with MSV challenges.
Participants drew explicit connections between their sources of strength and resilience and their experiences with MSV challenges, highlighting how supports such as family, friends, and culture could form a core aspect of their healing journey. A key theme in both studies was how supports could act as companions who walked with them; Five Views participants referenced how their supports made them feel like they were not facing their challenges alone, which was echoed by Photovoice study participants, who characterized their supports as helpful companions on their healing journey. These supports helped participants reorient their worldviews towards a position of positivity. Positive perspectives on life were attained by instilling feelings of pride, self-worth, and self-esteem. Strength and resilience were found where supports provided a sense of clarity, offering alternative perspectives regarding the MSV challenges that were rooted in optimism, and providing individuals with the inspiration to move forward.
Our findings can be viewed in the context of Canada's Truth and Reconciliation Commission's (TRC) Calls to Action ( Commission and Reconciliation Commission of Health Canada, 2015 ). As per TRC Calls to Action #23 and 24 which state “provide cultural competency training for all healthcare professionals” and “require all [medical and nursing school] students to take a course dealing with [Indigenous] health issues, including the history and legacy of residential schools, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples , Treaties and [Indigenous] rights, and Indigenous teachings and practices” respectively, the value and impact of relational, trustworthy, and non-judgmental supports is vital for programs and services to be more culturally safe. Cultural safety is a term that has been used to describe how services provide care in ways that allow people to feel comfortable and safe and to self-determine who they seek support from ( Brascoupé and Waters, 2009 ; Organization, 2008 ). Cultural safety requires service providers to be critically aware of their own identity, privileges, biases, values, assumptions, social capital, and their role in addressing health inequities ( Curtis et al., 2019 ; Williams, 1999 ). The TRC Call to Action #23 also includes a “call upon all levels of government to increase the number of [Indigenous] professionals working in the healthcare field.” The TRC Calls to Action cite a need for culturally based healing practices that integrate Indigenous healers and Elders ( Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 2015 ). Taken as a whole, our findings suggest that people find strength and resilience in contexts where they were grounded in who they are as an Anishinaabe person, and feel understood, cared for, and respected. In our analyses, these positive attributes most often came from friends and family as well as First Nations staff, who were key in providing opportunities to reorient perspectives towards position of wellness and possibility. Thusly, these findings affirm the need for further investment in resources to put the aforementioned TRC Calls to Action into place.
Photovoice can facilitate three substantive goals: 1) to facilitate reflection by community members on strengths and issues within their communities, 2) to allow critical discussion around these topics, 3) to promote knowledge creation to reach policy makers ( Wang and Burris, 1997 ). In this study, the collection of local strengths-based data in Aamjiwnaang First Nation provided the impetus and direction for culturally based healing to improve community wellness. One co-author [SP] is the Director of Health Services and another [TG] is the Mental Wellness Supervisor for AFN, both members of AFN. Together with community leadership, they played a key role in informing the studies throughout the research process and implementing new initiatives based on both studies' findings and recommendations. Since the Five Views study was completed, the mental wellness team has grown and improved access to consistent 1) pre-treatment and aftercare support through creating an outreach team and 2) transportation to local programs, including taxi vouchers if the community transportation service is unable to accommodate everyone. There is now a stronger emphasis on holistic and culturally-based services, since the studies have been completed. Training on trauma-informed practices for staff and community members have been offered to health centre staff and community members alike, in response to hearing community members express concerns about confidentiality. Community workshops and events about traditional teachings and practices as well as responses to mental health and/or addiction crisis continue to be offered to community members. Additionally, Aamjiwnaang First Nation established programs such as the Women's Wellness Group, Men's Wellness Group, Girl Group, and other drop-in style programs to improve community wellness.

Section: 6. Limitations

Our findings are constrained by several limitations. First, the focus of the Five Views interviews were on experiences with seeking help and thus did not explicitly deal with strengths. Therefore, findings from these interviews were based largely on experiences seeking or receiving help from mostly formal services. Second, the Photovoice study drew heavily on narratives from the 13 people involved, and may not reflect the diversity of ways people in Aamjiwnaang First Nation have gained strength, healing, and resilience after experiences of mental health and/or substance use hardships. Third, people in both studies identified as male or female and it is unclear how the findings may or may not resonate with people who identify as two-spirit, transgender, or gender non-conforming. Finally, coding was done by non-Indigenous researchers who are from outside of Aamjiwnaang First Nation. Though they have extensive research experience working with and in Indigenous communities, their perspectives nevertheless reflect those of outsiders to the community.

Section: 7. Conclusion

Having rich narrative accounts of how healing is sought, realized, and sustained by First Nations members living through mental health and substance use challenges provides helpful information for community wellness planning. In particular, the Photovoice study participants who responded to open-ended questions highlighted the importance of spirituality, culture, and connections to family and the natural environment, which are not often recognized or included in many health and wellness supports and services. We suggest that sources of strength and resilience that carefully consider peoples' relationships with all living beings are important to take into account when conceptualizing, recording, or asking about peoples’ health and wellbeing, as well as in planning health and wellness programs and training staff.

Section: Credit author statement

Melody Morton Ninomiya: Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Project administration Bryan Tanner: Writing original draft, Writing – review & editing Laura Peach: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing Ningwakwe George: Validation, Writing – review & editing Sara Plain: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition Tracey George: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition Kathryn Graham: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition Sharon Bernards: Data curation, Writing – review & editing, Project administration Laura Jane Brubacher: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing Samantha Wells: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition

Section: Funder

This research was funded by Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) Project [ PJT – 153,256 ]. The original data used for the secondary analyses were collected as part of an earlier CIHR Team Grant [ CBG – 101,926 ].

Section: Acknowledgements

We thank and respect all members of Aamjiwnaang First Nation who participated in the interviews and Photovoice –for sharing their experiences, knowledge, reflections, and hopes for their families and community. We also thank Amy Williams who helped in reaching participants and assisted with transportation as well as Todd Williams for helping coordinate and book spaces for interviews and events at the Maawn Doosh Gumig Community and Youth Centre.
