Title: Cultural conceptions of Women's labor pain and labor pain management: A mixed-method analysis


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Aim

We assess American cultural beliefs about labor pain and labor pain management , including stereotypical and disparate beliefs about labor pain of women from different racial groups.

Abstract_Section: Rationale

Understanding cultural beliefs about labor pain is critical as these beliefs influence experience, interpretation, and treatment of labor pain.

Abstract_Section: Method

We used an online survey with quantitative and qualitative questions about American labor pain beliefs. Participants were recruited and compensated using TurkPrime's Panels during the first week in August 2017 and the last week in May 2018. The completion rate was 76.86 percent (n = 214). After screening using quality control items, the final sample included 200 respondents.

Abstract_Section: Results

Qualitative results indicate that 56.5 percent (n = 113) of respondents have an accurate understanding of nociceptive/sensory drivers of labor pain, and 55.8 percent (n = 63) of those respondents focused on the second stage of labor . However, only two respondents (1%) mentioned non-sensory (i.e., psychological) causes of labor pain - reflecting a lack of cultural knowledge of the biopsychosocial nature of pain. Categorical responses indicate almost all respondents (95%; n = 190) believe women have a right to labor pain relief, and the majority believe labor pain has value (68%; n = 136) and should be treated medically (87%; n = 174). Quantitative results document stereotypical beliefs that women of color experience less labor pain than white women. Belief that there is value in experiencing labor pain and that pain should not be treated medically were both associated with greater racial disparities in beliefs about labor pain severity . Beliefs were not related to respondent sociodemographic identity, suggesting they are American cultural constructs.

Abstract_Section: Conclusion

Future consideration of the influence of dominant American cultural beliefs about labor pain – including misunderstanding of the nature of labor pain and racial bias in expectations of labor pain – on individuals, norms, and structures is expected to improve quality of patient care.

Section: 1. Introduction

Cultural connotations of the female body do not equate to the actual individual female body, but cultural norms are always lived and enacted, such that these norms have real effects on the lived body and its encounters with other bodies ( Sörensdotter and Siwe, 2016 , p. 1297)
Despite ubiquitous cultural descriptions of intense labor pain, cultural beliefs about labor pain in America – beyond beliefs that it is severe and unbearable ( Cleeton, 2001 ; Luce et al., 2016 ; Morris and McInerney, 2010 ) – are rarely examined in the scientific literature. Yet, labor pain behaviors and their interpretation exist within a cultural context ( Christiaens et al., 2010 ), and cultural conceptions of labor pain influence its experience and treatment ( Lowe, 2002 ). When considered, culture is perceived as existing within minority groups. Dominant cultures – both macro (e.g., national culture) and micro (e.g., specific labor and delivery unit culture) – are often invisible and unexamined. Yet, pain cannot be separated from a cultural interpretation as “the interpretation of pain behaviors is heavily dependent on the social and cultural learnings and understandings of both the person in pain and the observer" ( Whitburn et al., 2019 , p. 30). This framework of labor pain is consistent with the biopsychosocial model of pain – but despite evidence of this mechanism, this perspective has not permeated clinical practice nor reached the level of current cultural knowledge.
Description and quantification of cultural beliefs about labor pain are critically needed, especially in light of public outcry and scientific and ethical mandates that urgently appeal to researchers to focus on the profound racial inequity in labor and delivery outcomes ( American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017 ; Ghidei et al., 2019 ; Mann et al., 2018 ). Evidence suggests that clinicians’ disparate interpretation and responses to pain in childbirth based on maternal race contribute to inequitable pain management ( Davis, 2019 ; Morris and Schulman, 2014 ). As with all racial disparities in health, it is important to remember that race is a powerful, but socially constructed, category that acts on health via deeply embedded cultural beliefs that are reified in structures, systems, traditions, and norms ( Hardeman et al., 2019 ; Roberts, 2011 ; Smedley; Smedley, 2005 ). Racist cultural beliefs – insidious as they may be – are social determinants of (or “upstream” contributing factors to) numerous and seemingly distinct health disparities ( Palmer et al., 2019 ). Importantly, interventions targeting social determinants have the prospect of improving health equity in multiple ways. Thus, an examination of cultural beliefs about race in the context of labor pain is arguably foundational to understanding the etiology of inequity in labor pain perception and treatment, and this understanding is a necessary step in working toward greater equity in maternal outcomes more generally.
Cultural beliefs and stereotypes have powerful yet often implicit effects – both on the decision-making of clinicians ( Belak et al., 2020 ; Grant and Lynda, 1996 ; Penner et al., 2014 ) and on patient interpretation, experience, and report of symptoms ( Lowe, 2002 ; Nayak et al., 2000 ). Women of color are frequently excluded from the decision-making process during childbirth and/or stigmatized as “uncooperative” if they request or decline specific treatment ( Altman et al., 2019 ; Attanasio and Hardeman, 2019 ; Davis, 2019 ). In other clinical contexts, implicit theories/cultural beliefs about medical conditions and corresponding medical treatments have been shown to influence patient behavior as well as symptomology ( Bishop, 1991 ; Leventhal et al., 1992 ). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recently called for research on the role of bias in the context of maternal health . As a first step toward this goal, context-specific beliefs and biases must be identified.
Because labor pain has been described throughout all of human history, the cultural beliefs about labor pain are deeply-ingrained, having been passed down through generations ( Wolf, 2012 ). Therefore, cultural beliefs about labor pain may not only have powerful effects on clinical treatment and patient experience, but also permeate more general knowledge. Indeed, in other contexts, cultural beliefs have been shown to persist and co-exist with public health messages in such a way as to maintain false beliefs and present a barrier to health and health education (e.g., Davison et al., 1991 ; Hoffman et al., 2016 ; Robbins et al., 2019 ).
The objective of this manuscript is to assess dominant American cultural beliefs about labor pain and labor pain management. First, we consider cultural ideas of the causes, purpose, and treatment of labor pain. Second, we examine potential embedded disparate cultural beliefs about the experience of labor pain by women of different racial groups.
To contextualize our results, we first provide information about the known causes of labor pain. As with all painful experiences, labor pain is a biopsychosocial phenomenon resulting from a complex integration of numerous inputs. Labor pain involves clear nociceptive drivers conceptualized as the sensory component of pain. Although cross-cultural and individual variability exists in behavioral responses, severe sensory pain during labor is universal ( Melzack, 1984 ).
Labor is divided into three stages characterized by different sensory pain stimuli ( The Boston Women's Health Collective, 2008 ; Zhang et al., 2010 ). The first stage lasts from a few to over 24 hours and is painful due to uterine contractions , which lead to a shortening of the uterine muscles and to thinning and dilation of the cervix (the opening of the uterus). The second stage of labor is when the baby maneuvers through the woman's birth canal and emerges through the vaginal opening, lasting from a few minutes to up to 4 hours. Women often experience pushing as a relief and, although painful, the pain is typically not as extreme as the pain from the first stage of labor . The third stage is the expulsion of the placenta from the uterus, and lasts from 5 minutes to an hour.
Affective states also contribute to the pain experience, though this component is left out of the common biomedical approach to treating labor pain ( Whitburn et al., 2019 ). The affective component of pain tends to be less severe than the sensory component of pain and to decrease after the first stage of labor ( Lowe, 2002 ). The affective component of labor pain also relates to the positive feedback loop, especially during the first stage of labor, involving the body's production of oxytocin, which produces labor contractions. Fear can disrupt this loop, causing labor to stall or contractions to be more painful.

Section: 2. Method

We used a mixed-method approach through an online survey with quantitative and qualitative questions to gain a better understanding of labor pain beliefs. The quantitative questions solicited demographic information, personal pain sensitivity , and race-based stereotypes of labor pain intensity. The qualitative questions captured cultural beliefs about the purpose and value of and reason for labor pain, what labor pain feels like, and whether labor pain should be medically treated. All questions were presented in the same way to all participants.
Participants were recruited and compensated using TurkPrime's Panels ( Litman et al., 2016 , https://www.turkprime.com now cloudresearch.com) – an online platform connecting millions of potential respondents from diverse backgrounds and geographic locations based on eligibility criteria. Interested volunteers sign up for studies based on eligibility and expected time investment (no study-specific advertisements are used). This sampling method was chosen to ensure the diversity needed to assess dominant American cultural beliefs. Compared to traditional survey methods involving in person or mail-based recruitment, online surveys decrease participant burden, increase the response rate, and importantly result in samples that more closely represent the demographic and geographic diversity of the US ( Heen et al., 2014 ). TurkPrime has been shown to further enhance sample representativeness compared to other online platforms ( Heen et al., 2014 ; Litman et al., 2016 ). Participation was voluntary, and people could stop at any time. The survey was available at two separate time points due to funding constraints (first week in August 2017 and last week in May 2018). The completion rate was 76.86%, resulting in 214 completed surveys. Fourteen responses were removed for wrong answers to at least three out of four quality control items (e.g. Please answer 8 for this question , Oppenheimer et al., 2009 ) or fewer failed quality control items along with qualitative responses indicating lack of attention to the survey (e.g., responding “good” to all open-ended questions). Thirty-two responses were retained that failed up to two quality check items, but provided qualitative responses that indicated study engagement.
The final sample includes 200 (18–79 years old, M = 39.75 years, SD = 15.41) participants from diverse backgrounds ( Table 1 ). Participants were paid between $1.50-$2.53 (depending on the panel, in accordance with TurkPrime standard costs) for completing the brief survey. The survey was open to adult, English-speaking residents of the United States with minimum quotas ( n = 50) specified for African American and Hispanic American participants to allow for comparison across and within subsamples. Because our goal is to better understand American cultural beliefs (with culture defined as “the languages, customs, beliefs, rules, arts, knowledge, and collective identities and memories developed by members of all social groups that make their social environments meaningful” ( American Sociological Association )) about labor pain, we did not limit participants to any particular age range or gender or to those who had previously given birth. Participants could take as much time as desired, but the majority completed the survey within 15 minutes. Texas A&M University IRB classified this study as exempt. Before beginning the survey, all participants were presented with an information sheet and electronically confirmed consent to participate. Table 1 . Sample characteristics ( n = 200). Empty Cell Empty Cell Percentage of total sample Gender Female 60 Male 40 Race African American 23 American Indian/Alaskan Native 1.5 Asian American 8.5 Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.5 Hispanic/Latinx 25 Multi-racial 8 White/non-Hispanic 33.5 Education Less than high school 3 High school degree or GED 25.5 Some college or associate's degree 38 Bachelor's Degree 23 Graduate degree 10.5 Employment Employed 53.5 Unemployed 44.5 Declined to respond 2 Related experience Given Birth 36 a Experienced labor pain 35 b Previous jobs related to pain 14.5 a 60% of female participants. b 58.3% of female participants.
After consenting, participants read definitions of terms they might be unfamiliar with (e.g., labor, epidural) and then read and responded to brief labor pain narratives . Responses were largely uniform and not discussed here. Participants then completed the measures below, presented in fixed order, and were electronically debriefed.
Qualitative Reports. Participants answered open-ended questions on their beliefs about labor pain: 1)Why do you think labor is painful?; 2)What do you think the purpose of labor pain is?; 3)What does labor pain feel like? Participants were also asked three “yes or no” questions: 1)Do you think there is value in women experiencing labor pain?; 2)Do you think labor pain should be treated medically?; 3)Do women have a right to labor pain relief ?; each followed with the open-ended question: Why or why not?
Quantitative Assessment of Cultural Stereotypes . Modeled after prior surveys assessing explicit stereotypes about pain in general ( Hoffman and Trawalter, 2016 ; Wandner et al., 2012 ), participants were asked to mark on a 0 (no pain) - 100 (worst pain imaginable) continuous numerical rating scale , their estimation of labor pain severity for specific prototypical individuals: the typical American woman, the typical American woman from various racial/ethnic/geographic backgrounds, and participants themselves if they were to experience labor pain. Note that respondents defined typical for themselves .
Personal Pain Sensitivity. Participants completed the 17-item Pain Sensitivity Questionnaire (PSQ, α = 0.942 in the current sample) and a single-item self-rating of their own pain sensitivity relative to others ( Ruscheweyh et al., 2009 ). The PSQ has been validated in healthy and clinical pain populations and is reliably associated with laboratory assessments of physical pain ( Ruscheweyh et al., 2012 , 2009 ).
Demographic Characteristics . Participants provided their age, gender, race, education, and employment status. Those who self-identified as Hispanic/Latinx or Asian American were asked to select a more specific national/racial category, consistent with best practice recommendations that race categories in research reflect within group diversity ( Ghidei et al., 2019 ). The five most common Latinx ( United States Census Bureau, 2016 ) and the six most common Asian ( Lopez et al., 2017 ) countries of origin among Americans were presented with an option for self-identification outside these categories.
Personal Experience with Labor and Pain . Participants reported any experience and familiarity with labor and pain, including current or prior work involving helping women with labor pain or that deals with pain more generally, and also any personal experience with childbirth and labor pain.
Qualitative Analysis . The data were iteratively coded by the second and third authors using Thematic Analysis (TA), “a method for systematically identifying, organizing, and offering insight into patterns of meaning (themes) across a data set” ( Braun and Clarke, 2012 , p. 57). The strength of this method is that it allows researchers to identify common patterns in qualitative data. Guided by this methodology, we used Dedoose Version 7.5.10 (SocioCultural Research Consultants, LLC, Manhattan Beach, California), a mixed-method software program to code and analyze the qualitative data. For each question, the authors met to discuss the coding and read the answers to the questions. Working question by question, we identified themes in the data and developed and applied an initial list of codes. We then compared codes, collapsed overlapping categories, and recoded data for that question. We continued to work iteratively until we had 100 percent agreement on the application of codes.
Quantitative Analysis . Quantitative data analyses were conducted using SPSS (version 25; IBM Corp, Armonk, NY). Repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted to examine cultural stereotypes about labor pain. The primary model included six levels/anchors (typical (1) American Woman, (2) African American Woman, (3) Asian American Woman , (4) Hispanic American Woman, (5) White American Woman, and (6) One's self). This study had 98% power (at α = 0.05, n = 200, assuming intercorrelation of ratings ≥0.5) to detect even small effects (η 2 ≥ 0.01) of the anchor on ratings. Separate models probed for specific subgroup stereotypes within Asian American and Hispanic American groups, as well as stereotypes about geographic region (i.e., North, South). Paired sample t -tests were conducted to clarify significant omnibus effects (power = 80% to detect small effects ( d ≥ 0.20) at α = 0.05, n = 200). Exploratory analyses probed associations between individual differences on covariates (e.g., demographics, personal pain, relevant experiences) and stereotype endorsement as well as between qualitative themes and quantitative results using simple comparisons, bivariate correlations, and chi-squared tests as appropriate based on the variable type. A data-driven score of racial bias in stereotypes about labor pain [estimates of the pain of White American women – estimates of pain of American women of color (African-, Asian-, and Hispanic American)] was calculated to explore participant-level correlates of bias in group-based stereotypes and expectations. Pairwise deletion was used for missing data such that all available data were included. All missing data were due to participants choosing not to complete a particular item. In all such cases, sample size for the particular comparison is noted.

Section: 3. Results

Patterns of responses point to the cultural beliefs about pain being related to women's bodies as sexual and an almost exclusive focus on the sensory dimension of pain ( Table 2 a). Two respondents mentioned cognitive/evaluative explanations for labor pain related to the pain being tortuous and qualitatively worse than other pains: “I think labor pain is painful because I experienced it THAT was the worst pain I felt in my life … [sic]” (female) and “its [sic] one of the worst pains imaginable” (female). No other affective reasons for pain such as fear were mentioned by respondents. Just over half of respondents had an accurate understanding of the sensory stimuli that contribute to labor pain. Of the 113 respondents with an accurate physiologic understanding of why labor is painful, 82.3 percent focused exclusively on either the first stage of labor (26.5%) – uterine contractions , uterine muscle shortening, and cervical thinning and dilation (“Contractions are painful” (female); “Because it's your body stretching” (female)) – or the second stage of labor (55.8%) – the birth of the baby (“A human body is trying to exit through the vagina” (male)). Only 20 respondents had a comprehensive sensory understanding of why labor is painful that involved both the first and second stages of labor being a source of labor pain: “Big baby, little hole. Contractions” (male); “Contractions and pushing the baby out” (female). Table 2 . Primary qualitative responses. a. Why is Labor Painful, Accurate Sensory Responses Empty Cell n Women Men % of Respondents with Accurate Understanding % of All Respondents First Stage 30 19 11 26.5% 15.0% Second Stage 63 29 34 55.8% 31.5% First and Second Stages 20 16 4 17.7% 10.0% Totals 113 64 49 100% 56.5% b. Why is Labor Painful, Inaccurate/Other responses n Women Men % of Respondents with Inaccurate/Other Understanding % of All Respondents Inaccurate Understanding of Labor Pain 15 8 7 17.2% 7.5% Non-Human Analogies 11 9 2 12.6% 5.5% Descriptions of Labor Pain 38 24 14 43.7% 19.0% Ideological Answers 7 5 2 8.0% 3.5% Don't Know/No Answer 16 10 6 18.4% 8.0% Totals 87 56 31 99.9% 43.5% c. What Does Labor Pain Feel Like n Women Men % of All Respondents Analogies 43 27 16 21.5% Labor Pain is Excruciating/Intense/Indescribable 30 14 16 15.0% Description as Bodily Process 30 26 4 15.0% Tautology 31 14 17 15.5% Pain Tolerance 10 7 3 5.0% Pain is Progressive 3 2 1 1.5% Personal Experience 5 5 0 2.5% Don't Know/No Answer 48 25 23 24.0% Totals 200 120 80 100% d. The Value of Labor Pain n Women Men % of Value of Pain Respondents % of All Respondents Baby/Mother-Baby 65 43 22 47.8% 32.5% Natural/Normal/Necessary/Signal 34 17 17 25.0% 17.0% Strong Woman 15 10 5 11.0% 7.5% Religious 4 2 2 2.9% 2.0% Birth Control/Population Control 4 3 1 2.9% 2.0% Don't Know/No Answer 14 9 5 10.3% 7.0% Totals 136 84 52 99.9% 68% e. No Value in Labor Pain n Women Men % of No Value or Pain Respondents % of All Respondents Labor is Painful 23 15 8 35.9% 11.5% No Value 8 4 4 12.5% 4.0% Pain is Natural/Relief Unnecessary 8 4 4 12.5% 4.0% Women are Entitled to Choice 3 0 3 4.7% 1.5% Mother-Baby Connection 3 3 0 4.7% 1.5% Men Don't Experience Labor Pain 1 1 0 1.6% 0.5% Pain Tolerance 1 1 0 1.6% 0.5% Not the Woman's Fault 1 0 1 1.6% 0.5% Pain is Tied to Sex 1 1 0 1.6% 0.5% Don't Know 15 7 8 23.4% 7.5% Totals 64 36 28 100.1% 32 f. Labor Pain Should Be Treated Medically n Women Men % of All Respondents Labor is Painful/Pain Should be Reduced 74 37 37 37.0% Women are Entitled to Choice 43 33 10 21.5% Pain Tolerance 17 11 6 8.5% Make Labor Easier, More Comfortable 16 11 5 8.0% Treat Pain to Avert Risk 8 4 4 4.0% Other Pain is Treated Medically 4 3 1 2.0% Personal Experience 1 1 0 0.5% Been Paid For 1 0 1 0.5% Don't Know/No Answer 10 5 5 5.0% Totals 174 105 69 87.0% g. Labor Pain Should Not Be Treated Medically n Women Men % of All Respondents Labor Pain is Natural or Normal 11 4 7 5.5% Concern with Overmedication/Addiction 2 1 1 1.0% Women are Strong/Pain Medication is Not Necessary 2 2 0 1.0% Safety 1 1 0 0.5% Pain is Punishment 1 1 0 0.5% Women are Entitled to Choice 6 5 1 3.0% No Answer 3 1 2 1.5% Totals 26 15 11 13.0%
The other respondents' explanations for labor pain fell into several categories that exhibited patterns consistent with a cultural focus on women's sexuality and vaginas but indicated a lack of knowledge of the physiological causes of pain ( Table 2 b). Fifteen respondents had an inaccurate understanding of the sensory stimuli that cause labor pain, eight of whom focused on vaginal tearing, dilation, or enlargement: “Because the vagina has to dilate wide enough to allow the baby to exit” (male). Eleven respondents used non-human analogies to describe labor pain (only two of whom did not focus on the vagina), a way of dehumanizing labor pain. Typical responses equated the baby to a watermelon, bowling ball, or skillet and the woman's vagina to a straw, lemon, or walnut: “Because it's like trying to push something the size of a watermelon from the size of like a lemon” (female). Thirty-eight respondents gave descriptions of labor pain but did not answer why labor is painful: “Because it … just seems painful” (female). Six respondents gave ideological answers that tied women's labor pain to religion: “[B]ecause of eve [sic] eating the apple in the garden. It is gods [sic] punishment on women” (female). One respondent focused on how women's labor pain is not due to Eve's transgressions: I DON'T believe it's because of anything in the Genesis portion of the Bible (I DO believe in the Gershwin lyrics at the beginning of “It Ain't Necessarily So (female).
Sixteen respondents answered, “Don't know.”
Violence emerged as a primary theme in the beliefs about what labor pain feels like ( Table 2 c). Forty-three respondents used analogies, sometimes quite violent, to express how painful labor is: “Like you are being stabbed in the abdomen with a machete” (female). Another 30 said labor pain was excruciating, intense, or indescribable and often used violent words in their answers: “Hell” (male); “Intense and scary” (male). In other words, pain is expanded in the cultural images so that describing it requires extreme hyperbole. Thirty respondents focused on bodily descriptions of pain: “Intense cramping” (female); “A tearing pain” (female). Thirty-one answered tautologically that labor pain is painful. Ten respondents described how pain varies depending upon an individual's pain tolerance: “Depends upon person. Body weight and structure” (female). Three answered that pain is progressive (“the pain goes from tolerable to intense as labor progresses” (female)), and five answered by describing their own experience of labor pain. Forty-eight respondents said they do not know what labor pain feels like or did not answer the question.
One hundred thirty-six participants answered there is value in the experience of labor pain ( Table 2 d). The most common reason, given by 65 respondents, links pain intrinsically to issues of the mother-baby relationship: “To prepare our body for the wonderful amazing little human being called our own to be born!” (female). Thirty-four respondents indicated the value involves labor pain being natural, normal, and/or necessary or a signal that everything is going right – “ It is part of the natural, normal birth process” (female) – or, paradoxically, that something is wrong –“its [sic] necessary because it tells where there is a problem” (male). Fifteen indicated that the value of labor pain is its indication of the strength of women: “It makes you realize how strong you are … and it makes you feel more confident as a woman and as a mother” (female). Four respondents gave a religious justification for women's labor pain: “Because God provided women the labor pain, to feel what hard work is like” (female); “The value is to obey god [sic]” (male). Another four indicated that labor pain serves as birth control or as a check on population growth: If they remember the pain, which they usually don't at the intensity it was, it is perfect birth control (female).
The 32 percent of respondents who reported there is no value in experiencing labor pain cited widely diverse reasons and only two large categories emerged from the data, both very similar to categories of answers to those who thought labor pain has value, and, thus, quotations are not shared ( Table 2 e). Twenty-three respondents indicated pain had no value because labor pain is painful, and 15 respondents indicated they did not know why there is no value in labor pain. Eight respondents simply stated there is no value of pain. Other answers varied and included statements that pain is natural or pain relief unnecessary; women should have a choice about treating labor pain; and the mother-baby bond makes pain irrelevant.
In total, 87% of respondents agreed labor pain should be treated medically ( Table 2 f). The two most common reasons given were that labor is painful/pain should be reduced (“Just so you can ease the pain” (female)), given by 74 respondents, and that women are entitled to treat labor pain medically if they choose (“I believe it should be a mothers [sic] choice to use medical intervention” (female)), given by 43 respondents. Other answers were more diverse with fewer respondents giving similar answers. Seventeen respondents mentioned that women have different levels of pain tolerance: “Some women can't deal with the intense pain” (female). Sixteen indicated that pain treatment leads to women's comfort, concentration, or, in general, makes labor and pushing easier: “To make the woman more comfortable” (female). Eight said that pain treatment makes labor safer or less risky: “Cause [sic] you can die if untreated” (male). Four respondents suggested that other pain is treated medically: “Because any other type of pain would be treated” (female). Ten respondents did not answer or answered, “Don't know.”
Thirteen percent of respondents indicated pain should not be medically treated ( Table 2 g). Only individuals who have not given birth indicated this sentiment. Eleven respondents who answered this way framed birth as natural or normal. Six respondents focused on women's rights to pain medication: “It is up to the woman giving birth” (female). Three did not explain why. Two respondents indicated that society is overmedicated. Two indicated that women are strong and do not need pain medication.
Ninety-five percent of respondents (116 women; 74 men) reported that women have a right to labor pain relief. Because there is a strong overlap to answers from the previous question, we have not included qualitative answers here nor in a table. The most common answer involved women having the choice to relieve pain and deserving or being entitled to the right to reduce labor pain (49 women; 40 men). Other themes include that labor is painful (18 women; 14 men), women have different levels of tolerance to pain (16 women; 2 men), other pain and men's pain is treated medically (5 women; 4 men), and pain relief leads women to have more comfort, control, focus or makes labor easier (8 women; 1 man). Other categories with fewer responses include that women have a right to medical treatment for labor pain because the technology exists (4 women; 2 men) or it makes birth safer (3 women; 1 man). Some respondents qualify the right to labor pain medication to indicate it exists as long as the baby is not harmed (2 women; 2 men), it is “safe” (2 women), or the physician agrees (1 woman). One female respondent indicated pain relief is a right because pain should not be a punishment, and one male respondent indicated that women have a right to pain relief unless pain is a good lesson. Fourteen respondents (7 women; 7 men) indicated they did not know why or did not answer the question.
Ten respondents (4 women; 6 men) answered that women do not have a right to labor pain relief, and respondents were split fairly evenly on reasons why. Three respondents (2 women; 1 man) simply indicated there is no right, two (1 woman; 1 man) wrote women have to be able to afford pain relief, and four (1 woman; 3 men) either did not answer or answered that they did not know. One male respondent indicated pain relief might not be available.
There was a significant main effect of stereotype anchor on estimates of labor pain severity , F (5,990) = 12.488, p < .0001, η p 2 = 0.059 ( Table 3 ). Participants reported that if they were to experience labor pain themselves, they would experience significantly more pain than the typical woman of any group (1.995 < t s < 5.047, all p s < .05, 0.142 < d s < 0.353). There were no significant differences between perceptions of pain during labor experienced by women of color: Asian-, African-, or Hispanic Americans. White American women were thought to have significantly more labor pain than all women of color (2.955 < t s < 4.179, all p s < .005; 0.280 < d s < 0.296). Relative to estimates for the average American woman, Hispanic American women were perceived as experiencing significantly less ( t (199) = 2.330, p = .021, d = 0.165) , whereas White American women and one's self significantly more ( n = 199 (due to missing data), t (198) = 2.630, p = .009, d = 0 . 182) labor pain. Asian- and African American estimates did not significantly differ from the average American woman. Table 3 . Cultural stereotypes about race and labor pain. Stereotypes about the typical: M ( SE ) American Woman 70.41 (1.472) Southern 68.96 (1.551) Northern 70.09 (1.529) African American Woman 69.08 (1.553) Asian American Woman 68.57 (1.551) Chinese 67.96 (1.649) Indian (South Asian) 69.16 (1.570) Japanese 70.50 (1.570) ˄ Korean 70.46 (1.541) ˄ Vietnamese 70.55 (1.553) ˄ Hispanic American Woman 68.05 (1.572)* Mexican 68.35 (1.559) Puerto Rican 68.40 (1.539) Cuban 69.85 (1.546) White American Woman a 72.80 (1.515) ˄ Self 76.27 (1.707) ˄ Primary analyses were conducted on the underlined groups. Secondary analyses examined italicized subgroups. *, significantly lower (and ˄ , significantly higher than) than the superordinate group (i.e., American woman for primary analysis, Asian American or Hispanic American for subgroup analyses). One person declined to answer this item, n = 199.
There were also significant differences in stereotypes for Asian Americans and populous subgroups, F (5,995) = 4.230, p = .001, η p 2 = 0.021. Japanese-, Korean-, and Vietnamese Americans were perceived as having more labor pain than the average Asian American (1.980 < t s < 2.174, all p s < .05; 0.140 < d s < 0.154), and estimates did not significantly differ between these three groups. Estimates for the labor pain of Chinese American women were significantly lower (2.973 < t s < 3.681, all p s < .005; 0.211 < d s < 0.260), and for Indian American women marginally lower (1.832 < t s < 1.944, .053 < p s < .068; 0.130 < d s < 0.137), than the other three groups, but did not differ significantly from the average Asian American estimates.
The effect of the anchor was smaller and marginal for labor pain stereotypes about Hispanic American women's labor pain and populous subgroups, F (3,597) = 2.285, p = .078, η p 2 = 0.011. Cuban American women were perceived as experiencing significantly more labor pain than the average Mexican- or Puerto Rican American woman ( t s = 2.498 & 2.219, p s = .013 & .028, d s = 0 . 176 & 0.157, respectively), and marginally more than the average Hispanic American woman ( t (199) = 1.928, p = .055, d = 0.136). There were no significant differences between Mexican- and Puerto Rican American stereotypes, and these groups did not differ from stereotypes about the average Hispanic American.
Finally, although the typical woman from the southern US was expected to experience marginally less labor pain than the typical woman from the northern US ( t (199) = 1.687, p = .093, d = 0 . 119), neither significantly differed from estimates for the typical American woman.
Stereotype endorsement was relatively consistent across participants and few significant associations with participant-level factors were observed.
Personal Pain Sensitivity. Although personal pain sensitivity (PSQ) differed across racial groups [African Americans reported greater pain sensitivity ( M = 4.344, SD = 1.521) compared to both Hispanic- ( M = 3.595, SD = 1.649, t (94) = 2.306, p = .023, d = 0 . 471) and White Americans ( M = 3.130, SD = 1.653, t (111) = 3.960, p = .0001, d = 0 . 758); main effect of race: F (2,160) = 7.703, p = .001, η p 2 = 0.088], differences in total PSQ scores were not associated with, and did not interact with, stereotype endorsement. However, the single-item comparative pain sensitivity score was correlated with estimates of one's own labor pain but not the pain of any other groups, such that the more someone reported having greater pain relative to others, the more labor pain they think they would experience ( R = 0.200, p = .005).
Demographic Characteristics . Gender, race, age, education, and employment were not associated with estimates for the average American women nor bias in these estimates. Further, cultural beliefs and physiological understanding of labor pain as revealed in the qualitative responses did not differ across demographic groups.
Personal Experience with Labor and Pain . Neither personal experience with labor nor being present for someone else's labor was associated with estimates of the average American woman's labor pain or racial bias in these estimates. These factors were also not associated with cultural beliefs or physiological understanding of labor pain.
Cultural Beliefs about Labor Pain . People who reported thinking there is value in women experiencing labor pain ( n = 136) thought the average American woman experienced marginally lower labor pain ( M = 68.74, SE = 1.76) and revealed marginally higher racial biases in stereotypes ( M = 5.48, SE = 1.39) relative to respondents who did not (average: n = 64, M = 73.97, SE = 2.65, t (198) = 1.667, p = .097, d = 0.251, bias: n = 63 (due to missing data), M = 1.78, SE = 1.78, t (197) = 1.638, p = .104, d = 0.243).
People who thought labor pain should not be treated medically ( n = 26) believed the average American woman experienced significantly less labor pain ( M = 56.85, SE = 4.554) and revealed significantly more racial bias (thought the labor pain experienced by American women of color was lower than that of white American women, M = 10.55, SE = 4.22) relative to people who report that it should (average: n = 174, M = 72.44, SE = 1.50, t (198) = 3.672, p = .0003, d = 0.724, bias: n = 173 (due to missing data), M = 3.37, SE = 1.10, t (197) = 2.201, p = .029, d = 0.392).
Although only 10 respondents reported they thought women do not have a right to labor pain management, these respondents thought the average American woman experienced marginally less labor pain ( M = 59.50, SE = 5.57), relative to those who reported women do have this right ( n = 190, M = 70.98, SE = 1.51, t (198) = 1.708, p = .089, d = 0.595. There was no difference in bias.
There was no association between beliefs about the value and medical treatment of labor pain and women's right to pain management (−0.106 < ɸ < 0.089, all ps > .10), though the number of respondents that indicated labor pain should not be treated medically and that indicated women do not have a right to labor pain management was very small, leading to significantly unbalanced groups for these comparisons.
Exploratory analyses of associations between qualitative themes and quantitative responses indicated people who offered biblical explanations for labor pain ( n = 6) also revealed significantly greater racial bias in labor pain stereotypes ( M = 25.44, SE = 16.43) compared to those who did not offer this type of explanation ( n = 193 (due to missing data) M = 3.65, SE = 14.02, t (197) = 3.447, p = .001, d = 0.723). No other associations with qualitative themes were statistically significant. Non-significant patterns of association with qualitative themes are briefly reported as follows given the exploratory nature of this first study and to stimulate needed future research on this topic. People who had accurate physiological understanding of labor pain ( n = 113) tended to display less racial bias ( M = 2.97, SE = 1.22) than those with inaccurate understanding ( n = 86, due to missing data), M = 6.07, SE = 2.00, t (197) = 1.386, p = .167, d = 0.194), though accuracy was not associated with the perception of labor pain for the average American woman ( t (198) = 0.251, p = .802, d = 0.035). There were no associations in this sample between accuracy, nor biblical themes and belief in value, medical treatment, and right to pain management.

Section: 4. Discussion

Cultural beliefs about the nature, function, and meaning of labor pain – as well as group-based stereotypes about labor pain intensity – are important because they have the potential to influence patient experiences, behaviors, and choices as well as provider-level decision-making and pain management. In this paper, we shed light on an important and scientifically unexamined intersection, examining prevalent American cultural beliefs about and biases related to labor pain. The qualitative results identify cultural concepts of labor pain, while the quantitative results illuminate cultural race-based stereotypes of labor pain intensity. A key strength of our paper is in its integration of quantitative and qualitative data.
We highlight two important results from the qualitative analysis. First, we found an overwhelming focus on sensory definition of pain for why labor is painful. Though consistent with other research ( Whitburn et al., 2019 ), this finding highlights a lack of understanding of the biopsychosocial interactions involved in labor pain and points to a potential educational target for future intervention. Despite being highlighted as the cause of labor pain, the sensory sources of labor pain are accurately understood by only a bare majority of respondents, and most of those respondents focused on the second stage of labor. This finding suggests that Americans' cultural understanding of labor pain is tied up with issues of the body and sexuality, as highlighted by several feminist theorists. Daly (1978) argues in her seminal book Gyn/Ecology (p. 225) , the medical specialty of gynecology was founded on cutting women's genitals and “reducing women to their sex organs” and de Beauvoir (1952) argues that women are culturally defined as “women” after having sex with men and highlights the non-physiological words that denote the loss of virginity , such as taking a female's flower or cherry. Further, there exists modern-day cultural discourse around women's right to choose an elective cesarean section (sometimes colloquially referred to as vaginal bypass surgery by obstetricians) to ensure they keep their honeymoon vaginas ( Wolf, 2003 ). Together, these themes make sense of the respondents' focus of labor pain being due to the second stage of labor and especially vaginal tearing and stretching, which is an apt reflection of our cultural fascination with female sexual organs. The way some respondents discussed labor pain with non-human analogies is also, paradoxically, reflective of the general discomfort American culture has with women's sexuality and how individuals often use passive language when referring to women as a form of dehumanization and erasure ( Daly, 1978 ), not unlike using words like cherry and flower to represent a female's virginity to resolve this discomfort. Second, the qualitative results show a biblical understanding of labor pain among some participants, consistent with the notion that Judeo Christian values are integrated into American culture ( Silk, 1984 ). Such explanations may influence cultural understanding of labor pain even in the absence of explicit endorsement of these ideas or personal religious beliefs.
Quantitative results indicate some beliefs are associated with thinking that women experience less pain during labor. Believing there is value in experiencing labor pain, that pain should not be treated medically, and that women do not have the right to labor pain management were all associated with perceptions that women experience less labor pain. This is consistent with previously discussed cultural biases discounting the pain of women and the consequent risk of inadequate treatment of pain-causing conditions among women ( Ballard et al., 2006 ; Hoffmann and Tarzian A, 2001 ). Though the direction of this relationship cannot be determined in this cross-sectional study, different mechanisms may underlie these patterns. For instance, it is reasonable to expect that people who think labor is less painful might think medical treatment is not warranted. On the other hand, valuing the pain of labor may provide a perspective that diminishes the desire to ameliorate the pain. Others have suggested that conceptualizing labor pain as purposeful and productive may decrease the subjective experience of one's labor pain ( Whitburn et al., 2017 ).
The quantitative results also demonstrate widely held group-based racial stereotypes of labor pain intensity. Though historically there have been cultural myths about pain-free labor among certain groups, severe labor pain is experienced across cultures ( Callister et al., 2003 ; Melzack, 1984 ). Nonetheless, false beliefs about group differences in pain experience persist. Our results indicate that White American women are thought to have significantly more labor pain than all women of color ( Table 3 ). Stereotypes particularly undermine the pain of Hispanic American women and privilege the pain of White American women.
Current results replicate the finding that African Americans have higher mean PSQ scores relative to White Americans ( Bell et al., 2018 ), and show for the first time a pattern of enhanced pain among Hispanic Americans. Taken together with the primary results of this paper, this suggests a double-discounting of the labor pain of women of color – that women of color experience more severe pain and also have their pain undermined/under-perceived.
Previous work has largely overlooked the significant heterogeneity captured within larger racial and ethnic categories that might influence stereotypes. The present results suggest there is within-group variability in cultural stereotypes about labor pain. Among Asian Americans, stereotypes undermine the pain of Chinese- and Indian-Americans, and among Hispanic Americans, the pain of Mexican- and Puerto Rican-Americans. Except for Chinese American women, women from more specific subgroups (e.g., Japanese American) were generally thought to experience at least slightly more pain than the average woman from the larger census-level group (e.g., Asian American). One potential explanation for this is that specifying subgroups may have increased perceptions of greater individuation (i.e., considering distinct individuals rather than abstract categories), which is known to help mitigate group-based biases ( Haque and Waytz, 2012 ; Sherman et al., 2005 ). Still, biases were not eliminated by this added layer of individuation in the present study: Participants revealed small, but in many cases significant, biases based purely upon a social category – even within larger racial groups. This is clearly a place for future research on the mechanisms underlying these perceived differences and also an indication that future research on this topic is necessary.
Cultural beliefs were also associated with racial bias. Participants who answered that there is value in women's experiencing labor pain and answered that pain should not be treated medically also revealed greater racial biases (i.e., beliefs that women of color experience less pain than white women during labor). Importantly, experimental social psychological studies have demonstrated that such biases, in turn, influence people's perceptions – including the perceptions of clinical gatekeepers of analgesic pain relief – of the pain of others ( Glance et al., 2007 ; Hoffman et al., 2016 ; Mathur et al., 2014 ; Orejuela et al., 2012 ; Wandner et al., 2012 ). Therefore, the current findings suggest that known inequity in labor pain treatment might be associated with – or potentially reinforced by – cultural values of experiencing labor pain. Indeed, cultural beliefs, even when not about group-based stereotypes, often serve to maintain the status quo, status structures, and inequity.
While cultural beliefs were associated with beliefs about the pain women experience during labor, personal experience and participant demographics were not associated with stereotypes. In fact, respondent race and gender did not have a significant effect on any of the dependent variables . This pattern supports the notion that there are cultural constructs of women's labor pain that guide individuals' perceptions and that these stereotypes are a product of culture rather than situated within the individual. In other words, these are widespread beliefs that are not displayed by one gender or another or by people of one race compared to others. As such, we would expect clinicians to be influenced by these cultural constructs. This is consistent with prior work demonstrating culturally constructed health-relevant beliefs are held by laypeople and medical professionals alike ( Hoffman et al., 2016 ; Maina et al., 2018 ).
Taken together, these results have a number of implications. First, the prevalence of inaccurate and incomplete understanding of the nature of labor pain is both reflective of dominant cultural frameworks and has implications for the experience and treatment of labor pain. Even accurate interpretations of labor pain reflect a biomedical understanding – consistent with the still-dominant model in medicine, but exclusive of known affective modulators of pain in general and labor pain specifically. Importantly, as others have suggested ( Lowe, 2002 ), an accurate understanding of labor can decrease fear, increase self-efficacy, and decrease pain for women in labor. Conversely, it is possible that widely held cultural misunderstanding of labor pain may negatively impact the experience of labor pain among Americans. Others have suggested that psychological support to challenge false beliefs may decrease labor pain and improve the experience of childbirth ( Saxbe, 2017 ). Misunderstanding of labor pain – including misunderstanding of physiology or a conceptualization that excludes psychological and socioenvironmental pain drivers and moderators – likely also influences cultural conceptions of labor pain and may influence norms related to treatment (medical and social) and personal preferences for pain management. For example, despite convergent evidence that social support modulates labor pain, social support as a pain management and prevention strategy per se remains underappreciated within modern American culture and clinical care standards ( Hodnett et al., 2013 ; McGrath and Kennell, 2008 ; Saxbe, 2017 ). Of great concern, inaccurate understanding may also influence racial bias and inequity in the treatment of labor pain.
A concerning theme of dehumanization emerges in several places across qualitative themes – in many cases tied to the fact that labor exclusively affects women (e.g., focus on women's sexuality and vaginas), and perhaps related to cultural discomfort and lack of knowledge about women's physiology (e.g., non-human analogies). Further, perceptions that people of different races experience less pain – diminishing the perceived capacity for a critical human experience based on an arbitrary group marker – is also a form of dehumanization and has implications for inequitable treatment and care. The consequences of dehumanization include decreased motivation to help and decreased concern for harm of the dehumanized individual or groups ( Haslam and Stratemeyer, 2016 ). Recent research suggests cultural beliefs that racial group membership is associated with less capacity for pain in general are widespread and associated with decreased and inappropriate treatment recommendations for African American pain ( Haque and Waytz, 2012 ; Hoffman et al., 2016 ; Waytz et al., 2015 ). Even cultural beliefs that appear positive can lead to treatment inequity. For example, superhumanization of Black bodies has also been shown to be associated with denial of the pain of Black Americans ( Waytz et al., 2015 ). One such belief that has been well-described in the literature is the cultural image of the Strong Black Woman/Superwoman who is resilient in the face of extreme adversity ( Woods-Giscombé, 2010 ). In the context of a pain that only affects women, this expectation of superhuman resilience combined with pain denial may contribute to the undermining of labor pain. Further, in the context of the ongoing crisis of profound racial inequity in maternal mortality and morbidity ( Davis, 2019 ; Ghidei et al., 2019 ; Mann et al., 2018 ), the current research points to one potential contributing factor and target for intervention – false cultural beliefs. Thoughtful consideration of structures that create racial inequity in labor pain and maternal outcomes will need to consider the role and reproduction of racist beliefs and racial injustice in labor pain and outcomes.
Though structural change to root out racism within health-care systems will require dedicated, deeply-reflective, and sustained efforts, we offer a few empirically-supported strategies to decrease the severity of racial injustice in the response to and management of labor pain. First, programs to reduce implicit bias among clinicians may reduce treatment inequity ( Burgess et al., 2017 ; Stone et al., 2020 ). Second, audits with feedback may help ensure that the pain of women of color is not being treated differently ( Ivers et al., 2012 ). Third, hospital labor and delivery units should conduct their own surveys after women give birth, focused on pain experiences ( Grob et al., 2019 ). Finally, race-based beliefs about pain must be exposed as false and harmful within systems and by medical professionals. This is part of a larger need to correct how race is conceptualized within medical contexts and education ( Nieblas-Bedolla et al., 2020 ).
The cross-sectional design of the current work limits interpretation of causality. Future work investigating the effects of changed beliefs (e.g., after an education intervention) on responses to labor pain are needed. Results may not generalize to all individuals. This study aimed to capture current common American cultural beliefs; thus results are specific and limited to this geographical and historical context. In the current study, personal experience with labor pain was not associated with cultural beliefs or racial bias; however, future studies may examine the influence of type of birth experience on the endorsement of common cultural beliefs. Further, future work examining the influence of larger cultural beliefs – as well as micro-cultural beliefs (e.g., hospital-level norms/expectations) – on labor pain and maternal outcomes is needed.

Section: 5. Conclusions

In conclusion, our study accomplishes two goals. First, this study provides an initial exploration of dominant American cultural beliefs and knowledge about labor pain. Second, our study documents clear racial bias in cultural stereotypes of labor pain. Currently, consideration of culture in medical contexts is related to “cultural competence” which conceptualizes culture as existing in minority groups or in “others.” A move toward understanding culture as shared at a societal level – and embedded in social and organizational structures – is expected to bring to light often invisible yet influential beliefs. The present results provide a foundation for future research examining dominant cultural influences on labor pain beliefs, experience, and treatment in relevant contexts.

Section: Credit author statement

Vani A. Mathur: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Funding acquisition; Theresa Morris: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition; Kelly McNamara: Data curation Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing

Section: Declaration of competing interest

None.

Section: Acknowledgements

We thank Hanggi Lee, Sanya Varma, Amanda Gomez, and Keridwyn Spiller for research assistance, and Namrata Nanavaty, Brandon Boring, and Kaitlyn Walsh for helpful feedback on the manuscript. This work was supported by a Texas A&M Liberal Arts Social Science Consortium Proof of Concept Grant (V.M. & T.M.) Previous versions of this manuscript were presented at the 2018 Eastern Sociological Society meetings, Baltimore, MD, February 22–25, 2018; a Texas A&M University Sociology Department Colloquium, College Station , TX, February 6, 2019; and the 2019 American Sociological Association meetings, New York, New York, August 10–14, 2019.
