Title: “Going through it together”: Being accompanied by loved ones during birth and abortion


Abstract: Abstract

We sought to understand the meaning people who have given birth and have had an abortion ascribe to being accompanied by partners, family members and friends during these reproductive experiences. Incorporating this knowledge into clinical practice may contribute to improving the quality of these services, especially in abortion care, in which loved ones are often excluded.
The study took place in Northern California in 2014. We conducted semi-structured, intensive interviews with twenty cis-women about their birth and abortion experiences and analyzed their narratives with respect to accompaniment using grounded theory. The roles of loved ones were complementary yet distinct to those of medical personnel. They were also multifaceted. Participants needed familiar individuals to bear witness, share the emotional experience and provide protection from perceived or possible harm associated with medical care. In some cases, more often in the context of abortion than childbirth , participants shielded their loved ones from emotional burdens of the reproductive process. Some pregnant people of color faced gendered racism, which also influenced their accompaniment needs. Male partners played a distinct role of upholding dominant social ideals related to pregnancy.
As is commonplace in birth-related care, abortion services could be formally structured to include partners, family members and friends when desired by pregnant people to improve their experiences. Such integration should be balanced with considerations for privacy, safety and institutional resources. Working toward this goal may reduce structural abortion stigma and help alleviate pregnant people's burdens associated with reproduction.

Section: 1. Introduction

Pregnant people value having loved ones such as intimate partners, family members and friends accompany them during childbirth , and this practice is widely accepted in the United States; however, pregnant people's wants and needs for accompaniment when ending a pregnancy are not only understudied but also not fully appreciated ( Altshuler et al., 2016 ; Bohren et al., 2017 , 2019 ; Chor et al., 2016 ; Leavitt, 1986 ; Lyerly, 2013 ; Wilson et al., 2017 ). This discrepancy between childbirth and abortion may be due to society's preferential focus on motherhood and resultant marginalization of abortion ( Kumar et al., 2009 ). Viewing terminating a pregnancy as inferior to giving birth has stigmatized people who have abortions, as well as those who surround them, such as their families, friends and abortion providers ( Norris et al., 2011 ).
Abortion stigma also permeates medical institutions and their policies, constraining the opportunities, resources and wellbeing of the stigmatized ( Hatzenbuehler and Link, 2014 ). As most abortions take place in an ambulatory setting and entail counseling, decision-making, a procedure while the patient is awake and recovery, there are multiple opportunities to incorporate companions. However, having a companion during any aspect of abortion care tends to be an exception rather than the rule due to abortion facilities’ policies and practices ( Mahoney and Mitchell, 2016 ). While the purpose of many of these policies and practices is to ensure safety and privacy, an unintended consequence is propagating a norm that patients should experience abortion on their own, irrespective of their preferences to be alone or not, which further reinforces abortion stigma.
Since we know little about people's preferences for companionship during abortion care and to what degree stigma influences their preferences, we may use their preferences in childbirth to begin this investigation. Childbirth is a useful comparison for numerous reasons. First, both childbirth and abortion can forever shape the trajectory and composition of a family, and patients may prefer having someone with them privy to the context and meaning of the pregnancy ( Lyerly, 2013 ; Mahoney and Mitchell, 2016 ). Second, these experiences can have elements of fear, physical discomfort and vulnerability that may be eased by the presence of familiar individuals. Third, in the United States, birth and abortion each have problematic histories and contentious politics resulting in pregnant people not always feeling safe in medical institutions and wanting to be accompanied by loved ones to feel more secure ( Joffe, 1995 ; Leavitt, 1986 ). This concern most significantly affects people of color who, due to the pervasiveness of institutionalized racism in healthcare, suffer the poorest pregnancy-related outcomes and treatment ( Pérez, 2012 ; Petersen et al., 2019 ; Rosenthal and Lobel, 2018 ; Vedam et al., 2019 ).
In the U.S., accompaniment during childbirth has changed multiple times since the early 20th century with respect to the types of individuals present, their roles and what their presence signifies to the birthing person. Before the 1940s, most births took place at home and were centered around the birthing person in their domestic space, with women from their social networks in attendance to provide emotional and practical assistance ( Leavitt, 1986 ). When the location of births shifted to the hospital due to urbanization, delegitimization of midwifery and gradual advances in medicine, birthing people relinquished authority over their environment ( Leavitt, 1986 ). In the hospital, they were not allowed to be accompanied by loved ones during the birthing process and while “alone among strangers,” often endured abusive and alienating treatment ( Leavitt, 1986 ; Morton and Clift, 2014 ).
Reforms toward more humane medical practices during 1960s–1980s allowed men (initially, married white men) to accompany their partners during labor and birth ( Leavitt, 2009 ). They could share in the emotional and psychological significance of this life event and support their partners ( Leavitt, 2009 ; Reed, 2005 ). Institutional visitor policies have become more flexible over time, granting entry to family and friends to birthing suites. Doulas , trained non-medical labor companions, also now accompany a small proportion of birthing people to the hospital, to provide labor support and to help loved ones feel included in the birth experience ( Klaus et al., 2012 ; Morton and Clift, 2014 ; Simkin, 2018 ). Despite these improvements, mistreatment in pregnancy-related care continues, and many birthing people do not have adequate support ( Morton and Clift, 2014 ; Vedam et al., 2019 ).
Compared to childbirth, accompaniment during abortion has not been as well studied in the U.S. context. For most of 20th century, only pregnant people with life-threatening conditions could have had an abortion legally; in a state of desperation, they sought care at hospitals where they were subject to high levels of medical scrutiny ( Joffe, 1995 ). Everyone else had abortions illegally, relying on their personal social networks to find a provider and to pay for the abortion; thus, being accompanied by a familiar individual to the abortion was not uncommon ( Joffe, 1995 ; Messer & May 1988 ). However, how a companion was involved, if at all, during the abortion itself has not been well documented. Shortly after legalization, free standing clinics became the primary sites for abortion care. Meanwhile, the anti-abortion movement began to stigmatize and politicize abortion by aggressively targeting patients and providers as well as propelling numerous legislative restrictions to constrain service provision and patient access ( Joffe et al., 2004 ). These efforts have made it logistically and emotionally more difficult for pregnant people to have abortions and for facilities to offer these services, contributing to structural stigma ( Joffe, 2013 ).
Most pregnant people obtain abortion care at high-volume, specialized abortion clinics and rarely have the option of having a familiar companion present during any aspect of in-clinic care due to concerns about safety, privacy, limited space and staff resources to attend to the needs of others besides the patients ( Altshuler et al., 2016 ; Jerman and Jones, 2017 ; Mahoney and Mitchell, 2016 ; Nguyen et al., 2018 ). As in childbirth, doulas have emerged to provide dedicated support during abortion procedures, fulfilling some of the psychosocial needs of pregnant people ( Mahoney and Mitchell, 2016 ; Pérez, 2012 ). However, few abortion patients have access to abortion doulas, and those who do (such as in cases when doulas are part of the medical team) are typically offered a doula in place of a familiar person ( Chor et al., 2015 ; Wilson et al., 2017 ).
Few studies have focused on describing patients’ emotional needs during abortion services; they have found that patients have low expectations due to the stigma and controversy that surround abortion and are grateful for kind and competent treatment ( Taylor et al., 2013 ; Tilles et al., 2016 ). Patients also cope better with having an abortion if they feel supported by loved ones ( Kimport et al., 2011 ; Major et al., 1990 ). Accordingly, it is reasonable to assume that patients may want to have their loved ones incorporated into various aspects of their care to improve their abortion experiences. We aim to explore how a racially diverse group of people who have given birth and have had an abortion describe and assess accompaniment by intimate partners, family members and friends using one reproductive experience to inform the other.

Section: 2. Methods

This study about accompaniment by familiar individuals is part of a larger project exploring what constitutes good birth and abortion experiences ( Altshuler et al., 2017 ). It was conducted in Northern California through semi-structured, intensive interviews and a survey from April to December 2014 with cis-women with a prior birth and abortion. Participants who were age 18–49 years, had an abortion in the last 5 years and a prior birth at any time point in the United States, and were not pregnant at the time of interview were recruited from the community using locally targeted print and internet advertisements. All enrolled participants gave informed consent and received a $40 gift card for participation.
Participants were invited to describe their most recent abortion and any other salient personal experiences with birth, abortion and miscarriage. In addition to other open-ended questions directed at understanding the positive and challenging aspects of their experiences, each participant was asked, “Who was there with you during the birth (or abortion) experience?” followed by prompts about attendance of various people such as friends, family members, partners, doulas or midwives, as relevant to their narrative, and how these companions participated (midwives are clinicians but were included given a common misunderstanding of the roles of doulas and midwives). Participants were also asked, “If you could do it differently, who would you have liked to have been present and why?” At the end of the interview, each participant completed a self-administered survey about demographic characteristics. Interviews were conducted until no new iterations of theoretical concepts emerged. In parallel to conducting interviews, AA performed field observations inside abortion and birthing facilities and interviewed abortion doulas in the geographical area studied to further contextualize the participants’ narratives.
The codebook was developed through an iterative process of coding transcripts in collaboration with a full-spectrum doula and researcher (AOG) who had participated in the study design and transcript coding with AA and consultations with LF to construct a theoretical perspective on the data ( Altshuler et al., 2017 ). We identified all codes in which participants described the roles loved ones, doulas or medical personnel played in their reproductive experiences. Then we queried transcripts of eligible participants for application of these codes using Dedoose analytical software (version 8). We reread transcripts in their entirety, focusing on the individual(s) present and the participant's assessment of their accompaniment, such as the degree to which their needs were fulfilled. We started with transcripts that had the greatest number of code applications and ended with the fewest, forming the basis for constructing a grounded theory. Quotations selected exemplify the phenomenon described and represent the range of experiences, not necessarily the participants' most common experiences. This project was approved by Institutional Review Boards of Stanford School of Medicine (IRB-29296) and Sutter Health (2015.053EXP CPMC) and is reported according to Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research ( O'Brien et al., 2014 ).

Section: 3. Results

The transcripts of twenty of the twenty-four participants were eligible for analysis. Of those excluded, one participant had an abortion nine years ago and three participants reported having induced abortions which were actually miscarriages. The remaining individuals contributed the experiences of thirty-four induced abortions and thirty-one births. All twenty transcripts were analyzed as each had at least one code application pertaining to accompaniment. A majority of the participants self-identified as Black or Latina, spiritual or with a religious affiliation. At the time of the interview, four participants were married and ten were in a relationship ( Table 1 ). A majority of the abortions occurred in the first trimester and were performed at a specialized abortion facility via a surgical procedure for non-medical indications. All births occurred at a hospital and 68% were vaginal deliveries . Table 1 . Participants’ characteristics, N = 20. Age at interview; median, range 32 years (19–42) Racial identity Black 7/20 (35%) Latina 7/20 (35%) White 4/20 (20%) Mixed 2/20 (10%) Enrolled or completed ≥ Assoc. deg. or vocational school 15/19 a (79%) Religious or spiritual 11/19 a (58%) Family income $25,000/yr or less 8/19 a (42%) Married or in a relationship at time of interview 14/20 (70%) Age at first pregnancy; median, range 18 years (14–38) Had given birth before having abortion 11/20 (55%) Years since last (or only) abortion; median, range 3 (0–5) Years since last (or only) birth; median, range 3 (1–16) Abortions , total number 34 Abortion care at a specialized abortion facility 26/34 (76%) Abortion in the first trimester 30/34 (88%) Medication abortion 6/34 (18%) Abortion for fetal or pregnant person's health 3/34 (9%) Abortion attended by a doula 0 Births , total number 31 Cesarean birth 10/31 (32%) Birth out of hospital (intended or not) 0 Adoption 1/31 (3%) Birth attended by a doula 2/31 (6%) Miscarriages 6 a Denominator accounts for those who answered the question.
We define accompaniment during childbirth as a familiar person being physically present in the laboring space of the hospital (or home), operating room, or waiting room during labor or birth, and in the case of abortion, as being physically present in the consultation room, waiting room, procedure room, recovery room or private setting during a medication abortion. Medication abortion usually entails taking two sets of medications, the first in abortion-providing facility and the second outside the facility, often a private place such as a home.
Of the twenty most recent (or only) births, all participants were accompanied by at least one familiar person, most commonly their intimate partner or mother ( Table 2 ). In comparison, eleven of the twenty participants were accompanied in their most recent (or only) abortion, most often by an intimate partner or friend. One participant was married at the time of her most recent abortion. Of the nine participants who were unaccompanied during abortion, all had in-clinic procedures and eight had a familiar person pick them up to fulfill a discharge requirement. Four of these nine participants went to clinics that did not allow companions on premises and the others either had their accompaniment plan fall through or had not intended their loved ones to enter the clinical space. Table 2 . Frequencies of loved ones accompanying participants during most recent (or only) birth and abortion experiences, N = 20. Empty Cell Birth Experience Abortion Experience No one 0 9 Intimate partner 15 5 Mother 15 1 Other family member 11 (sister, sister-in-law, mother-in-law, cousin, father, brother, daughter, son) 2 (sister, cousin) Friend 5 4 More than two loved ones 10 0
We identified three overarching themes in the participants' birth and abortion narratives. The first two themes reveal how accompaniment may positively influence pregnant people's experiences: (1) familiar individuals could bear witness and provide a sense of security through their presence, and (2) attendance of intimate partners may signify shared responsibility for the pregnancy and protect participants from shame. The third theme highlights a potential burden of accompaniment: some pregnant people may have to manage the emotions and experiences of those who accompany them.
In birth and abortion, participants voiced the importance of having a partner, family member or friend accompany them as a way to bear witness to what they were going through. The physical presence of someone from their social networks allowed participants to share the experience and associated emotions with someone who cared for them and could personally contextualize the event's significance. Participants valued such a person showing up, irrespective of what else they did during the birth or abortion.
For instance, Marcia (34 years old, Black; 2 births, 2 abortions; all names are pseudonyms) had her mother, sister, boyfriend and cousins accompany her during labor. She was pleased with her medical team, “They were kind … they came in and out checking on you … a nurse will tell you how to do your breathing while you're … going through your contractions … so yeah, they do help you out.” Nevertheless, they could not replace the presence of a loved one. Marcia elaborated on how she selected her companions, “Well, this was obvious. The baby daddy get to come in … And my sister, she's a jokester. She tries to make you feel comfortable laughing and giggling but she just irritated me … [still] it was good to have some family member there. It's always good to have somebody there holding your hand.” Although Marcia did not like her sister's approach, she looked past it as she found her sister's physical presence comforting. Accordingly, she had her sister accompany her to a subsequent birth and abortion. Even in the setting of an involved and helpful medical team during labor, Marcia valued having someone from her family with her as well.
Katherine (31 years old, White; 1 birth, 2 abortions) described a comparable need for familiarity during abortion. She also felt that her medical team catered to her emotional needs, “they were holding my hand, very comforting and reassuring” yet the clinic policy of excluding companions during the abortion procedure posed a major problem. She compared her most recent abortion to one she had before: This most recent time, I wanted my boyfriend to be in the appointment with me because—I mean, you want someone's hand to squeeze or something. And they wouldn't let him, like under no circumstances.…But that first abortion … my boyfriend was able to come in the room. He was there for me during the whole procedure. He was holding my hand. And then it felt more like I wasn't going through it alone, you know? When I found out … that they weren't going to let anyone come in with me, I was crying.…That definitely made it harder and a more negative experience. Because the whole time, when I was like mentally preparing myself for this, I had been picturing everything happening, with someone there in the room with me [who] was familiar and who could kind of go through the experience with me.
Katherine had this most recent abortion because her relationship with her boyfriend was deeply strained; they already had a child together and could not co-parent another child. Nonetheless, Katherine needed her boyfriend to accompany her as she explained, “I know he'd be there for me” and she disclosed being pregnant to him only. Having someone who personally understood her circumstances provided a sense of solidarity and relieved feelings of isolation. A familiar one's presence was necessary even when the medical personnel technically did what she wanted her boyfriend to do: hold her hand. This seeming contradiction implies that Katherine was using “hand-holding” both literally and figuratively. His hand holding hers signified them going through it together, sharing an experience in a way that the medical team could not. Some other participants voiced an analogous sentiment, wishing that a familiar person, not necessarily the intimate partner, was in the abortion procedure room with them.
A desire for privacy also informed how some participants selected people from their social networks to bear witness; however, their rationales differed in birth and abortion. For instance, in her birth narrative, Katherine's explained: During my labor, I had [my mom and my girlfriends] visit … But during the actual delivery, I only wanted my boyfriend there … it is sort of like a private thing, even though it becomes very public because you have [the medical staff] in the room with you. But just like my boyfriend and I were going to go through it together.
Katherine drew a distinction between labor and birth, electing to be more inclusive of loved ones during labor but more exclusive during birth to protect her modesty and to create a sense of intimacy. She selected only her boyfriend to bear witness to the birth of their child, “to go through it together,” in order to make that moment special.
More often in abortion than in birth narratives, participants described limiting the number of companions (when companions were permitted) for feelings of embarrassment or shame, and they selected individuals who were most likely to understand their decision to end the pregnancy. Natalie (37 years old, Asian/Latina; 1 birth, 3 abortions) and her boyfriend had a child together and when she conceived again, he insisted that she have an abortion. She was profoundly hurt by his disregard for her feelings and conflicted because she viewed abortion as morally wrong. Yet, she lacked the resources to have another child and went on to end the pregnancy. Natalie selected medication abortion (described by her as the “second process” below) rather than an in-clinic procedure as it met her needs better: [The] first process is in the clinic to abort the baby and then the second process is go home and actually everything comes out so I didn't really need [my boyfriend] with me … [Also], I didn't want to do the clinic abortion ‘cause to me it was more realistic and more of a reality of what I was doing …. It wouldn't really be like oh, I made the decision to have an abortion … [You] could just … do it at home and … just pretend that you miscarried on your own.
Natalie decided that medication abortion was a more passive process and possibly less morally challenging. It was also easier to carry out without involving her boyfriend, whom she planned to exclude. Nevertheless, she did not want to go through the abortion alone and asked her mother to be with her for moral support and in case of emergency, “I had told her everything that was going on just in case anything happened … she was very supportive and she knew what was going on and she was there for me.” During the most trying moment, when Natalie passed the pregnancy, she needed her mother with her: “I yelled for my mom and she came in the bathroom and she saw and she was crying ‘cause, you know, it was hard to see that … I just wanted confirmation, like, ‘Oh, is this what it is, mom? You think I'm done? Am I okay?’” Through her presence and tears, Natalie's mother shared the emotional experience with her daughter, free of judgment. Thus, Natalie was able to have the empathy and privacy she sought by including only her mother during the medication abortion.
For some participants, accompaniment during birth and abortion also contributed to a feeling of safety in the face of perceived or possible harm or mistreatment. Due to the stigmatization of abortion, some participants believed that it was a dangerous procedure despite strong scientific evidence of its safety. Jacqueline (22 years old, Mixed Race; 1 birth, 1 abortion) relied on her two closest friends in order to have an abortion, both logistically and emotionally. They helped her pay for the abortion and came with her to the clinic, staying in the waiting room. She reflected, “Honestly, it was safer than any other option ’cause … you can hear about the people who have like botched home abortions … they get really sick or even die … this was a way better situation than something like that … also my friends being there with me, like actually going with me, made me feel a lot better.” Jacqueline found security in having an abortion in a clinical environment and in her friends accompanying her.
In comparison, Elisa (38 years old, Latina; 2 births, 1 abortion) had an abortion unaccompanied and summarized how the companion policy played a role in making her view her care as impersonal and possibly unsafe: I heard on the news that this lady … got really sick, and she ended up dying and I just thought … what if something happens to me? She had some sort of hemorrhage because of the procedure. … And I thought, well, that could possibly be me … because … I feel … like a number.… You're there for [the abortion] and then they just tell you, “Okay, you have to go home now.” And you just don't have that feeling of, oh, yeah, the doctor's going to take care of me. … So someone does have to drive you home … but otherwise, they don't allow [companions]. So that I thought was good because at least they know that [the patient is] safe. But in the same sense, I got a feeling that, okay, that's to cover themselves.
Elisa felt that the care was too protocolized, without a genuine effort to ensure she was going to be safe. The discharge policy provided additional evidence of their disregard for her wellbeing—while requiring she had a ride home was seemingly caring, she sensed that its actual purpose was to avoid liability if she had any complications once she left the premises. In her mind, these low standards reinforced the marginal and unsafe nature of abortion care.
As accompaniment was more common during birth, there were more opportunities for loved ones to contribute to feelings of security and to step in on their behalf when they perceived the participants' care being compromised. For instance, Isabel (35 years old, Black; 3 births, 4 abortions) recounted how her family advocated for her when giving birth. The doctor had arrived late and was angry with the staff: “[My daughter] was almost born … head coming out and everything, and he just walked into the room … And so … he's chewing out the staff and upset at them, and I'm just sitting here. … My mom and my aunt, it was like, ‘ … We're going to need you all to take that shit outside.’” Isabel's mother filed a formal complaint because of, in Isabel's words, “how [the doctor] was acting amongst the staff and not just really delivering the patient care that he should have given … the focus should have been on me and my care.” Isabel felt relieved in the moment by having her family redirect the medical personnel to focus on her and later, by using a formal channel to protect future patients from mistreatment. As in this example, mothers were most often in an advocacy role compared to other loved ones.
However, what is most striking is the number of instances in which participants described aspects of their care as impersonal, disrespectful or abusive without an associated mention of protection from loved ones. In abortion narratives, this option was not available because participants tended to be unaccompanied. Yet even when patients were accompanied, we learned from our field observations and interviews with doulas that often neither patients nor their loved ones felt comfortable challenging medical personnel due to the wide power differential. One participant, Violet (33 years old, Latina; 1 birth, 2 abortions) described that such efforts may be counterproductive by sharing her relative's birth experience. This relative was a young, single, non-English speaking, recent immigrant who asked Violet to accompany her to the hospital to help her navigate an unfamiliar system and support her in labor. Violet tried to advocate for her relative but felt powerless: I just remember … feeling really anxious … [My relative] wanted to have a normal birth. They would not let her. They kept coming in. I'm trying to tell them like, “It's not what she wants” …. The doctor yelled at me every single time he came in. [He] asked me who I was, what do I know? … Telling me— not talking to her hardly ever, “You came in here because you wanted my help. Now let me help you” …. I was very afraid for what was going to happen.
Violet endured verbal abuse while trying to protect her relative from mistreatment. Despite her efforts, she could not surmount institutional protocols and medical authority. Her experience in the supportive role for her relative elucidates that even though being accompanied by loved ones may contribute to feelings of security, it may not be enough to overcome problematic care due to powerful institutional forces.
Some participants viewed companionship of partners during birth and abortion differently from companionship of other familiar individuals. A partner's presence specifically counteracted the sense of loneliness and responsibility some participants felt while carrying a pregnancy, reinforcing the fact they created the pregnancy together and were pursuing a joint future. Violet (quoted previously) described the significance of her partner being with her. Her partner and doula accompanied her during birth, and each had a distinct role: “What [my doula] did was keep the nurses and the doctors from putting any needles in me. She kind of distracted people a little bit.…My partner was with me the whole time. Like he's the one that was massaging me, holding me, everything, and she kind of did crowd control … he really wanted to be part of it.” Violet viewed herself and her partner as laboring together, with his physical engagement acting as a way of sharing the experience with her. Meanwhile, the doula helped them create a space of intimacy by minimizing disruptions.
Violet knew in advance that her partner would not be allowed to accompany her during any part of her clinical abortion care per facility policy and so he was just her ride. Nevertheless, she would have preferred a comparable degree of engagement from him in the procedure room as in the laboring room, as they discussed after she had the abortion: He wanted to know everything that happened from beginning to end … he really wanted to know, and I know he really wanted to be there. I know he was worried about me more than anything … I think I would've wanted him to just kind of see maybe how similar these two things were, you know, him being in there for me when we had the baby and when we didn't.
Violet and her partner had a mutual desire to share of the experiences of birth and abortion. She viewed these reproductive experiences as something they went through together from conception to the end, irrespective of outcome, making his companionship unique from others.
Conversely, Carla (28 years old, Black; 1 birth, 2 abortions) felt unsupported by her partners due to their absence, as she summarized, “I was by myself on two abortions. I was by myself when I gave birth to my child.” While she had other supportive individuals in attendance and was not technically alone, she felt alone because she had wanted the men with whom she had conceived accompanying her. In her first pregnancy, Carla embraced becoming a mother but had an abortion because her boyfriend did not want to have a child and had told her to choose him or the baby. She recalled: After the procedure was over … [I'm] just talking to the lady [a member of the medical staff], the one that was by my side … showing me some kind of moral support and I'm just sitting up there crying, crying because I'm like, dang, that was my baby, you know? So it made me feel like basically like no one wants to really be with me, or I felt like I didn't have anything left.
Even though Carla had the abortion to continue her relationship, going through it without a partner at her side made her feel the heaviness of the loss. His lack of support for having the baby and his absence during the abortion reinforced that he was not committed to Carla in a way she had hoped.
Carla felt a similar void during the birth of her son about a year later. Carla's mother was with her the entire time, yet her mother's companionship could not stand in for the absence of her partner, as Carla shared: I just wanted someone there that cared. But I was still by myself. I woke up in the recovery room by myself [after cesarean birth]. … It would have been nice if my son's father would have been there. I would have been very happy and sincere and safe. But my mom being there … She was trying. … At the same time, I just wish that he could have been there. I just wish he really could have.
To have her partner come would have communicated support, security and desire to share the experience of parenthood, which could not be achieved by her mother, despite her efforts.
Partner's accompaniment also served as protection from embarrassment and shame. It was described more often in the context of abortion but also emerged in birth narratives. Being accompanied by a partner communicated to others that the woman had someone who was committed to her and, at the most basic level, that she should not be judged as promiscuous (i.e., having sex with multiple men, not using contraception, and being unsure with whom she had conceived the pregnancy). Some Black and Latina participants described either experiencing or fearing judgment based on historically rooted stereotypes of their communities related to sexuality and motherhood.
For example, Danielle (34 years old, Black; 1 birth, 1 abortion) was embarrassed for not being accompanied by a partner during birth or abortion. When asked about who accompanied her in the hospital for birth, she described being abandoned by the father of the baby and connecting with the social workers of the Black Infant Health (BIH) program (a case management and community-building program to support low-income Black women and babies in California). Danielle was hospitalized for preeclampsia before giving birth and recalled, “That was very embarrassing and depressing … [BIH workers] would visit me in the hospital and kind of took the place of my son's father being absent. … But it still made me feel bad because, you know, all these women [other patients] had husbands and stuff, and I have an organization coming to help me.” Danielle internalized the stigma of being single and pregnant and and felt insecure in front of others whom she perceived as better off because, unlike her, they were partnered. When asked about having an abortion, Danielle had a similar response: It's very embarrassing because here I am, alone again, and without a husband, not married. And I feel irresponsible. And then you know so many people, like all the non-Black women are in there with husbands and boyfriends, and all the Black women, “Oh, I'm here for my abortion,” like they're proud of it.
Gendered racism imposed an additional level of stress for Danielle. Her lived experiences as a Black woman shaped how she viewed others in the abortion clinic and categorized them into two groups: unaccompanied, Black and having abortions nonchalantly; and accompanied, non-Black and having abortions presumably with an appropriate demeanor. Earlier in the interview, Danielle described trying to break from the stereotypical narrative of a low-income Black woman having an abortion: “When you're on Medi-Cal [California's Medicaid healthcare program], I think it's even worse having an abortion, because, you know, oh, here comes this promiscuous Black woman, not on birth control, irresponsible.” Because she was not accompanied by a partner and Black, she felt embarrassed for being perceived as belonging to the first category. Danielle thought that being accompanied by a partner would have protected her from that problematic narrative.
Like Danielle, Faye (24 years old, Latina; 3 births, 2 abortions) thought that being accompanied by a partner during abortion would have lessened her feelings of shame, which she also contextualized through a gendered and racialized lens. She was raised to view abortion as “something to be ashamed about” yet articulated why it was necessary for her: “I'm Mexican. It's a stereotype that we have a lot of kids … we have ‘em young … even to this day it's embarrassing having three kids [at my age]. … If I would've kept the other babies, I would've ended up on Welfare and been a statistic … young mom, Hispanic … minority on Welfare … So it's like I really did it … to not end up as that stereotype.” Part of the stereotype was also being single, as Faye described in her account of the abortion clinic: I would've liked [my boyfriend] there only because I did see a couple in the waiting room and in my mind I'm like, I'm being judged by these people. They probably think … I don't have the baby's father. And it's like I do … you guys don't understand … we're a family, a full, complete family. And actually, when he went to pick me up after my second abortion, he came in with the car seat and they kicked him out. They're like, “You can't be in the waiting room waiting for her with a baby.”
Being unaccompanied made her feel vulnerable to judgment, prompting her to defend herself by explaining the actual circumstances of her relationship and family. Unfortunately, the clinic was unable to provide Faye refuge from gendered racism that was pervasive in her life, and indirectly reinforced it by prohibiting her boyfriend from being with her. She felt that his presence would have shielded her.
Some participants were concerned about their partners' wellbeing (and, less often, other loved ones) and sought ways to lessen their partners' burden by taking on more responsibility themselves or limiting their partner's involvement. While more common in the context of abortion, it emerged in birth narratives also as in Hailey's (40 years old, White; 1 birth, 1 abortion). She personally felt well-equipped for birth but worried about her partner: “I actually thought about getting a doula, not for myself but for my partner ‘cause I was mostly worried about him … he doesn't handle extreme emotions very well. It just really stresses him out … I was worried that he would really, really want to help but not know how to help.” Hailey knew her partner would have wanted to support her but anticipated that the high emotions of labor such as seeing Hailey in pain and fearing something going wrong may have been overwhelming for him. She focused on helping him navigate the birthing process rather than on her needs.
Likewise, Sophia (19 years old, Latina; 1 birth, 1 abortion) was concerned about her boyfriend's emotions during her abortion. She went to the hospital with her boyfriend and he remained in the waiting room. He was not allowed to come with her to the operating room per hospital policy and Sophia preferred it this way: It's already painful for me going through it. I don't want to be messed up and make him go through it too because that's horrible … you're taking a baby's life. … I would not want to put anybody through that. It's not just surgery, you know? It's not regular surgery. It's like really personal to your heart, to your body, like something that you're never going to forget. So I wouldn't want him to remember that with me.
Sophia described the act of ending a pregnancy, stopping a developing human from being born, as being both emotionally painful and unforgettable. As the person having the abortion, she had no choice but to go through it, yet she wanted to spare her boyfriend this emotional pain by not having him play a more active role.
Laila (34 years old, Black; 3 births, 2 abortions) also wanted to protect her partner, even though she knew he would have been a great source of support to her emotionally and physically. She described her husband's help during birth, “he was very supportive and took all my ‘leave me alones’ and ‘don't touch me's’ in good stride. … He held my hand and did the stuff they taught him in Lamaze to help me stay focused off the pain.” They had two other pregnancies that they decided to end and Laila underwent both abortions without him, including a medication abortion, for which he could have been in attendance. She found the abortion experiences emotionally challenging and when asked whether she had considered having her husband with her, she reflected: Out of the two abortions, I never had him come to deal with it. I kind of just felt like I'll take it all on myself. … [Having my husband would have been helpful for] the moral support, just to hold my hand. I mean, he's really, really good at keeping me calm or calming me down when I'm upset or something. … Having my husband with me, that probably would've been helpful, instead of trying to just carry the burden myself.
Laila took on physical and emotional burdens of ending the pregnancies, wanting to protect her partner even as she knew that including him would have aided her.

Section: 4. Discussion

As in other medical contexts, people generally appreciate companionship of loved ones during their birth and abortion experiences ( Laidsaar-Powell et al., 2013 ). They want to determine who accompanies them and their companion's role. Pregnant people consider being accompanied by familiar individuals as distinct and complementary to the presence of attentive medical personnel. While a companion is often referred to as a “support person,” accompaniment is multidimensional and may not always equate with physical or emotional support. Having familiar individuals present creates an opportunity to go through the reproductive experience with someone who understands its significance and contributes to a sense of security. Abortion stigma felt by some patients, expressed as shame and embarrassment for being pregnant and seeking an abortion, may influence their decisions about accompaniment. However, it should not be interpreted as a desire to be alone.
Intimate partners, when available and involved, play an important role as prior literature suggests, with accompaniment during childbirth and abortion being an expression of shared responsibility for the pregnancy and potential parenthood ( Altshuler et al., 2016 ; Bohren et al., 2017 ; Klaus et al., 2012 ; Nguyen et al., 2018 ; Reed, 2005 ). A partner's presence also serves as protection from feelings of shame that being alone while pregnant may elicit as well as protection from gendered and racial stereotypes perpetuated in medical settings as has been noted previously in other medical contexts ( Rosenthal and Lobel, 2018 ; Vedam et al., 2019 ). In some cases, pregnant people view their partners as actors in the reproductive experience rather than as companions in a purely supportive role; as such, they were worried about their partners' emotional reactions and limited their partners' degree of involvement. This division of responsibility for the pregnancy not only physically but also mentally and emotionally underscores the disproportionate burden taken on by pregnant people. It is consistent with Andrea Bertotti and later Katrina Kimport's work on the unequal and feminized work of managing fertility ( Bertotti, 2013 ; Kimport, 2018 ). It was more pronounced in abortion than birth experiences due to the degree of stigma associated with ending a pregnancy and pregnant people wanting to reduce negative associations for their partners.
Medical institutions create a need for accompaniment as well as constrain it, affecting pregnant people's experiences. Historical and ongoing mistreatment of pregnant people in childbirth and abortion motivates some to seek care with loved ones as a means of protection from harm. Even though accompaniment may help some feel secure, it does not necessarily protect pregnant people from problematic care. Companion policies tend to be stricter in abortion care compared to birth-related services, with a stronger focus on the pregnant person rather than the couple or family. Their purpose is to create a safer space for patients, free of coercion or violence, which is particularly important in settings where pregnant people lack reproductive freedoms. It can also protect medical staff and allocate limited resources to patients.
Nevertheless, institutional policies and practices that separate patients from their personal support networks by excluding companions may be contributing to structural abortion stigma. Stigmatization may occur by establishing the norm that people having abortions should experience clinical care on their own, which in turn may send a message that they should take full responsibility for the pregnancy and the decision to end it and are undeserving of the benefits associated with having a loved one present. Companion restrictions may further reinforce harmful race and gender stereotypes for women of color by requiring them to get care alone. Rectifying these problems begins with their recognition. Policy makers and other leaders need to assess how institutional policies and practices may be contributing to structural abortion stigma. Meanwhile, medical providers need to comprehend how their institutions and their services operate within systems of oppression related to reproduction, race and gender.
There are several limitations that affect the scope of application of these findings. Most of the participants went to abortion facilities that did not permit companions on premises or past the communal waiting room, limiting our understanding of how loved ones might be involved if granted entry to the procedure or other steps in the abortion process. Also, expectations of loved ones during birth and abortion might be culturally determined and we did not explore cultural influences explicitly, which may be another important part of pregnant people's care. We also did not explicitly ask participants how racism may have affected their experiences and influenced their need for accompaniment unless participants provided such information voluntarily, and therefore possibly underestimated the degree that it plays a role. In cases of mistreatment or other problematic care, we did not ask participants in each instance how familiar individuals could have been a source of protection unless it felt relevant to their overall narratives, which may account for its absence in some narratives. Very few participants had a doula with them during birth or abortion, limiting our analysis on the meaning of doula-specific accompaniment, though it appears it may complement the involvement of medical personnel and loved ones. Lastly, all our participants were cis-women and heterosexual, limiting generalizability to people with other gender and sexual identities.
While the importance of accompaniment may seem self-evident, it is often overlooked in medical practice, especially in the structure of abortion care. Intentionally making space for partners, family members and friends during childbirth and abortion, when desired by pregnant people, may improve their experiences and reduce any associated physical, mental and emotional burdens as well as stigma.

Section: Author contribution

Anna Altshuler: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Data Curation, Formal Analysis, Writing Original Draft, Writing-Review & Editing, Visualization, Alison Ojanen-Goldsmith Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing-Review & Editing, Paul Blumenthal: Conceptualization, Writing-Review & Editing, Lori Freedman: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing Original Draft and Writing Review & Editing.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

None.

Section: Acknowledgements

We thank SisterWeb leadership circle for reviewing an earlier version of this manuscript as well as Bay Area Doula Project for providing guidance in the early stages of this project. We are grateful to Khristina Wenzinger for editing. This study was funded by Society of Family Planning Research Fund (SFPRF). The views and opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of SFPRF.
