Title: From sustainability to sustaining work: What do actors do to sustain knowledge translation platforms?


Abstract: Abstract

Knowledge translation platforms (KTPs) are seen as an important collaborative arrangement between researchers, policymakers, and practitioners. Yet, their ‘sustainability’ is a recurring issue. Several studies describe what makes KTPs sustainable, and focus on the role of institutional and contextual factors therein, yet few studies show how sustaining of KTPs is done in practice. We therefore performed an ethnographic case-study on ‘sustaining work’ of KTPs in Jordan, Cameroon, and Nigeria. This approach focusses on what KTP actors do to make and keep their platforms productive. We followed the KTP actors for two years and interviewed the KTP actors and their colleagues (n = 63), observed the KTPs' practices (59d), and reviewed related documents to construct thick descriptions of their practices. We collected all data between September 2017 and November 2019. Our analysis revolves around three work processes of translating , contexting, and institutionalising and shows that sustaining takes place within the platform actors' everyday work. Sustaining work, while not necessarily purposive, and without a clear ending, was crucial: the KTPs were not sustainable by themselves, but were actively sustained through the struggles and efforts of the platform actors. This move from ‘sustainability as such’ to sustaining work has important theoretical ramifications for understanding how KTPs work and are made to perdure. Most importantly, this requires a shift from identifying factors that make KTPs sustainable towards constructing environments in which sustaining work can be done. This includes further exploring the role of (research) projects in sustaining KTPs. Additionally, our analysis showed that the sustaining of KTPs was contingent on the capacity of platform actors to forge productive dependencies with other actors and ongoing policy or research agendas. Our analysis thereby offers a practice-based perspective that can inform capacity-building programmes for KTP actors and that can guide the actual sustaining of KTPs.

Section: 1. Introduction

A wide range of collaboratives in the health sector aim to support ‘knowledge translation’ (KT). In the global health literature, KT is described as a set of activities directed at aligning scientific knowledge production, health policymaking, and health systems governance ( Grimshaw et al., 2012 ). Ultimately, the field aims to increase the use of scientific knowledge in health policymaking and healthcare practice ( Straus et al., 2013 ). One way of organising KT collaboratives is through so-called knowledge translation platforms, or KTPs ( Lavis et al., 2006 ). KTPs can take different shapes, ranging from web fora to dedicated units within a ministry, university, or NGO ( Berman et al., 2015 ; Kasonde and Campbell, 2012 ).
While KTPs are generally deemed useful and important, their sustainability remains a recurring issue ( Berman et al., 2015 ; El-Jardali et al., 2014 ; Koon et al., 2020 ; Lester et al., 2020 ). Most KTPs are constructed as part of research projects or development programmes and operate in spaces where international development interests and national policy objectives may collide ( Partridge et al., 2020 ). Additionally, KTPs are usually part of (inter)national networks that seek to promote evidence-based movements and depend on efforts of so-called ‘local champions’ who are committed to improving health policies and practices in their countries ( Ongolo-Zogo et al., 2014 ; Straus et al., 2013 ). KTPs derive part of their existence from this combination, but these supporting networks may fall apart, the connections can become more tenuous, and local champions may shift positions or cease to be active ( El-Jardali et al., 2014 ; Uneke et al., 2015 ). Consequently, the activities of KTPs may come to a halt and the platforms may become inactive.
Within the global health literature, there are numerous studies into the sustainability of KT practices ( Greenhalgh and Abimbola, 2019 ; Proctor et al., 2015 ; Tricco et al., 2015 ). Such studies commonly describe that sustainability depends on whether certain institutional and contextual ‘factors’ are met ( Koon et al., 2020 ; Uneke et al., 2015 ). A commonly mentioned institutional factor, for instance, is the extent to which there are regulations that support the work of KTPs ( Koon et al., 2020 ). Contextual factors are seen as external to KT practices, such as funding availability ( Ziemann et al., 2019 ). While there is an important descriptive value to identifying institutional and contextual factors, they are unlikely to represent the efforts that are necessary to create such contexts, or more generally: how actors ‘work’ with such contextual and institutional ‘factors’ to sustain KTPs (cf. Asdal and Moser, 2012 ). We therefore argue that to understand how KTPs are sustained, it is important to study what KTP actors do in practice to sustain their platforms and, more specifically, how they work to create institutional contexts, or align with existing ones that sustain their work as KTP ( Borst et al., 2021 ).
Following a critical interpretive synthesis into the sustaining of KTPs ( Borst et al., 2021 ), this study investigated over the course of two years how KTP actors did sustaining work – which we understand as the ongoing mundane work that various KTP actors engage in whilst aiming to make and keep their KTPs productive. In the conceptual framework of this paper, and building on our practice-based approach, we will show how our notion of sustaining work departs substantially from earlier conceptualisations of sustainability within the global health literature. Based on longitudinal ethnographic research in three countries, the results of this study zoom in on the different activities that were part of the KTP actors' sustaining work. We anticipate that applying our framework to the practices of KTPs makes two key contributions. Firstly, we aim to forefront those aspects of KTP actors' mundane work that are not usually considered important for their sustaining. Such insights contribute to the literature on capacity building in relation to KTP actors and sustaining work may be recognised as a core competency. Secondly, this study's application of the sustaining work perspective may produce new insights on what sustainability means in practice. These insights move beyond the health-related scientific literature and have the potential to feed into wider social science literature on sustainability as well.
Our focus on sustaining work follows the ‘practice turn’ in social sciences ( Schatzki et al., 2001 ). This means that we focus on what actors within specific practices do, instead of only focussing on what ‘structures’ support such practices. We thereby abandon the idea that KTPs must only align once to contextual or institutional factors, as that disregards the work that is required to do precisely so: dependencies with political actors must be made productive and connections beyond temporary projects need to be actively created . To further justify our notion of sustaining work and its relevance for studying KTPs, we start our conceptual framework with deconstructing KTP as concept. Subsequently, we problematise understandings of sustainability as a mere characteristic. Our framework ends with presenting a triad of work processes that can be identified within sustaining work .
Following Kasonde and Campbell (2012) , we conceptualise KTPs as “a national- or state-level entity designed to create and nurture links among researchers, policy-makers and other research-users; these links draw the research and policy communities closer together to ultimately create cycles of policy-informed evidence and evidence-informed policy.” (p. 2) However, this definition does not reflect on what it means to work as a platform. We deem it useful to explore ‘platform’ as a concept because it hints at both stability and flexibility ( Baldwin and Woodard, 2009 ). The word platform is originally borrowed from French and hints at the level ( plate) surface ( forme) on which “things can stand” ( Oxford University Press, n.d., para. 1). This connotation of stability is what Gillespie (2010) refers to as a normative dimension of platforms; platforms are expected to offer a solid base for action. At the same time, van Dijck et al. (2018) argue that platforms are inherently dynamic and flexible: they are temporary and usually do not have the same obligations as their more solid counterparts. This dual character of platforms – being solid and flexible at the same time – will inform our empirical study of sustaining work by KTP actors.
The global health literature offers numerous definitions of sustainability ( Moore et al., 2017 ; Pluye et al., 2004 ; Shelton et al., 2018 ; Tricco et al., 2015 ; Yang et al., 2010 ). Most of these definitions suggest that sustainability of an entity means that it will exist beyond a specific time and place (authors, under review). Walugembe et al. (2019) show, for instance, that sustainability definitions commonly focus on the extent to which programmes or interventions maintain, or continue to be in use “beyond their initial funding period” (p. 5). Other global health scholars emphasise that sustainability depends on the extent to which KT practices consider institutional and contextual factors ( Koon et al., 2020 ; Novotná et al., 2012 ; Tricco et al., 2015 ) . While such definitions may help in defining prerequisites for the sustainability of KTPs, they are also prone to becoming implicitly linearised reductions of more complex realities, which suggest that sustainability is a matter of tweaking the right ‘factors’ to reach a certain end-state. In this study, we will depart from the idea of a singular definition of sustainability (as noun) and argue that sustainability is not an outcome or end-state that KTPs can achieve. Instead, we will speak of sustaining work (as practice) . This implies a shift from a static towards a more dynamic ontology, where the focus lies on what actors do in practice to make and keep their KTPs productive. We thus understand sustaining not only to mean that KTPs are kept in existence, but more precisely that KTP actors work to keep conducting their KT activities despite potential constraints in time and place. As such, applying our sustaining work perspective to concrete practices of KTPs can provide guidance for those who seek insight into the acts and strategies that may contribute to sustaining KTPs. Throughout our manuscript we will use sustaining (as verb) to highlight our dynamic perspective, and sustainability (as noun) to refer to a static ‘usual’ understanding.
Our understanding of sustaining work is based on a critical interpretive synthesis of literature on sustainability and knowledge translation ( Borst et al., 2021 ). The sustaining work approach builds on the Science and Technology Studies (STS) literature, which is an interdisciplinary field of study that is rooted in the constructivist study of scientific practices ( Sismondo, 2010 ). Within STS, it is common practice to focus on everyday (mundane) interactions and activities to better understand social phenomena. The synthesis itself distinguishes between three aspects of sustaining work: translating , contexting, and institutionalising. These work processes interact and entangle, yet each connote a different aspect of what actors do to sustain their KT practices. We will briefly reiterate the analytic distinctions between these processes here, even though the work processes may be difficult to disentangle in practice. The entire framework, including the methodological substantiation, is available elsewhere ( Borst et al., 2021 ).
When we speak of translation, or translating, we build on actor-network theory (ANT) – particularly how translation is understood by Latour (2005) and Callon et al. (2009) . There, translation connotes a strategic and political process through which connections between actors – that were not there before – are made. In ANT, actors (i.e. humans and other entities) are bound together in networks and translation is about creating, extending, and maintaining such networks. Our use of the term translation differs from ‘knowledge translation’ (KT) as commonly used in health services, health policy, and health systems research literature. There it refers to the practices of mediating between scientific knowledge and places where such knowledge can be used (e.g. ministries, municipalities, elderly care, hospitals, etc.). Yet the two approaches also relate, as KT focusses on combining different knowledges and creating connections between that knowledge and potential users ( Schlierf and Meyer, 2013 ).
Within the global health literature, scholars often revert to using context as explanation for implementation differences across situations. Such analyses neglect, however, that contexts must be constructed, and are constantly changed ( Meier and Dopson, 2019 ). What might count as context in one case, may be disregarded in another. STS scholars therefore suggest focussing on how and for what purpose actors are combined into a context: this is what they refer to as the process of ‘contexting’ ( Asdal and Moser, 2012 ). Law and Moser (2012) speak of making ‘patchworks’ to emphasise how actors are bound together for a specific purpose. In our example, KTPs may want to create a context in which their policy recommendations can be implemented; thus, making a patchwork of policymakers from a ministerial department and representatives from civil society organisations. Such a context acts supportive and provides the KTPs with stability.
The role of institutions in sustaining KTPs is one of the more disputed topics in the global health literature ( Koon et al., 2020 ). Most studies build on Powell and DiMaggio (1991) , who see institutionalisation as a condition in which actors and their practices are “institutionally anchored” and have “staying power” (p. 201) . Within the KT literature, institutionalisation commonly refers to a state of routinisation and integration of KT work within organisations ( Davies and Edwards, 2013 ; Novotná et al., 2012 ). We propose to study how such states are achieved by focussing on so-called institutional work ( Lawrence and Suddaby, 2006 ). Rather than focussing on institutions themselves, an institutional work perspective emphasises how actors interact with institutions and attempt to disrupt, maintain, or change them. We draw on Wallenburg et al. (2019) , who accentuate the mundanity of institutional work and the mediating role of materiality. This institutional work perspective might further highlight what role institutions play in sustaining work, and how that might be supported.
In short, translating is about making connections that were not there before (i.e. making networks). Contexting is about making environments that provide fundaments for action. As such, this is not necessarily about making networks, but about combining and reorganising networks and placing actors in a contextual role as to be able to ‘do’ something. Lastly, institutionalising concerns working and linking with institutions with the aim of achieving an objective. Therefore, it is not about just making any connection or fundament, but explicitly about using the rule-like status of institutions. Thus, not all translations are about contexting and institutionalising, but contexting and institutionalising can be seen as particular types of translating. Similarly, institutionalising might be seen as a particular kind of contexting.

Section: 2. Methods

We set out with this ethnographic case-study to analyse how actors of KTPs in Cameroon, Jordan, and Nigeria worked to sustain their platforms. These platforms have different histories but have in common that they were constructed gradually and do not originate from one specific programme ( Supplement 1 ). We selected the KTPs based on their organisational heterogeneity and pre-existing connections between the different research teams. The pre-existing connections established rapport ( Agar, 1985 ) and allowed us to follow and participate in the KTP actors' daily work. The first and last author of this manuscript have a background in epidemiology , health systems research, and STS, whereas the second and third author are mainly trained in STS. These different backgrounds within the team allowed the first and last author to sometimes ‘zoom in’ closely on the health systems practices of the KTP actors, whilst the other two authors could help with ‘zooming out’ and identifying patterns beyond the specific ‘micro’ interactions only ( Nicolini, 2009 ).
We used a semi-structured approach to interviewing the KTP actors and others with whom they interacted, combined with observations and document analysis. The data were collected over a period of two years (September 2017–November 2019). Our theoretical framework sensitised us to identifying strategies and activities in the mundane work of the KTPs that directly or indirectly facilitated their sustaining. The data collection started with observing the KTPs’ daily activities and an initial purposive interviewee sample that included two key actors per KTP. These key actors were gatekeepers to the empirical site and were interviewed during multiple occasions ( Spradley, 1979 ). Throughout the observations, and based on referrals by the key actors, we included actors in our study with whom the KTPs regularly interacted. In total, we conducted 63 semi-structured interviews with 56 key actors (see also Table 1 ). Interviews lasted between 25 min and 2.5 h and were digitally audio-recorded with permission of the interviewee. One interviewee refused audio-recording, but did agree to us taking detailed notes and writing down quotes directly from the interview. All other interviews were transcribed verbatim. Some of these actors were also interviewed more informally, as we worked with them over periods spanning several days. Jottings of these conversations were included in the observational notes. Table 1 . Overview of interviewees. Empty Cell Cameroon Jordan Nigeria Total Academic researcher 3 3 3 9 KTP actor a 3 11 6 20 Medical professional 5 3 0 8 NGO member 5 2 3 10 Policymaker 3 0 6 9 a These actors were directly involved with a KTP and were by profession generally an academic researcher, policymaker, or medical professional.
Observations were gathered during two visits to Jordan (14d), three to Cameroon (34d), and one to Nigeria (11d). During such visits, the lead researcher would observe the daily practices of the KTP and participate in planned meetings, interviews, and social events. Most observations were written down directly and otherwise during breaks, taxi transfers, or at the end of the day. The observations included a paper trail: most of the activities we observed included documents, such as policy briefs, strategic notes, and literature reviews. These documents were included in our analysis and served as materialised practices that triangulated findings from the interviews and observations.
The data that we obtained through the three methods were abductively analysed ( Tavory and Timmermans, 2014 ). This allowed us to sensitise the data collection using a conceptual framework, but did not refrain us from focussing on empirical phenomena that did not align with this existing framework. Therefore, we constantly moved between sensitised coding using our framework and open coding of the interview transcripts , notes, observational notes, and documents. The codes were used to create thick descriptions of the practices of the three KTPs ( Geertz, 1973 ), in which we organised the practices among the three work processes of our theoretical framework. Within the descriptions of the work processes, we identified key activities. This initial analysis was performed by the four authors of this paper, followed by a second iteration in which the (assistant) directors of the KTPs were asked to reflect on the activities we identified. Following suggestions by the directors, we applied more focus on how the practices of the KTPs were situated (e.g. within a project, or in a time of political uncertainty) rather than merely focussing on the practices only.
Our study received an ethical waiver from the Erasmus Medical Centre institutional review board. To warrant the rights of the participants, and to make sure that the study abided to the requirements for scientific research in Cameroon, Jordan, and Nigeria, the project teams in those countries obtained institutional clearances as well. In meetings with external actors, the KTPs would announce the presence of the research team and no objections were registered. The concept manuscript was shared with the KTP actors to prevent misrepresentation – this procedure functioned as a member check.

Section: 3. Results

The results chapter is divided into the three work processes that we identified in our conceptual framework. For every work process, we analyse what activities the KTP actors undertook and how these can be understood through the notion of ‘sustaining work’. Table 2 provides an overview of the KTPs and Supplement 1 provides a historical account of their construction. Overall, the analysis highlights that the KTP actors did not work with sustainability as an end-state, rather they created and constantly revised a dynamic environment in which they were sustaining. Table 2 . How the three KTPs are organised. Empty Cell KTP Cameroon KTP Jordan KTP Nigeria Current host organisation Central Hospital of Yaoundé Higher Population Council (HPC) University of Calabar Teaching Hospital Formal host position Public hospital Government advisory-council Research institute within a public teaching hospital Focus areas Health policy, medicine, public health Population health, sexual and reproductive health Medicine, public health Funding • Grants • Government • Grants • Government • Grants Staff numbers 10–18 26 14–20
A main part of the mundane KTP work involved establishing connections and creating networks. This ‘translation work’ permeated the KTPs' activities and could be divided into three concrete activities: developing repositories of scientific research, creating interests, and linking the activities of the KTP to the momentum of ongoing reforms. We present several examples of these activities and argue that the connections that the KTP actors established were not fixed, but largely uncertain and dynamic.
A first aspect of the KTP's translation work was the development of repositories. The necessity and function of such repositories was explained by the Cameroonian KTP director. The 21st century marked a period of policy change in Cameroon. These changes increasingly required substantiation with international and domestic scientific knowledge. The latter, the director argued, was not very ‘reviewable’, as there was no central overview of domestic research. Thus, the Cameroonian KTP director developed a repository for health-related science in the country, which positioned the KTP as the key source of scientific information that was required for the proposed policy changes. “So, we started with few experiences, bringing together those working on HIV, then those working on TB, then those working in malaria, those working in the social sciences, and we called it a platform. We called it a platform; it was not formal. It was basically a repertoire on those who were working, who actually were doing [research], and what were their results.” (interview with KTP director Cameroon)
Similarly, the Jordanian KTP developed an online repository that would contain listings of all Jordanian population research conducted since 2000. Alike the situation in Cameroon, the rationale behind that repository was that both researchers and policymakers would now be bound to the KTP as key source for “validated knowledge” (fieldnotes January 2019) . The development of the repository, and positioning of the KTP as validator, did not mean that the KTP actors would wait passively for others to find them. Instead, the KTP actors actively mingled with ongoing disputes. An example is provided in the quote below, where the Jordanian KTP director observed that data from a demographic health survey (DHS) did not match the population dynamics they observed. “So, the DHS came out and we looked at the data. One of the indicators showed that fertility rates had dropped drastically. We know that the population dynamics have stayed the same. So, we started asking: where did the fertility rate change? Why did it change? (…) We need to check and validate this.” (interview with KTP director Jordan)
The quote above shows that the KTPs saw it as their responsibility to act as validator of knowledge; especially because this knowledge was expected to be translated into policies. The repositories that the KTPs in Jordan and Cameroon developed positioned them as mediators and coordinators within a network of different policy and research actors. By obtaining this position, the KTPs present themselves as indispensable: for decisions to be based on the best available knowledge, there first had to be an overview of such knowledge. What this also shows is that relationality is central to the KT practices of the platforms: the sustaining work that focusses on creating and extending networks and the actual KT work depend on each other for their success.
Another part of the KTPs' translation work was creating interests among the communities they sought to affect. This relationship building is often considered a routinised activity that should also be done as part of dissemination strategies. We show instead that creating interests is central to KTPs’ work and existence. By constantly interesting others, the KTP actors form social links that can carry their advice and recommendations. These links also establish trust and make KTPs more approachable.
We noticed similar patterns across the KTPs, but the work of the Nigerian KTP director was an exemplary case of creating interests. The director was trained abroad in the early 90s to perform Cochrane systematic reviews and now wanted to convince other researchers and (foreign) decisionmakers to hire the KTP to conduct such reviews. The director explained that he was “running conferences” to convince others of the relevance of the Cochrane Library. “[What I did was] to find people, colleagues who were interested. So, whenever I went for conferences, I would do one-on-one consultations with people who were interested in the concept of systematic review and give them quick guidance on what the process is and how they can get involved. And a few of those who got really interested, I had facilitated their visit to Cochrane.” (interview with KTP director Nigeria)
The director was creating interest for the Cochrane Library, but at the same time was trying to bind actors to a service that also benefitted his KTP. This is reflected in the quote below, where the director explains that he increasingly became a mediator who translated between the internationally oriented Cochrane Collaboration , health issues in Nigeria, and research funding. “The idea was to fund this network. Because this is what drove it: this is an important skill-set, and was something that was catching-up globally. And I wanted Nigeria to be part of it. So, I had to get friends at meetings (…) Okay, so, all those linkages made that if they had primary research to do, we became potential collaborators.” (interview with KTP director Nigeria)
A final element of translation work was how the KTP actors linked their agendas to momentum produced by ongoing reforms. In Cameroon, these reforms took place at different administrational levels. The Cameroonian KTP director noted that these reforms also affected the health system and its organisation. “ I was tasked to set up the Division of Health Operations Research in the Ministry. And at the time, the system was going through reform. It was clear that you couldn't move forward in reforming the agenda without using evidence.” (interview with KTP director Cameroon)
Other interviewees concurred that there were increasing demands for evidence-informed health policy. The reforms in Cameroon took place when the KTP was still located at the Ministry of Health and as such the KTP was deemed the obvious candidate for making sure policies were evidence-informed. Yet, the KTP also had its own priorities for policy change, mostly improved health system equity. Their linkages to the ongoing reforms were said to be “the entry point” and “good opportunity” for furthering the KTP's priorities ( interview with KTP director Cameroon ).
The three KTPs all worked with and within different reforms. While the Cameroonian KTP derives part of its existence from a reform towards more evidence-informed policymaking, and the Jordanian KTP came into being after increased demands for national population policies (see Supplement 1 ), the Nigerian KTP attached to the evidence-based medicine movement. More specifically, the Nigerian KTP started conducting reviews according to the standards set by this movement. The KTP actors subsequently promoted the study results among medical professionals and decisionmakers at the relevant ministries. But some of these actors, they argue, would rather work “eminence-based” (fieldnotes October 2019) – meaning that decisions are based on authority alone. The Nigerian KTP was provided with further directive by intervening in what they called a “battle” between these different modes of working. By capturing international momentum for more evidence-informed policymaking, the KTP could conduct KT activities directed at the Nigerian health system. Taken together, the three activities of translating show a picture of actors that try to sustain their own position by establishing new connections.
Throughout the data collection, we observed that the KTP actors kept constructing contexts that worked for them. While some of the KTP environments could be seen as politically and economically challenging, the KTP actors did not treat these as ‘given’ contexts. Instead, the KTP actors tried to actively arrange contexts in a way that would aid their conduct. Once contexts ceased to be productive, a process of realignment would start. The examples that we will mobilise in this section will focus on how this contexting was done.
We showed earlier that the KTPs did translation work to establish connections with actors that supported the KTPs. Sometimes the connections themselves were less important than how the KTPs used them to construct supporting contexts. One example is how the Jordanian KTP wove together with the Hashemite dynasty. We observed workshops where the KTP would place a banner of the King's portrait, accompanied by supporting words for the KTP, beside the lecterns (see Photo 1 ). At other times, the connection with the royal family would be shared more anecdotally. When we asked several of the KTP actors what the connection with the royal family meant for them, they explained that they the family is much respected in the country and that it provides the KTP with more legitimacy towards policy entities.
By establishing and maintaining close relationships with key actors, the Jordanian KTP constructed a context that worked for them. The notion of such contextual relationships repeatedly surfaced during the fieldwork. Most prominently was a KTP advisor who “constantly pulled his phone” and “started calling as soon as someone asked him to arrange something” (fieldnotes January 2019) . This image of relational work was further amplified by how the KTP advisor and his colleagues spoke of calling and working with “friends” (fieldnotes April 2019), instead of the commonly used ‘stakeholders’ or ‘users’. These observations together provide an image of how KTPs may work to create closely knitted contexts composed of (social) relations with whom the KTPs can collaborate on different occasions. This weaving together of key actors thus contributes to the sustaining of KTPs because it mobilises support and further legitimates the position of the KTP.
The literature commonly holds that KTPs’ sustainability depends on stable funding. Our analysis shows that this meant that the KTPs had to pragmatically combine (project) grants and funds to create supporting financial contexts. Most of this contexting related to the organisation of KT activities that would otherwise not be funded. A policymaker who used to work with the Cameroonian KTP reiterates this in the quote below. “It is about combining funds and then if someone asks if they have the resources to do this and that project: yes, they have. We can move beyond that funding time only. We want [KTPs] to be beyond the funding. Only if you do combine then that sustainability is embedded from the get-go.” (interview with policymaker Cameroon)
The quote above shows that combining funds is deemed an important element to sustaining KTPs. Yet, for the Nigerian and Cameroonian KTP, there was a discrepancy between the work they deemed valuable, and the work for which they would receive most funding. Several of the interviewees in both countries said that the KT activities were highly appreciated, and that they usually strengthened ties between the different communities involved. Nonetheless, these activities would rarely receive funding; certainly not as stand-alone activities independent from a dedicated research project. The alternative contexts that the KTP actors created were thus commonly referred to as contexts of “buffers” and “overheads” (fieldnotes September 2019) derived through working with projects.
Another connotation of contexting was constructing stability: the contexts had to provide a stable fundament on which to – more routinely or for prolonged periods of time – organise KT activities. This understanding is reflected in the subsequent words of a Jordanian policymaker. “The knowledge translation platforms are aiming at creating an environment, creating a platform by which the researchers, the academics, the producers of the knowledge, will interact properly with the policy makers and with the media. For the public good.” (interview with Jordanian policymaker)
After a year of observation, however, we noticed that contexting seemed to be about winding together stability and fluidity. The KTP actors anticipated that their funders, collaborators, but also their locations and area of interest could change. This meant that either they would overhaul their existing contexts, or create new contexts. Usually, this was a cyclical process where some contexts worked, but others failed. One example was how the Cameroonian KTP re-arranged its context. The director explained that by the end of 2007 there were signs that their context was no longer as productive. “The question was: how can this happen without being as something within the Directorate in the Ministry. Because, if it is something within the Directorate in the Ministry, at some point in time it would be difficult, because, if we don't create this space for researchers to do their job without interference … It was advised it should be something established in the hospital. […] So that it can grow without being under the complexity of the central administration – where the wholesome relation at some point in time would take too much of energy.” (interview with KTP director Cameroon)
During 2019, the KTP in Cameroon yet again had to rearrange its contexts to move along with the rapidly changing political environment. Several interviewees in Cameroon conferred that there were many sequential policy reforms, with little time to mobilise scientific evidence for decision making . In addition, the KTP director reported that most of their larger project grants had run through and “indigenous funding” (second interview with KTP director Cameroon) for the KTP was not readily available. To “continue the job” (second interview with KTP director Cameroon) , the Cameroonian KTP actors temporarily shifted their focus from supporting evidence-informed policymaking to promoting evidence-based clinical guideline development. This required the KTP to make new alliances with guidelines commissions, but also to create a context in which the KTP mediates between the medical scientific literature and actual medical practice. It was particularly this fluidity of the KTP that provided stability: by constantly revising contexts, the KTPs remained productive.
In contrast to common understandings of context, our analyses show that context was hardly seen as something fixed. Instead, the KTP actors actively created contexts. We have summarised this contexting in three activities that i) show how the KTP actors created contexts composed of friends that would support their practices, ii) describe how contexting involved arranging funding in such a way that it provided the KTP actors with spaces in which their work was not dictated by project objectives, and finally iii) how the KTP actors used contexting to make their platforms flexibly stable.
Our analysis shows that much of the KTPs' institutional work focused on a constant (re)positioning towards institutions such as ‘academia’ and ‘medicine’. Most often, the KTPs tried to use these institutions to make their activities more productive. We will zoom in on three phenomena that showed how the KTPs did institutional work.
The global health literature stresses the importance of so-called ‘local champions’ in sustaining KTPs. When we asked several interviewees about the role of these champions, they commonly referred to a combination of mandate and knowledge, as is expressed in the quote below. “He has those two factors: on the one hand he has the knowledge, right? […] And then the second thing is, if you compare him to [others], they don't really have the, I don't know how to best express this, but not really the mandate. But he has been chosen as the person, or, he has become now the person – the champion in his country to drive the process.” (notes of conversation with UN actor)
This quote refers to how the Cameroonian KTP director has become the mandated actor for KT issues in his country. Similarly, policy actors in Nigeria would refer to the Nigerian KTP as the key organisation “representing the scientific evidence” (fieldnotes September 2019) on health interventions. What these two cases have in common is that the KTP actors have created an authoritative position from which to translate knowledge.
The mandates of the KTPs usually built on notions of scientific authority. The KTPs see it as their role to mediate between scientific evidence and how that evidence translates into better policies. This mediating role presented itself as a carefully walked tightrope between distance and proximity. Sometimes, the KTPs created a physical or symbolic distance between them and health policymakers or clinicians. At other times, the KTPs moved closer and shared a table with them as equals. One of the KTP actors construed that their work is all about balancing and approaching policymakers and practitioners with patience. Otherwise, they will argue that “this is your project, your priority, not ours” (notes from phone call with KTP director Nigeria, June 2018) and the KTPs will lose mandate. One of the KTP directors summarised this position by stating that a KTP is not “in between” institutions, but that they are “both scientists and decision-makers” (interview with KTP director Cameroon) .
A second activity was the distribution of institutional uncertainty. The KTPs commonly worked with and depended on overlapping, but different organisations. The Nigerian KTP, for instance, worked simultaneously within a university teaching hospital, an international UK-funded research collaborative, multiple government advisory committees, and the Cochrane Collaboration (see also Supplement 1 ). For outsiders, these entities are hard to disentangle: they have the same spokespersons and use the same entrance (see Photo 2 ). In the background, the KT activities would be conducted by the same staff, yet relied on multiple organisations. By distributing institutional uncertainty, the KTPs became less prone to institutional dynamics. Download: Download high-res image (626KB) Download: Download full-size image Caption photo 1 . Meeting of the Jordanian KTP, with the portrait banner of King Abdullah II bin Al-Hussein to the speaker's right. Download: Download high-res image (697KB) Download: Download full-size image Caption photo 2 . Building entrance of the Nigerian KTP, the sign on top states ‘School of Nursing’, the sign just below notes ‘Calabar Institute of Tropical Disease Research’ and later added ‘& Prevention’.
Much like the relational work that is part of translation, distributing institutional uncertainty required the KTP actors to link to multiple institutions such as academia or medicine. When we asked the KTP actors how the process of distributing and combining works in practice, they explained the importance of working across “layers” and with “collaborators” (quotes from fieldnotes November 2018, and September and October 2019) . A KTP advisor from Nigeria provided an example of how this works in practice. “The model for funding depends on your ability to collaborate with others, also because many of the core staff at Cochrane Nigeria also are employed either by the University or the Teaching Hospital. In that way, there is some form of support by way of salaries which we earn. (…) and also the physical structure, which we use to hold meetings and trainings.” (interview with KTP advisor Nigeria)
The above quote indicates that the KTPs usually linked their activities and actors to authoritative institutions, such as academia or medicine. The act of distributing uncertainty made the KTPs less dependent on one single institution. Their institutional uncertainty was thereby distributed over different organisations. We noted, however, that his could also lead to conflicting responsibilities and logistical hardship. One of the Nigerian KTP actors expressed, for instance, that they constantly had to shift between working as researcher and working as consultant – the latter of which would sometimes be prioritised as that produced more funding. Too much distribution across different institutions therefore potentially threatens the KTP's sustaining.
“It is like planting seeds, so that you can harvest their fruits later” (quote from a KTP director, fieldnotes project meeting in the Netherlands, October 2019).
As described before, academia showed to play an important role in sustaining the KTPs. University duties would recur throughout the fieldwork and were a prominent part of the KTPs’ mundane work. What stood out was the extent to which such activities were part of sustaining work. An example was how the KTPs used teaching to create future support for the KTP – something that one of the directors referred to as “planting seeds”. “And then of course institutionalizing the process, because we are lucky that many of us are also academics, so we are teaching postgraduates and undergraduates. So, we also tried to, to make this part of what we do. Some of my colleagues ended up leading these courses in evidence synthesis and evidence-based medicine at the West African College of Physicians, of Surgeons. And of course, the National Governmental Medical College of Nigeria. So, I speak some of my colleagues, these are people that I once mentored, they teach those courses now in those places.” (interview with KTP director Nigeria)
The position of the KTP as educator of prospective KTP stakeholders returned throughout the observations. At one point we observed two of the KTP advisors who had just completed an interview with a director of a well-known NGO. They were standing outside the interviewee's gate and pondered over their status. A short conversation ensued over how the KTP director would compare to the interviewee. “I overhear O saying “he is a big man”. A wipes the sweat from her forehead and sighs “very”. I ask them where the interviewee hierarchically would be compared to [the KTP director]. “[The director] would certainly be above him”, O answers. O hesitates and adds: “Because [the director] probably educated him”. A nods and concludes: “[The director] is a humble big man.”” (fieldnotes September 2019)
The three activities of institutionalising KTPs show that the role of institutions was different than commonly suggested in the literature. While the literature often describes that KTPs should become an institution, or be enshrined in law, our interview data and observations show that the KTPs worked with existing institutions to sustain their own activities. Overall, we show that institutionalising was a constant process where KTP actors link to and collaborate with institutions in a way that benefitted their KT activities. What distinguishes the process of institutionalising with that of contexting in practice , is that with the former KTP actors clearly seek to legitimise their own activities and aim to construct a more authoritative position. This is thus not merely about creating contexts, but about working with institutions in such a way that it contributes to the sustaining of the KTPs.

Section: 4. Discussion and conclusion

With this study we set out to better understand how actors work to sustain knowledge translation platforms (KTPs). Our fieldwork was informed by the notion of ‘sustaining work’, which refers to the ongoing mundane work that various KTP actors engage in whilst aiming to make and keep their KTPs productive. The most salient result is that, in practice, ‘sustaining’ KTPs was an iterative, and uncertain, process of tinkering that depended to a large extent on capacities of actors related to the KTPs. Such capacities included a charismatic and pragmatic approach to building alliances and networks, and working flexibly with financial buffers. This does not mean, however, that sustaining is random. Instead, sustaining work will take different shapes, and will involve different strategies and activities, depending on the situation in which that process evolves. As such, it is a process that is impossible to completely plan or structure. Sustaining work mainly took place throughout the KTP actors' other responsibilities and tasks. This further emphasises the importance of understanding what necessitates sustaining work, and how such work can be facilitated. What stood out was the role that (research) projects played: sustaining work often made use of projects, for instance by combining funds or creating new partnerships. In conclusion, the KTP actors we followed did sustaining work in all their ‘regular’ work: they pragmatically created new connections, shaped, and constructed working contexts, and sought to perdure their KTPs by using institutions to their benefit.
Our multi-sited empirical study of KTP actors' sustaining work contributes to ongoing discussions on how sustainability works in the health policy and -systems field. The contribution of our analysis is twofold. First, we highlight the somewhat dual nature of KTPs: they are made and kept stable and flexible at once. This further emphasises that KTPs are dynamic and require constant sustaining work to remain productive. Particularly, we discuss how KTP actors’ sustaining work involved creating dependencies that were strong enough to offer stability, but weak enough to allow the KTP to change course. Second, we note that the work of KTPs was increasingly organised in (research) projects. This projectification of KTPs affected how sustaining work was done and to what extent such work was necessary. We will expand on these contributions separately in the paragraphs below.
The notion of ‘project’ recurred throughout our analysis. Most prominent was the role of projects in establishing KTPs, but similarly our analysis shows that moving from project to project was a modus operandi for some KTPs. In the management literature, the increased tendency to organise practices in accordance with project management models is commonly referred to as ‘projectification’ ( Jensen et al., 2016 ). Projectification, as argued by some STS scholars, is a threat to both the production and potential use of scientific knowledge. Most notably, Felt (2017) argues that projectification results in short-cycled research focussed on productivity and delivery, rather knowledge generation directed at learning and improvement. For KTPs specifically, projectification is said to decrease their sustainability. Both El-Jardali et al. (2014) and Law et al. (2012) describe that most KTPs are initiated using project funding, but that they generally fail to create an existence beyond those projects. As a result, the KTPs move through different projects to ‘survive’.
While our observations corroborate the challenging nature of projectification, our analysis shows that some KTP actors used projects more pragmatically. The Nigerian KTP actors, for instance, spoke about projects in relation to a process of making friends. By working through projects, the KTP actors created new connections and exchanged skills and methods. Projects also provided the KTPs with an ability to create autonomous spaces by combining project overheads. These observations hint at a double translation: on the one hand the projects were used to produce new links, alliances, and clients, and on the other hand the projects would have to contribute to the research agendas and knowledge bases of the KTPs. We hypothesise that when one of these two conditions is not met, projectification becomes ineffective. Besides, working with projects demanded ingenuity from the KTP actors and necessitated an ability to negotiate and manage. This implies that the emphasis may need to shift from critique on projectification as such, to more detailed studies of how projects become part of the KTP actors’ sustaining work, and the necessary conditions under which projects are useful (cf. Bal, 2017 ; Biruk, 2018 ).
In our conceptual framework we hinted at the ability of KTPs to be both stable and flexible. In practice we noticed that both KTPs' stability and flexibility were enacted through a phenomenon that we propose to call ‘productive dependency’. We understand productive dependency to be a mediating process where – in this case – KTP actors gave up part of their autonomy to create a new link with another actor that offered them (temporary) stability (e.g. a working environment, internet access, exposure at a conference). Such links may break apart when they are no longer productive for one, or both actors involved. The Cameroonian KTP, for instance, moved from a policy host organisation and created a new dependency with a university hospital as that offered them more stability. Similarly, two of the KTPs did not have a specific thematic focus but created dependencies with local research needs instead. While the literature commonly suggests that this relatively nomadic nature of KTPs is a weakness ( El-Jardali et al., 2014 ; Lester et al., 2020 ; Moore et al., 2017 ; Pluye et al., 2004 ; Tricco et al., 2015 ), our findings show that some malleability may strengthen KTPs. Admittedly, the ability of KTP actors to create productive dependencies may be born out of working in an environment that dictates financial hardship, infrastructural scarcity, and inequal collaboration. But the capacity of KTP actors to, as it were, fold in their KTPs and relocate them – both physically, strategically, and thematically – is what allows them to move along with the tides of the policy and practice communities they work with. This is a key characteristic for a collaborative format that explicitly seeks to affect policymaking.
Our study of KTPs' sustaining work brought about several challenges and potential limitations. A first limitation is the limited account of how the organisational arrangements of the KTPs changed the necessity for them to do sustaining work in the first place. As argued before, the practices of sustaining work we studied were largely a response to an environment in which KTPs are not always supported or appreciated. In two of the host countries, the role of researchers, and evidence-informed policymaking is coming under increased public scrutiny. This might mean that sustaining work is needed more, but also that the nature of such work changes accordingly. Besides, the KTPs differ in the extent to which they have a ‘stable’ host organisation. The Jordanian KTP, for instance, is built on the fundament of a semi-governmental organisation that provides some continued funding. At the same time, we did notice that such seemingly stable situations still require sustaining work, albeit not because of funding shortages, but for instance to remain productive beyond the national sphere only. Thereby, our analysis' strength lies precisely in the heterogeneity of cases. Another potential limitation might be that our focus on ‘work’ obfuscates those things that did not work – that is: lose sight of activities that did not contribute to the sustaining of KTPs. By looking at three rather successful cases of KTPs, we reverted to studying what made that these KTPs ‘worked’. It is important to note that we aimed to avoid an overly positive view by triangulating both our data collection and analysis by using multiple methods and by working in a research team.
While we have emphasised the mundanity of sustaining work, we do deem it possible to facilitate such work and have articulated three implications for practice. First, analysing other KTPs through a lens of sustaining work may underscore activities, interactions, and actors that were seen as ‘tiny details’ before ( Stoopendaal and Bal, 2013 ), but may play an important role in sustaining those KTPs as well. This implication extends beyond KTPs only and presents a potential course of further study. Second, the notion of sustaining work itself may be translated into programmes of training and education in, for instance, health policy and systems research ( Borst et al., 2019 ). Our descriptions of sustaining work in practice do highlight skills and strategies that can be experimented with, even though their success is not guaranteed. Third, and final, the role of projects in health policy and systems research is often criticised – especially in the context of (un)fair collaboration between what are sometimes called the ‘Global South’ and ‘Global North’. Our results show that projects also enabled the KTP actors to conduct activities beyond the formal project agenda. This is certainly not to be read as an argument in favour of pushing projects from the Global North, but does shift the focus of the debate from defenceless Southern ‘project partner’ to ingenious and bold Southern expert (cf. Hasnida et al., 2016 , Kok et al., 2017 ).

Section: Author contributions (Credit)

Robert Borst: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Project administration Rik Wehrens: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision Roland Bal: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition Maarten Kok: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to express their gratitude to the various partners and participants in the Science for Using Research Evidence (SURe) project who contributed, directly or indirectly, to the activities that were implemented and studied. We like to express our gratefulness to Her-Excellency Dr Abla Amawi and Ali Al-Metleq from the HPC Jordan, Prof Pierre Ongolo-Zogo and Dr Moustapha Nsangou from the CDBPS-H in Cameroon, Prof Martin Meremikwu, Dr Ekpereonne Esu and Dachi Arikpo from Cochrane Nigeria, Sylvia de Haan and Kathelene Weiss from Cochrane International and Françoise Jenniskens, Kimberley Meijers, Anke van der Kwaak, and Dr Noor Tromp as Share-Net International partners. In addition, we thank Tanja Kuchenmüller for encouraging us to study KTPs in action. Finally, we thank Chiara Carboni, the healthcare governance group at ESHPM, and the anonymous reviewers for sharing their reflections and suggestions.
