Title: Professional authority and sexual coercion: A paradigmatic case study of doctor abuse


Abstract: Abstract

Professionals occupy a position of esteem in society. Doctors and health professionals tend to score especially highly on public opinion surveys of trust. Sexual violence and abuse (SVA) by medical professionals towards their patients is a grave breach of that confidence. This paper uses thematic analysis of a paradigmatic case study of doctor abuse, drawn from a larger sample of semi-structured interviews conducted for an Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) funded United Kingdom (UK) study 2015–2018 into justice and gender based violence. It explores how professional authority can both facilitate and conceal sexual coercion through building dependency; use of language and authorship of the official record; and by functional complicity and ‘data doubling’ within intra and inter-professional cultures. While there is an established literature on child sexual abuse, including in institutional contexts, this paper focuses on the lived experience of grooming and sexual violence of an adult survivor of doctor abuse.

Section: 1. Introduction

‘Professionals’ are individuals employed in an occupation characterised by organisation (for example, having a governing body or association); specialist knowledge (often certified through higher education); and a code of ethics (Millerson 1964; in Abbott, 2014 : 4). ‘Professions’ may also signal hierarchy, exclusion and the “intellectual and organisational domination of areas of social concern” ( Abbott, 2014 : 6). Traditionally, professionals have enjoyed public confidence and esteem, particularly those employed in health and social care, those who have responsibility for children and young people, and those whose role it is to secure our safety and ensure justice. In the 2020 Ipsos MORI Veracity Index, for example, a poll running since 1983 on trust in the professions in Britain, 93% of the general public said they expected nurses to tell the truth; doctors 95%; teachers 85% and police 71%. The high regard for medical professionals relative to other professions precedes the COVID-19 pandemic (see, for example, Williams and Lees, 2015 ). Such confidence is critical since patients may engage in personal disclosures and undergo physical and intimate examinations, which would be unthinkable in any other context. Sexual violence and abuse (SVA) by medical professionals towards their patients is therefore a “profound breach of this trust” ( Bismark et al., 2020 : 218).
Over the decades, a small but steady flow of literature, notably in the United Kingdom (UK), the United States (US), Australia and Canada, has explored sexual contact, including SVA, between medical professionals and their patients or clients (see Fahy and Fisher, 1992 ; Disch and Avery, 2001 ; Searle et al., 2017 ; Subotsky et al., 2018 ; Searle, 2019 ; Bismark et al., 2020 ). Collectively, these studies tend to observe a higher incidence of sexual contact in mental health or psychiatric professionals, general practitioners (GPs) and those working in gynaecology and obstetrics, possibly given characteristics specific to the patient-practitioner interactions in those specialisms. SVA is perpetrated and experienced across society, including across the health professions spectrum, and there is no evidence that professionals perpetrate disproportionately, compared to any other social group. However, the trusted status and social license of professionals, often compounding existing privileges which enabled their access to the professions in the first place, affords them a certain level of social power. This power, consistent with the criminological literature on white collar crime ( Croall, 1989 ) and crimes of the powerful ( Pearce, 1976 ; Box, 1983 ), may make their offending harder to identify and to remedy.
This paper starts from an interest in professionals acting alone, who sexually groom, abuse and violate adult victims who are their clients or patients. It draws on a paradigmatic case study of doctor abuse to explore how perpetrators may use the status and opportunities granted to them, to abuse and to conceal their abuse. In short: how professional authority can be sexually coercive.
The General Medical Council (GMC) is the public body that decides which doctors may work in the UK, oversees standards and training and takes any action necessary to prevent a doctor from risking patient safety. Chamberlain (2018) solicited GMC data via a Freedom of Information (FOI) request on doctors who received criminal convictions between 2005 and 2015 and the decisions of the GMC on whether those doctors were fit to continue in their employment. After vehicle-related offences, convictions for violent and sexual offences were the most common category, accounting for 18 per cent of the 1359 offences identified.
Chamberlain's research is notable in its focus on doctor offending within a criminological journal: literature with a comparable focus is authored usually by academics and practitioners within medical and health disciplines. Indeed, a barrier to researching some forms of ‘professional’ offending for the criminologist is that it can require the researcher to have specialist expertise ( Larsson, 2012 ) both in criminology, but also, for example, medicine. For this reason perhaps, extant research on doctor offending tends to use regulatory language such as ‘professional boundaries’ ( General Medical Council, 2013 ) and ‘sexual misconduct’ ( Galletly, 2020 ) rather than ‘sexual abuse’ or ‘rape’, as would be used by researchers in gender based violence.
In 2005, the Government published the Kerr/Haslam Inquiry Report ( HM Government, 2005 ) following the conviction in 2000 and 2003 respectively of two consultant psychiatrists, William Kerr and Michael Haslam. Both worked during the 1970s and 1980s in the same psychiatric hospital in York in England and both were convicted of indecent assaults against female psychiatric patients in their care. For Haslam, a conviction of rape was quashed on appeal: Kerr was convicted in his absence, on a Trial of the Facts. The Inquiry heard both from witnesses in the trial and also from others who did not pursue criminal proceedings, all of whom provided consistent accounts of abuse. Despite victims reporting the doctors on several occasions and persistent rumours during their tenure, the Inquiry heard that concerns were either not believed, not communicated upwards or not acted on. The final report identifies organisational, cultural, structural, professional and individual factors which facilitated this failure. For example, “consultants had undue power and accountability” (2005: 14) and there was “a predominantly male hierarchy of doctors and a predominantly female nursing cohort, which reinforced gender power relations” (2005: 14), a “lack of knowledge (or acceptance of the knowledge) that doctors might abuse their patients” (2005: 15) and a “lack of supervision/monitoring of domestic visits” (2005:15). The Inquiry made wide-ranging recommendations and inspired one of the few UK published books focused specifically on doctor abuse, edited by Fiona Subotsky, Susan Bewley and Michael Crowe in 2010.
In 2017, Rosalind Searle and colleagues were commissioned by the Professional Standards Authority to report on professional misconduct in the UK health sectors. By analysing fitness to practice decisions provided by regulators, including the General Medical Council (GMC), Searle et al. were able to show in which settings sexual misconduct cases were reported and compare reporting levels with other indices, such as levels of verbally aggressive behaviour or reports of workplace discrimination. However, the authors express doubt about the quality of data recording, which in turn affects the validity of relationships identified between factors (2017 , p.32). A further report by Searle in 2019, identifies issues of power, both between the doctor and patient and within professional hierarchies. Again, she identifies lack of consistent recording (for example on gender, ethnicity and status – e.g. rank of colleague or type of patient - of the alleged victim in fitness to practice cases) as making detailed analysis difficult (2019 , p.18).
In the US, Teegardin and Norder (2019) recount how a chance inquiry by a reporter for the Atlanta-Journal Constitution led to the launch in 2016 of a full-scale investigation published as the ‘Doctors & Sex Abuse’ series. The investigation uncovered more than 3500 cases of sexual misconduct by physicians across the United States since 1999 (2019: 1). The Atlanta-Journal Constitution investigation emerged the year after USA Gymnastics, the National Governing Body for the sport of gymnastics in the United States, took action against Larry Nasser. Nasser was an osteopathic physician who abused hundreds of girls and young women in his role as team doctor for US women's national gymnastics team. In Australia, research by Bismark et al. (2020) revealed that regulators had received a sexual misconduct notification in relation to 0.2% of registered health practitioners. Seventy-five percent of those notifications related to sexual harassment or assault and 18% of practitioners were subject to more than one report over 2011–2016. Consistent with previous studies, GPs, psychologists and psychiatrists, as well as male and rural-based practitioners were more frequently cited in the sexual misconduct cases analysed. DuBois et al. (2019) analyse 280 cases of serious ethical violations in medicine – such as sexual abuse, unnecessary surgeries or criminal prescription of drugs – over the period 2008–2016 and note that 95% of the cases within their sample were committed by males and 97% involved repeated instances of misconduct. Female doctors are cited in sexual misconduct cases, but at a far lower rate than male colleagues: for example, Harris and Slater (2015) found that 18% of doctors suspended or erased from the GMC register in 2014 were female. There may be under-recognition of female offending, their offending may generally be less serious, or female doctors may be treated more leniently through the disciplinary process: but it is also likely that, consistent with sexual offending across society, perpetrators are predominantly male.
Studies of adult victims of doctor abuse, and their experiences, are small in number. Commonly, such papers are written pre-2000 or in the last 4–5 years. It is possible this publication profile links to successive cycles of feminist campaigning and public focus on sexual violence (sometimes described as feminist ‘waves’), most recently #MeToo. The available studies focus principally on psychiatric patients ( Disch and Avery, 2001 ; Devereux, 2010 ) or unnecessary treatment or surgeries which may have a sexual element. For example, Rodriguez (2020) recounts the story of Dr James Burt, the self-professed ‘love surgeon’ who mutilated hundreds of women's bodies over thirty years in the United States. Disch and Avery (2001) conducted a unique study comparing the experiences of those who survived doctor, psychiatric and clergy abuse, respectively. They found that first experiences of doctor or clergy abuse were likely to first occur under 18, but abuse by mental health professionals over 18, reflecting later referral age to psychiatric care ( Disch and Avery, 2001 : 208). A study by Luepker (1999) of 55 women who had been abused by a variety of professionals found that the mean age of first sexual contact with the professional was 32 years old (three of the fifty-five were under 18) and that 18% had been sexually exploited by more than one professional (1999: 53).
Devereux (2010) presents a model of ‘idealising transference’ where a patient can feel bonded to a professional through their disclosures, which can turn to dependency. Disch and Avery (2001: 205) found that ‘dependence’ was fostered in different ways, depending on context: for example, since dependence was harder to establish in GP-patient relationships as appointments are irregular, victims reported that GP perpetrators would try to encourage more frequent visits than required. This process of establishing dependence can be understood as adult sexual grooming. Sinnamon (2017) describes grooming as the "systematic preparation of a victim" (2017: 462) through: Establishing trust with the target and their family and social network, normalizing intimate interactions, blurring the lines of what is and is not appropriate behavior, desensitizing their victim to the warning signs of abuse or exploitation, and creating a psychologically, socially, emotionally, and often physically reinforcing experience […] (2017: 462)
Given that adults tend to have more resources than children in terms, for example, of making sense of the behaviour of others, and they tend to have wider familial, social and professional networks, ‘priming’ adults for abuse can take much longer, even years (2017: 463). Perpetrators in professional positions can be well placed to invest this time if the relationship with the client is ongoing. In Disch and Avery's study, the period of relationship, including the sexual abuse, varied from a year for medical survivors to two and half to three years for mental health and clergy survivors (2001: 208). Long term, the authors note that: Clients who were extremely dependent upon the abusive practitioner often suffer long-term depression and chronic suicidality, which, clinically, often looks like a permanent personality trait rather than a response to the abuse . ( Disch and Avery, 2001 : 215) [emphasis added]
This is echoed in more recent studies. Middleton and colleagues argue that a significant proportion of victims of childhood abuse (sexual, physical, emotional) “present to medical and psychiatric systems and receive various diagnoses which do not necessarily refer to the traumatic origin of their illness” (2013: 22). Örmon and colleagues survey the abuse experiences (in childhood and adulthood) of female psychiatric in-patients and similarly caution that if “symptoms of abuse” are not distinguished from “symptoms of mental ill health”, patients will not receive the right care and support ( Örmon et al., 2016 : 4). Of course, not all adult victims of professional abuse have experienced abuse formerly. Nevertheless, these studies demonstrate how some adults not formally classed as ‘vulnerable’ may be groomed and abused by professional perpetrators and then, paradoxically, become drawn into requiring further professional support as their needs are medicalised.
At the same time, individuals who have experienced professional abuse are likely to be extremely distrusting of other professionals and this further hampers their help-seeking and recovery ( Disch and Avery, 2001 : 215). Their fears may not be entirely unfounded. In a study of patients abused by their therapists, Devereux (2010) describes how some professional perpetrators altered their notes to pathologise the patient or retrospectively detail “seductive behaviour on the part of the patient” (2010 : 21). In terms of holding perpetrators to account, feelings of shock, guilt and shame may deter victims of doctor abuse from reporting ( AbuDagga et al., 2019a : 1331). Patients may find the regulatory system difficult to navigate and the complaints process re-traumatising (2019a: 1331). Finally, without legally mandated reporting structures, professional colleagues may be reluctant to refer suspected (particularly more senior) colleagues and medical disciplinary boards may be hesitant to act in the absence of material evidence or witnesses, other than the victim (2019a: 1330).
In the United States, Erooga et al. (2020) use the term ‘powerful perpetrators’ to describe individuals who leverage their professional status, financial or leadership influence over an organisation to access and abuse children. They write that: Powerful perpetrators […] often use organisational grooming and efforts to minimise detection as opportunities to “flex their authoritative muscles”, clarify that others are not in a position to challenge them, and to point out the potential consequences to staff of [doing so]. (2020, p.81-82)
Studies of such professional perpetrators working within institutional settings (hospitals, youth custody, school) find that they tend to exploit the particular features of the institutional environment to facilitate the abuse and prevent disclosure of the abuse by the children and other professionals (Brannan and colleagues 1993 in Sullivan and Beech, 2004 : 163). Features include hierarchy, vulnerability and charismatic leadership ( Coates, 1997 ). While traditionally in Western political philosophy, power is underpinned by force and authority by expertise, in practice the distinction is unclear ( Jones, 1988 : 122). In the case of powerful professional perpetrators, ‘authority’ can be coercive ( Weiss, 2002 ).
It is also important to recognise how professional authority may overlap with male authority, and other social privileges, to facilitate the exercise of sexual coercion. Multiple extant studies show that doctor abuse tends to involve a male perpetrator and female victim. For example, in a study of anaesthetists subject to discipline in Canada 2000–2011, 90% were male ( Alam et al., 2013 ); in Germany, Clemens et al., (2021) a significantly higher proportion of females in their sample reported unnecessary physical examinations by doctors. Reviewing sexual misconduct by American nurses, AbuDagga et al. (2019b) observe that 63% of reports related to men, yet male nurses represent around 10% of the nursing workforce. Such ‘gendered authority’ (see Robinson, 2000 , drawing on Connell, 1995 , 2005) is not exercised simplistically; nor by all male professionals; nor does it preclude cases of female perpetrators. But it does reflect the prevailing order of gender-power relations ( Connell, 1995 ). Understanding the role of ethnicity, age, sexuality or migrant status are also important, though may be hampered by inconsistent processes of tribunal or regulator data collection. In another professional field, the Canadian military, for example, Hajizadeh et al. (2019 : 2581) find that risk factors for being a victim of sexual misconduct included age (being younger); marital status (being single); sexuality and gender identity (being LGBT) and ethnicity (being Indigenous). In a review of victims of sexual abuse and harassment perpetrated by public servants in New Zealand, Buckmaster (2018 : 65) finds that employees in subordinate positions, women and migrants are at higher risk.
In summary, gender, class, education and so on, are critical elements in making sense of professional abuse. However, my interest is also in elucidating certain practices afforded professionals, which compound those social privileges. This analysis seeks to explicate a relationship between ‘professional authority’ and ‘sexual coercion’ in the perpetration and concealment of SVA by professionals against adults, focusing specifically here on a case of doctor abuse.

Section: 2. Methods

The case study selected for this paper is from one of 251 semi-structured interviews conducted with victim-survivors of gender based violence (‘GBV’), including SVA, in England and Wales during 2015–2018. The Justice, Inequalities and Gender Based Violence project 1 explored how victim-survivors perceive, seek and experience ‘justice’. The interview participants were a combination of individuals self-selected through responding to a national online survey and individuals identified through local and national non governmental organisations (NGOs), acting as gatekeepers and referrers. Across the final sample of 251 participants, disclosed experiences of GBV (commonly more than one experience per participant) were as follows: domestic abuse (n = 220); sexual violence, harassment and abuse as an adult aged 18 and over (n = 109); ‘honour’-based violence (n = 45); and abuse as a child aged under 18 (n = 112).
The interview schedule was developed in consultation with victim-survivors (see Williamson et al., 2021 ) and combined an opening verbal questionnaire establishing details and context followed by a series of open-ended questions. Interviews were carried out over the telephone, in-person, and using other on-line platforms as requested by participants, and lasted an hour on average. The case study interview selected for this paper was conducted by phone and lasted nearer two hours. Informed consent was secured in writing prior to the interview and repeated verbally at the start of the call. The interview was recorded, transcribed and anonymised. Ethical approval for the project overall was given by a University of Bristol Ethics Committee.
Existing literature on doctor abuse tends to utilise surveys, secondary data analysis or synthesise mixed methods data. While such approaches are valuable, to understand abuse in the round we need also to include in our methodological toolbox “detailed accounts of the experience and impact of coercive sexual acts by survivors” ( Stone et al., 2019 : 834). Such accounts are important in feminist research because they directly facilitate the voices of those involved, rather than speak for and cluster in a way that can sometimes de-contextualise and de-materialise diverse experiences.
This paper uses a single interview as a paradigmatic case study. Flyvbjerg (2001) acknowledges that seeking insights from a single case study is generally frowned upon by adherents of the scientific method and I too recognise that focusing on just one interview is unorthodox and indeed atypical to my existing work. Following Flyvberg, however, I agree that, “it depends upon the case one is speaking of, and how it is chosen” ( Flyvbjerg, 2001 : 73–74). Drawing on the work of Hubert and Stewart Dreyfus, Flyvbjerg (2001: 78) suggests that researchers can strategically select ‘critical’ or ‘paradigmatic’ cases. Defining the features of a paradigmatic case though, is not well prescribed. Recalling an interview with Hubert Dreyfus on this issue, Flyvbjerg reveals Dreyfus' frankness: Heidegger says, you recognize a paradigm case because it shines, but I’m afraid that is not much help. You just have to be intuitive. ( Flyvbjerg, 2001 : 80)
A paradigmatic case then is one which illustrates a number of different dimensions of a social phenomenon and an experienced researcher can intuit such a case by drawing on their familiarity with the wider field. The story of Kathy, presented in this paper, can be considered ‘paradigmatic’ because it contains key elements identified across the other 250 narratives of victim-survivors seeking justice in the project sample. These include vulnerability; grooming; the abuse; first report and disbelief; shame and withdrawal; re-traumatisation; speaking out; and seeking accountability and remedy. In her interview, Kathy discloses briefly experiences of abuse in both her childhood and marriage, signalling another common feature, repeat victimisation. Issues relating to age, class and mental health intersect her experience and she pursues justice through both criminal and administrative processes. Finally, Kathy's experience spans five decades and therefore charts changing public awareness of, and attitudes towards, SVA in the UK. However, from the perspective of the perpetrator, Kathy's story has an outlier element: her perpetrator was a doctor. Only two cases in the sample of 251 identified their abuser as a professional providing them with care, in both cases doctors (although a greater number identified their intimate partner abuser as a high status professional, for example). However, the methodological goal here is to bring the paradigmatic elements of SVA victim-survivorship and justice-seeking into the medical sociology literature, where in-depth qualitative experiences of doctor-perpetrated sexual abuse are less commonly used.
The presentation of findings and analysis will be in two parts. First, the participant's story is summarised to provide context. Given the focus on a single case study, special care is taken to protect anonymity by substituting some specific details provided for more general phrases. Second, the findings of a thematic analysis ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ) are presented, identifying three practices which, it is argued, link ‘professional authority’ to ‘sexual coercion’ in this case study. The participant's own words are drawn on – extensively in places - and indicated through italicised font. Narratives can be understood as “verbalized memories of past or ongoing experiences” ( Heath, 1986 : 84) and, in narrative analysis, it is generally thought important to convey the original shape and features of someone's account ( Riessman, 1993 ). While this article does not use narrative analysis, there can be a value in quoting at length, to acquaint readers more intimately with the participant's voice and story. This seems particularly appropriate when using a paradigmatic case study.

Section: 3. Findings and Discussion

Kathy is a White British woman who was in her sixties when I interviewed her by phone. After asking her some initial descriptive questions, we moved into discussing her experience. In her teens, Kathy was placed in a psychiatric hospital, the only child among adult women. She implies in our conversation that her GP is instrumental in this decision and he becomes a constant and central present in her life through regular appointments. In her early twenties, he starts to invite her to babysit his children and she is brought in, and made to feel special, in his family home. In her mid-twenties, Kathy is married and her husband is working away. She becomes unwell: And I called a duty doctor … and it was a fairly big practice so I had no idea who the duty doctor would be … and it was him. I didn’t know until he came to the flat. By that time, it was evening, and he had an emergency that he was going on to. And I remember him giving me a tablet to settle me, and that he would call back on his way home to see if it had worked, and that’s when the abuse happened. And then over a period … and that’s why I’ve never managed to come to terms with it being rape, because to me rape is a one-off thing that happens. I know now that’s not true … and over a period of a fortnight he [would come] back to my flat after he’d been playing squash, after surgery … so-called ‘to check on me’. So here’s me feeling like this very special patient, but also knowing that this is not what I want, this is wrong, this is … and what if I say 'no' to him, he’s my doctor, where will I go then, who will help me? I just … all the emotions under the sun. And thinking I don’t know what to do. So, then the blame kicked in. It was my fault – and that’s been the biggest, biggest thing that I’ve carried.
Within a week of the final assault, and in a distraught state, Kathy reported to police. They turn her away, implying she is ‘troubled’. The experience is a turning point, tipping her into trauma and despair, which lasts decades. It was like everything was imploding in on me – I’ve got myself into something that I don’t know what I’ve got myself into. And to be honest, most of the rest of [two decades] is a complete … it’s not a blur, it’s a mess, it was lurching from one crisis to another trying to survive …
Kathy's search for justice had been long and, at the time of interview, as yet incomplete. She continued to see a succession of doctors and psychiatrists over the years and disclosed to them on a number of occasions her experience of SVA. In the early 2000s, she reported again to the police, but no action was taken. In the 2010s, she was listening to a radio programme about the Savile scandal and how police were encouraging victims of historic abuse to come forward, so she called the helpline. Within four hours, two police officers were at her door. Her perpetrator was arrested and admitted to having sex with Kathy, but claimed it was consensual. As the analysis below explains, the case was not prosecuted, despite police support and lodging three appeals to the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS). It did, she says, secure an assurance from the regulator that he would not be able to practice again, but by then the doctor had already retired and Kathy claims that her previous requests to have him investigated were ignored. Kathy considered confronting her perpetrator personally but decided against it. At the time of the interview, she was applying for compensation and was struggling with both securing her medical notes going back decades and reading their contents.
This section draws on Kathy's interview to identify three practices which explain, how in her case, ‘professional authority’ both enabled, and hindered justice for, ‘sexual coercion’: these are (1) building dependency; (2) use of language and authorship of the official record; (3) functional complicity and 'data doubling' within intra and inter-professional cultures.
Kathy explains that in the era she grew up, doctors were “ like God” . Reflecting Erooga and colleagues’ study (2020), her perpetrator is charming, well known in the community and idolised by her mother. She says: The first grave injustice that he did to me was putting me in that hospital […] I wasn’t out of control, in trouble with the police, doing drugs, being promiscuous. I was just a sad unhappy child, not coping at school.
We did not talk in the interview about the exact reasons behind this, although in the opening questionnaire, Kathy said ‘Yes’ to the questions on experiencing emotional and physical (but not sexual) abuse and neglect as a child. Later in the interview, she says that through her life she had only ever been diagnosed with anxiety, depression and an eating disorder. It is possible then that this hospitalisation as a teenager is the first instance where simple neglect of Kathy's needs as a child are interpreted as a medical and psychiatric problem (see Middleton et al., 2013 ). This is a pattern that appears to repeat and compound in her life. From this period, she begins to see the doctor “ weekly, sometimes more, so I depended on him ”. That dependency is fomented by his position as a well-respected professional, her family's deference to his expertise, his stable presence, his role as her healer, and his interest in Kathy and her feelings. He was possibly the first person in her life to have shown such interest.
Kathy recalls what she now sees as the “ first boundary he crossed ” in her early twenties. Consistent with Disch and Avery (2001) , the Kerr/Haslam Inquiry Report ( HM Government, 2005 ) and Sinnamon (2017) , the perpetrator disrupts the patient-doctor framework, which has hitherto guided their interactions, by inviting Kathy to babysit his children. Now first, he should never have done that, and silly me, I was the black sheep of the family, I was an embarrassment to my family … the impact it had of this amazing doctor asking me to babysit his most precisions possessions in life made me feel, ‘Oh God’ - incredibly good.
The power differentials of gender and income are evident in her description of his first collecting and driving her to his house. She is enraptured by his “ beautiful home … beautiful wife, beautiful children ”. It is in stark contrast to her “ grotty flat ” and she feels special that he has selected her to be part of this. She is given her own room when she babysits. And when they used to come in late, I used to go on to bed. And they would both come into the bedroom and sort of ask if the children were okay. [And then] his wife would go on out and he would stay sitting on the bed talking to me.
She remembers once being tangentially aware how “ bizarre ” it has to have her doctor sitting there, but she “ brushed it aside ” because being treated as important and special was too good a feeling to let go. Elsewhere in the interview, she describes him asking her to take the children swimming with him, because his wife could not go: And again, being in the pool, just thinking he was too close.
The doctor has drawn Kathy intimately into his heteronormative, comfortable, middle-class home, which contrasts with her own living circumstances and poor family relationships. In this world, he is driver and provider; father and husband; doctor and saviour. He also “ knew everything about me ”. Almost ten years into their acquaintance, he rapes her, several times over days. Kathy is clear: Right up to the moment it happened, I never saw it coming.
During that fortnight when the abuse occurs, Kathy describes her confusion and fear. On one side, she knows what he is doing is wrong. But this is dampened by feelings associated with dependency: If I say no to him, he’s my doctor, where will I go then, who will help me?
Before leaving her the last time, her perpetrator seeks to mask ( Sinnamon, 2017 ) and re-frame the two weeks as their secret: Well, the last time he left it was him saying, ‘This has to remain between you and me’ and really … you know, thought it was ‘good therapy’. I remember those words and I wish I could have recorded them because he actually denied it [much later] to the [police] … or said he didn’t remember … but I remember.
Positioning the abuse as ‘part of the therapy’ is a perpetrator tactic identified also in Devereux's study ( 2010 ). For a while, he continues to be Kathy's doctor. Much later, in an interview with the police, who were reviewing her medical records, the detective asks Kathy why she later ‘allowed’ him to perform an internal examination, an incident she has no recollection of. The issue here is not however ‘allowing’ or giving consent, it is rather that long-established dependency has led to internalised coercion: she might not want the doctor to do what he does, but she feels unable to challenge him either. [I continued as his patient because] I needed him.
Her perpetrator's control is strengthened by Kathy being identified as a mental health patient. The implications of this label echoes down the decades, impeding her access to justice. Some years later when her husband sought to confront the doctor, she recounts that the doctor replied: ‘If you ever do anything with this and try and ruin me, I will ruin you first … Your wife is a psychiatric patient.’
It is perhaps this label which gave her perpetrator assurance that he could act with impunity. In the 2010s, when the doctor is arrested and questioned about the rape for the first time: Apparently, it blew the detective away, because […] they were all set for the denial but not the, ‘Oh yeah I had sex with her’ … then, ‘but it was consensual’.
He had used his position of trust and authority to engender dependency in Kathy over many years, laying the path to sexual abuse. His backstop should she decide to speak out was his power to label Kathy as a psychiatric patient, and therefore undermine her credibility. Defining terms and authorship of the official record are privileges accessible to professionals.
When Kathy becomes pregnant with her husband, she decides to opt for a female doctor, thinking “ a woman is going to be best ”. She tries to tell this new doctor about what happened to her, but struggles to find the words: And um … I couldn’t use the words ‘rape’ or ‘intercourse’, anything like that. … She said, ‘Well what are you trying to say? – you had an affair with him?’ and I sort of sat there thinking, ‘You call it what you like, I don’t know what it was, it was wrong’ – that’s the first time now l believe, again with all the hindsight, that the word ‘affair’ - reference to ‘an ‘affair’ with her GP’ - went into my notes.
This female doctor's ascription of what happened to Kathy as an ‘affair’, and her (or subsequent professionals) documenting that in her notes and so making it part of the official record, was to have profound consequences for Kathy's later attempts to seek justice.
Requesting and re-reading her records through the process of securing justice has been a traumatic process for Kathy. In one set of hospital notes, when Kathy and her husband had attended family therapy, she finds: … a piece of A4 paper in there with the words, in big letters, ‘YUCK’ just written across it after one session, ‘[Kathy] and her husband are vying for victim role’.
She explains how there are often no signatures against the notes, something the police later tell her, “ Would not happen now ”. This means that not only are professional authors powerful in writing the official record, but, in this particular instance, they are also not accountable for any mistakes, gaps or malpractice. This written record of Kathy's life, penned by successive professionals, are both an obstacle, and a potential route, to redress. She keeps them in a box by her bedside: … every so often I trawl through them, and I can’t control what I feel because I can’t alter them.
Despite police support, the CPS decide not to progress her case, mainly she believes, “ because the word ‘affair’ appears in my notes ”. However, this last experience of the police has been positive. Not only do the officers believe her, but they seek to give Kathy new words and a new narrative for what happened. He [the detective] said, ‘You were raped, [Kathy]'. He used to come out with some amazing things. He said, ‘I don’t care if you threw yourself at his feet and begged him - he was your doctor’.
The officer's insistence on using the word ‘rape’ reminds us how terms such as ‘sexual misdemeanour’ or ‘boundary violations’, can artificially formalise and potentially deny the significance of an incident. Likewise, the phrase ‘amorous patients’ ( Davies, 2015 ) could be used to gloss over troubling patient behaviour towards a doctor. Choice of words are important because language is constitutive, not just descriptive ( Hall, 2013 ). As Foucault (1973) and others have demonstrated, the disciplinary effects of discourse are powerful and form the epistemic architecture of social institutions such as medicine, psychiatry or penality. AbuDagga et al. (2019a) find that in the United States, the Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB) use the term ‘sexual misconduct’ as catch-all for a spectrum of behaviours. They argue that this fails to convey the specific and ‘profound unethical nature of sexual relations between physicians and their patients’ (2019a : 1330). The authors instead advocate the Ontario approach, enshrined under the province's Regulated Health Professions Act 1991, which ‘deems any sexual contact between a physician and a patient or any behaviour or remarks of a sexual nature by physicians toward patients to be considered as sexual abuse’ (2019a : 1330, emphasis added).
To summarise, this subsection identifies that the ability to interpret and define through language, and in turn to author the official record, are characteristics of the professional role. Both can strengthen the link between authority and coercion, because professional interpretations represent ‘expertise’ which can be imposed over the voices of patients, clients or service-users. From Kathy's perspective, other non-offending professionals may be complicit in this process. However, this perceived complicity could also be understood as an outcome of cumulative official records forming a ‘data double’ of Kathy ( Moore and Singh, 2018 ; drawing on Haggerty and Ericson, 2000 ), which becomes the accepted version of her personhood, over and above Kathy's corporeal experience. This leads to the final practice identified linking professional authority to the perpetration and concealment of sexual coercion: functional complicity and ‘data doubling’ within intra and inter-professional cultures.
There are two sets of professionals in Kathy's story who, from her perspective, are functionally complicit in impeding her route to her own sense of justice: the medical profession and the police. Turning first to the medical profession, sometime after her abuse, Kathy moves into the care of a female consultant psychiatrist, whom she sees for over a decade. Kathy says that the local mental health team disapproved of this psychiatrist's long-term and “ mothering ” approach, but Kathy says that at the time, that is what she needed. She describes how the psychiatrist told Kathy that it was best not to pursue her perpetrator through the criminal justice system: [The consultant psychiatrist] always maintained that she kept it quiet because she said I would not get through the court process, because, being a psychiatric patient, they would destroy me. And maybe she was right, but also there’s an anger [in me] that she didn’t have the strength to believe in me, that we could get through it. And it wasn’t till after she died and then the police started looking into it, and then I saw what she’d written about me. She also used this word ‘affair’ in my notes. I couldn’t believe it. I thought she believed me, but she kept [what happened to me] to herself [rather than referring it]. She closed ranks. She protected her profession. And now I wonder, did she really believe me? Or did she not want to believe me because this was her profession also, and was it just easier to say, ‘Let’s keep this quiet’?
Devereux (2010) reports abused patients in her study alleging ‘collusion’ between colleagues (2018: 21) and the Kerr/Haslam Inquiry Report ( HM Government, 2005 ) identified occupational hierarchy, including gendered authority (2005: 14), as factors inhibiting the identification, acceptance and reporting of doctor abuse. In her interactions with both medical and police professionals, Kathy also describes experiencing minimisation. In some instances, this is related to her status as a ‘psychiatric patient’. In the week following the final rape, Kathy went to the local police station to report. She describes being, Made to feel like a dirty cheap young woman, um, ‘Go away, my dear, you’ve got problems'.
It is not clear if the police had access to her personal records or whether she was presenting in a disorganised way, but it is an example of how mental health issues can be confused and conflated with the impact of SVA trauma ( Middleton et al., 2013 ; Örmon et al., 2016 ; Disch and Avery, 2001 ). Indeed, Kathy is reflexive about how her interactions with professionals have been cyclical, compounding and always defined by her medical history: That’s all the contact I’ve ever had, you know I was this ‘troubled person’, so it was the medical profession mainly I told, and any time I had to see anybody new I reacted badly, and then it would all come tumbling out. And then it just … it backed up how crazy a person I was.
Kathy's insight here is consistent with Haggerty and Ericson ' s (2000) concept of a ‘data double’. In the context of crime or medicine, for example, this ‘double’ is the rendering of personhood in and through a data record, such as a CCTV video, police statement, DNA swab, or doctor's note. These items of data become an authoritative simulacrum of a ‘real’ physical person, their experiences and their memories. Data doubles can also be professionals. In reviewing sexual assault cases in the US, Hlavka and Mulla, (2021) describe a police officer giving testimony in a court case, attesting to the veracity of an alleged victim's experiences of violence, in place of that victim. Kathy has then become the person described in the records; this ‘data double Kathy’ is a psychiatric patient, implicitly unreliable and therefore mistaken about her experience of rape.
Kathy's second attempt at reporting to the police is also unsuccessful. From her description, she is thwarted explicitly by rape myths ( Edwards et al., 2011 ) around consent and male sexuality, which are employed by the interviewing officer: In about 2006/7 I had a lady police detective come and interview me, and again her attitude was, ‘Well did you say no?’ It’s like somebody struck me dumb, because no, actually I never said no … I didn’t say no to him. He was my doctor. So she said … ‘Well, he may have been a professional, but he was only a human being’. So again, it was my fault, I’d enticed him, I’d made him do it … so that went nowhere.
Kathy did not know whether the doctor went on to abuse other patients through this career, or indeed had offended previously. In her most recent contact with the police, Kathy's detective had suggested that if they had been permitted to name him, other victims may have come forward. This is hypothetical, of course, and arguments around defendant identity disclosure are contested. It nevertheless underlines what the England and Wales police inspectorate Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary, Fire and Rescue Services (HMICFRS, formerly just HMIC) have described as the ‘one chance rule’ ( HMIC, 2015 : 15): that police officers may only hear once from a victim and that good report handling can save a future victim; save a life.
On the morning of our interview, Kathy had been following up a request for medical notes from a former GP practice, which she had requested some weeks before. She describes the receptionist as being sharp with her. She knows her request is time-consuming and the practice staff are busy. Kathy says she would “ prefer to burn ” all her notes, but they continue, paradoxically, to be her route to some compensation or rectification of the official record. She notes how in her interactions with authority, she always discerns a “ hint that I am slightly, you know, a fantasist, that I made it all up” . For Kathy, there is a mutual dynamic among and between professionals, their cultures and bureaucratic processes, which, in her perception, serves to protect their own interests and to present obstacles to clients and service-users: Certainly, in terms of, you know, the medical profession protected their own, and to a certain degree the police help them do that. I don’t know, through ignorance whether it was like they just all didn’t want to believe and it was easier to think that I was crazy, so …
Moore and Singh's observation that, “far from helping the victim to substantiate her claims, the victim's data double becomes a nemesis who blocks the victim's ability to affect the course of prosecution of her own victimisation …” (2018, pp.129-130), precisely captures Kathy's predicament. The collective authorship of a data double by professionals is not an intentional collusive act, as it may be perceived by the victim, but it can be functionally complicit in sexual coercion.
In the UK, the issue of inter-professional cultures is beginning to receive greater attention. In December 2021, Staffordshire Police arrested a doctor on suspicion of sexually assaulting a child. The doctor had previously been investigated by police in 2018, following a complaint by a female patient, but there was insufficient evidence to pursue action. Reporting by UK newspaper The Sunday Times 3 suggested that 109 cases of concern in relation to the doctor, were now being reviewed (100 relating to adults; 9 to children). At the same time, British public confidence in the police has been damaged through 2021 and 2022, following the rape and murder of Sarah Everard by a serving Metropolitan police officer and media reporting of police perpetrators of domestic abuse, sexual violence and the exchange of misogynist content within private messaging groups. This in turn raises questions about low rates of charging for domestic and sexual violence, including SVA committed by professionals, and evidence for institutional sexism across public organisations, including policing and medicine ( Westmarland, 2008 ; Bleakley, 2014 ).

Section: 4. Conclusion

Professionals are a valued and trusted group in society. They carry out key roles in our lives and a great deal of time and resources are invested in their formation ( Chamberlain, 2018 ). It can be hard to accept, therefore, when professionals misuse their position to perpetrate SVA against children and adults. Less recognised in research, adults – some of whom are identified as ‘vulnerable’, some not - can also be sexually groomed and abused by professionals who occupy a position of trust and authority. These include doctors, religious leaders, lecturers, police officers, psychologists or lawyers, for example. This paper draws on a paradigmatic case study of doctor abuse to identify three practices which enable professionals to both perpetrate and conceal sexual coercion: building dependency; use of language and authorship of the official record; and functional complicity and 'data doubling' within intra and inter-professional cultures.
Writing in medical journals, Flynn (2015) in Australia and Samuriwo (2019) in the UK claim that the medical profession is at a critical juncture in terms of recognising and understanding doctor abuse against patients, as well as sexual harassment of colleagues and trainees. However, Kremer et al., (2018) identify good reasons why sex offending by professionals (they focus on psychologists in particular) is to date relatively under-researched. First, securing ethics approval for projects examining real-life misconduct and malpractice may be difficult; second, it may be hard to access both accused professionals and victim-survivor participants, especially as some will be required to sign a non-disclosure agreement if the case has been adjudicated; third, case decision data is hard to access, often held by regulatory bodies and subject to privacy laws; and fourth, professionals “willing to be interviewed [… may] sanitise their account of the incident, playing down their culpability, and exclude the victim's perspective entirely” (2018: 485).
It is recognised that this paper is limited in its wider insight by focusing on one case study. However, the value of using a carefully selected paradigmatic case is to signpost new lines of inquiry to be developed. The area of doctor abuse, for example, would benefit from further inter-disciplinary working between health academics and social scientists, particularly those researching gender based violence, and building trust and partnership between both sets of academics and regulatory and membership bodies. Critical scholarship could help to challenge the language of ‘boundary violations’ and ‘sexual misconduct’ and recognise and name ‘adult sexual violence and abuse’, where it occurs. This in turn has implications for the regulatory and administrative justice processes governing medical practice and for medical professional cultures.
