Title: Discharge readiness as an infrastructure: Negotiating the transfer of care for elderly patients in medical wards


Abstract: Abstract

The discharge from hospital is an essential care transition for elderly people with chronic illness , specifically because the responsibility for treatment and care is transferred between locations and healthcare staff. To optimise the use of healthcare resources in a time of progressively shorter hospital admissions and increasingly streamlined hospital care, discharges are highlighted as important moments to be handled with caution. Yet, discharges are expected to be “early” and “quick” procedures to maintain a flow of patients through the hospital. In this qualitative article, we use ethnographic methods to investigate how this apparent contradiction unfolds in everyday discharge situations through the work of establishing discharge readiness in three medical wards in a middle-sized Danish hospital. We use the lens of infrastructure to help us see how elements like patient screens, screen meetings, clinical (and embodied) signs and community health care criteria are interrelated in the work of establishing discharge readiness of patients. By looking closely into specific discharge situations, we analyse the way care needs are defined and how care work is transferred, and we identify the inherent uncertainties for health care professionals, patients and relatives. We show how clinical signs take precedence over embodied experience, and how complex situations are reduced to workable problems to enable discharge.

Section: 1. Introduction

The discharge of elderly patients (aged >65 years) from medical wards has gained much political and scholarly attention in Denmark in recent years. It is seen as a moment in the patient pathway with increased risk of medical errors and suboptimal care, making discharge planning an important element to ensure effective use of resources in times of capacity limitations and bed shortages ( Boston Consulting Group, 2019 ; The Danish Health Data Authority, 2016 ; Wentzer, 2020 ; Aasbrenn et al., 2021 ). The political context of capacity limitations is related to a reduction in the number of hospital beds; from 4.25 per 1000 inhabitants in 2000 to 2.5 in 2020 ( OECD, 2022 ). It is also driven by a political ideal of moving medical work “closer” to the patient's home (primary care and home context), thereby reducing the need for hospital admissions ( The Danish Ministry of Health, 2017 ). These changes are often legitimised by demographic projections showing a steadily growing population of elderly people with chronic illnesses in need of health care , which challenge the limited health care resources, but they are also legitimised by arguments about the negative outcomes and the risk associated with hospital admissions for patients, such as nosocomial infections and risk of medical errors in the transitions. In Denmark, attempts to streamline health care and increase effectivity often target hospital care through interventions that aim to reduce both the number and the length of admissions ( The Danish Ministry of Health, 2021 ; Vinge et al., 2011 ).
An analysis made by a management consulting firm for the Danish Ministry of Health in 2019, argues that numerous elements must “add up” to optimise the discharging process, especially when patients need continued medical care after discharge ( Boston Consulting Group, 2019 ). Medical decision-making, test results and “rules of notification” in the primary sector are among the factors identified as liable for delays and complications (ibid.). Central to the report is the work of optimising, timing and planning; these ideals have become the sine qua non of health care planning in Denmark. Such changes take place both inside the hospital (e.g. implementation of procedures to promote “early” discharges) and outside the hospital (e.g. “beds” in community health care facilities and transfer of clinical tasks into the homes of patients). As a result, an increasing number of patients are discharged from hospital while still having care needs, and they must be handled in other parts of the health care system or in the home by family members or others ( Wentzer, 2020 ).
A recent report by the Danish Centre for Social Science Research showed that elderly patients often experience to be left in a difficult situation after discharge ( Wentzer, 2020 ). They experience discharges as hastened and rushed. As they are often still cognitively and physically affected by the changes that led to the admission, discharges are related to uncertainty about how their illness and everyday life will develop. Uncertainties are often related to physical frailty and dependence on health care professionals to re-shape a meaningful everyday life after discharge as well as physical and cognitive changes (ibid.).
In this article, we build on a long tradition within sociology of examining the social organisation of medical work and its consequences for both health care professionals (HCPs) and patients ( Strauss et al., 1985 ; Strauss and Corbin, 1985 ). We do so by centring on the concept of discharge readiness , and how it is shaped by and shap ing the illness trajectories of elderly patients in medical wards.
In the clinical literature, the term discharge readiness is used as an indicator to be assessed to optimise the timing of hospital discharge. This is to ensure that patients do not have unnecessary stays in the hospital after found ready for discharge, yet they should not be discharged before being ready ( Bloom and Waits, 2020 ; Brent and Coffey, 2013 ; Chan et al., 2014 ; Frederick et al., 2016 ; Lau et al., 2016 ; Lodise et al., 2015 ; Mabire et al., 2015 ; Oehler et al., 2018 ). In other literature, being “ready” is understood in a variety of ways, depending on the type of measurement that informs the assessment. For example, in one study, discharge readiness is associated with “markers of volume status” in patients with heart failure and is assessed in relation to readmission rates ( Oehler et al., 2018 ). An article analysing the use of the concept of discharge readiness in literature and practice suggests that central attributes are physical and psychological stability, adequate support, and adequate information and knowledge ( Galvin et al., 2017 ). Few of these studies consider elements within the institutional and organisational structure ( Moats, 2006 ). Through the analysis in this article, we question the assumption of discharge readiness as a pre-defined category, which can be assessed by HCPs on the basis of measurable criteria. We suggest that it is instead the result of negotiating and tinkering with the infrastructural arrangements intended to transfer care work out of the hospital. In doing this, we build on ethnographic studies of discharge decision-making and planning, which already in the mid-1990s revealed unintended effects of economic incentives to accelerate hospital discharges and shorten admissions. These studies showed an incongruence between discharge decision-making and the clinical progress of the patient, as well as a neglect of the social and structural conditions involved ( Dill, 1995 ; Wells, 1997 ). More recent sociological studies on clinical work and discharging have shown how people are translated into organisationally recognised patients by aligning care needs with systems and care pathways ( Allen, 2009 , 2014 , 2018 ; Allen & May 2017 ; Bishop and Waring, 2019 ; Waring et al., 2015 ). These studies point to the increasing complexity in the clinical work of managing healthcare trajectories and to the difficulties of involving patients in the process. In line with these studies, we explore the relationship between organisational structures and care needs by zooming in on the work of establishing discharge readiness and the conditions for assessing and accommodating care needs in the process.
This study is based on fieldwork in three different medical wards in a middle-sized hospital in Denmark. The Danish health care services are universal and free of charge. In recent years, developments in the hospital sector have been dominated by centralisation and specialisation; small hospitals have closed, and large “super-hospitals” have emerged. A majority of patients enter the hospital through the emergency ward and are transferred to one of the medical wards after initial assessment and treatment. As a particular place of health care delivery in the Danish health care system, the medical ward has undergone many recent transformations, which has resulted in a break-down of broader medical specialisations. It has been argued that this development leaves no specialised hospital ward for “medical patients”, which comprises a considerable group of patients characterised by high age, loss of functioning and a complex spectrum of symptoms and diagnoses. As these patients often have medical problems that belong to different medical specialisations and physical locations, they are vulnerable to being “pushed around” in the health care system ( Falch, 2019 ; Høgsgaard, 2016 ; Wentzer, 2020 ). Formally, the responsibility for medical treatment is transferred to the general practitioner (GP) or hospital ambulatory care after discharge. However, in practice, patients and their relatives must make sure that new appointments are made.
According to Danish legislation, the decision on when a patient is fully treated is the responsibility of the physician in the hospital setting. The legal framework does not describe any details on what this entails, but it is defined indirectly through the structures that guide the overall distribution of responsibility in the Danish health care system. In a local policy document, the specific responsibility of the hospital is described as concerning bodily functions and functional impairments , but only when these problems require the specialist knowledge and equipment found in hospitals ( Central Denmark Region, 2008 ).
This reflects the ongoing political efforts to define which parts of health care belongs in the hospital (or outside), and a dividing line is often made between somatic and social factors ( Vinge et al., 2011 ). The political classifications of who needs hospital care are further complicated by financial regulations that place the financial responsibility for patients registered as fully treated in the administrative units with the municipalities ( The Danish Ministry of Health, 2013 ). This means that the municipalities must find ways of ensuring that the care needs of citizens are met when the hospital has terminated their treatment and the condition must be handled by the GP or the municipality. In public debates, questions have been raised about which kind of health care and treatment tasks can be managed in which parts of the health care system, and how these changes influence the quality of health care . Hence, while these political underpinnings shape and enable the transfer of elderly people with chronic illness, the daily negotiations of possibility take place in interactions between HCPs, coordinators, patients and relatives.
Anthropologist Brian Larkin defines infrastructure as “matter that enable the movement of other matter” ( Larkin, 2013 , p. 329). As such, infrastructures are made up of routines, conventions, materials and the work required to maintain them. Infrastructure as an analytical tool highlights the embedded elements that are often invisible, but which shape and enable practice ( Star, 1999 ). Establishing discharge readiness is exactly that; an assessment that facilitates movement and flow. Using this analytical lens allows us to see how discharge readiness is established through everyday practices, enabling the movement of patients and care tasks out of the hospital.
In this perspective, discharge readiness is both an infrastructure consisting of a range of practical, material and discursive elements within the hospital and across care locations that make discharge (and thereby termination of hospital care) possible, as well as in itself infrastructur ing ( Danholt and Langstrup, 2012 ) because the work done to maintain it constantly re-shapes and changes how hospital care (and care for the elderly) is understood and practiced. While the concept of infrastructure has traditionally referred to things like roads, railways and pipelines, recent theorisation in a variety of academic fields has shown the usefulness of the concept in understanding many other kinds of phenomena ( Jensen and Morita, 2016 ; Langstrup, 2013 ; Larkin, 2013 ; Star, 1999 ; Street, 2011 ; Weiner and Will, 2018 ). Research in medical anthropology has used the theoretical lens of infrastructure to highlight, for example, “chronic care infrastructures” and the importance of the spatial organisation of care ( Langstrup, 2013 ), the socio-material practices of getting medications ( Danholt and Langstrup, 2012 ) and the use of medical technologies in the home ( Weiner and Will, 2018 ). We add to such studies by highlighting hospital discharges as critical moments in the infrastructure, where care needs are negotiated to transfer elderly patients with chronic illnesses .
The concept allows for an analysis of the actual work done in the medical wards to establish discharge readiness and how it is related to what is going on in other places, for example in the community and the home of the patient. Thinking with infrastructure allows us to stay tuned on the concrete relations, materials and discourses that shape and enable discharge, and the consequences it has for patients and HCPs. An important aspect of infrastructures is their embeddedness within other arrangements and their transparency ( Star, 1999 ). Rather than being directly observable in the medical wards (although some elements are), much of the infrastructure becomes visible upon analysis by foregrounding the work, actors and complexities involved in moving and placing care tasks. In turn, this allows us to see the consequences that are invisible in the discourses of optimisation and flow.

Section: 2. Methods and materials

This article is based on material from 18 months of ethnographic fieldwork , which was conducted from April 2019 to October 2020. During fieldwork, ALS produced data on the illness- and treatment-related work involved in the care trajectories of people with chronic illness who experienced repeated acute hospital admissions; a particular focus was placed on conceptualisations and negotiations of work, care and responsibility in the illness trajectories . The fieldwork consisted of an initial period of participant observation in three different medical wards and one emergency department for 2–3 weeks at each site. Concurrently, patients were recruited for a subsequent period of 1–18 months of participant observation in clinical encounters across the included sectors (hospital, clinic, GP, home care), home context and other health-related activities. Access to the wards was negotiated with the hospital management and was facilitated by the anchorage of the project in the research department of the same hospital. Nine persons living with one or more chronic illnesses and having experienced three or more admissions during the past 12 months were recruited to the project. Patients were first identified in anonymised lists showing number of admissions, and these were sampled according to our eligibility criteria while ensuring a broad representation of diagnoses and age. Patients were given oral and written information about the project before deciding on participation. While the age of the recruited patients ranged from 45 to 89 years, the present article focuses on discharge cases involving elderly patients (defined as 65 years and above), where issues such as declining ability to manage daily living and reduced social network could make the discharge complex. This choice was made due to the specificities of these cases in the material and in consideration of the political interest in this group. The article draws on data related to discharge and discharge readiness from the entire fieldwork period, but the extended cases presented in the findings section were observed in the hospital. During fieldwork in the hospital, ALS observed patients and followed their pathways in the hospital; from arrival at the emergency ward, transfer to a medical ward and finally discharge. ALS participated in daily routines, such as ward meetings and ward rounds, and made observations in the “coordination room”, where HCPs interacted and communicated in front of computers and monitors. Such observations were complemented by conversations with HCPs, coordinators, hospital management, patients and relatives and were documented in detailed fieldnotes. In addition, ALS collected relevant documents, such as local guidelines for discharging.
Encounters in the hospital setting were primarily documented as short fieldnotes at the scene, while longer fieldnotes were written back in the office. The used participant quotes originate from fieldnotes written verbatim by ALS. All fieldnotes and quotes were originally spoken and written in Danish and have subsequently been translated into English by ALS and quality assured by MTH.
Analysis of the material followed an abductive approach, where ALS oscillated between the data produced in the field and the relevant literature in a hypothesis-producing process ( Tavory and Timmermans, 2014 ). Fieldnotes were coded and general themes were identified, such as recurring clashes in perceptions on discharge between patients and HCPs. Subsequently, the fieldnote excerpts that most clearly illustrated this theme were commented analytically by ALS in consideration of the overall ideas of care work and its distribution ( Emerson et al., 2011 ). The question of exactly how discharge readiness was established in the hospital encounters was pursued by revisiting these phenomena in fieldnotes ( Tavory and Timmermans, 2014 ). When discussing the theme of discharge readiness in the research group, the analytic lens of infrastructure emerged as a helpful way to understand the more invisible work involved in discharging ( Star and Strauss, 1999 ). While “integrated” care pathways were found to be emic concepts frequently discussed by HCPs and management in the field as an ideal of communication and transfer ( Allen, 2014 ), the sociological studies of the infrastructures that undergird health care relations provided a framework that could merge the actual material and the discursive elements of transferring care, as will be presented in the following sections.
The research project was approved by the Danish Data Protection Agency (reference number 1-16-02-110-19). The project was reported to the Committee on Health Research Ethics in the Central Denmark Region. Following assessment of the study protocol, the committee determined that this type of study required no ethical approval according to Danish legislation on health research (reference number 1-10-72-148-19). Fieldwork implies an ethical relation to the world under study and consent is an ongoing negotiation ( Hastrup, 2004 ). In the cases presented in the article, both HCPs and patients were informed orally about the project and consented to participation and researcher presence in the specific situations. Names and other personally identifiable information has been changed or left out, to ensure anonymity.

Section: 3. Findings

I enter the coordination room and hear the coordinating nurse describe “safe patient flow” – a term written in capital letters above the patient screen – to a colleague. She explains that the essence of the concept is to start preparing one day ahead so the physicians can discharge patients when they arrive in the morning. To clarify why this is important, she points to another screen on the wall that visually displays each ward in the hospital as a circle of green (vacant beds) and red (non-vacant beds) colours. She then points to the increasingly red circle displaying the emergency department and says: “This is their situation now because the general practitioners have opened and start to send in people. So, we have to get beds ready, and that is why we cannot wait until the afternoon to discharge our patients". (fieldnotes, June 2019)
As this description illustrates, representations of capacity, like the monitors on the wall, continuously remind health care professionals in the medical ward to keep an eye on hospital capacity and take this into consideration when planning discharges. In this specific case, a nurse is instructed to make sure her patients are discharged in the morning hours to have beds ready for new patients being admitted by the GPs. The excerpt illustrates how considerations of timing are not only related to the situation of the patient; it is also related to the “bed situation” of the emergency ward and the opening hours of GPs.
The monitor on the wall frames the practice of discharging as an ongoing drama, which is visualised by the red areas (indicating shortage and lacking resources) that slowly take over the green areas. In combination with other material signs, such as an A4-sized poster on the notice board illustrating the “action plan for capacity challenges”, they represent the everyday realities in which HCPs are both responsible for counting the beds and for taking care of the patients in them. It could be said that the “master narrative” ( Star, 1999 ) of the discharge readiness infrastructure is to maintain flow and make sure that patients do not “get stuck” in the hospital. This was also a common way of expressing it among coordinators and HCPs in the medical wards.
The concept termed “safe patient flow” [sikkert patientflow], was introduced in the hospital to counter the problem of delayed discharges and unnecessary waiting-time for patients that are considered fully treated and wait for discharge (Danish Society for Patient Safety , 2015). The idea is that enhanced collaboration and communication between hospital wards can accelerate the process of examining and treating the patient, thereby accelerating discharge and promoting flow.
A core practice implemented as part of “safe patient flow” was daily meetings between all HCPs to discuss the admitted patients. While intended to improve coordination by enhancing communication, these meetings also became representations of capacity concerns. The following fieldnote excerpt captures the atmosphere in one of these meetings on a busy day:
The coordinator leads the meeting, standing in front of the monitor in one corner of the room. The room is filled with nurses, physicians and therapists. The pace is high because everyone needs to get back to work – there are patients, relatives and other colleagues waiting. The coordinator points to a patient on the monitor while saying the bed number out loud, and the HCPs present their patients one by one. Most of them give a short summary of reasons for admission and status. The coordinator asks questions in a hurried tone: “Do we have a date for discharge?”, “Did you alert?”, “Is the home situation under control?" (fieldnotes, April 2019)
The fast-paced atmosphere at the screen meeting and the character of questions asked by the coordinator show how the attention was guided towards making patients ready for discharge. She asks about the date of discharge, which should preferably be known already when the patient is admitted. The coordinator also asks about the communication with the municipality health care team, indicating that the HCPs need to act in conformity with the rules to avoid delays. Finally, she asks if the home situation is “under control” because there might be a range of practical arrangements and assessments to be made before the patient can leave the hospital. In sum, these questions are intended to promote flow.
An earlier study from a Danish emergency ward pointed to the importance of “flow culture” as an organisational and collective prioritisation of actions to secure available beds ( Kirk and Nilsen, 2016 ). The study showed how flow culture created conflicting views on what constitutes being a professional; you must pay attention to the flow of the ward and yet adhere to the guidelines on patient care (ibid.). Our material supports the centrality of flow culture in medical wards, but it also indicates differences between the role of the nurses and that of the physicians. As an example, when discussing a patient (who wanted to stay in the hospital, but was assessed to be fully treated) with a nurse, a physician stated: “If it was up to me, she could stay a little longer, but I am not sure I am doing my job then – do you know any tricks?” (fieldnotes, May 2019). The statement shows that the physician, being responsible for the final assessment, and caught between a consideration of flow and the expressed needs of the patient (to stay longer), can turn to the nurse, who in turn can use “tricks” to somehow establish discharge readiness. In this case, “tricks” referred to ways of convincing the patient to agree to discharge, but tricks could also refer to finding legitimate reasons for keeping the patient in the hospital. The latter was seen with another patient, where the nurse reminded the physician that this patient had experienced returning infections in the past and needed to stay hospitalised for prolonged antibiotics treatment. In this case, the physician changed the decision and prolonged the admission.
We observed how physicians sometimes made decisions on the discharge status of patients based solely on information from the patient journal and monitor. This could provoke arguments from the nurse who knew more details about the patient that would complicate discharge. For example, the patient could have a critically ill spouse at home or no support from relatives. In these situations, physicians reconsidered the decision about discharge or concluded that the presented problem did not belong in the hospital and should be dealt with somewhere else. These interactions reflect the everyday work of classifying what constitutes hospital care, which is central to the discharge readiness infrastructure.
While physicians determine when a patient is fully treated and clinically ready for discharge, nurses often have an advantage in knowing how to negotiate discharge readiness and tinkering with the infrastructure. Nurses spend more time with patients and are expected to handle the practical arrangements preceding a discharge ( Allen, 2018 ). One example is the production of care plans and functional descriptions , which are tools to communicate care needs between the hospital and other parts of the health care system. A statement by one of the head nurses illustrates the importance of these tools: “ We [the hospital HCPs] can never promise the patients or relatives a certain care facility, home care , home nursing or anything like that, because we are not entitled to decide those things. We can only become better at writing care plans and functional descriptions, so they correspond to the language of the decision-makers and thereby push the right buttons (fieldnotes, June 2019).
The statement reveals the limitations placed on hospital HCPs in deciding how to accommodate the care needs of patients after discharge, but it also points to the possibilities of using communication tools and the categories that prompt care services, in order to tinker with it. With these infrastructural arrangements in mind, we now turn to the discharge experiences of patients.
According to STS scholar Susan Leigh Star, identifying the master narrative of an infrastructure requires attention to that which is silenced or made invisible ( Star, 1999 ). In our study, we found that patients sometimes contested their status as “fully treated”. As an example, Laura, who suffered from severe asthma and experienced several acute hospital admissions each year, said: “I have experienced my discharges as … inappropriate … I was lying in bed with masks and medications all around, fighting to catch my breath, and was told that ‘tomorrow you can go home'" . She explained that an important prerequisite for her to feel ready to leave the hospital was that she “could get enough air”. While the embodied experience of breathlessness was central to Laura's perception of readiness for discharge, she related this to the clinical signs. She said: There is a big difference between when they [the physicians] are satisfied, and when I am. They say 90–95% [is sufficient], but I know I need to be on 95% or more” (referring to the level of blood oxygen saturation).
Another interlocutor, Marie, who suffered from COPD combined with several other chronic illnesses, had been hospitalised repeatedly with recurring infections during the past year. She related being ready to leave hospital with having completed a certain number of days with intravenous antibiotics. She stated that she had a clear perception of when her body had responded efficiently to the medication, so that the infection did not return, but she often experienced being discharged too early.
These two examples thematise a more general experience among the participants in our study, where embodied signs of illness in combination with their acquired knowledge of the clinical signs form their perception of when they are ready for discharge. Several of the patients in our study described experiencing their discharges as “unmotivated”; something they related to the experience of not knowing what the purpose or goal of the admission was. While the acute cause of their increased breathlessness or pain, for example an infection, was treated, the actual embodied sign/symptom that led them to seek care was given less medical attention, with the result that they sometimes felt very ill when returning home.
We shall now turn to a case which illustrate the work involved in negotiating clinical and embodied signs of discharge readiness when a patient clearly objects her discharge. Lena, a 78-year-old woman with COPD , had experienced several acute admissions due to exacerbations during the previous year. She knew from earlier admissions that the stays were often shorter than she expected and hoped for, which she consistently pointed out to the HCPs in the ward. The nurse taking care of Lena on the day of discharge stated that “ it usually takes some work to get Lena to agree with the prospect of discharge ”. It was said in a caring tone, acknowledging that they could not “just” discharge Lena, but they had to somehow get her acceptance first. ALS walked with the nurse to Lena's room to talk about discharge. When asked why she wanted to stay in the hospital, Lena said, “ because I do not feel safe about going home ”. The nurse then asked, “ What should be different for you to feel safe about it?” , and Lena quickly responded, “that I wasn't gasping so much for breath” in a frustrated tone.
Lena lived alone and managed daily living with help from the home care team, but being alone with the breathlessness provoked anxiety. In the hospital, Lena felt closer to professional and practical help. On hearing Lena's answer, the nurse said that she would talk to the physician about it. When walking back to the office, the nurse explained to ALS, “She (Lena) gets enough oxygen, so it is all about the sensation of not being able to breath, but her oxygen level is fine".
The nurse was clearly ambivalent about the situation, knowing that they had to discharge Lena despite her objection, and she tried to convince both herself and ALS that a discharge was legitimate. The situation indicates that clinical signs, such as oxygen level in the blood, takes precedence over the embodied sign of breathlessness in the assessment of discharge readiness.
In pursuit of a solution for Lena, the nurse talked to a discharge coordinator from the municipality, who suggested support oxygen in the home. The nurse said that this was not possible because Lena was a smoker, and the hospital did not allow for support oxygen and smoking in the same home.
The coordinator then suggested morphine for home use, which could be administered by the patient herself when overwhelmed by breathlessness and anxiety.
Lena was informed about the plan. When hearing about the morphine, she said that she had already tried this several times with no effect. No further solutions were suggested, and Lena was discharged.
In Lena's case, it turns out to be difficult to accommodate her care needs in the home context due to her perception of the hospital as a safer place and due to bureaucratic rules (risk of fire and oxygen tubes in the same house), and this prevents her from getting support oxygen in the home. It shows how transferring care tasks into the home context is no straightforward activity. Despite tinkering with different solutions, this case ends dissatisfactory for both Lena and the HCPs involved.
The case supports findings from earlier studies showing difficulties with aligning subjective and objective assessments of breathlessness in the clinic ( Macnaughton, 2020 ), and how the incurable character of the underlying disease, such as COPD or asthma, often implies a lack of medical attention to the symptom of breathlessness ( Macnaughton and Carel, 2016 ).
While breathlessness to the patient, in this case, is an embodied sign that calls for hospital treatment, the discharge readiness as established by the HCPs demands a translation of the symptom into a measurable number that can legitimise a decision on discharge. The work done to establish discharge readiness for Lena, despite her blatant objection, reveals how embodied signs of illness that are not supported by clinical ones are not easily accommodated within the hospital; they must be translated into a category that prompts a solution in the home context or be ignored. Lena's perception of the hospital as a safer place to be when experiencing breathlessness points to the symbolic and practical meaning of hospitals for elderly patients with chronic illness and to the importance of including these aspects when transferring care tasks.
As pointed out elsewhere, people enter hospitals with all the complexities of life outside and not just with their illness ( Street and Coleman, 2012 ). A large part of the patients admitted to medical wards are elderly people with multiple chronic conditions . They often need various arrangements to ensure the procurement of medicine, food, clothes, habitation, treatments, etc., which involves several actors like home care, service facilities, family, friends and other network. This is reflected in a local hospital document, which describes what HCPs should consider when planning discharge; home visit (relatives or professionals), clothes for the ride, transport, key to main door, grocery shopping arrangements, delivery of assistive devices , medications, follow-up appointments and rehabilitation plans. It also includes questions: Who will meet the patient when getting home? Who should receive a phone call when the patient is discharged? Is there any food in the home? Does the patient need take-away food from a local restaurant, a packed lunch from the ward or something else? Does the patient have a microwave oven?
The detailed questions and attention points in this document illustrate how becoming ready for discharge involves interacting and revealing intimate details of everyday life , as these arrangements become interrupted during hospital admissions and must be re-established for the patient to return home. Changes that led to the admission and persistent challenges to bodily and cognitive functions might also demand re-arrangements of the relationships and materialities that underpin everyday life.
Here, we present a case illustrating how these re-arrangements could be central in negotiations on discharge readiness. A patient, Else, an 89-year-old woman with walking difficulties, was planned to be discharged from the medical ward. She was admitted for a leg infection, and she was now assessed as fully treated due to her biomarkers of infection and a clinical examination. When ALS and the nurse walked to her room, they met the physician in the hallway, who told them that Else still found it “ too difficult to walk ” and wished to stay a couple of days more in the hospital. The physician seemed a bit ambivalent, but he assessed her to be in “ not too much pain anymore ”, and he saw “ no medical reason for keeping her in the hospital ”. This statement indicates that the embodied sign of finding it “difficult to walk” is not considered a legitimate reason for staying in the hospital, while being in “too much pain” could be. The physician did not know how to convince Else of being discharged. He asked the nurse to talk to her, which resulted in the following conversation: Nurse: I hear that the physician has been here to talk about discharge ? Else (tired voice): Yes, I'm not fond of the idea . Nurse (friendly tone): How come ? Else (hesitating, then in a resigned tone of voice): If only I could get a shower first, then it would be okay, it is so troublesome to take a shower at home, I have to ask someone to help me!
When the nurse inquired about Else's reason for opposing her discharge, it turned out that coming home without being able to walk and take a shower would require Else to ask for help from a neighbour or friend; something that she clearly perceived as unacceptable. Else wanted help from the community home care team, but she needed to have a care bed in her home to be eligible for their help. Else's bedroom was too small for the care bed, which meant that she would have to move it into the living-room and re-arrange the home that she had been living in for the last thirty years. This requirement was her reason for refusing home care. After a short discussion, the nurse and Else came to agree that she would not be discharged until the afternoon; this gave the nurse assistant time to help her get a shower before going home. Else seemed very relieved with the decision.
The exchange between the nurse and Else and the final agreement show that it was the practical consequences of not being able to walk properly that bothered Else, and when her primary concern was solved, she could agree to a discharge. It also shows how something as mundane as a shower cannot be expected to be easily accommodated in the home context but demands considerable work. This was well-known to the nurses in the wards, and we observed several examples of this sort of tinkering with the infrastructure, and it was often commented on or problematised. In the afternoon screen meeting, the nurse said, “Today, I have negotiated a discharge”. On hearing about this, the coordinator referred to the importance of discharging in the morning. This reflects the imperative of attending to timing and flow, but also to the accompanying ambivalence of being attuned to the immediate care needs of the patients.
Else's case shows how intimate details of everyday life are central to establish discharge readiness. It supports our argument that nurses seem to have an advantage in tinkering with the infrastructure. In this case, the nurse used one element of the infrastructure (knowledge of the routines of the nurse assistants) to plan the discharge accordingly, while ignoring the element that new patients start coming around noon (prompting the need for vacant beds).
Hospitalisation might bring a range of new care tasks that patients, their relatives or other parts of the health care system may need to handle after discharge. Each change in bodily and cognitive states, and the related changes in treatments and rehabilitation, comes with potential changes in how to integrate care tasks in everyday life, which is likely to produce new elements of chronic homework ( Mattingly et al., 2011 ) and chronic care infrastructures ( Langstrup, 2013 ) that need to be maintained to live a life with illness. The shortened duration of admissions tends to force the HCPs in the medical ward to assess care needs before it is known to which habitual state the patient will return when treatments and the passing of time have shown the full potential of recovery. This creates much uncertainty about the specific care needs of the patients, and how to best accommodate such needs. One example is our final case, which unfolds the uncertainties related to establishing the continuation of care under these circumstances.
Peter, a 79-year-old man, was admitted with acute cramps and dehydration. When he recovered from the cramps, his cognitive state was affected. He appeared distant and confused, and he had difficulties participating in conversations. In the office, nurses and therapists discussed what might be the reason for these changes. Was it due to a worsening of his dementia or a result of the dehydration and cramps? Would he eventually go back to his usual state or was it permanent? These considerations gave rise to the essential question: Was Peter's home situation sufficiently safe for discharge? In other words, which care was necessary (and by which means) for Peter following his hospitalisation? In the movement towards discharge when the cause for admission (cramps and dehydration) had subsided, the task for the physician and nurse was to find a place that could take over the care for Peter. As they discussed this, the following exchange took place: Physician: Could there be some kind of short-term nursing facility [aflastningsplads] for him? Nurse (hesitating): There are not many short-term facilities in the area … Physician: Then what about a “short-term emergency facility [akut plads]" ? Nurse: Yes, but the criterion for these is that there must be a nursing-problem to be managed … (short silence) … maybe this could be “observation for cramps" ? Physician (nodding): How long can one stay there, is it 48 h ? Nurse: No, it's more like 14 days . Physician: Can you check if it's an option? Maybe an alternative could be increased home care ? Nurse: Maybe … but I think he already receives the highest level of support … I'll follow up on this .
This conversation illustrates how the HCPs need to establish the continuation of care outside of the hospital. As the reason for Peter's acute condition was still unclear, it was also uncertain whether he (at some point) would be able to continue living as before admission, and they had to make decisions on which type of care he should receive and from whom. The questions discussed among the HCPs capture the stakes for many patients admitted to the medical ward, where uncertainties related to symptoms, diagnoses and prognosis are common. The conversation also shows how HCPs need to navigate the “language of the decision-maker”, as stated by the head nurse, in this case the medical officer at the short-term facility. In his current state, Peter can no longer manage to live at home with his usual home care, and his medical situation is uncertain, but a specific problem needs to be the focus of the stay – a nursing problem to be managed. So, while Peter is considered to have been fully treated in the hospital because he no longer has acute symptoms, the prospects of his illness and the care needed in the future remain highly uncertain. This makes it a difficult task to establish discharge readiness; it requires the nurse to reduce his complex situation into a manageable specific problem (like “observation for cramps”) and negotiate a suitable solution that will prompt a transfer of the patient out of the hospital setting. While the uncertainties in the case of Peter are specific, it thematises a general problem in the medical ward. Patients do not stay long enough for HCPs, patients and relatives to obtain knowledge about the prospect of recovery and to re-arrange the materialities and social relations needed to live life after the discharge.

Section: 4. Concluding discussion

In this article, we have analysed cases of discharging elderly patients with chronic illnesses, foregrounding the work involved in establishing discharge readiness. We have drawn on the concept of infrastructure, as that which enables movement and flow ( Larkin, 2013 ), in our analysis of the relation between material and discursive elements, and how they come together to promote a flow of patients through the hospital, and facilitate the transfer of care tasks and medical work. Discourses on optimisation and flow often highlight communication pathways and organisational structures as central to avoiding delays and complications that “obstruct” the flow of patients through the hospital. Our findings indicate that these discourses represent an oversimplified view of the work involved in establishing discharge readiness for elderly patients in medical wards. For HCPs, the establishment of discharge readiness involves the work of sorting out which care tasks can and should be accommodated in the hospital, and which should be transferred to other settings. As we have seen, this work involves determining the meaning of a concept such as being “fully treated”, and negotiating patient experiences of readiness, in situations of uncertainty about prognosis, care needs and available care services. To counter uncertainty in these situations is a time-consuming task, influenced by the contingent nature of illness trajectories and care relations. By showing examples of the complexities involved when physicians and nurses negotiate whom to “keep and care for” ( Langstrup, 2013 , p. 1008) in the hospital, we direct attention to the invisible work of maintaining the discharge readiness infrastructure and its consequences. The invisibility of the contingencies and trade-offs in the negotiations of discharge readiness may feed the idea that it is possible to plan and accelerate every element of admission and discharge, with no major consequences for patients and HCPs. Defining the hospital as a place providing care for only patients requiring specialist knowledge and equipment excludes other care needs from the formal understanding of hospital function, and this legitimises a transfer to another domain (home care or relatives). Our findings show how, in the practical work of caring in the hospital, these classifications create ambivalences, which hold a risk of neglect because embodied experiences, clinical signs and practical consequences are always interrelated in complex ways.
Configuring hospitals as spaces of flow and shortage (the circle turning red) legitimate prioritisations which sometimes implicate compromises to care needs. As we have seen, patients in our study were uncertain about the purpose of their admission, because they experienced an inattention to their embodied signs of illness, and to be discharged before seeing any progress. This suggest a need for an informed, public discussion on what constitutes “good” hospital care ( Mol et al., 2010 ). Making visible the work of prioritising and negotiating is paramount to this discussion. While these considerations point to the implications of our findings for improving hospital work, it might be even more important to consider the implications for care work in the home context. As mentioned in the introduction, the current Danish health care policies aim to transfer medical work out of the hospitals and into the home context. Consequently, the number of hospital beds has been nearly halved during the past 20 years. Hospital admissions are increasingly termed “avoidable” or “inappropriate” as part of a logic indicating that they are caused by patient or HCP behaviour ( Clubbs Coldron et al., 2022 ) rather than by contingencies in illness trajectories ( Strauss et al., 1985 ). These developments increasingly limit what is seen to belong in the hospital, which in turn change the configuration of hospitals, as places brimming with historical and social significance ( Street, 2011 ; van der Geest and Finkler, 2004 ), with the ability of generating certain feelings and states ( Hoybye, 2013 ; Street and Coleman, 2012 ). We saw an example of this with Lena, who explicitly defined the hospital as a safe place to be when she was breathless. If hospitals are spaces which are made meaningful in their relation to other places ( Street and Coleman, 2012 ), then attention must be paid to the relation between the hospital and the home context, and the implications for care work ( Andersen et al., 2020 ; Langstrup, 2013 ). The findings in this article support claims of the necessity of future research into how homes are not always a safe or good place for everyone to be when ill, and how to accommodate these inequalities in developing future health care ( Wentzer, 2020 ). Finally, the presented findings call for more studies on the invisible work of HCPs and related consequences when re-arranging care infrastructures, care relations and care responsibilities.

Section: Credit author statement

Anna Louise Skovgaard: Investigation, Project administration, Writing – original draft, Marianne Johansson Jørgensen: Writing – review & editing, Tine Tjørnhøj-Thomsen: Writing – review & editing, Mette Terp Høybye: Writing – review & editing, Supervision.

Section: Acknowledgements

We thank Central Denmark Region , Aarhus University and The Research Fund, Regional Hospital Central Jutland , for financial support of the research. We would also like to express our sincere gratitude to the patients, relatives and health care professionals who took part in this research.
