Title: Ownership of change: Participatory development of a novel latent construct for neighborhoods and health equity research


Abstract: Abstract

Processes of neighborhood change are important determinants of health . One salient dimension of the experience of neighborhood changes is a person's evolving sense of empowerment over the changes around them, such as development of new housing or shifts in economic opportunity. Community residents collaborating on a Participatory Action Research study developed the novel construct “ownership of change” to capture this psychosocial process, and hypothesized that it may help explain the relationship between neighborhood change and health. In this paper, we describe our participatory process for developing a way to measure ownership of change, explore the construct's validity , test the hypothesis that it is associated with health, and analyze qualitative data to understand the process through which one's sense of ownership of change is produced. We argue that the construct is useful for studying the role of neighborhood changes in shaping health, and that building ownership over neighborhood change must be a key dimension of urban planning and policy for health equity.

Section: 1. Introduction

Neighborhood conditions have long been understood to shape health, however less is known about the health and health equity implications of neighborhood change processes like gentrification , climate adaptation, and suburbanization ( Duncan and Kawachi, 2018 ; Fagliano and Diez Roux, 2018 ; Schnake-Mahl et al., 2020 ; Swope and Hernández, 2019 ). In addition to altering the material and social contexts in which people live, neighborhood-level change involves power relations that influence the level of agency residents have over their own circumstances. Lack of agency over one's ‘destiny’ is a determinant of health , and empowerment over changes in one's neighborhood environment is an important area for further inquiry ( Whitehead et al., 2016 ).
In this paper, we introduce a novel construct, “ownership of change,” to describe one's sense of empowerment over changes in their neighborhood environment. We describe how we used Participatory Action Research (PAR) to develop, measure, and interpret this construct as part of the Healthy Neighborhoods Study (HNS), which explores the relationship between neighborhood change and community health in nine gentrifying neighborhoods across metropolitan Boston ( Arcaya et al., 2018 ).
The Boston area has experienced significant economic and population growth in recent decades, driving rapid and widespread real estate development ( Modestino et al., 2019 ). The area is one of the country's most expensive housing markets, and has an inadequate supply of affordable housing. Economic mobility in the region is declining, while income inequality is high, contributing to financial insecurity and stress among low-income residents of rapidly-developing neighborhoods ( Binet et al., 2021 ; Schuster and Ciurczak, 2018 ). The region's housing and economic pressures are disproportionately severe for residents of color due to decades of discriminatory financial and housing policies, and the city's racial wealth gap is among the widest in the nation ( Muñoz et al., 2015 ).
Community-based organizations have sounded the alarm about these development trends, and have advocated for policies that would prevent displacement and preserve affordable housing ( Robinson and Steil, 2020 ). Despite the advent of new models of consensus-based planning and collective impact that seek to empower communities in urban planning and policy-making processes, contemporary patterns of urban governance in the region undermine local democracy and perpetuate inequality ( Levine, 2021 ).
Rapid real estate development, widening social and economic inequality, and community disempowerment are all characteristic features of gentrification, a “racialized process of class change” by which low-income, historically disinvested neighborhoods experience re-investment and experience an influx of higher-income individuals and amenities ( Rucks-Ahidiana, 2021 , p. 2). Racial capitalism undergirds gentrification: how a neighborhood is racialized determines how that neighborhood is valued, and thus whether it is seen as a worthwhile investment by real estate developers, financial institutions , government agencies, and individuals seeking to profit from urban development ( Rucks-Ahidiana, 2020 , 2021 ). Dispossession and displacement are key characteristics of the experience of gentrification and central features of the urban process under racial capitalism ( Dantzler, 2021 ).
Reflecting on their own experiences of living through gentrification, residents of HNS neighborhoods serving on our PAR team (“Resident Researchers”) surfaced the importance of feeling ‘ownership of change,’ defined as “a sense of empowerment that occurs when the changes happening in your neighborhood align with the changes you think should be happening in your neighborhood.” We propose that ownership of change is a psychosocial process, and that its measurement captures the health-relevant effects of complex environmental and social exposures on individual feelings, experiences and actions. Specifically, ownership of change arises out of urban planning and development processes, which are the means by which social structures, such as racial and class hierarchies, become physically embedded in the lived environment and shape people's opportunities and life chances.
The development of ownership of change as a construct was motivated by the hypothesis, put forward by Resident Researchers, that the extent to which a person felt ownership over the cumulative changes in their neighborhood would matter for their health. A review of scholarly research into adjacent ideas, like place attachment, locus of control , and collective efficacy , further suggested 1) that ownership of change may matter for health, and 2) that no method currently exists to measure one's feelings of ownership over processes of change shaping their neighborhood environment. However, the literature does offer several useful adjacent constructs that capture various aspects of peoples' relationships to their environment, many focusing specifically on feelings of attachment, belonging, or control.
Sense of community refers to positive emotional orientation towards one's neighborhood measured across four dimensions: group membership, influence, integration and fulfillment of needs, and shared emotional connections ( McMillan and Chavis, 1986 ). Sense of community influences quality of life , well-being, social capital, and is correlated with psychological empowerment, mental health and depression ( Carpiano and Hystad, 2011 ; Gattino et al., 2013 ). Similarly, ‘sense of place’ refers to the emotional relationship between people and their environmental setting ( Low and Altman, 1992 ). Place attachment has psychological benefits including sense of belonging, positive emotion, and stronger social capital ( Scannell and Gifford, 2017 ). Gentrification affects place attachment via social and cultural displacement, introducing new amenities, and influencing sense of safety ( Fullilove, 1996 ; Tuttle, 2021 ; Versey et al., 2019 ).
Some scholars have identified and defined – but not measured – sense of ownership. For example, Kim and Kaplan (2004) defined sense of ownership in terms of feeling control over one's home or community, conceptualizing it as an element of place attachment. Similarly, Walton (2016) , (p. 232) conceptualizes “sense of ownership” in terms of “social psychological investment.” The effects of gentrification on “sense of community ownership and belonging” can alleviate alienation from place for some while exacerbating it for others ( Tuttle, 2021 ).
Empowerment refers to the “processes by which people gain greater control over their lives, participate in democratic decision-making, and develop critical awareness of their sociopolitical environments” ( Christens, 2012 , p. 114). Empowerment and control are crucial to a person's capacity to develop and adapt to changing circumstances ( Bandura, 1982 ). Three related constructs in the extant literature capture different elements of empowerment over neighborhood changes: control over destiny, collective efficacy, and community power.
Control is central to understanding how health inequalities are reproduced ( Marmot, 2004 ; Whitehead et al., 2016 ). Syme (2003) , (p. 3) defines control as: “the ability of people to deal with the forces that affect their lives.” Pathways leading from low control to poorer health include chronic stress, exposure to unhealthy living environments, behaviors like substance misuse, and endocrine and immune function. Low perceived control over one's living environment is an important element of the pathways that link low socio-economic status to poorer health ( Orton et al., 2019 ).
Two overlapping constructs capture control at the community level: collective efficacy and community power. Collective efficacy refers to a community's ability to manage members' behaviors related to social disorganization , and is associated with premature mortality , depression and asthma, and living in neighborhoods with higher collective efficacy is associated with better self-rated health ( Ahern and Galea, 2011 ; Browning and Cagney, 2002 ; Sampson et al., 1997 ). Certain features of the neighborhood environment, like parks, can foster collective efficacy, and interventions to improve collective efficacy have been shown to reduce health disparities ( Butel and Braun, 2019 ; Cohen et al., 2008 ). Community power is a construct from the field of community psychology that is closely related to collective efficacy, but focuses more explicitly on challenging structural inequities and unjust distributions of power ( Speer et al., 2020 ).
These precedents point to the importance of empowerment over one's environment as an important determinant of health and health equity. Previous research also suggests that a valid ownership of change measure would show concordance between ownership of change scores and social support , mental health, and self-rated health measures. However, the constructs described above focus on place and control separately. New measures are needed to explore how people experience control over place-based changes specifically.
Other researchers have recently developed the “perceptions about changes in environments and residents” (PACER) instrument, in part to understand how people relate to place-based changes ( Hirsch et al., 2021 ). In fact, two items on PACER overlap closely with those measured by the ownership of change instrument designed by HNS Resident Researchers in 2016: whether individuals feel like changes in their neighborhood were meant for people like them, and whether they feel like they have a say over the changes in their neighborhood. The development of PACER reflects a growing consensus that understanding resident experiences of change fills a critical gap in the literature on gentrification and health ( Hirsch et al., 2021 ; Schnake-Mahl et al., 2020 ).
Ownership of change is a novel addition to the cluster of constructs that explore person-setting relationships and feelings of control because it focuses explicitly on feelings of agency over meso-level place-based changes. Next, we report how we articulated, measured, and interpreted the ownership of change construct through a participatory process spanning 2016–2021. We report descriptive statistics from our ownership of change measure, and show construct validity based, in part, on the measure's positive associations with health. We also use qualitative data to explore how respondents' sense of ownership of change is produced. Finally, we discuss how ownership of change contributes to our understanding of neighborhoods and health; the value of a participatory approach for understanding neighborhood effects; and implications for urban planning and policy.

Section: 2. Methods

The HNS is a longitudinal, multi-site Participatory Action Research study that explores the relationship between neighborhood change and health. The nine study sites ( Fig. 1 ) are urban neighborhoods that were low-income but experiencing rising real estate development pressures when the HNS began in 2015. HNS study sites were chosen through a multi-step screening process based on built form, development context, and health outcomes ( Arcaya et al., 2018 ). Download: Download high-res image (824KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . HNS study sites in the Boston metropolitan area .
The HNS centers on a network of approximately 40 ‘Resident Researchers’ - current or recent residents of study neighborhoods who range broadly in age, languages spoken, life experiences, and history in their communities. Resident Researchers participate in all aspects of our five-phase PAR process ( Binet et al., 2019 ). First, we build partnerships with community-based organizations in each of the study neighborhoods, and work with them to recruit Resident Researchers. Second, we conduct collaborative research design workshops to set a shared research agenda, determine research questions, and develop data-gathering instruments including community surveys and semi-structured interview guides. Third, we develop sampling plans and collect data. Fourth, we analyze the data - academic team members typically carry out tasks like cleaning data and using analysis software, while Resident Researchers make key decisions and interpret results. Finally, Resident Researchers apply findings to improve health equity in their communities.
The HNS collects two types of primary data. We collect quantitative data via a community survey on a roughly annual basis. The survey employs a mix of new and validated measures to collect data across domains including demographics, household and neighborhood characteristics, health, financial security, social support , discrimination, and ownership of change. Surveys are administered by Resident Researchers following a convenience sampling strategy they design to yield responses across demographic, housing, and socio-economic strata of neighborhood residents.
We collect qualitative data via semi-structured interviews with members of a nested longitudinal cohort established in 2018. Cohort members were enrolled by Resident Researchers during the course of regular surveying, and subsequently contacted by academic staff for a combined survey and semi-structured interview. Interviews last between 45 and 90 minutes, and are conducted by academic team members at a location of the respondent's choosing, typically their home or a nearby public space like a café or library. Interview protocols delve into themes that overlap with survey domains, such as financial security and social support, as well as cross-cutting themes like sense of control and direction in life.
In 2016, HNS staff facilitated our first cycle of collaborative research design workshops with Resident Researchers. Our goal was to develop the necessary data-gathering tools and skills to investigate the issues that Resident Researchers deemed most important.
During an initial workshop, Resident Researchers discussed links between neighborhood change and health, focusing on a possible mediating role of whether the changes felt like they were “for you,” by which they meant feeling that neighborhood changes were developed with your interests in mind. Academic team members reviewed existing literature for potential existing validated measures of feelings of ownership over neighborhood change. Based on that review, Resident Researchers decided that existing measures did not fully capture their interest, and to pilot their own measure of “ownership of change.”
In subsequent workshops, Resident Researchers narrowed in on key elements of “ownership of change” and translated these elements into survey items. The resulting instrument ( Appendix 1 ) asked four questions (yes, no, I don't know). Respondents were asked whether they: 1) notice changes, 2) feel like these changes are “for them,” 3) feel like the average person in their community has a voice in these changes, and 4) are personally involved, about seven domains of neighborhood change: (1) Housing: “building new homes, apartments or condos”; (2) Commercial: “building new commercial developments like shops, cafes, offices”; (3) Public space: “building or improving public spaces like libraries, plazas or community centers”; (4) Jobs: “creating new jobs”; (5) Parks: “creating or improving public green spaces like parks, greenways or community gardens”; (6) Transportation: “developing new transportation options”; and (7) Policing: “changing policing practices and activities.” These dimensions reflect Resident Researchers' lived experience of changes underway in their neighborhoods.
In 2017, academic team members and Resident Researchers co-designed semi-structured interview guides, and prioritized asking questions about ownership of change because it was a new construct. Resident Researchers developed questions about respondents' ownership of change responses, for example “Can you say more about the type of [domain, eg. housing] changes you expect to see? How do you think they will impact your life?” They also elected to include questions probing factors that may influence a person's feelings of OOC, such as “Who or what do you think is driving these changes?” and “How have the changes affected the identity of your neighborhood?”
For our quantitative analyses, we use an analytic subsample which includes all respondents who were surveyed using the final version of the ownership of change survey section (2018–2019), and who provided complete data for the set of demographic, socio-economic, and neighborhood change variables analyzed in this paper (n = 1248). We analyze qualitative data from all members of the nested longitudinal cohort who completed interviews in the first round of outreach in 2018–19 (n = 122).
We employed a three-step process to score and explore the validity of our novel ownership of change measure, via a series of collaborative data analysis workshops in 2020. Step 1: Scoring items in OOC measure
To determine how to score respondents' feelings of ownership over specific changes measured by the instrument, academic facilitators and Resident Researchers discussed which responses should count as positive or negative sentiment. Resident Researchers decided that feeling that either (a) a change is “for you” or (b) the average person in one's community has a voice over a change counts as positive sentiment. They reasoned that some people may still feel ownership without feeling as though changes are “for them” – for example, a retired senior may still feel ownership over changes in the local job market because they feel like their community has a voice in these changes. Correspondingly, Resident Researchers agreed that negative sentiment is represented by seeing changes and reporting that they are not “for you” and that members of your community do not have a voice. Resident Researchers decided not to assign a sentiment value to personal involvement, agreeing that involvement could involve both positive and negative sentiment.
From a technical perspective, each of the seven types of change is analyzed separately and assigned a sentiment score of −1, 0, or +1. For each type of change, we first evaluate whether the person notices the change. If they respond “No” or “don't know” they are assigned a score of 0 for that change. To be assigned a positive sentiment and a score of +1, a person has to respond “Yes” to at least one of the questions about benefit and voice. To be assigned a negative sentiment and a score of −1, a person has to reply “No” to both questions. All other responses count as neutral and are assigned a score of 0. Step 2: Constructing an overall ownership of change score
Next, Resident Researchers determined how to assign respondents an overall ownership of change score. This process extended over two collaborative data analysis workshops. In the first, Resident Researchers generated ideas about how to score the measure and evaluated preliminary options developed by the academic team. Then, academic facilitators developed three scoring options. In the second workshop, Resident Researchers discussed how well each option aligned with the intent of the measure and performed with predictors, and then came to a decision.
The final score sums all positive, neutral, and negative sentiments the respondent reports towards each of the seven types of neighborhood changes included in the survey instrument. Since the value for each type of change ranges from −1 to +1, the value for the sum of all sentiments ranges from −7 to +7. The higher the score, the higher level of ownership a person feels towards neighborhood changes. A score of 0 can indicate that a person either does not notice any changes, or that the sum of negative and positive sentiments results in a balance of 0. Step 3: Estimating the relationship between the ownership of change score and health outcomes
We fit a series of multilevel models regressing self-rated health, mental health , and happiness on ownership of change net of theorized statistical confounders as a way of assessing construct validity . All models nest survey respondents within their neighborhood to account for statistical correlation between neighborhoods. For mental health, which is measured as a score on a scale of 0–100, we fit linear mixed models with a random intercept for each neighborhood. For happiness and self-rated health, which are measured on an ordinal scale, we fit hierarchical ordered logistic models with a random intercept for each neighborhood. For each outcome we fit a set of three multilevel models that evaluate the relationship between ownership of change and the outcome, while gradually adjusting for more factors.
The first set of models adjusts for age, race/ethnicity, and gender. We conceptualize our self-reported race/ethnicity measures as a proxy for the risk of experiencing of racism, and our self-reported gender measure as a proxy for the risk factor of experience gender-based structural discrimination, recognizing that racial/ethnic and gender-based marginalization both act as prior common determinants of health and ownership of change outcomes ( Bailey et al., 2017 ). Next, we add markers of residential stability and financial security to account for potential prior common causes of ownership of change and all health outcomes. To account for the potential mediation effect of social networks, we add three markers of social cohesion : relational social support, functional social support, and neighborhood belonging.
We analyzed qualitative data to understand the factors that shape feelings of ownership over neighborhood changes. Our collaborative analysis process consisted of four phases of qualitative coding accompanied by analytic memo-writing. First, academic team members index-coded transcripts ( Deterding and Waters, 2018 ).
Next, academic team members began open coding all passages of transcripts index-coded as pertaining to ownership of change, and coded until no new themes emerged. Then, we facilitated a workshop where Resident Researchers learned about, and then conducted, open coding on a subset of passages, and discussed major themes. Academic team members then developed an analytical codebook, which they used to code all interview passages index-coded for ownership of change.
The fourth and final phase was axial coding, to sharpen our understanding of the different properties and dimensions of the most important emerging themes ( Saldana, 2015 ). Resident Researchers also conducted axial coding during a workshop, and discussed how these themes helped us understand the experience of ownership of change.
The academic team used coding, memos, and notes from discussions with Resident Researchers to draft a conceptual model detailing how feelings of ownership of change emerge and the factors that influence this psychosocial process. Via journaling and discussion, Resident Researchers gave feedback to improve the model's interpretability and better portray structural factors. Academic team members incorporated this feedback, and Resident Researchers approved the revised model.

Section: 3. Results

A third of respondents identify as Black, and a quarter as Hispanic or Latino/a/x ( Table 1 ). Nearly two thirds of respondents are female. The majority of respondents are long term residents of their neighborhoods. Nearly two-thirds report being short in paying their bills in the last month. Health and well-being measures are positive for most respondents: only 22% report being in poor or fair health, and only 11% report not very happy or not at all happy. Markers of social cohesion and connectedness are high for most respondents, and the majority report being able to receive relational and functional social support in their neighborhood. Table 1 . Sample characteristics (n = 1248). Response Frequency % Age 18–24 130 10.43% 25–44 586 46.99% 45–64 384 30.79% 65+ 147 11.79% Race Black 402 32.21% White 382 30.61% Hispanic or Latino/a/x 286 22.92% Multiracial 32 2.56% More than one race* 52 4.17% Other 56 4.49% Asian/Native Pacific Islander 15 1.12% Native American 23 1.84% Gender** Female 808 64.9% Male 431 34.62% Transgender 6 0.48% Short on Income No 447 35.82% Yes 801 64.18% Years in Neighborhood Less than 1 year 36 2.88% 1–5 years 294 23.56% 5–10 years 239 19.15% More than 10 years 679 54.41% Self-Rated Health Poor 46 3.69% Fair 225 18.03% Good 437 35.02% Very good 363 29.09% Excellent 177 14.18% Happiness Not at all happy 29 2.32% Not very happy 104 8.33% Somewhat happy 534 42.79% Very happy 581 46.55% Neighborhood belonging Strongly disagree 67 5.37% Disagree 150 12.02% Agree 742 59.46% Strongly agree 289 23.16% *Note: Respondents in the "More than one race" category are respondents who selected more than one race/ethnicity on the survey but did not self-identify as multi-racial. **Note: No respondents selected "I do not identify as female, male or transgender." When the survey was intially fielded, the instrument did not explicitly invite respondents to pick more than one response to this question. We have since amended the instrument to explicitly instruct respondents that they may pick more than one gender response.
In Table 2 we present the summary of “Yes” responses by domain of change. Results show that people respond to each type of change differently, and that the share of people noticing change is always higher than the share reporting benefit, voice, or involvement. There is notable range in the extent to which respondents think different types of change are “for them.” A third of people who notice housing changes report feeling they are “for them” while two-thirds of those who notice parks changes report feeling benefit. Table 2 . Summary of “Yes” responses by type and domain of change (n = 1248). Change Domain Notice Change (%) Benefit (%) Voice (%) Involved (%) Housing 62% 21% 21% 7% Commercial 53% 30% 21% 6% Parks 45% 32% 24% 10% Jobs 40% 24% 21% 7% Public 38% 27% 21% 8% Transportation 33% 23% 17% 6% Policing 30% 21% 18% 8%
The ownership of change score ranges from −7 to +7 with positive median (1) and mean (1.72) ownership of change values ( Fig. 2 ), indicating that more respondents report positive versus negative sentiments towards neighborhood changes. Download: Download high-res image (357KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Summary statistics for ownership of change metrics (n = 1248).
In Table 3 we present three sets of mixed level models which evaluate the relationship between ownership of change and three health outcomes: mental health, happiness, and self-rated health. After accounting for age, race, and gender, all confounder adjusted models (M1) show that higher levels of ownership of change are significantly and positively associated with better mental health and higher levels of happiness and self-rated health. This association is robust when adjusting for the potential confounding of markers of residential stability and financial security (M2). In models that explore the potential mediation effect of markers of social cohesion (M3), higher levels of ownership of change maintain positive and significant association with all health outcomes, but the parameter estimates for mental health and happiness are attenuated by more than 10%. Markers of social cohesion are also positively and significantly associated with all health outcomes. While we can't rule out confounding, based on the literature and qualitative analysis we interpret markers of social cohesion as potential mediators of the relationship between ownership of change and mental health and happiness. Table 3 . Ownership of change score predicting health and wellbeing outcomes. Empty Cell Mental Health Happiness (Expressed in odds ratio) Self-Rated Health (Expressed in odds ratio) M1 M2 M3 M1 M2 M3 M1 M2 M3 Ownership of Change Score 0.73*** (0.18) 0.67*** (0.17) 0.36* (0.17) 1.139*** (0.02) 1.139*** (0.02) 1.083*** (0.03) 1.083*** (0.02) 1.073*** (0.02) 1.051* (0.02) Years in Neighborhood −0.09 (0.27) −0.24 (0.26) 0.99 (0.04) 0.961 (0.04) 0.942† (0.03) 0.932† (0.03) Short Paying Bills: Yes −6.61*** (0.85) −5.4*** (0.83) 0.458*** (0.12) 0.543*** (0.12) 0.589*** (0.11) 0.625*** (0.11) Functional social Support Score 1.54*** (0.29) 1.284*** (0.04) 1.083† (0.04) Relational Social Support Score 2.36*** (0.46) 1.363*** (0.07) 1.209* (0.06) Neighborhood belonging: Strongly Agree & Agree 4.89*** (1.07) 3.421*** (0.16) 1.336* (0.14) Notes: †p < 0.1, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
As their neighborhoods change, respondents try to make sense of the changes happening around them, assess how vulnerable they may be to their impacts, and determine their ability to influence these changes. This process is ongoing and cumulative, reflecting both past experiences and hopes for the future, and shapes how respondents come to understand their positionality within their changing neighborhoods and the ways they will perceive and interact with future developments. We report our findings beginning at the level of structural forces and moving in towards specific elements of the psychosocial process of ownership of change.
Respondents’ feelings of ownership of change are shaped by structural conditions of racial capitalism , which influence both the patterns of neighborhood change, and the individual-level characteristics, that shape the psychosocial experience of neighborhood change. Anti-Black racism is the primary pathway through which these structural factors shape the psychosocial experience of ownership of change.
Our data shows notable differences between Black and non-Black respondents in the way they conceive of racism as a force shaping neighborhood changes and their ownership over them. Black respondents spoke explicitly about how anti-Blackness has contributed to the devaluation of Black communities in the urban development process, resulting in unique vulnerabilities and feelings of exclusion for Black people that led them to feel a lack of ownership of change. One respondent explained, “[There's a] cultural dislocation of the cultural vitality and the cultural representation that [Black] venues offered … unless we really look at what does it mean to bring in new housing at a higher income rate and have people really be a part of that community and really integrate themselves in that community, then this whole new land-use practice is … going to fall apart.” Other Black respondents pointed out how historic patterns of racist disinvestment reverberated through the present with disproportionate impacts on Black residents: “I think that you want your community to be vibrant. You want it to be a good area. But why do the people have to change? Why do we have to kick Mrs. Thompson out, or Mrs. Blue out?.. They was a part of it when it wasn't the best. Why can't they be a part of it when it is the best?”
Non-Black respondents were largely silent on the role of race in the changes in their neighborhoods and the impacts thereof. Nevertheless, some Black respondents noted how anti-Black racism disadvantaged communities of color more broadly: “I don't think it's a community decision, I think with gentrification happening everywhere it's just a matter of time. Of course, people of color have no control over gentrification happening.” Racial capitalism, as it plays out at the neighborhood level via patterns of exclusion and displacement, reproduced hierarchies of empowerment and disempowerment over urban change.
The first phase of the psychosocial process of ownership of change involves noticing different types of change in one's neighborhood context. Respondents most commonly noticed housing-related changes, followed by changes in commercial spaces and public spaces like parks and libraries, and reflected on how the changes correlated with shifts in neighborhood culture, their sense of belonging, and inequalities within the neighborhood.
Neighborhood tenure and place attachment were important factors influencing the degree of change that people noticed, and their perception of the impacts of these changes. Respondents with longer tenure had a greater depth of precedent to which they could compare present change, and more avenues to learn about changes, particularly via established social networks and word of mouth. For example, one respondent spoke of one neighborhood building that “sat there for 30 years abandoned” and is only now being renovated because “you have these new people coming.”
For some respondents, certain characteristics and ways of life buffered them from noticing neighborhood change as much as others. For example, a handful of respondents reported that they tended to spend most of their time alone and/or at home. “I don't go nowhere. I stay in the house. That's what I do,” explained one respondent who reported noticing few changes. Others noted that being busy with work or childcare meant that they paid less attention to changes in their neighborhood.
The extent to which people noticed changes informed how they evaluated their degree of ownership. Greater attunement to the changes in one's neighborhood entailed more opportunities to evaluate those changes and one's agency with respect to them, and consider whether or not they were for one's benefit.
The second phase of the psychosocial process of ownership of change is evaluating the changes one notices. Respondents did so through combinations of five lenses: perception of vulnerability, information access and type, mismatch, power analysis, and response. These evaluative processes happened concurrently and to varying degrees depending on the person. Ultimately, respondents sought to understand what is at stake and how much power they have to influence neighborhood changes.
Perception of vulnerability: Perceived vulnerability to neighborhood changes influenced how respondents felt about their future in the community and thus the extent to which ownership of change was a concern. Respondents evaluated their level of vulnerability to changes by considering impacts including unaffordability of housing and basic goods, loss of social support, and cultural displacement. Perceptions of vulnerability were informed by material, social, and psychological buffers such as homeownership, expectation of leaving the neighborhood in the near-term, social support, and self-efficacy. Respondents who did not perceive themselves to have such buffers felt more vulnerable. Some recounted the frustration of wanting improvements for their neighborhood, but fearing that they will not be able to stay there long enough to benefit from them. “Of course, we want to make Boston an attractive city. But not at the cost of losing the residents that [have] been there forever.”
Information access and type: Respondents' perceived access to information about the changes underway in their neighborhood also influenced feelings of ownership, because uncertainty about the nature of the changes underway and their impacts, and feeling like development decisions were made without adequate transparency, could detract from feeling ownership. Most respondents did not feel like they had adequate access to information about neighborhood changes, particularly information from those with power over the changes. Respondents were often frustrated with how development decisions were made. For example, one explained “It's like a secret society when they have their meetings. And they exclude people.” Another said that “whenever there's a new development on the rise, there has been poor communication.” When information was shared, respondents typically perceived it as coming too late: “In most cases, we'll hear about a development after the construction has begun. And so people will freak out and say, ‘Since when did this happen?’” In the absence of adequate official information, respondents relied primarily on fellow community members for information. But when neighbors are also not in positions of power, the community's ability to access this information is often difficult.
Mismatch : Whether or not neighborhood changes were perceived to meet community needs was also an important factor shaping feelings of ownership. Many reported feeling degrees of mismatch between what they thought the changes underway would bring to their community and what their community needed and desired. This mismatch could stem from not feeling like those with power over the changes shared community members' priorities. “I'm not sure who's in charge but I definitely don't think it's somebody who has the people in mind,” said one respondent. Some respondents perceived mismatch from an intergenerational perspective, citing the historic lack of response from the city to meet the needs of previous generations in their neighborhood. One respondent described how a high level of mismatch led people to feel disillusioned about neighborhood changes: “People don't want these expensive houses being built, but it doesn't seem to matter.” When respondents mentioned changes that were in accordance with their needs, they were typically smaller in scale, such as the installation of improved street lighting.
Power Analysis : Respondents also evaluated the changes in their neighborhood from the perspective of their perceived power over them, because feelings of ownership reflected a respondent's perception of their ability to influence neighborhood changes to make them more beneficial to themself and/or their community. Some recounted past experiences of not being heard: “Because when somebody does say something, nothing happens. So everybody kind of just gives up on it, doesn't say anything.” Those who felt little individual power often disengaged with the changes. Others had more confidence in collective power. “There's power in numbers, getting people involved, getting people to come to the community meetings.” Respondents' evaluation of their power over the changes was closely connected to past experiences taking action, and correspondingly, respondents who felt greater degrees of power were more likely to attempt to act on the changes in their neighborhoods.
Response to changes : Based on how much power they felt over the changes in their neighborhood, some respondents attempted to shape the changes they saw. Their experiences doing so informed the degree of ownership they felt by affording insight into the opportunities and limitations of existing avenues for community members to have a say in development decisions. For example, one respondent described taking part in community meetings to contribute to collective power: “We have monthly community meetings, so a lot of those meetings are tailored around people's houses, new developments.” Others focused on individual-level internal responses to neighborhood change. One respondent described feeling no agency over neighborhood changes because he perceived Black people like himself to be excluded from the change-making process, and instead focusing on changing his personal circumstances. Other respondents indicated that they didn't try to respond to changes because of external pressures. “There's a multitude of reasons for lack of involvement … If there's two parents in the household and they're both working two jobs … unless [the circumstances are] really unusual, they just are not going to take the time to go participate in it,” one respondent explained. Finally, some respondents identified environmental and systemic factors inhibiting action: for example, one respondent noted how police presence at public meetings could feel intimidating and deterred people from attending and engaging.
The five processes of evaluation informed respondents' feelings of empowerment or disempowerment over neighborhood changes. Most respondents expressed degrees of disempowerment: “Whether you like it or not, if it's coming, it's coming. You can't stop it in some cases. You know what I mean? Or they say that you can stop it, but they didn't let you know that you had a voice, and when to come out -- you know what I mean?” Feeling a lack of ownership often reflected cumulative, and sometimes intergenerational, experiences. “For me, for us, because we needed it back then, and it wasn't there. But then now all of a sudden, you're saying, ‘Oh, we're building this. We're building that. Now we can put something here.’ Wait a minute. My mother and father was there 50 years ago, and they needed this and needed that.” But some respondents saw opportunities for empowerment in the changes, particularly for younger generations : “Show them the knack to be their own business owner. Pay for their schooling. Internship them. Don't just bring a business in and say, “Okay, let's make money in this community."”
Finally, we present a model of the psychosocial process of ownership of change ( Fig. 3 ). This model is based on our results and is thus specific to the context of the HNS. Beginning at the outermost level, the model indicates that racial capitalism is the predominant structural force that shapes individual experiences of ownership of change, via anti-Black racism, which affects each of the subsequent scales of this process: neighborhood changes, individual circumstances, and psychosocial experiences. At the neighborhood scale, respondents witnessed changes in all domains measured by the survey: housing, commercial, green space , public space, economic opportunities, and policing. The model then shows individual circumstances that influence the psychosocial process of ownership of change: financial security, social support, housing, health, food security , neighborhood tenure, and socioeconomic status. Resident Researchers emphasized that these circumstances are dynamic, and can change quickly. Download: Download high-res image (700KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Model of the psychosocial process of ownership of change.
Nested within and influenced by structural forces, neighborhood changes, and individual circumstances is the psychosocial process of ownership of change. As the model demonstrates, this is cyclical and cumulative. Past experiences of ownership of change shape the changes respondents notice and how they evaluate them, and one's sense of ownership of change is informed by cumulative experiences of feeling empowerment or disempowerment over neighborhood changes.

Section: 4. Discussion

In this paper, we introduce a novel latent construct, “ownership of change,” defined as a sense of empowerment that occurs when the changes happening in your neighborhood align with the changes you think should be happening in your neighborhood. In the absence of a gold standard against which to test the predictive validity of our measure, we argue that positive associations between our ownership of change measure and mental health, happiness, and self-rated health provide some evidence of criterion validity. Our analysis of HNS interview data shows that feelings of ownership of change are the product of a cumulative psychosocial process that is shaped by individual circumstances, patterns of neighborhood change, and structural factors.
Our qualitative analysis predicts racialized differences in ownership of change via anti-Black racism in particular. This key finding illustrates the value of PAR: insight about the role of anti-Black racism in shaping ownership of change came from Resident Researchers bringing their lived experience of anti-Blackness in study neighborhoods into the data analysis process. Resident Researchers also emphasized the importance of time, cumulative experience, and learning as crucial factors shaping ownership of change. They named the experience of realizing that one's hopes for what would happen were wrong or un-founded, and how that can make a person feel like ‘the whole thing was a game.’ Such experiences could lead to disillusionment with the prospect of ownership of change, they argued.
Our qualitative results also indicate potential pathways between ownership of change and health including feelings of disempowerment, low sense of control, perceptions of status and inequality, and experiences of structural racism and discrimination. Though outside the scope of this paper, building our understanding of the distribution and determinants of ownership of change and its links with health is the next priority for our collaborative data analysis team.
This manuscript makes two key contributions to neighborhoods and health equity research. First is the articulation of ownership of change as a measurable and interpretable health-relevant meso-level construct that captures an important link between perceptions of structural processes that manifest as changes in the neighborhood environment, and feelings of ownership and empowerment over those changes as they occur. Ownership of change sits at the intersection of a number of important existing constructs, such as sense of belonging and collective efficacy , but is unique for its focus on control over meso-level neighborhood environment. Ownership of change integrates considerations of power and place with an explicit focus on how structural forces manifest in physical, social, and economic changes to the meso-level living environment. Our method for measuring the construct ownership of change joins the PACER instrument, discussed above, as an important new tool for measuring experiences of gentrification-related neighborhood changes, critical to understanding the relationship between gentrification and health ( Hirsch et al., 2021 ).
Second, this manuscript describes how PAR was used to expand the ideas and measures that social epidemiologists and urban planning researchers can use to understand neighborhoods and health. The idea of ownership of change emerged and crystallized through conversations between community residents about the relationship between their neighborhoods and their wellbeing. We demonstrate how researchers can use collaborative research design processes to articulate, measure, and interpret constructs emerging from communities. Our process provides an example for other researchers seeking to center community knowledge and lived experience to better understand the impacts of neighborhood changes on community health and wellbeing.
We also note several limitations to our work. First, because we are identifying and measuring a novel latent variable, we are not able to validate our proposed ownership of change measure against a gold standard. Instead, we relied on a PAR process and the lived experience of Resident Researchers to produce content validity, tests of concurrence with theoretically-related constructs to assess criterion validity, and our team's sense that the measure exhibited face validity . Second, the decisions our team made about measuring ownership of change are specific to the geographic and temporal context of the HNS and the lived experiences of Resident Researchers. In different contexts, it may be more important to measure ownership over different domains of change. Finally, we acknowledge that the construct of ownership of change is not clearly associated with a well-defined intervention ( Schwartz et al., 2016 ). How to build ownership of change is likely to vary across contexts and require systemic change to urban planning and policy.
Identifying mechanisms linking elements of the psychosocial process of ownership of change to health is an important next step. In particular, Resident Researchers pinpointed perceptions of vulnerability and power as particularly important pathways between OOC and health to explore further. The significance of anti-Black racism as a force shaping respondents’ sense of ownership of change points to the need to better understand the types of experiences of racism and discrimination that most strongly influence ownership of change, and with what effects for health inequities. More research is also needed to understand how shifts in planning and policy influence levels of ownership of change. For example, research might examine whether certain approaches to community development are more effective at building ownership of change than others.
Ownership of change may be useful for research to understand how urban development, and gentrification specifically, impacts population health outcomes and health equity. It may also be valuable for investigation into other types of neighborhood change that people may experience, such as post-disaster recovery. In other contexts, researchers could adapt the types of changes that the instrument measures to the local context via a participatory process like ours.
Changes that happen to, rather than with, communities, may harm health and create feelings of alienation and powerlessness. To feel ownership, communities need to know how the changes they see will benefit them, and feel confident that these benefits will be real and aligned with the community's culture and priorities. This can be accomplished by enhancing participation in designing interventions and policies, supporting and enhancing community organizing infrastructure, redistributing decision-making power, fostering transparency, and enhancing access to information to ensure that community-members have the knowledge they need to feel confident in their use of collective power. Such efforts must directly address the role of anti-Black racism in shaping the historical and contemporary distribution of power over urban development, and the rewards and harms thereof.
Practitioners in the fields of urban planning, design, policy, finance , and development all have roles to play in fulfilling these objectives. So do local government institutions, and anchor institutions like hospitals, who are typically stakeholders and often play a role in neighborhood changes. Gains in community empowerment come when community organizers have ongoing interactions with housing developers, policymakers and government agencies ( Howell, 2016 ). Progress towards redistribution of power over neighborhood changes can be assessed by the extent to which community members have the means to distribute rewards and consequences, frame and define key matters of debate, and influence understandings about the changes and challenges at hand ( Speer et al., 2020 ).
Discussing our results, Resident Researchers pointed to a gap between what they perceived as broad awareness among fellow residents of the challenge of insufficient ownership of change, but limited opportunities to build ownership of change given the differences in power and resources between community residents and the institutions and structural forces guiding urban development. Addressing this gap would require building the community's voice, they suggested, and to have power, the voice needs “ears”, or to be heard, “teeth,” or enforceable consequences, and “legs,” or broad collective support. They saw the proven association between ownership of change and health as a means to convince decision-makers to invest in building ownership of change, making the case that more resident leadership of neighborhood change processes will benefit community health.

Section: 5. Conclusion

Processes of neighborhood change are an important mechanism through which health inequities are produced and can be alleviated. A key dimension of neighborhood change is the extent to which the people who call that neighborhood home have agency over the changes in their environment. In this paper, we have introduced a novel construct developed via PAR that captures feelings of empowerment and disempowerment over neighborhood-level changes. We have demonstrated that ownership of change is positively associated with health and happiness, and that feelings of ownership of change emerge through a cumulative, cyclical psychosocial process of interpreting one's agency vis-a-vis one's environment. The psychosocial process of ownership of change is shaped by racial capitalism via anti-Blackness.
Given the significance of control over one's living environment as a pathway between socio-economic inequalities and health, building ownership of change where it has been undermined or withheld stands to be a key strategy for urban health equity. The urban planning field has a complicated history of working through the challenges of building resident engagement in decisions about their neighborhoods, but the central challenge is putting people before profit. There is no silver bullet to achieve ownership of change - instead, building ownership of change will require systems-level change that redistributes resources and power.

Section: Author contribution

Andrew Binet : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Yael Nidam : Methodology, Software, Validation, Analysis, Writing – original draft, Rebecca Houston-Read : Investigation, Analysis, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Project administration, César Garcia Lopez : Investigation, Analysis, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Gabriela Zayas del Rio : Investigation, Writing – original draft, Dina Abreu : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, Carl Baty : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, Arnetta Baty : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, Josee Genty : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, Goldean Graham : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, Jeff Joseph : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, Will Justice : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, Gail Roderigues : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, David Underhill : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Analysis, Vedette Gavin : Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Mariana C. Arcaya : Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Analysis, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition

Section: Acknowledgements

We are grateful to all members of the Healthy Neighborhoods Research Consortium for their contributions to the Healthy Neighborhoods Study, and to Oktawia Wojcik and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for their generous support.
