Title: Shifting paradigms: Developmental milestones for integrated care


Abstract: Abstract

Frameworks for understanding integrated care risk underemphasizing the complexities of the development of integrated care in a local context. The objectives of this article are to (1) present a novel strategy for conceptualizing integrated care as developing through a series of milestones at the organizational level, and (2) present a typology of milestones empirically generated through the analysis of four cases of integrated community-based primary health care (ICBPHC) in Canada and New Zealand. Our paper reports on an analysis of 4 specific organizational case studies within a large dataset generated for an international multiple case study project of exemplar models of ICBPHC. Drawing on earlier analyses of 359 qualitative interviews with patients, caregivers, health care providers, managers, and policymakers, in this article we present a detailed analysis of 28 interviews with managers and leaders of local models of integrated care. We generated a detailed timeline of the development of integrated care as expressed by each participant, and synthesized themes across timelines within each case to identify specific milestone events. We then synthesized across cases to generate the broader milestone categories to which each event belongs. We generated 5 milestone categories containing 12 more specific milestone events. The milestone categories include (1) strategic relational, (2) strategic process change, (3) internal structural, (4) inter-organizational structural, and (5) external milestones. We propose a comprehensive framework of developmental milestones for integrated care. Milestones represent a compelling strategy for conceptualizing the development of integrated care. Practically, policymakers and health care leaders can support the implementation of integrated care by examining the history and context of a given model of care and identifying strategies to achieve milestones that will accelerate integrated care. Further research should document additional milestone events and advance the development of dynamic frameworks for integrated care.

Section: 1. Background

Despite longstanding attention to integrated care in research and practice ( Kodner and Spreeuwenberg, 2002 ; Leutz, 1999 ), there has been limited progress in understanding the complex interplay of influences on whether and how integrated care can be achieved in a given context ( Goodwin, 2019 ; van der Vlegel-Brouwer et al., 2020 ). Systematic reviews of the literature have generated comprehensive lists of the “elements”, or constitutive processes and structures of integrated care ( Briggs et al., 2018 ; Struckmann et al., 2018 ), but these have shed limited insight into when and how these elements can be successfully introduced. In-depth case study research has been especially important for the field of integrated care, and has described crucial facilitators or mechanisms through which integrated models of care can be implemented ( Leijten et al., 2018 ; Looman et al., 2021 ). Yet, these studies often illustrate truisms about the importance of features such as leadership and positive organizational culture ( Goodwin, 2019 ), without clearly illustrating their confluence with other considerations in the development of sustainable models of integrated care ( Ahmed et al., 2021 ; Shaw et al., 2018 ).
This challenge in understanding integrated care is at least partly a result of the differing paradigms from which research and theory on the topic are approached. Different conceptualizations of integrated care are linked to varying beliefs about science and the world that are held by researchers and other stakeholders ( Boulton et al., 2020 ). Paradigms aligned with a positivist orientation to the world are more likely to favor conceptual frameworks of integrated care where a clear, succinct set of influences are identified that can be individually managed and addressed during the process of implementing integrated care. Alternative paradigms, such as those that view human action and professional practice as emergent from the complex intersection of individual, material, and social realities, would challenge the accuracy and utility of such an approach. Aligned with the latter perspective, our approach to analyzing integrated care in this paper is intended to represent various dimensions of the complex dynamics from which integrated care emerges, and to situate integrated care in the wild : in the actual, dynamic, and often messy environments in which such models of care evolve.
When we use the phrase in the wild to describe the contexts in which integrated care emerges and evolves, we are emphasizing the observation that every model of integrated care exists in unique social, economic, financial, geographic, political, and other circumstances ( Dilley, 1999 ). These unique circumstances lead to the support or facilitation of some developments in the model of care while others are made more difficult to achieve ( Meier and Dopson, 2019 ; Shaw et al., 2018 ). Our use of the term context to denote these circumstances aligns with Meier and Dopson's (2019) definition, which clarifies that “context is a relational construct that specifies what is at any given point considered the background for understanding a phenomenon or event” (p. 3). Importantly, what exactly is considered context is not objectively determined or inherently obvious. Rather, the “background/foreground relationship is continually constructed by people, as they make sense of their experiences and the social worlds in which they engage” ( Meier and Dopson, 2019 , p. 3). The way the relationship between background and foreground is presented depends in important ways on the paradigmatic perspective of those studying the topic ( Meier and Dopson, 2019 ; Shaw et al., 2018 ), and we revisit this important point with respect to the development of integrated care in our discussion section.
In this paper, we view integrated care as being situated, dynamic, and inherently local. For the purpose of this analysis, integrated care is defined as a collection of individuals and groups (including patients, caregivers, health care providers, managers, and other stakeholders), and their organizations, working together to provide culturally appropriate care for patients that is coordinated as best as possible along informational, relational, and care management dimensions. In this definition, continuity of care is prioritized ( Haggerty et al., 2003 ), care is delivered in particular local realities ( Minkman, 2020 ), and integrated care is never deemed “complete”, but rather evolving as stakeholders enter and exit the ecosystem, and external events shape the possibilities for the model of care ( Wright and Turner, 2021 ). Furthermore, this definition is agnostic to whether these stakeholders and organizations work within a single definitive governance model, or collaborate voluntarily through relationships between individuals and organizations.
This definition is inspired by two insights arising from research on integrated care. The first comes from approaches that explicitly assess the interplay between individual actions and contextual circumstances in the implementation process. This literature suggests that whether and how integrated care is achieved in a given setting is not determined solely by macro influences (e.g., policy contexts) or by micro realities (e.g., local leadership) acting independently, but rather by the specific ways in which they interact in a dynamic process of building a particular model of care. For example, Williams and Sullivan (2009) examined a variety of efforts to implement integrated care in Wales from the perspective of the sociological debate between structure and agency ( Williams and Sullivan, 2009 ). This debate contrasts theories about the ways in which individuals develop and express free, creative action when enabled and constrained by the particular social circumstances in which they are situated ( Bourdieu, 1977 ; Giddens, 1984 ). In a similar vein, Embuldeniya et al. (2018) drew on the theory of Pierre Bourdieu to outline the interplay between contexts and mechanisms that facilitate the generation of integrated care, finding that “integration is both generated and stymied by the interplay of contexts and mechanisms” ( Embuldeniya et al., 2018 ). These and other important contributions clarify that it is essential not only to understand the influences that exist at different analytic levels, but also how they intersect in their influence on implementing integrated care ( Hughes et al., 2022 ).
The second insight that frames our understanding of integrated care arises from research that applies an explicitly organizational lens, and particularly that of organizational development. The Development Model of Integrated Care put forward by Minkman et al. (2009) is based on the observation that “there is a consensus in the literature that organizations change over time in response to important problems related to survival” ( Minkman et al., 2009 ). Emphasizing the dynamic nature of organizations, this model outlines four phases and multiple dimensions through which organizations and groups develop successful models of integrated care. Importantly, the specific structures and processes that constitute the development of a given model of integrated care are fundamentally determined by local realities.
For example, Heeringa et al. (2020) described ten distinct types of organizational structures that can be found in models of integrated care in the United States ( Heeringa et al., 2020 ). Which particular models characterize integrated care in a specific area depends on the development processes and health system contexts that shape their implementation. This is the reason why each instance of integrated care in the wild is fundamentally unique, even when sharing many common aspects with other models. We propose a novel conceptualization of integrated care based on these two insights: that the development of integrated care must be understood through the intersecting influences of forces at multiple levels of analysis, and that the organizational level offers an entryway into understanding those intersecting influences throughout the development process. In this way, we bring observations at the organizational level to the foreground of our analysis, and treat features of context at other levels of analysis as background influences that contribute to our understanding of why and how a model of integrated care develops over time.
In this study, we focus on the influence of milestones in the development of integrated care. We define a milestone as the occurrence of a salient event that is perceived by stakeholders to facilitate or disrupt efforts towards the development of integrated care. We synthesize these events at the organizational level. Organizations perform an important and specific function in society, both for those who work for them and those who consume their products or services ( Scott, 2013 ). Organizations are the sites in which broad social trends of economics and governance come to bear on the lives of individuals as they carry out organizational mandates or interact with other organizations in their daily activities ( Boltanski and Thévenot, 2006 ; Scott, 2013 ). In this way, organizations represent the intersection of trans-local social contexts and individual actions. They are the sites at which macro and meso contexts, and micro (or individual) aims meet ( Boltanski and Thévenot, 2006 ).
In the effort to implement integrated care, health care organizations thus represent the sites at which health system policy contexts and individual actions by clinicians and leaders intersect. Denis and Forest (2012) suggest that organizations represent the crucial link between the health system and patient care when considering health care reform ( Denis and Forest, 2012 ). Actors within health care organizations confront and interpret the demands of the health care environment. Substantial and continuing progress on integrated care requires the collective endeavors of groups of people working together. So, while individual actions and policy decisions are essential to efforts to implement integrated care, we choose to represent these considerations through significant milestones visible at the organizational level: events that signify important contextual and individual realities and either speed up or slow down the integration process.

Section: 2. Methods

Our paper reports on an analysis of a large dataset generated for an international multiple case study project of exemplar models of integrated community-based primary health care (ICBPHC) in Canada and New Zealand. The larger study is the Implementing Integrated Care for Older Adults with Complex Health Needs (iCOACH) study ( Wodchis et al., 2018 ), which involved 359 interviews with patients, caregivers, health care providers, managers, and policymakers across 9 models of care (3 in each of New Zealand, and the Canadian Provinces of Quebec and Ontario). Coauthors on this paper co-led the processes of collecting, organizing, and coding the qualitative data on this large project. For the purposes of this paper, we completed a visual mapping analysis of milestones at the organizational level across a subset of four included cases ( Langley, 1999 ), which we approached from a perspective of “process studies of organizing” ( Langley et al., 2013 ).
The “process studies of organizing” approach refers to a particular way of studying organizational phenomena by focusing on the active processes through which the goals of organizations are accomplished ( Langley, 1999 ; Langley et al., 2013 ; Pentland, 1999 ). Although there are different ways of understanding organizational change from various process-focused perspectives, they share an emphasis on the events and activities that represent the intersecting effects of contextual, managerial, and individual influences ( Langley et al., 2013 ). By mapping these activities and events out over time, process-focused studies of organizations help to generate theories of organizational change that are grounded in the specific activities of selected industries and environments ( Tsoukas, n.d.). In our study, we sought to generate a novel way of understanding the implementation of integrated care by identifying milestones at the organizational level, and mapping these events across a timeline representing the implementation of integrated care.
The iCOACH study was developed to generate a clear understanding of the ways in which integrated models of CBPHC are implemented in different contexts, and we refer readers to studies by Wodchis et al. (2018) , Kuluski et al. (2019) , Breton et al. (2019) , and Steele Gray et al. (2019) for further detail about the study methodology and its initial findings (the Wodchis et al., 2018 paper is part of a special issue dedicated to this large project) ( Breton et al., 2019 ; Gray et al., 2018 ; Kuluski et al., 2019 ; Wodchis et al., 2018 ). The analysis reported in this paper was completed after the entire dataset had been coded and early analyses had been completed. To generate further rich insights regarding implementation processes, the team determined a deeper analysis of a subset of cases informed by a process studies approach was needed.
We selected 4 among the 9 cases for this focused analysis with the goal of ensuring that each jurisdiction was represented (Ontario and Quebec in Canada, and New Zealand), and that varying organizational sizes and governance structures were included. In Canada, health system policy and delivery are under provincial jurisdiction, and each province has developed different delivery systems consistent with broad federal principles. All health systems in Canada are publicly funded through taxation, and integrated care has been viewed as a priority in jurisdictions across Canada for several years, including both Ontario and Quebec ( Tenbensel et al., 2017 ). New Zealand has a single publicly funded health care system, which is administered locally by District Health Boards. Although models of service delivery vary, District Health Boards are mandated to promote integration of care especially in primary and community care settings ( Tenbensel et al., 2017 ). Integrated care has been a longstanding focus of policy efforts in New Zealand as well. A more complete description of the policy environments for primary health care in each jurisdiction can be found in ( Tenbensel et al., 2017 ).
The dataset that formed the primary focus of this analysis is composed of 28 interviews with managers and other organizational leaders interpreted in the context of the authors' detailed knowledge of the broader data corpus of the iCOACH study. Interviews with managers and organizational leaders ranged in length from 45 to 90 min and focused on participants’ experiences of implementing their unique model of ICBPHC. Interviews explored topics related to the history of the organization, relationships with stakeholders, the impact of the policy environment, and the nature of the clientele served. Interviews taking place in Quebec were conducted and analyzed in French, with bilingual team members collaborating on overarching analysis. All interviews were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim. Interviewers wrote reflective memos immediately following each interview, and all transcripts were compiled into a single dataset using NVIVO 12 qualitative data management software. Details of data that formed the focus of this analysis and each included case are outlined in Table 1 . Table 1 . Details of included cases. Case Pseudonym Jurisdiction Number of Interviews with Managers and Leaders Organizational size *See Breton et al. (2017) for more details about each organization.( Breton et al., 2017 ) Geographical Catchment Clientele Served Case A Ontario (Canada) 8 Two large collaborating organizations (community care and primary health care) Large Urban Area Diverse urban-living population Case B Quebec (Canada) 12 Large network of more than 30 organizations across the continuum of care Large Urban Area Diverse urban-living population Case C New Zealand 6 Large network of more than 200 organizations across the continuum of care Medium Urban Area Entire population of the urban area Case D New Zealand 2 Small organization responsible for community-specific primary health care Rural Area Mainly Māori population
Informed by several seminal sources on process-focused organizational research ( Langley, 1999 ; Langley et al., 2013 ; Pentland, 1999 ), our analytic approach began by generating visual maps of important events in the development of the models of ICBPHC in each case. Visual mapping is a common analytic tool in process-focused studies of organizational change, and serves as an important step in the analytic process, as opposed to ultimate goal of a given analysis ( Langley, 1999 ). First, one map was made for each interview participant (n = 28), representing the different perspectives on events deemed important in the development of integrated care from each participant in each case. Fig. 1 represents a sample visual of a single interview produced during our analysis. As is typical in visual mapping studies ( Langley et al., 2013 ), we found that participants expressed different opinions and experiences of many of the events represented in our maps. As a result of the variety in participant viewpoints with respect to the sequencing and significance of various events, we chose not to synthesize the visual maps into a single unifying visual representation of events in the development of integrated care for each case. Rather, we used the visual maps as inputs into our effort to generate theory about the existence and significance of milestones of integrated care. Download: Download high-res image (983KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Sample Visual Map from a single interview in the Quebec case.
Second, we looked across the visual maps and completed two phases of synthesis. In the first phase, we grouped and named important events into a smaller group of categories. We found 12 categories of events representing specific milestones related to the implementation of integrated care. All events identified in the maps were grouped under one of these mutually exclusive categories. The second phase of synthesis produced higher level conceptual insights, while having practical utility for stakeholders intending to support the development of integrated care in different contexts. Through this second phase of synthesis, we generated 5 overarching milestone categories. These 5 milestone categories and the 12 specific events they represent constitute our primary analysis. We describe each milestone and the categories of events they represent in the results section.

Section: 3. Results

Milestones in the development of integrated care arise from a confluence of causes, including the influence of political contexts, inter-organizational relationships, individual tenacity, or a range of other possible inputs. We emphasize this point to convey a crucial definitional feature of our use of the concept: milestones arise from the intersecting influence of multiple contexts and levels of action, but represent specific, recognizable events in the development of integrated care . By building our central theoretical concept of milestones in this way, we account for the intersecting influences at different levels on the implementation of integrated care while remaining focused on specifically identifiable events at the organizational level to guide thinking and practice in the implementation process.
In the remainder of our findings section, we describe the 5 categories of milestones, present the specific events arising from our data that belong under each category, and give illustrative examples throughout (a summary is provided in Table 2 ). In the discussion section, we present a proposed framework generated through our analysis and informed by the anonymous reviews of our manuscript that outlines a comprehensive approach to identifying and supporting the achievement of developmental milestones for integrated care. Table 2 . Milestone categories, definitions, and specific events. Milestone Category and Definition Specific Events Examples Strategic relational milestones : strategic investments in building inter-personal relationships between key stakeholders who can contribute to the development of integrated care. 1. Critical meetings that lead to stronger commitments of collaboration between organizations. 1. A series of meetings to build trust between primary health care and home care organizations in Ontario (Case A). Strategic process change milestones : strategic investments to improve practice and understand performance of health care providers and other stakeholders oriented toward further developing integrated care. 2. Initiating or modifying the use of specific best practices or tools. 2. Using a comprehensive needs assessment survey with clients to identify health care needs in Quebec (OEMC; Case B). 3. Initiating the collection, sharing, and/or use of data to advance integrated care. 3. Sharing performance data with the District Health Board to document successes in community-based care (Case D). Internal structural milestones : changes in organizational structure within a focal organization that support the development of integrated care. 4. Creating new roles and/or other human resource changes that enable collaboration. 4. Adding a Geriatric Specialist nurse to the emergency department in the hospital to better coordinate care in Quebec (Case B). 5. Changes in individual or organizational leadership, or leadership structure that alter integration efforts. 5. Hiring a dynamic new leader who led integration efforts in New Zealand (Case D). Inter-organizational structural milestones : changes in the legal, operational, or leadership structures that facilitate relationships between organizations that support more integrated care. 6. The establishment of new collaborative programs. 6. The establishment of the Community Service Level Alliance in New Zealand (Case C). 7. Modifying, participating in, or creating connections between existing programs to encourage greater collaboration. 7. Formalizing connections between 4 distinct programs for integrated care in Ontario (Case A). 8. The establishment of a contract, memorandum of understanding, or other formal agreement that leads to more integrated care. 8. Establishing a contract to share the costs of a health promotion worker with a community support services organization in New Zealand (Case D). 9. Formalizing health information sharing between organizations and professions for clinical purposes. 9. Providing formal permission for home care staff to access electronic health records in primary health care (Case A). External milestones : External milestones refer to changes in the social, natural, or political environments in which a model of integrated care is situated that produce changes in the opportunity or resources available for the development of integrated care. 10. Occurrence of an external event that directly affects integration efforts. 10. An earthquake in New Zealand that demanded stronger collaboration as a response (Case C). 11. Critical meetings lobbying to secure resources for the organization to provide more integrated care. 11. Meeting to lobby senior health policymakers to ensure continued funding of the integrated care program in New Zealand (Case D). 12. New policies that directly influence integration efforts, including new funding streams. 12. Re-structuring of the governance of local models of care in Quebec (Case B).
Strategic relational milestones refer to strategic investments in building inter-personal relationships between key stakeholders whose actions contribute to the development of integrated care. Although it is widely recognized that relationships are central to successful models of integrated care ( Shaw et al., 2017 ), identifying the specific instances in which such relationships develop has not been emphasized in past work. We identified one specific type of event in our data that participants described for its considerable impact as a strategic relational milestone: 1. Critical meetings that lead to stronger commitments of collaboration between organizations.
Across our cases, many participants referred to particular meetings that were especially important for the development of their model of integrated care with various organizational partners. In Ontario , for example, participants described a series of early meetings between a large primary health care organization and a home care commissioning organization. One participant from the home care commissioning organization explained, “And so, a lot of our initial meetings we spent time just listening to primary care providers talking about their experiences working with [us] - how we're a black hole. And they are valid comments in some ways. And we've tried to put strategies and put things in place to, to help alleviate those [concerns].” (ON 15)
Although it was a challenge to hear honest critiques of their organization, the home care commissioning organization responded with meaningful changes that contributed to establishing stronger relationships between the two organizations. These relationships became the foundation for a substantial and longstanding model of integrated care. As a different participant in the same case explained, “It was all these new things that we had never done before that we started doing. And it was really relationship-based. I think that's what [the integrated care initiative] was, it was more about the relationships … Everyone always provided excellent care, but it was always done in silos …. This was, now I trust you .” (ON 05)
We have identified just one type of event classified as a strategic relational milestone; however, we anticipate that other types of events occurring in other models of care could be classified under this form of milestone. We present the broader category of strategic relational milestone as an indication of the importance of events that contribute to establishing and supporting strong inter-personal relationships between stakeholders over time.
Strategic process change milestones refer to strategic investments to improve practice and understand performance of health care providers and other stakeholders oriented toward further developing integrated care. Changes in health care processes enable the implementation of integrated care. Creating change in these practices requires examining and promoting change in the routine activities of health care providers and other stakeholders who have learned to work in particular ways over time. Drawing on a mix of research evidence, process improvement methods, and conventional wisdom, leaders in our cases expressed two distinct types of events that could be considered strategic process change milestones: 1. Initiating or modifying the use of specific best practices or tools. 2. Initiating the collection, sharing, and/or use of data to advance integrated care.
These two types of events were purposefully enacted by leaders in our cases to encourage shifts toward higher quality and more integrated care. The use of specific best practices or tools ranged from the introduction of new sources of information for patients, such as the introduction of a newly designed patient-facing website in New Zealand, to the inclusion of the LACE index ( Van Walraven et al., 2010 ) in patient records in Ontario (which helped to predict outcomes in particular patient groups). These data and tools facilitate more collaboration and enable better coordination between providers and organizations. The patient website provided more accurate information to patients about where and how to seek out services, and the LACE index was used as a communication tool between providers at different organizations to plan care more effectively for individual patients. In these ways, the best practices and tools identified in our cases facilitated the development of integrated care. The use of practice data (e.g., distribution of visits to patients with various diagnoses) to inform practice changes functioned in a highly similar manner.
Internal structural milestones refer to changes in organizational structure within a focal organization that support the development of integrated care. By focal organization we mean a single organization that is being embedded in or is building a model of integrated care. We make this clarification because changes within one organization can enhance that organization's collaboration with others in advancing integrated care. We found two types of events that could be considered internal structural milestones: 1. Creating new roles and/or other human resource changes that enable collaboration. 2. Changes in individual or organizational leadership, or leadership structure that alter integration efforts.
The two types of events listed here refer to changes in the roles or positions of people within an organization. For example, in the Ontario case, a Geriatric Emergency Nurse (GEM nurse) position was created at a hospital nearby the primary health care organization specifically to enhance collaboration with primary care and home care for older people with complex needs. Another example in the Quebec case was the creation of a new position at an emergency department to coordinate care for older adults by home care staff. Although this took place within one organization, the hospital, it had the effect of enhancing integrated care in the region.
In New Zealand, the hiring of a new organizational leader whose leadership style emphasized collaboration led to sweeping changes across one case study organization. In an interview, the new leader explained, “I think the secret of my success here, as a CEO with a team, is that I never move for myself; I move for the whole of the Māori health service provision … So, I'm prepared to be patient, to take extra time on relationships, to work so that everything I do actually reaches out and includes others in that decision, and that they benefit from that decision.” (NZ2-01)
Such changes in human resource and leadership structures within a given organization illustrate the potential salience of such milestones on the development of integrated care.
Inter-organizational structural milestones refer to changes in the legal, operational, or leadership structures that facilitate relationships between organizations that support more integrated care. This category of milestone contains the largest number of event types in our paper which may reflect the salience of such events in the evolution of integrated care. Although high functioning models of integrated care can exist without structural linkages between organizations or programs, we found in all four cases that formal structural agreements to collaborate were created to support integration. These efforts to formalize collaboration took different forms, and four types of events could be classified as inter-organizational structural milestones in our cases: 1. The establishment of new collaborative programs. 2. Modifying, participating in, or creating connections between existing programs to encourage greater collaboration. 3. The establishment of a contract, memorandum of understanding, or other formal agreement that leads to more integrated care. 4. Formalizing health information sharing between organizations and professions for clinical purposes.
Each of these events facilitated stronger collaboration between organizations, including the establishment of collaborative programs that were layered on top of one another over time. In Quebec, the provincial government mandated integrated models of care that established locally relevant collaborative programs including a streamlined entry point for home care services, a joint committee to address elder abuse, and a geriatric consultation and treatment team. These programs were each governed by inter-organizational agreements supporting the evolution of an integrated model of care. Although no large-scale policy change occurred to this degree in Ontario or New Zealand, a similar layering of newly introduced programs on top of one another occurred in our other cases as well.
Agreements that enabled sharing of health record information between organizations forms a distinct type of event in this milestone category. The organizations embedded in our cases did not use their health record systems in technically sophisticated ways ( Gray et al., 2018 ), but had taken steps to ensure that access to clinical notes was shared across collaborating organizations. In Ontario, a leader at the primary health care organization explained that this was far from perfect, but helpful regardless: “We wrote a data-sharing agreement—or a clinical information user agreement with [the home care commissioning organization] allowing them access to our EMR. So, if you're going to chart, let's try and chart in one common record versus, you know you've got [the home care record] but that doesn't talk to [the primary care record]. And they still have to, unfortunately, do the duplicate of things, because they [chart] for their own records too. But at the same time we can create a more wholesome picture with that patient in primary care.” (ON 06)
This point further illustrates that milestones in the development of integrated care can create new challenges: in this case home care coordinators had to create duplicate clinical notes in order to link information. However, the establishment of formal access to the primary care record facilitated a new degree of collaboration and constitutes an important inter-organizational structural milestone.
External milestones refer to changes in the social, natural, or political environments in which a model of integrated care is situated that produce changes in the opportunity or resources available for the development of integrated care. External milestones can include events that are unrelated to or transcend integrated care, such as an earthquake or a global pandemic, or can include events more directly related to integrated care such as changes in the context of policy or politics that have direct bearing on the strategy or structure of health care systems. These latter examples related to policy and politics might include governmental actions that influence integrated care, and events affecting key stakeholders whose resources facilitate integrated care (e.g., health insurance companies). Such third parties can play a key role, especially in jurisdictions where governments do not have direct control over the resources required to develop integrated models of care.
In our data, we identified three types of events that could be classified as external milestones. 1. Occurrence of a natural external event that directly affects integration efforts. 2. Critical meetings lobbying funders and other stakeholders to secure resources for the organization to provide more integrated care. 3. New policies that directly influence integration efforts, including new funding streams.
There was only one natural external event that figured prominently in our data, and that was the Christchurch earthquake of 2011. The earthquake in Christchurch led to the urgent restructuring of relationships between organizations in the region to meet both newly created and ongoing health needs of the community. The inter-organizational relationships that were strengthened during the crisis persisted well beyond the immediate aftermath of the earthquake supporting longer term development of integrated care. As one New Zealand participant explained, “The earthquake gave us the incentive I think to get moving because we realized we needed to work in a multidisciplinary way, in a better way than we were working.” (NZ1-01)
External events such as an earthquake are very rare, but their impact in building a foundation for collaboration and integrated care can be profound. We refer to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in our discussion section, which took place after our data were collected.
With respect to events more closely related to policy and politics, the most striking example in our data is the organizational and governance mergers in Quebec. Quebec implemented a policy-driven reorganization of the health system in 2015 that mandated the merger of most publicly funded healthcare organizations into 24 regionally integrated health care models across the province. These changes eliminated existing governance structures and many organizations found themselves under new leadership. One example was the merger of long-term care facility and several other health organizations with a hospital in a new regional integrated model of care. One participant working at the long-term care facility used pharmacy services as an example of what this new change meant, “We had a contract with a private pharmacy that did all the preparation, then the distribution [of medications]. But now … We have merged with the hospital. Everything is done in the hospital, delivered by the hospital. The implementation was difficult because, we had to revisit several processes. All of that, it was a period, uh, of … that was not easy. But now, I think we have some benefits, I think, it works better … we have better service here, than we had before.” (QC- 01)
In the Quebec case, the external milestone involved large-scale legislative change. However, in other instances the efforts of organizational leaders engaging with political representatives constituted the external milestone. For example, the newly appointed CEO of the New Zealand case described earlier in our findings engaged in a sustained campaign to advocate for her organization; through a series of high stakes meeting, she successfully secured public funds for the organization to develop a more integrated and community-oriented model of care in their region. In this way, external milestones related to policy and politics can ultimately modify the capital held by a group of stakeholders (financial, social or otherwise) to support the development of integrated care.

Section: 4. Discussion

In our analysis we have proposed a view of the development of integrated care in which a concatenation of critical milestones unfolds in ways that vary greatly depending on context. We contribute to the novel conceptualization of integrated care by situating the development processes of integrated care in the actual contexts in which such models of care develop over time. We propose the notion of milestones to describe the development of integrated models of care, and document 12 such milestones empirically through our analysis of four cases in New Zealand and Canada.
Our analysis has illustrated that the implementation of integrated care can be understood clearly through the occurrence of recognizable events at the organizational level that either accelerate or decelerate efforts to achieve integration. This approach to conceptualizing the development of integrated care encourages a shift toward theory and practice that focuses on understanding the histories in which integration initiatives take place, the local contexts that shape integration efforts, and the specific organizational events that have potential to accelerate integrated care. In this discussion section, we propose a comprehensive framework of milestones for the development of integrated care that illustrates important directions for future research, comment on the implications of this approach for theory on the implementation of integrated care and outline practical implications for health system leaders.
Our analysis enabled us to inductively generate milestone events and the categories to which they belong, directly linking the data in our case studies to the conceptual contributions presented in the findings section. We are immensely grateful to two anonymous peer reviewers of this manuscript who encouraged us to push our analysis beyond these inductively generated categories to propose a comprehensive framework for milestones in the development of integrated care that would inform future research, theory, and practice. Building on the suggestions provided by one reviewer in particular, we propose the milestones framework presented in Table 3 as a more comprehensive categorization of the milestones that can conceivably occur in the development of models of integrated care. Table 3 . A comprehensive framework for developmental milestones in integrated care. Empty Cell Structural Change Relational Change Process Change Strategic Milestones : Events pertaining to purposeful efforts to shape the context of health care into which the integrated model of care is being developed. Strategic investments to promote changes to the structure of the system in which the integrated model of care is being developed in ways that promote integrated care. Strategic investments in building inter-personal relationships between key stakeholders who can contribute to the development of integrated care. Strategic investments to improve practice and understand performance of health care providers and other stakeholders oriented toward further developing integrated care. Intra-Organizational Milestones : Events pertaining to efforts to shape organizational readiness and capability to develop integrated care. Changes in organizational structure within a focal organization that support the development of integrated care. Changes in interpersonal and professional relationships within a focal organization that support the development of integrated care. Changes in organizational processes within a focal organization that support the development of integrated care. Inter-Organizational Milestones : Events pertaining to efforts to shape the inter-organizational context implicated in the development of the model of integrated care. Changes in the legal or organizational structure of the relationship between organizations that facilitate the development of more integrated care. Changes in the interpersonal and collaborative nature of the relationships between organizations that support the development of more integrated care. Changes in the operational or delivery processes accomplished by the collaborative effort of two or more organizations that support the development of more integrated care. Empty Cell Natural Change Social Change Political Change External Milestones : Events outside of the control of stakeholders directly involved in developing and delivering integrated care that have bearing on the development of integrated care. Changes in the natural environment in which a model of integrated care is situated that produce changes in the opportunity or resources available for the development of integrated care. Changes in the social environment in which a model of integrated care is situated that produce changes in the opportunity or resources available for the development of integrated care. Changes in the political or policy environment in which a model of integrated care is situated that produce changes in the opportunity or resources available for the development of integrated care.
Table 3 advances our findings by establishing a matrix with two important developments from our inductively generated milestone categories reported earlier. First, the table proposes the existence of the first set of three milestone categories as strategic, intra-organizational, and inter-organizational, each of which are understood to have three possible manifestations: structural, relational, and process change. This observation acknowledges the possibility that milestones may occur in strategic ways beyond the immediate intra-organizational or inter-organizational contexts, and allows for structural, relational and process changes in each milestone category that align with broader literature on organizational changes in health care ( Kislov et al., 2021 ; Mayo et al., 2021 ). Second, the table proposes the addition of “social change” as an external event in addition to “natural” and “political” changes in the external milestone category. The social change category anticipates issues that might arise because of civil unrest, war, and other social developments, and serves to produce a more complete description of the category of external milestone. In sum, the matrix proposed in Table 3 offers a comprehensive framework for contemplating milestone events within each of these categories. We elaborate on what this might mean for research, practice, and theory in the next section.
Looking across the health systems included in our study, we find that milestones assume different meanings depending on the contexts in which they occur. A meeting between a CEO and a group of policymakers in New Zealand has a different effect in galvanizing energy and securing resources than would the same meeting in Ontario or Quebec, because they take place in different contextual circumstances, with different organizational demands, and between different personalities in each case. The significance and magnitude of a policy change in Quebec are also different than they would be in Ontario or New Zealand, for a similar range of reasons. This point has important implications for theory and practice of integrated care, which we outline here.
Although milestones will certainly build upon one another as an integrated model of care develops over time, there cannot be a required set nor a single order in which milestones must take place to achieve integrated care. Models of care and the local health systems of which they are a part develop according to particular histories that have followed particular logics of policy development ( Tuohy, 1999 ), leading to unique local contextual circumstances. The historical logics of each local system mean that past milestones in the development of integrated care have been idiosyncratic to local realities ( Hughes et al., 2020 , 2022 ), and have come to generate new relevant contexts that frame a focus on new milestones for integrated care. Said differently, where milestones are achieved, and sufficient time passes, those milestones become relevant contexts for contemplating investments in the effort to achieve new milestones for integrated care ( Shaw et al., 2018 ); past milestones become relevant contexts for future milestones. This point aligns with the comments made in our introduction about considering the contexts most relevant to developing integrated care in the wild , and resonate with the notion of policy layering that explain the unique nature of path dependence in the development of health systems and local models of care ( Grudniewicz et al., 2018 ).
However, the lack of a necessary order to milestone events does not mean that they cannot inform planning for more integrated care. On the contrary, contemplating the type of milestones that would most accelerate efforts to achieve integration might be a highly promising strategy. This form of strategic thinking about which milestones would have the biggest impact and are most feasible likely represents one of the greatest skills in achieving the development of integrated care.
An additional point to note is that external milestones cannot be predicted or controlled. Local leaders simply need to account for and respond to such changes based on the strategic directions that might best contribute to the development of more integrated models of care. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic created an opportunity for some providers to collaborate in ways they never had before, producing integrated care where it had not existed prior ( Vrijhoef and Linden, 2020 ). Such examples illustrate the importance of responsive leadership and resilient health systems as foundations for the ability to invest in achieving milestones of integrated care in response to political and environmental events.
We have defined milestones as events that can either accelerate or decelerate efforts toward achieving integrated care. However, we have not emphasized any examples of milestones that decelerate the achievement of integrated care in our paper. It is important to include the possibility that salient events have a negative effect on the implementation of integrated care because this is highly plausible in actual health system contexts ( Denis and Forest, 2012 ). It is likely that our approach to case selection in our large international study systematically excluded milestones with negative effects on integrated care, as our cases were selected as exemplars of integrated care.
Our approach offers a new framework for conceptualizing the work required to promote action on bringing about events that help to achieve integrated care. Stakeholders invested in implementing integrated care are encouraged to look across the six milestone categories and gauge which type of milestone events have already taken place locally, and which require further investment in the future. Although this approach resonates with the Development Model of Integrated Care ( Minkman et al., 2009 ), it also has important distinctions. The milestones approach does not imply a single specific implementation pathway, but rather the encouragement of strategic events that have the greatest potential to contribute to integrated care given the specificities of the local history and context. Furthermore, the milestones approach is different from models outlining various influences or levels of integration, such as the Rainbow Model of Integrated Care ( Valentijn, 2016 ), and instead focuses on the actual work of leaders, clinicians, patients and other stakeholders that support or enact integrated care in practice. In this way, our approach resonates with the Context and Capabilities for Integrated Care Framework ( Evans et al., 2016 ), which is explicitly focused on the organizational activities that lead to more integrated care.
Theoretically, our analysis has been built on a foundation of social science that points to additional avenues for development from different perspectives in social theory. For example, how might an analysis of stakeholder power dynamics shape which milestones come to fruition and which do not? How might alternative views about the influences on human action lead to enriched understandings of milestones? We suggest that further research exploring the implications of different social theories for the achievement of integrated care would both enhance the milestones approach and accelerate the field of integrated care.

Section: 5. Conclusion

The field of integrated care research and practice has made important advances, but further developments in the theory of integrated care will lead to more robust analyses and clearer practical guidance. We have presented an alternative strategy for conceptualizing the implementation of integrated care as occurring through a series of milestones at the organizational level. These milestones represent the confluence of different levels of analysis, and refer to distinct, recognizable events that accelerate or decelerate the achievement of integrated care. We encourage researchers and practitioners in the field of integrated care to invest in the development of theory that offers new conceptual resources for integrated care, and present our approach to the milestones of integrated care as one contribution toward this goal.

Section: Author credit statement

James Shaw contributed to data collection, led the data analysis, writing, and approving of the manuscript. Jennifer Gutberg contributed to data collection, data analysis, writing, and approving of the manuscript. Paul Wankah contributed to data collection, data analysis, writing, and approving of the manuscript. Mudi Kadu contributed to data collection, data analysis, writing, and approving of the manuscript. Carolyn Steele Gray contributed to data collection, data analysis, writing, and approving of the manuscript. Ann McKillop contributed to data collection, data analysis, writing, and approving of the manuscript. G. Ross Baker contributed to data collection, data analysis, writing, and approving of the manuscript. Mylaine Breton contributed to data collection, data analysis, writing, and approving of the manuscript. Walter P Wodchis contributed to data collection, data analysis, writing, and approving of the manuscript.

Section: Acknowledgements

This study is supported by grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (Funding Reference Number TTF-128263 ) and from the New Zealand Health Research Council . The views expressed in this paper are the views of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the funders.
