Title: Mixed claims in Health Technology Assessment: The case of Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing


Abstract: Abstract

Health Technology Assessment (HTA) uses explicit methods to determine the value of a health technology. This typically results in several claims regarding the effects that are expected to follow from the use of a health technology in a particular context. These claims seem to capture conclusions based solely on facts, but they often combine empirical information with normative presuppositions. Claims that have this character reflect (implicit) value judgments and have been labelled mixed claims. Not recognizing these normative components of such claims risks value inattention and value imposition , presenting results as self-evident and not in need of any moral justification. As proposed by Anna Alexandrova, to avoid these risks of value inattention and imposition we need rules to deal with mixed claims. According to her, when producing and evaluating mixed claims we need to unearth the invoked value presuppositions and check whether these presuppositions are invariant to disagreements. By applying these rules, the robustness of mixed claims can be checked: it can be evaluated whether their truth value is independent from the way in which their components, involving normative presuppositions, are conceptualized. This paper aims to illustrate the role of mixed claims in HTA , and expand upon the work by Alexandrova, by analyzing claims and recommendations presented in an HTA report on the introduction of Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) in The Netherlands. Our results show that the report contains mixed claims, and that a normative analysis of these claims can help to clarify the normativity of HTA and evaluate the robustness of claims on alleged effects of a health technology.

Section: 1. Introduction

According to a widely held view, scientists, when informing policy, should refrain from making value judgments ( Douglas, 2009 ). Although, on this account, values admittedly play a role in policy making, scientific research itself is regarded as value-neutral. In the present paper, this view will be challenged. In particular, it will aim to show that in a specific type of policy analysis, Health Technology Assessment (HTA), value judgments cannot be avoided. HTA is a specific type of policy analysis, aimed at clarifying, through empirical inquiry, the value of health technologies ( O'Rourke et al., 2020 ). Typically, it is conducted in the context of public policy making, providing guidance as to how public resources are to be used in funding health services. Because of its functioning in value declaration and in public policy making, the role of values is of specific importance to HTA. In the current practice of HTA, two features stand out: [1] the distinction between assessment on the one hand, and appraisal on the other, and [2] the distinction between ethical, legal and social issues (‘ELSI’) on the one hand, and safety, clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness on the other hand. ‘Assessment’ is held to be the value-neutral collection of facts about a health technology; ‘appraisal’ refers to the value-laden process of reaching decisions (e.g., reimbursement) on the basis of those facts. The separate inquiry into ‘ELSI’ suggests that the other aspects (safety etc.) can be insulated from these value issues ( Ducey et al., 2017 ; Hofmann et al., 2018 ; Legault et al., 2018 ). Both features may be considered as attempts to prevent values from unduly biasing the evidential basis for policy making.
The question is, however, whether the passionately sought separation of facts from values can be obtained in the first place. And, if not, whether we are not making things worse, and would be better advised to squarely face the unavoidable entanglement between facts and values without sacrificing scientific rigor. The present paper explores whether the concept of mixed claims, as developed by Alexandrova (2016) , can be used for this purpose.
This paper aims to investigate the role of mixed claims in HTA and apply the methodology presented by Alexandrova (2016) to deal with these claims. We use the introduction of Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) in the Netherlands as a case study . Our findings will be discussed in terms of whether the methodology of mixed claims provides a means to get a firmer grip on the role of values in HTA, without sacrificing scientific rigor and introducing undue bias.
In the following, we will present a more detailed account of the concept of mixed claims and explain how it may play a role in the context of HTA.
According to Lucivero (2016) , the general structure of claims that are being produced and evaluated in the context of HTA is as follows: Technology → [ Conditions ] Effect
They relate the introduction or use of a technology, given certain conditions, to alleged effects. For example, a claim that a new antihypertensive drug (‘Technology’), prescribed for people with high blood pressure (‘Conditions’), will lead to a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease (‘Effect’). Such claims can be made by either developers of a health technology, professionals who wish to use a health technology, or other stakeholders having certain expectations. A central task for HTA is to assess the plausibility of such claims. How these components (Technology, Conditions, Effect) are defined will determine what sort of evidence needs to be collected (as part of the assessment to substantiate, or challenge, such claims).
The reason why the work by Alexandrova on mixed claims ( Alexandrova, 2016 ) is interesting to HTA, and to health policy analysis generally, is that she has demonstrated that components of a causal claim can be defined in a way that involves value judgments, potentially affecting conclusions on the causal relation itself. In fact, she has shown that examining causal claims may involve value judgments in two ways: (i) a researcher may adopt a given effect measure because it is held to more adequately reflect a certain quality (e.g. health) than other measures; (ii) and a researcher may adopt a particular methodology for measuring an effect that implies a normative commitment to the validity of certain conceptualizations of that effect. For example, when analyzing the effectiveness of an antihypertensive drug its effect can be defined and measured in terms of lowering blood pressure, reducing the risk at cardiovascular disease and co-morbidities, or in terms of the impact on quality of life . A choice between these measures already suggests a judgment on the relative importance of certain outcomes. But some of these measures, like quality of life , demand additional decisions, in terms of how to apply them, which imply a normative commitment to what constitutes a desirable outcome. Therefore, when examining claims on the effectiveness of antihypertensive drugs, empirical inquiry and normative presuppositions become entangled resulting in mixed claims.
Hence, values may become entangled with empirical information in a complex way when claims concerning the effects of a health technology are being produced or critically examined. This means that claims that appear to capture conclusions based solely on facts actually partly depend on value judgments. Not recognizing this may lead policy makers and the general public to assume, wrongly, neutrality of the claims at stake. Instead of trying to prevent values from influencing the evidential basis for policy making, we should acknowledge this entanglement between facts and values. By this, we can avoid the risk of value imposition , importing substantive moral views into science, by controlling the risk of value inattention , failing to notice the value judgments involved in science and presenting results as self-evident ( Alexandrova, 2016 ).
This paper aims to explore in more detail what such entanglement between value judgments and empirical inquiry looks like, by applying the concept of mixed claims and the methodology proposed by Alexandrova (2016) to an HTA conducted on NIPT.
Alexandrova proposed the following steps to deal with mixed claims: (i) unearth value presuppositions in methods and measures; (ii) check whether these presuppositions are invariant to disagreements; (iii) in case of disagreements, consult relevant parties ( Alexandrova, 2016 ). A claim can be regarded robust when it stands up to a range of different ways of conceptualizing its components. Thus, a claim that states that a specific health technology is safe, under particular conditions, is robust when its truth value is independent from the way in which safety is conceptualized. If it is not robust, the particular choice of how to conceptualize such an element (e.g. safety) should be discussed in a deliberative setting involving stakeholders.
We explored the use of the first two steps proposed by Alexandrova, using an HTA report on the introduction of NIPT in the Netherlands. NIPT is a prenatal screening procedure that analyzes cell-free fetal DNA, circulating in the mother's blood, to obtain information about the fetal genotype ( Hui and Bianchi, 2017 ). Its introduction raised a broad range of questions beyond clinical effectiveness, including societal and ethical implications ( Kibel and Vanstone, 2017 ). Assessing its potential added value raises questions on how to define its effects because these are not reducible to health-related outcomes and requires an evaluation of normative concepts such as reproductive autonomy ( Kessels et al., 2019 ; Stapleton et al., 2019 ). Consequently, it is to be expected that an assessment of this technology invokes value judgments, making it a suitable case to investigate how mixed claims may play a role in HTA.

Section: 2. Methods

We have used a case study approach to obtain an in-depth understanding of mixed claims in HTA . First, we selected an HTA report on NIPT in the Netherlands as an instrumental case to gain a broader understanding of the issue of mixed claims in HTA (section 2.1 ). In order to identify mixed claims, we collected causal claims from this report and analyzed them in terms of how alleged effects of NIPT were conceptualized (section 2.2 ). The robustness of these identified mixed claims was then evaluated by discussing different ways of conceptualizing and operationalizing these effects (section 2.3 ).
Until recently, prenatal screening for trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), 18 (Edwards syndrome), and 21 (Down syndrome) consisted of a combined test (i.e. a first trimester screening test based on blood serum markers and an ultrasound scan) and, after a positive test result, a choice between two invasive tests, amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling, to confirm diagnosis ( Hui and Bianchi, 2017 ). Since 2011, this practice of prenatal screening has changed due to the introduction of NIPT. Because only a blood sample of the mother is needed, it is a non-invasive procedure that does not pose any risks of procedure-related miscarriage. In addition, it can be performed early during pregnancy (around the 10th week of pregnancy), it might have an even higher reliability than existing tests, and could potentially be used to analyze the fetal genome which provides the option of detecting conditions for which as yet no screening protocol exists ( Hui and Bianchi, 2017 ). In The Netherlands, the current use of NIPT targets screening for trisomy 13 , 18, 21 ( van der Meij et al., 2019 ). After a positive test result, parents are offered the choice to take an invasive test to confirm diagnosis.
A task of The Health Council of the Netherlands is to advice the Ministry of Health on population screening programs. In 2013, the Health Council was asked to produce a report exploring potential future uses of NIPT. The goal was to provide recommendations with respect to future uses of NIPT and to explore whether the current evaluative framework suffices to provide guidance on novel screening technologies such as NIPT. The report analyzes safety, reliability, and social and ethical implications of NIPT, in an attempt to determine whether NIPT could contribute to improved prenatal screening by providing respective parents with ‘meaningful reproductive choices’ ( Health Council of the Netherlands, 2013 ). The report concluded that NIPT could indeed lead to improved reproductive choices, but also raises questions concerning the appropriateness of the current evaluative framework.
This report was used to analyze the role of mixed claims in assessing NIPT. It qualifies as an HTA report according to the typology of the International Network of Agencies for HTA (INAHTA), and is included in the international HTA database coordinated by INAHTA ( https://database.inahta.org/article/15018 ).
To assess whether the Health Council report on NIPT contains mixed claims, the following steps were taken: (i) The first author (BB) performed a mapping exercise, identifying causal and correlational claims in the report that relate the introduction and use of NIPT, under certain conditions, to a certain effect (e.g. ‘The use of NIPT will lead to less false-negative test results for trisomy 21’): N I P T → [ Conditions of use ] E f f e c t
As a first step, such causal and correlational claims were identified on the basis of the report's recommendations. Next, the full report was searched for definitions of their components ( NIPT , conditions of use , effect ), and for the arguments and evidence presented in evaluating the claim. Face validity of the results of this analysis was independently checked by a second author (GJvdW). (ii) To assess whether these identified claims represent ‘ mixed claims’, two authors (BB, GJvdW) independently analyzed every claim by answering the following question: ' Does the conceptualization of the alleged effect of NIPT presuppose a value judgment about its nature? '
According to the definition given by Alexandrova (2016) , all components of a causal claim (e.g. NIPT, Conditions, Effect ), may presuppose value judgments and, therefore, make the claim mixed . Given that NIPT is a prenatal strategy that can be implemented and used in many ways ( Vanstone, 2015 ), examining claims on alleged effects requires assumptions on the presumed implementation and use of NIPT. These assumptions may presuppose value judgments on the desirability of particular uses of NIPT. Although this may be interesting to analyze with respect to identifying mixed claims, we have chosen to restrict our analysis to the conceptualization of alleged effects. The Health Council of The Netherlands did not explicitly assess different ways of using NIPT, besides a broader (i.e. genome-wide testing) use of NIPT, because its use is constrained by the Dutch Population Screening Act. Therefore, many decisions concerning its presumed use were already made when the report was commissioned.
Although ‘values’ may be conceptualized differently, also in the context of health policy ( Giacomini et al., 2001 ; Shams et al., 2016 ), a common denominator is that it concerns ideas about what is right and wrong, and what situations in life we should aim to realize or avoid. A value judgment, then, is a judgment on whether a particular situation (or act, or event) satisfies these ideas (i.e. a judgment about what is good) ( Hofmann et al., 2014 ). A value judgment does not have to explicitly declare that we ‘ought’ to support a certain situation. For example, the statement ‘clean needle programs reduce the incidence of AIDS’ implies an evaluation and a prescription without declaring that we ought to support clean needle programs ( Giacomini et al., 2001 ). (iii) The results were discussed by these two authors (BB, GJvdW) to arrive at a consensus on the interpretation of the claims and which claims truly represent mixed claims.
To unearth the value judgments invoked by the identified mixed claims, all authors independently analyzed these claims. For every mixed claim, an author was asked to identify and explicate the values invoked by its conceptualization of an alleged effect of NIPT. This required them to provide different ways in which a particular effect could be conceptualized, the consequences of such a conceptualization in terms of how the effect may be observed and measured (operationalized), and whether these conceptualizations invoke different values and/or different conceptualizations of these values. For example, a claim that relates the use of NIPT to enhanced safety invokes the value of avoiding harm to people (i.e. the ethical norm of non-maleficence), which may be defined in different ways. Every author listed their identification of invoked values and alternative conceptualizations of these values.
To analyze the robustness of the identified mixed claims, the invoked values and their conceptualizations, as listed by the authors, were discussed in a joint meeting. During this meeting, we identified the values, and their conceptualizations, that could be recognized by all authors. Based on that, we evaluated whether alternative conceptualizations of these values would lead to different ways of conceptualizing and operationalizing alleged effects of NIPT, and whether that may lead to different conclusions concerning the plausibility of NIPT realizing that effect.

Section: 3. Results

The report on NIPT presents four recommendations for introducing NIPT in the Netherlands (see Table 1 ). Table 1 . Recommendations and claims in the Health Council of the Netherlands report on NIPT ( Health Council of the Netherlands, 2013 ), components of the claims, and our assignment of their status as mixed claim. Recommendation Claim Components Mixed claim (1) “NIPT as an early, completely safe and direct diagnostic test is not currently a feasible option. A realistic scenario is NIPT as the first follow-up test after a combined test indicating an elevated risk of trisomy. In time, NIPT may prove an alternative to the combined test. Although screening with NIPT can currently be considered, at most, safer and more reliable than the current approach, the Committee believes this suffices for consideration of NIPT in the screening programme. It particularly means that disadvantages of the screening for participants decrease, increasing the appeal of the advantages of participation (the intended reproductive choice) for a larger group. Removing impediments can lead to improved achievement of the screening goals. The Committee does feel that implementation studies should explicitly examine the potential disadvantages, such as the fact that NIPT sometimes fails.” (1) NIPT → [ second tier test ] safety Second tier test = NIPT as the first follow-up test after a combined test indicating an elevated risk of trisomy (13, 18, 21). Safety = safer outcomes = avoidance of invasive prenatal test procedures and procedure-related miscarriages. Yes (2) NIPT → [ second tier test ] more reliable test results Second tier test = NIPT as the first follow-up test after a combined test indicating an elevated risk of trisomy (13, 18, 21). More reliable test results = higher predictive value for the fetus having trisomy 21 than the existing prenatal screening procedure. Yes (3) NIPT → [ second tier test ] higher uptake Second tier test = NIPT as the first follow-up test after a combined test indicating an elevated risk of trisomy (13, 18, 21). Higher uptake = increased appeal of participation = less barriers to participation. No (2) “To date, the worries discussed in the literature on NIPT are primarily concerned with the possibility of routinization as a downside to an improved screening procedure. This may come at the cost of careful decision making and makes screening options vulnerable to the criticism that what is labelled reproductive autonomy is in fact nothing more than preventing the birth of children with conditions and handicaps that are costly for society. The Committee does not consider this a valid reason to reject improvement of current screening processes with NIPT. However, it does mean the development of daily practice must be carefully examined within the context of screening objectives. And that providing careful information and counseling will be no less important as screening tests become simpler, more reliable and safer.” (4) NIPT → [ secon d / first − tier test ] routinization Second/first-tier test = NIPT as second tier test (the first follow-up test after a combined test indicating an elevated risk of trisomy 13, 18, 21), or as a first-tier screening test. Routinization = the risk that the choice of taking the NIPT test will be presented as self-evident, which could potentially lead to situations in which parents do not sufficiently realize the disadvantages and consequences of taking this test. Yes (3) “An unavoidable question for the future is what the scope of screening tests should ultimately be, who should make the decisions, and based on what criteria. The Committee notes that assuming the goal of ‘providing meaningful reproductive choices’ is best served by screening that is as broad as possible, is too simplistic.” (5) NIPT → [ broad scope ] meaningful reproductive choices Broad scope = a screening test that is as broad as possible, given technological and economical possibilities. Meaningful reproductive choices = choices that concerns (severe) health problems (of the fetus), is informed (respects the autonomy of the parents), and proportional (respects the anticipatory autonomy rights of the child). Yes (4) “The Committee expects that the developments outlined in this monitoring report will have a major impact on the daily practice of prenatal screening in the coming decade. There is a strong need for steering focused on a responsible and timely transition to prenatal personalized medicine. How future proof the current normative framework is, as well as the role of the WBO in this area, must also be examined critically.” (6) NIPT → [ broad scope ] prenatal personalized medicine Broad scope = a screening test that includes mapping gene expression patterns and genetic variations that predict pregnancy complications and fetal developmental disorders, as well as findings that can lead to medical treatment for the fetus. Prenatal personalized medicine = offering prevention and treatment interventions, based on genetic information, to treat conditions of the fetus. Yes
Based on these recommendations, six causal claims are distilled from the report ( Table 1 ). For these six claims it was examined whether they can be regarded as a mixed claim, by determining whether the conceptualization of the alleged effect of NIPT invokes value judgments.
The potential effects that the Health Council evaluated included the impact of NIPT on the safety, reliability and uptake of prenatal screening; routinization, meaningful reproductive choices; and prenatal personalized medicine ( Table 1 ). The way in which these effects were conceptualized ( Table 1 ), as well as their operationalization and arguments and evidence presented to assess them (see Table A1 , Appendix 1 ), were analyzed to determine whether they invoked value judgments and can, therefore, be classified as being part of mixed claims.
Safety was evaluated with respect to avoidance of procedure-related miscarriages ( Table 1 , Appendix 1 ; claim #1). Because NIPT is a non-invasive test its main contribution to safety would be to avoid using invasive tests and their associated risk of miscarriage. In addition, the Health Council also considered avoidance of unnecessary worries concerning the health of the child, due to false positive test results, as part of the impact of NIPT on safety ( Appendix 1 ). Other possible influences on psychological well-being, such as decisional regret, societal pressure to take the test, and distress related to difficult decisions that need to be made as a consequence of test results, were not taken into account in the evaluation of safety. These consequences relate to alternative ways of defining ‘safety’ that involve value judgments on its scope and nature.
Reliability of NIPT was evaluated in terms of its predictive value for the fetus having trisomy 21 ( Table 1 , Appendix 1 ; claim #2). Although the Dutch Population Screening Act permits screening for severe conditions with no existing treatment or prevention options, and screening for Down's syndrome is already current practice in the Netherlands, it still requires value judgments to determine whether Down's syndrome is severe enough to offer information and facilitate parents in making decisions about continuing a pregnancy with this condition. Moreover, it is not a neutral exercise to define what constitutes an accurate and reliable test. Acceptable thresholds of different components of test accuracy and reliability (e.g. sensitivity, specificity) invoke value judgments concerning the (un)desirability of certain outcomes, the acceptance of uncertainty, and the severity of conditions being tested for.
Higher uptake was evaluated with respect to whether introducing NIPT would lead to more parents willing to participate in prenatal screening ( Table 1 , Appendix 1 ; claim #3). Although the desirability of a higher uptake of prenatal screening tests is a normative issue, defining higher uptake itself seems straightforward, not involving any particular value judgments.
Another examined claim was the alleged relation between introducing NIPT and routinization ( Table 1 , Appendix 1 ; claim #4). According to the Health Council, routinization refers to a specific threat to careful decision making: the risk that the choice of taking NIPT will be presented as self-evident, potentially leading to situations in which parents insufficiently realize the consequences of taking the test. Therefore, the assessment of claims on the relation between NIPT and routinization implies value judgments on what constitutes careful decision making to identify potential barriers introduced and denoted by ‘routinization’, making this another example of an effect that invokes value judgments in its conceptualization.
A central claim in the report on NIPT is the relation between offering this test and providing meaningful reproductive choices ( Table 1 , Appendix 1 ; claim #5). A meaningful reproductive choice is defined by the Health Council as a choice that concerns severe health problems (of the fetus), is made in an informed way (respecting autonomy of the parents), and proportional – meaning that it respects the anticipatory autonomy rights of the child. The report concludes that offering NIPT with a broad scope, providing genome wide information, does not necessarily serve the goal of supporting meaningful reproductive choices. This conclusion is based on concerns related to the requirements of informed choice, and that offering information on late-onset disease may not necessarily be in the interest of the fetus. This implies value judgments on which sorts of conditions are sufficiently severe enough to neglect the rights of the fetus to make its own decisions. In addition, determining the scope of meaningful reproductive choices also invokes value judgments.
Finally, we examined the claim that NIPT could be used to enable prenatal personalized medicine ( Table 1 , Appendix 1 ; claim #6). According to the Health Council, this means that NIPT does not only offer information to make decisions on the continuation of pregnancy but also on conditions that could be treated during pregnancy and birth (e.g. fetal developmental disorders). These decisions on prenatal prevention and therapy would align with a second objective of prenatal screening: ensuring a healthy outcome of pregnancy for mother and child. This could be conflicting with the first objective of prenatal screening (facilitating reproductive choice) when taking a test would be necessary to enable treatment of the fetus. The Health Council concludes that this raises questions on the adequacy of the current normative framework , which is based on an ethics of non-directive reproductive counseling. Although it is plausible that the development of prenatal personalized medicine would lead to potential conflicts between facilitating reproductive choice and ensuring a healthy outcome for the child, it could be argued that prenatal screening already leads to such conflicts. For example, does information on trisomy 21 not already allow the adoption of preventive measures (e.g. adapting the environment in which the child will be born) that could enhance the future health of the child? Therefore, the conceptualization of prenatal personalized medicine as a development that would lead to future conflicts is based on value judgments related to the scope of parental autonomy in relation to the rights of the future child. This makes it another example of a mixed claim.
The results of the identification of the values invoked by the identified mixed claims, and alternative conceptualizations of these values, are summarized in Table 2 . The results of the discussion on whether these alternative conceptualizations influence the robustness of these claims, leading to different conclusions concerning the plausibility of NIPT realizing these effects, are described below. Table 2 . Results of the identification and evaluation of the values invoked by the identified mixed claims in the NIPT report ( Health Council of the Netherlands, 2013 ). Mixed claim Invoked values Alternative conceptualizations (1) NIPT → [ second tier test ] safety Non-maleficence Non-maleficence: avoid harm done by taking the test; avoid harm done by decisions made during pregnancy; avoid premature death of a viable fetus; avoid harm done to users and non-users of the test . (2) NIPT → [ second tier test ] more reliable test results Autonomy, Non-maleficence Autonomy: respect the autonomy of prospective parents by offering them reliable information about the health of their fetus ; respect the autonomy of prospective parents by offering them all relevant information concerning the reliability of a prenatal test; respect the autonomy of prospective parents by facilitating informed decisions during pregnancy that do not clearly neglect or abuse the rights of the fetus . Non-maleficence: avoid unnecessary worries about the health of the fetus; avoid premature death of a viable fetus . (3) NIPT → [ second / first − tier test ] routinization Autonomy, Non-maleficence Autonomy: respect the autonomy of prospective parents by offering prenatal tests in such a way that they are informed about the consequences of taking a test and able to make their own decisions; respect the autonomy of prospective parents by offering prenatal tests in such a way that they are able to make a decision that is in their own interest . Non-maleficence: avoid the risk that the choice of taking the NIPT test will be presented as self-evident, which could potentially lead to parents insufficiently realizing the consequences of the test and a violation of disability rights . (4) NIPT → [ broad scope ] meaningful reproductive choices Autonomy Autonomy: respect the autonomy of prospective parents by offering prenatal tests that provide parents with the most reliable information about the future health of their fetus and help them making decisions during pregnancy and childhood that promote a desirable future for the fetus . (5) NIPT → [ broad scope ] prenatal personalized medicine Autonomy, Beneficence Autonomy: respect the autonomy of prospective parents by allowing them to make decisions during pregnancy that do not jeopardize the viability of the fetus; respect the autonomy of prospective parents by allowing them to make decisions during pregnancy that do not jeopardize the wellbeing of the fetus Beneficence: you should promote the wellbeing of persons who have been entrusted to your care by acting in a way that ensures the highest possibility of a healthy outcome of pregnancy for mother and child; you should promote the wellbeing of persons who have been entrusted to your care by acting in a way that ensures a minimal quality of life of the fetus .
The results show that safety ( Table 2 , claim #1) was conceptualized by the Health Council primarily in terms of avoidance of procedure-related miscarriages and unnecessary worries due to false positive test results. It could, however, be argued that other possible consequences of taking a prenatal test should be taken into account when considering its safety. For instance, potentially harmful effects on the fetus, on people declining the use of such a test despite societal pressure, and changing societal views related to people still being born with conditions that are screened, could be taken into account. Such considerations regarding the safety of a prenatal test may be held to relate to the value of non-maleficence, to avoid harm being done. Depending on how this is conceptualized, whose safety should be considered and which negative impacts are important, other aspects of using NIPT become relevant to take into account when assessing its safety. Depending on the outcome of such an assessment, this may also influence conclusions regarding the safety of NIPT (that is, the causal relation between the technology and the outcome).
The evaluation of the relation between introducing NIPT and the reliability of prenatal testing, routinization, facilitating meaningful reproductive choices, and the development of prenatal personalized medicine ( Table 2 , claims #2,3,4,5) all appear to invoke the value of autonomy. The relevance of these effects of NIPT is determined by the goal of enhancing parental autonomy, which is realized, according to the Health Council, by enabling parents to make well-informed decisions concerning severe health problems of the fetus and respecting the child's autonomy. However, the concept of autonomy can be understood in different ways. Does it refer only to decision-making capacity or also to be able to realize decisions? Is it realized by increasing knowledge or by encouraging self-reflection on how NIPT could help in realizing life goals of prospective parents ( Kater-Kuipers et al., 2020 )? Consequently, depending on the underlying concept of autonomy, providing information to prospective parents (by offering them NIPT) may not be sufficient nor necessary. In addition, values such as non-maleficence and beneficence are important with respect to determining which choices and information should be offered to prospective parents. Depending on the conceptualization of these values, and their relations, other aspects should be taken into account when examining alleged effects of NIPT. This could influence conclusions regarding the plausibility that NIPT leads to routinization and/or meaningful reproductive choices. They also could influence conclusions regarding the relation between NIPT and prenatal personalized medicine, given that it relates to defining the scope of parental autonomy with respect to the autonomy of the child. Claims on the reliability of NIPT could be influenced because the underlying value conceptualizations determine ideas on which conditions should be screened by using NIPT.

Section: 4. Discussion

Our results show that some of the claims examined in the HTA report on NIPT, produced by the Health Council of the Netherlands, can be perceived as mixed claims. In addition, these claims may not stand up against different ways of conceptualizing and operationalizing the effects of NIPT, possibly involving value judgments that are not agreed upon by different stakeholders.
These results imply that values play a much larger role in identifying and collecting empirical information, that needs to be taken into account in an HTA, than is often acknowledged. When examining the plausibility of claims concerning alleged effects of a health technology, decisions have to be made about how to conceptualize these effects and which methods to be used in measuring these effects. These decisions may involve value judgments but are necessary to conduct an assessment. Evidence on effects of a health technology needs to be actively collected and taken into account. Acknowledging and explicating the role of values in this process helps in identifying relevant evidence and empirical research that may be needed to draw conclusions on the robustness of these claims.
Therefore, a normative analysis aimed at explicating values that should be realized by the use of a health technology is an integral part of an assessment because it influences the informational requirements that an assessment needs to meet to inform decision making . This implies that the distinctions between assessment and appraisal, and between ‘value-laden’ ELSI issues and ‘value-neutral’ analyses of safety, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a health technology, cannot be obtained. Instead of trying to separate facts from values, we should develop methodology to get a firmer grip on the role of values in HTA and maintain scientific rigor. Incorporating the work performed by Alexandrova (2016) in the practice of HTA would be an important first step in realizing this.
In the remainder of the discussion, we will address issues related to the generalizability of our findings and the consequences for the practice of HTA.
Our results show that assessing safety and clinical effectiveness may involve mixed claims, and this points towards a role for value judgments in all types of analyses (safety, effectiveness, costs-effectiveness, ELSI) associated with HTA. Although the report on NIPT that we have analyzed does not include a cost-effectiveness analysis, there are reasons for suggesting that mixed claims are also involved in examining cost-effectiveness. This can be seen in the Belgian Health Care Knowledge Centre report on health economic aspects of NIPT ( Hulstaert et al., 2014 ). The authors of the report explicitly state that they deviate from Belgian guidelines for economic evaluations by not expressing outcomes in terms of euro per quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) gained. They prefer to use the average cost per trisomy 21 detected for different screening scenarios. According to the authors, this choice is not based on methodological considerations but based on their view that the use of NIPT should focus on providing correct information to parents. In addition, they also discuss challenges with translating outcomes into QALYs concerning whose QALYs should be taken into account and defining the appropriate time horizon (e.g. should only impacts up to detection of affected pregnancies be taken into account, or also long-term implications). This shows that analyzing NIPT in terms of cost-effectiveness also involves value judgments. Although NIPT may raise specific challenges, a role for value judgments in health economics in general is already described ( Harvard et al., 2020 ). Further research on the role of mixed claims in this area is needed to demonstrate how mixed claims are constitutive of claims concerning cost-effectiveness, and its implications for the role of values in health economic modeling.
Our analysis was based on a published policy report which may not capture all concerns, questions and decisions encountered and addressed by a committee responsible for drafting the report. Despite this, the report embodies the public manifestation and justification of decisions made and its results. Therefore, an analysis based on such a report does provide valuable insight on how mixed claims play a role, and are justified, in HTA. To also uncover how practical aspects of an assessment (e.g. context, material and non-verbal elements) structure and influence this normativity of HTA, it may be fruitful to conduct interviews or take an ethnographic approach in future research on mixed claims.
Because we have only analyzed an assessment of NIPT conducted in the Netherlands, contextual aspects of the Dutch healthcare system may have influenced our conclusions. Despite this, we believe that the nature of the normativity involved in the assessment process is similar in other contexts. For example, an analysis of the governance of NIPT in Germany shows similar challenges related to normative questions that are raised by informing and making decisions on the use of NIPT ( Braun and Könninger, 2018 ). One especially contested issue was the question whether NIPT can be seen as a medical procedure , because German law states that the statutory health insurance should guarantee access to medical necessary services. The Federal Joint Committee (G-BA) is the supreme decision-making body, and decides on therapeutic usefulness, cost-effectiveness and medical necessity of a health technology. The G-BA decided to define the medical purpose of NIPT in terms of its ability to save healthy fetuses from procedure-related miscarriages. By doing this, it implicitly defined the purpose of NIPT (i.e. as a medical procedure) in a way that was highly contested by different stakeholders and organizations in German society. Although the G-BA tried to take responsibility for these ethical and social implications by inviting other institutions to address them, the normativity involved in conducting an assessment of medical and scientific aspects of NIPT could not be eliminated. The decision itself to conduct an assessment of NIPT, recognizing it as a medical procedure, and decisions on what effects to take into account and how to define them, are already normative decisions.
Because our findings are based on a single case study. it may be influenced by the specific nature of NIPT. NIPT is an example of a morally challenging health technology that raises challenges because its purpose can be conceptualized in many ways, it is aimed at non-curative goals, and demands the use of outcome measures that are able to capture valuable effects beyond health-related goals ( Kessels et al., 2019 ). Despite these particular characteristics of NIPT, the claims assessed in HTA have a generic nature that makes it likely that mixed claims are involved in a wide variety of HTAs. The assessment of the impact of a health technology in terms of safety, clinical effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, or social and ethical implications, always has a normative dimension. The relevance and scope of these impacts is related to normative commitments. For example, ‘safety’ refers to the sort of outcomes that we wish to avoid because of our commitment to avoiding harm . And ‘clinical effectiveness’ refers to the sort of outcomes that we wish to achieve because of our commitment to doing good . These normative commitments guide the collection of information needed to assess whether a health technology is able to realize these effects. In addition, concluding that a health technology realizes a certain effect implies ascribing a certain quality to this technology ( Legault et al., 2018 ).
Moreover, for a health technology to be effective it must be able to reduce disease-related disabilities or enhance health , both referring to states of being that are either disvalued or desirable ( Stegenga, 2018 ). Therefore, a health technology not only needs to target just any constitutive, physiological, basis of health and disease, but also realize a change that is regarded an improvement. Consequently, an assessment of the effectiveness of a health technology always depends on specific accounts of normative concepts, such as health and wellbeing ( Hofmann et al., 2018 ), implying an evaluation of different states of being. Given the centrality of claims of effectiveness in HTA it is highly likely that mixed claims are present in assessments of a wide variety of health technologies.
In our identification of values we have tried to stay as close as possible to the reasoning of the Health Council of the Netherlands. Because their approach is guided by the Dutch Population Screening Act, which provides criteria that an acceptable screening program needs to satisfy, it may be seen as an instance of principlism . It could be the case that taking another approach, such as virtue ethics or a phenomenological approach , leads to the identification of other value concerns related to the use of NIPT ( Svenaeus, 2018 ). It would be interesting to see how an analysis of mixed claims would work out when these other approaches to ethics are taken into account.

Section: 5. Conclusion

Our analysis of an HTA report on NIPT shows that some of the claims examined are mixed claims , because the way in which alleged effects of NIPT are conceptualized invokes value judgments on desirable consequences of using NIPT. This illustrates that facts and values become entangled in assessing potential effects of a health technology. Recognizing this, by identifying and scrutinizing mixed claims in HTA, is important to avoid value imposition and inattention and get a firmer grip on the role of values in HTA. Developing methods for evaluating mixed claims could enhance transparency and robustness of the results of HTA.

Section: Credit author statement

Bart Bloemen: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Project administration; Maarten Jansen: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing; Wouter Rijke: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing; Wija Oortwijn: Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing; Gert Jan van der Wilt: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

Gert Jan van der Wilt was member of the Committee on Population Screening of the Health Council of the Netherlands at the time the NIPT report was drafted. He participated in the research that is reported in the present paper as an independent scholar affiliated to Radboud University Medical Centre, not bound by this erstwhile committee membership.

Section: Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Anna Alexandrova for her thoughtful comments on earlier versions of this paper.
