Title: Exploring equity in accessing diabetes management treatment: A healthcare gap analysis


Abstract: Abstract

Healthcare inequities are often investigated empirically as associations between socio-economic characteristics and differences between observed healthcare utilisation and estimates of needs-based utilisation. However, the concept of ‘need’ is tricky to operationalise and utilisation may be contingent on inequities arising at an earlier stage. In this study, we apply a unique combination of register and survey data collected in 2019 to assess equity in opportunities to access treatment for patients with recently diagnosed type 2 diabetes . In the study of this population (N = 1864) we escape the challenge of estimating needs by arguing that need can be approximated from treatment guidelines within a nationwide framework of disease management programmes . Furthermore, instead of observed utilisation we use patient reports on whether they have been offered treatment as a measure of opportunities to access multiple components of care, that is, we focus on possible inequalities arising prior to possible utilisation inequalities. ‘Healthcare gaps’ are computed as the discrepancy between an index of guideline recommended treatments and patients' perceived offers of treatments, thus providing a novel take on the ‘healthcare deprivation profiles’ approach to the study of healthcare inequalities. Using this method, we explore and document inequalities along multiple dimensions of familiar socio-economic factors (income, education, occupation) as well as self-reported barriers to access. We also provide supporting evidence that healthcare gaps, as measured in our study, are associated with poorer quality of care, and that those who experience large gaps are more likely to be disadvantaged in terms of self-reported difficulties in relation to key self-care aspects. We conclude that even in a health system with comprehensive universal coverage, healthcare inequity can arise already at the stage of offering access to preventive treatment. The results warrant further research into the causes, consequences and remedies of such inequities.

Section: 1. Introduction

The high, and rising, prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) constitutes an increasingly important challenge in the organisation and provision of healthcare worldwide. One important challenge relates to observed socio-economic inequalities associated with disease progression and risk of developing complications to diabetes ( Hill-Briggs et al., 2021 ; Sortsø et al., 2018 ). These inequalities raise concerns about the equity of the allocation of care resources intended to support peoples’ capabilities for living well with diabetes and to reduce and prevent adverse effects of the disease.
In Denmark equal access to healthcare is a stated health policy aim. Healthcare pathways for persons with T2DM are standardised in Danish national and regional disease management programmes (DMPs) for diabetes ( Frølich et al., 2015 ; Vrangbæk, 2021 ). The DMPs include a strategy of stratified care, standardising a principle of treating persons with T2DM differently according to need. At the same time, DMPs and diabetes care policies reflect concerns about equal access to equally high quality of care. The policies thus reflect a general notion of horizontal and vertical equity aims: equal treatment for equal need, and differential treatment in proportion to relevant differences in need ( Giacomini and Hurley, 2008 ; Tapager et al., 2020 ). The Danish healthcare system offers universal healthcare coverage and patients’ socio-economic characteristics should not be a barrier for access. However, little is known about the extent to which patients achieve equal opportunities to access the standardised care components, and how this relates to patient characteristics .
Research has produced many methods to quantify inequalities in healthcare access and use ( O'Donnell et al., 2008 ; Vallejo-Torres and Morris, 2014 ). In the context of healthcare access, a method has been developed for measuring and analysing equity by ‘healthcare deprivation profiles’ based on computed healthcare gaps (HCGs) ( Laudicella et al., 2009 ; Olsen and Laudicella, 2019 ). This method can be used to model and analyse possible gaps between hypothesised ideal provision of healthcare and what is really provided; and allows for straightforward visual interpretations.
A key challenge with such methods, is how to assess the extent to which observed inequalities deviate from justifiable differences by what may be considered legitimate need factors, namely, how to set the ‘ideal’ or expected level of healthcare as comparator. This is often done by ‘need-standardisation’ ( O'Donnell et al., 2008 ; Olsen and Laudicella (2019) ; Tenand et al. (2020) ). However, need is a tricky concept to define in a satisfactorily quantifiable and observable manner ( Culyer, 1995 ; O'Donnell et al., 2008 ), and it is debatable whether to define need from expert judgements on e.g. care quality standards, or by comparing to e.g. estimated average healthcare use ( Cookson et al., 2021 ). Arguably, applications estimating a need standardised expectation from observations of utilisation and proxies of need may fail to capture what healthcare planners consider to be ideal levels of care.
Another area of contention in studies of healthcare equity is whether utilisation is in fact the preferable or rather the most convenient outcome for studying equity in healthcare ( Cookson et al., 2016 ). Empirical applications often focus on utilisation as this is more easily observable, but it may be argued that an inquiry into healthcare delivery equity should focus on assessing opportunities for treatment rather than actual usage ( Donaldson et al., 2005 ), thus respecting individual preferences for accepting healthcare. Absence of utilisation may occur, for instance, due to patients opting out or a provider failing to offer treatment ( Dixon-Woods et al., 2006 ). Inequalities arising at different stages may thus have very different policy implications ( Tenand et al., 2020 ).
A final challenge in many existing studies of healthcare equity is the reliance on general measures of healthcare, for instance number of visits to GP or specialised care (e.g. van Doorslaer et al., 2004 ). Due to the multitude of characteristics that may explain differences in GP visits or needs for specialised care ( Bago d’Uva et al., 2009 ), such studies may lack precision in identifying (in)equity in healthcare allocation. For instance, the HCG method has been successfully demonstrated in the context of evaluating certain aspects of diabetes care ( Olsen and Laudicella, 2019 ); but by exclusively using generic healthcare use indicators obtained from registries potentially lack specificity to assess gaps between prescribed and actual care for diabetes.
The aim of this paper is to explore equity in opportunities to access healthcare services recommended in disease management programmes, as perceived by persons recently diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. A unique combination of registry and survey data allows us to analyse how self-reported offers of treatment relate to a rich set of socio-economic characteristics. Furthermore, we use self-reported measures of self-care challenges to refine our understanding of possible shortfalls in opportunities to access care, and whether such shortfalls express undesirable variation.
This paper offers three main contributions to the understanding of equity in T2DM healthcare delivery specifically, and to the literature on healthcare equity more generally: Firstly, we use self-reported measures of offers of treatment to gauge opportunities to access key T2DM care elements; thus providing a measure of inequalities of access preceding utilisation and thereby eliminating (some of) the variation that may be attributable to recipients opting out, rather than providers failing to offer treatment. Secondly, we present a new application of computing healthcare gaps by using treatment guidelines instead of an estimated need-standardisation to compute a benchmark of needed care elements. These gaps are then used to shed light on inequalities related to multiple survey- and registry-based indicators of socio-economic factors, geography, and health. Finally, we use various approaches to understand whether observed inequalities are expressions of justifiable or undesirable variation. We focus on the characteristics of those with the largest gaps (the most healthcare-deprived), and whether large gaps are associated with other indicators of healthcare-related disadvantage, namely self-reported indicators of difficulties with key T2DM self-care tasks as well as poorer quality of care, as proxied by the Patient Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (PACIC).
The following sections first introduce the setting of DMPs in Denmark and the operationalisation of healthcare gaps in this setting. Next, the approach to regression analysis of healthcare gaps is described, followed by a description of the survey data collection methods and the variables constructed from survey and registry data. Healthcare gap profiles are illustrated graphically for selected subgroups and multivariate regression results shed further light on the characteristics of those with the largest gaps. Finally, we discuss the implications and limitations of the present work.

Section: 2. Methods

Type 2 diabetes treatment is characterised by high demands for self-care and navigating multiple types and sectors of care. International guidelines recommend that management of T2DM should be patient-centred and include both pharmacological and non-pharmacological (behavioural and psychosocial) interventions – and it is considered critical to begin at diagnosis ( Davies et al., 2018 ). Diabetes care management is thus characterised by spanning multiple types of interventions in several healthcare contexts.
In Denmark, the organisational contexts of formal care for T2DM include general practitioners (GP), municipalities that provide various preventive and rehabilitation health services, private practicing specialists like ophthalmologists and podiatrists , and hospitals managed by five health provider regions ( Frølich et al., 2015 ). The majority (80% or more) of persons with T2DM receive their routine diabetes check-ups at their GP and the rest in hospital outpatient specialist clinics ( Jørgensen et al., 2016 ). The care coordinator (usually the GP) can refer patients to specialist examination and treatment (e.g. of eyes and feet) as well as preventive and rehabilitative services (e.g. physical exercise and dietician) often provided by municipalities ( Danish Health Authority, 2017 ).
The national DMP guidelines for diabetes cross-sectoral care ( Danish Health Authority, 2008 , 2012 , 2017 ) describe various elements of care, with provision dependent on needs assessment and patient preferences. The specific nature, availability and provider of the various elements may be subject to local variation. However, several treatment elements can be identified as generally recommended for all persons with newly diagnosed T2DM to be able to access. In Table 1 we have listed treatment elements and check-marked those included in our healthcare access target level h ∗ for the newly diagnosed. The elements were included by two criteria: 1) whether guidelines suggested them as likely to be relevant for all those newly diagnosed with T2DM to be able to access, and 2) whether it could reasonably be assumed to constitute a distinguishable element of treatment for the recipient (e.g. not part of general clinical examination or blood or urine testing). The elements thus reflect an attempt to identify an observable lowest common denominator of guideline-prescribed care for T2DM patients, to enable assessment of shortfalls from this benchmark. Table 1 . Diabetes disease management elements included in the computed ‘healthcare target’. Empty Cell Included in the DMP ‘healthcare target’ Pharmacological treatment - assessment and counselling regarding pharmacological treatment ✓ Screening for various complications - examination of eyes ✓ - examination of feet ✓ - other (incl. neuropathy, cardiovascular, kidney) ÷ Assessment of psychosocial status and special needs ÷ Assessment and counselling on possible diabetes related health problems (e.g. dental or mental problems) and flu vaccine counselling ÷ Dietary counselling ✓ Physical exercise ✓ Smoking cessation counselling ✓ (smokers) Education about diabetes ✓ Coping support ÷ Note: √ denotes whether explicitly included in the DMP healthcare target computed in this study and ÷ denotes otherwise. Source for disease management elements: Recommendations for cross-sectoral type 2 diabetes care pathways ( Danish Health Authority, 2017 )
In this study, equity in healthcare delivery is evaluated by comparing this benchmark of care to the elements of care that persons with T2DM report they have been offered. From the survey data, a simple summative index was computed based on questions about offers of the DMP elements mentioned above ( Table 1 ).
The healthcare gap has previously been defined as H C G i = max ( h i ∗ − h i , 0 ) (see elaborations in Laudicella et al., 2009 ; Olsen and Laudicella, 2019 ; Vallejo-Torres and Morris, 2014 ). h i ∗ is defined here as the number of benchmark elements which the person i is expected to need, i.e. in this application h i ∗ is defined as the sum of the above defined relevant and observable elements ( Table 1 ), i.e. h i ∗ = 7 or h i ∗ = 6 , depending on whether person i smokes. Opportunity to access these programme elements is defined here as whether the respondents report having received an offer of the given treatment elements, i.e. h i = ∑ P x p , i , with each element x p denoted with a binary indicator of whether the respondent has reported receiving an offer of the given treatment element p . As we only sum the elements in the defined healthcare target, there is no measured ‘over-access’, that is, the healthcare gap reduces to zero if access has been offered to all the elements about which we have inquired.
The distribution of HCGs in the population is graphically reviewed by a curve depicting the cumulative sum of HCGs ranked from largest to smallest. The more concave the curve, the higher the concentration of larger gaps among fewer persons in the population (i.e. higher inequality in the distribution of the size of gaps) ( Olsen and Laudicella, 2019 ). Two summary measures of the extent of shortfalls in care can be computed (and read from the curves): 1) The average HCG experienced in the population group (height of curve): μ = ∑ i n H C G i n , with n equal to the number of persons in the given population group. 2) The proportion of persons in the population group experiencing a HCG (point on the x-axis where the curve flattens): r
Computation of the curves follows the approach of Olsen and Laudicella (2019) . The HCG curves are examined for selected subgroups, allowing visual examination of the distribution of healthcare gaps by several dimensions of socio-economic factors, including income, education and occupation.
Income, education, and occupation tap into common as well as distinct aspects of people's socio-economic resources and social standing ( Green and Popham, 2019 ). In this context, we hypothesise that these indicators may affect offers of DMP elements through various channels. Education is likely to be the most distal measure and is thought to be an indicator of knowledge, and could be related to ability to access and interact with suitable healthcare services ( Galobardes et al., 2006 ; Green and Popham, 2019 ). Occupation is likely to be associated with education, but also provides a proximal measure of the current character of labour market participation. There is evidence that occupational status is associated with health ( Ravesteijn et al., 2013 ). We hypothesise that occupation could affect healthcare aspects such as DMP access through a practical lens: type of employment may affect ability to participate in (daytime) treatment as well as the match between available offers of, e.g. behavioural interventions and (physician perceived) patient needs. Current income is a direct indicator of material resources ( Galobardes et al., 2006 ; Green and Popham, 2019 ).
The HCG curves allow us to investigate the presence and full distribution of healthcare gaps (as defined above), and how they relate to various dimensions and operationalisations of socio-economic factors. However, since treatment guidelines allow some leeway for individual needs assessment, including considerations of motivation, patient preferences, psychosocial and contextual factors ( Danish Health Authority, 2012 , 2017 ; Davies et al., 2018 ) there may be unobservable but legitimate reasons for health professionals to deviate to some extent from the benchmark defined above. Therefore, we apply three further approaches to examine whether observed healthcare gaps appear to reflect inequities in opportunity to access care.
Firstly, we zoom in on those with the largest gaps to focus specifically on those who appear to deviate from the envisioned DMP principles of care, to an extent that cannot immediately be dismissed as smaller adjustments within the DMP model. We used regression analysis of experiencing a large HCG (defined as missing more than half of the generally recommended DMP elements, that is, missing at least 4 of the check-marked elements from Table 1 ) by multiple individual and contextual characteristics: (1) y i = α + S i ′ β + D i ′ γ + G i ′ δ + ε i where y i is a binary variable representing whether individual i has a large HCG, S i denote socioeconomic variables, D i are demographic and health variables, and G i denote geographical/contextual variables. The regression variables are detailed in the following section and summarised in Fig. 1 . We used a linear probability model with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors for ease of parameter interpretation, because events are fairly common (approx. 20%), and all covariates are categorical ( Hippel, 2017 ; Pischke, 2012 ). Logistic regression results are available for comparison in the online supplementary material (OSM). Download: Download high-res image (169KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Summary of variables applied to explain the probability of experiencing a large healthcare gap . Note: Light grey variables are included in all regressions. Darker shade variables are included in separate regressions according to colour.
Secondly, we investigate whether and how the derived HCGs are associated with selected intermediate outcomes concerning self-care which the DMP model aims to support ( Danish Health Authority, 2012 , p. 13). To examine the experienced difficulty of certain key self-care aspects targeted by the DMP we used questions from the multimorbidity burden of treatment questionnaire (MBTQ, Duncan et al., 2018 ; with permission). We looked specifically at four questions on the perceived difficulty of medication taking (remembering when and how to take medicine), monitoring health conditions (e.g. symptoms), making recommended lifestyle changes, and seeing different health professionals ( Duncan et al., 2018 , items 2, 5, 7, 12). We compared response distributions for those with and without a large HCG, and argue that if large HCGs are associated with more pronounced self-care difficulties it indicates that those with large HCGs are at an added disadvantage.
Thirdly, we explore how our HCG index relates to an overall quality of care indicator. If lack of reported offers of treatment is not associated with lower patient assessments of care, then variations in offers may be justified by other (unobserved) means of meeting chronic care process quality targets. However, if lack of treatment offers is systematically associated with lower quality of care, we would argue that it supports that observed large healthcare gaps express undesirable variation. We use the Patient Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (PACIC) instrument as an indicator of quality of care. The Danish DMP model is based on the ideas of the Chronic Care Model ( Frølich et al., 2015 ) and the PACIC was developed to measure alignment with the goals of this model ( Glasgow et al., 2005 , Danish validation in Maindal et al., 2012 ). It consists of 20 questions addressing various aspects of care. There is not a set cut-off point for optimal (or minimally sufficient) care, but higher average score indicates higher concordance with targets for person-centred chronic care delivery ( Center for Sundhed, 2015 ; Glasgow et al., 2005 ; Maindal et al., 2012 ). We compared average PACIC scores for those who report having received an offer of each of the enquired DMP elements vs. those who did not, as well as for those with and without a large HCG.
We used administrative health registers to identify a population of persons between 30 and 75 years of age who are likely to have begun treatment for T2DM in 2016 and 2017 (i.e. possible age span at the beginning of year of survey (2019) is 31–77). The inclusion criteria are based on an adaptation of the criteria of the Register for selected chronic conditions (RUKS) ( Danish Health Data Authority, 2018 ), supplemented by insights from the development of a new version of the Danish Diabetes Register ( Carstensen et al., 2020 ) using recorded hospital T2DM diagnoses and/or T2DM pharmaceutical treatments (see OSM 1 for a detailed description). From the identified gross population, a random sample of 4480 was drawn (by Statistics Denmark) and invited to participate in the survey together with a sample of people drawn from the general population. In this study, we report on findings related to the diabetes sample. To investigate current DMP practices and to minimise recall bias, we base our present analyses on those who self-report that they have been diagnosed with T2DM within the last 4 years.
Survey data collection took place in October–November 2019. Invitations to take part in the survey were sent to a secure official web inbox ‘eBoks’ and by postal mail (for those with eBoks exemption). The invitation letter contained an active link together with a personal code to access the survey. Written reminders were sent by digital and postal mail, and from the fourth week of data collection, non- or partial responders (with a registered telephone number), were approached by telephone and given the option of responding by telephone interview. Persons without a registered phone number were – by reminder in eBoks or postal mail – encouraged to call if they wanted to respond by telephone interview. All invitees for the survey were given the same information letter, including information on sampling and the use of registry data, and emphasising that participation was voluntary. Small monetary prizes were awarded by a lottery among respondents. Statistics Denmark's survey division (DST Survey) carried out the survey sampling and data collection for the University of Copenhagen.
A customised battery of questions in the survey asked specifically about the DMP components described for a person newly diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes (including content inspired by similar questions in two prior Danish surveys ( Center for Sundhed, 2015 ; Würgler et al., 2012 ). Table 2 in the results section lists the DMP component questions included in the DMP HCG index. Supplementary measures relating to DMP include the Patient Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (PACIC) ( Glasgow et al., 2005 ); Improving Chronic Illness Care, 2006 ; Maindal et al., 2012 ) and questions from the Multimorbidity Burden of Treatment Questionnaire ( Duncan et al., 2018 ; Friis et al., 2019 ). A question on the provider of diabetes-related contacts in the past year (‘where have you received check-up, treatment and/or education or exercise programs relating to your type 2 diabetes in the past 12 months?’) was used to compute categories of treatment loci. Table 2 . Descriptive statistics of the survey population: respondents vs. non-respondents. Empty Cell Respondents Non-respondents Test for statistically significant differences b N = 2467 N = 2013 Empty Cell Age, time of survey (mean) 60.7 58.3 <0.01 Sex (% female) 41.2 43.2 0.19 Ethnicity (% immigrants) 9.0 22.5 <0.01 Cohabitation (% with cohabiting partner) 67.4 58.8 <0.01 Education (%) <0.01 Low 26.8 39.5 Medium 47.6 41.5 High 24.0 13.5 - Missing 1.7 5.4 Occupation a (%) <0.01 Working: High skill/management/self-employed with 10+ employees 9.7 5.6 Working: Medium skill/self-employed (5–9 employees) 8.0 5.2 Working: Basic skill/co-working spouse 21.1 19.0 Working: Low/unskilled manual 11.7 15.1 Non-working: Transfer income (e.g. unemployed, early retirement benefit) 18.4 31.3 Non-working: Retired 31.2 23.9 Healthcare use in the preceding year Nb. of GP contacts (mean) 14.6 14.3 0.29 Hospital contact (% with contact) 52.9 50.8 0.15 Note: a details on grouping in OSM 3. b Chi-square test for categorical data, t -test for mean comparisons (age and number of GP contacts).
Income, education and occupation categories were derived from registry data-. Education was grouped by International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) levels into three main categories, following Eurostat (2019) . Income was grouped in income quintiles, reflecting the income level of the entire Danish population, based on household disposable income adjusted for household composition ( Statistics Denmark, 2021 ). Occupation was grouped from variables combining information on main economic activity (e.g. whether working or various types of non-working) as well as skill level and management aspects of occupation. The occupational grouping is inspired by Christensen et al. (2014) and elaborated in OSM 3.
A question on possible barriers to getting needed treatment (unspecified type) from the International Social Survey Programme ( ISSP Research Group, 2015 ) was used to compute indicators of self-reported financial or geographical/location related barriers to accessing healthcare (if needed).
Comorbidity was assessed by a dummy for having any comorbidities as measured by the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) ( Thygesen et al., 2011 ), computed for hospital diagnoses recorded in a ten-year period up to estimated diabetes treatment start date (proxied by registry criteria, OSM 1). Diabetes without complications was set to zero, that is, the applied CCI expresses comorbidities recorded in hospital care in addition to diabetes.
Healthcare use in the year preceding survey data collection was computed by Statistics Denmark as number of contacts with GP, and a binary indicator of whether the person had had at least one hospital contact (in- or outpatient).
Information on age, sex, ethnicity (immigrant or not), cohabitation status and geographical area of residence was obtained through linkage with national registries. Geography was used to assess differences between the five healthcare regions of Denmark that each have their own regional implementations of the DMP. Three categories of area type were applied: urban, provincial and rural municipalities (see OSM 3 for details). Unless otherwise stated, all registry-based variables were computed with data from the year of estimated diabetes treatment start, as proxied by registry criteria (see OSM1). If information was missing, newer data (if available) were used instead.
We fitted four different models in our regressions modelling the probability of a large HCG (eq. (1) ). All include the above described health and demographic variables and education, but we alternate between different more proximal indicators of socioeconomic position (occupation, income and self-reported barriers for healthcare) to avoid possible issues of multicollinearity. The variables and models applied are summarised in Fig. 1 . We used SAS 9.4 statistical software.
The project was registered in the University of Copenhagen's record of biobanks and research projects containing personal data (J.nr: 514–0032/18-3000) and approved by the Research Ethics Committee for Science and Health at the University of Copenhagen (J.nr: 504–0054/19-5000). Further approvals for data access were obtained from Statistics Denmark and the Danish Health Data Authority. The data was accessed and analysed through the research platform of Statistics Denmark, providing secure access to pseudonymised linked registry and survey data.

Section: 3. Results

The data collection process resulted in an overall response rate of 55% (N = 2467). Those who reported that they had never had T2DM or that they were diagnosed more than 4 years ago were excluded from the present analyses, resulting in a sample of N = 1864 respondents with recently diagnosed T2DM (see OSM 2 for details).
To assess the representativeness of respondents, Table 2 describes the total survey respondents (N = 2467), compared with non-respondents in terms of register-based information on: age, sex, ethnicity, cohabitation, educational level, labour market affiliation, mean number of yearly contacts with GP, and whether they had had any hospital contact in the preceding year. Respondents were generally slightly older, had higher educational level and were less likely to be living alone or to be immigrants, compared with non-respondents. All occupational groups are represented among respondents, but respondents include a higher proportion in retirement or skilled occupations. On the other hand, the proportion of females, the mean number of GP contacts, and share with hospital contact, are not statistically different.
Table 3 shows the frequencies of respondents who report having received an offer of the various DMP components used to compute HCGs, as well as the proportion who have or plan to participate. For all elements, more have received an offer than have or plan to make use of it. Almost all respondents (96%) have reported getting at least one of the ‘check-up’ elements, whereas four in five (81%) of respondents have experienced getting at least one of the ‘health-promoting behaviour’ elements. It is also more likely that respondents have made use of at least one of the ‘check-up’ elements. Table 3 . Self-reported treatment offers used in the HCG, and participation. Treatment element Have received offer of treatment type (% of respondents) Have or plan to participate in treatment type (% of respondents) a ’Check-up elements' Guidance on and check-up of medical treatment 86.4 79.9 Eye examination 84.2 79.6 Feet examination 76.6 62.2 ’Health promoting behaviour elements' Diet counselling 74.3 56.2 Physical exercise 38.9 26.8 Education about diabetes 43.4 30.0 Smoke cessation counselling b 58.2 19.2 At least one ‘check-up’ element 96.1 94.1 At least one ‘health promoting behaviour’ element 81.3 65.2 a This response is conditional on reporting having received an offer. This implies that the difference between first and second column correspond to respondents reporting having received an offer but not reporting to have participated or plan to participate in said offer. b Percentage among those who have not responded ‘I do not smoke’.
Fig. 2 , panels a–f, depicts the HCGs as measured by the combined DMP components index. Fig. 2 a shows that the curve flattens around 0.8, that is, approximately 4 in 5 lack one or more offers of treatment types and the remaining, approximately 20%, have no healthcare gap (have been offered all DMP elements in the defined healthcare target). The height of the curve is approximately 2, that is, averaged over the total population (with or without gaps) the average healthcare gap is missing 2 DMP elements. (Exact summary measures of HCGs are reported in OSM 4.) Download: Download high-res image (615KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Healthcare gap profiles measured by average number of offers of treatment elements lacking .
Fig. 2 b shows that gaps are larger and more common among persons with lower education. For income, the curves are not far apart and some cross. However, quintiles 1–3 all lie above the two highest income quintiles and therefore have a higher average number of DMP elements missing and more unequally distributed gaps ( Fig. 2 c.). The stratification on occupational groups also involves crossed curves and suggests a non-monotonic relationship between occupational class grouping and healthcare gaps, with the largest mean gaps seen among those in unskilled manual occupation and those with high-skill or management positions ( Fig. 2 d, OSM 4). Larger differences are found for those with self-reported barriers of access to needed treatment due to lack of affordability or local lack of availability of treatment, compared with those who reported no barriers or no need for treatment ( Fig. 2 e).
In terms of self-reported loci of diabetes care contacts in the preceding year, the largest gaps were found in the 11% of respondents who report not seeing any providers in relation to T2DM treatment in the past year. The most common self-reported point of contact for diabetes-related care is the GP, and larger average gaps are found among those who only report seeing the GP compared to those who report some type of shared care (have reported multiple places of contact regarding diabetes in the past year). The least DMP healthcare deprived are those who have seen a GP and/or been in municipal programmes and possibly other locations as well ( Fig. 2 f).
The results from the regressions of having experienced a large DMP HCG (N = 360/19% of the respondents) on socio-economic indicators, while controlling simultaneously for several covariates, broadly support the conclusions derived from the HCG curves. Lower education and self-reported experiences of geographical and financial restrictions to care are associated with a higher probability of having a large HCG. Yet, the same is found for high skill and management occupations. The results further show that substantial differences in probabilities are found between healthcare regions, whereas municipal urbanisation type was not statistically significant. Being an immigrant was associated with higher probability of a large HCG (although within quite wide confidence limits), whereas effects for sex and cohabitation were not statistically significant ( Table 4 ). Table 4 . Effects on probability of having a large healthcare gap - linear probability model estimates. Empty Cell Model (1) Model (2) Model (3) Model (4) Empty Cell β [95% CL] β [95% CL] β [95% CL] β [95% CL] Intercept 0.166 [0.103;0.229] 0.125 [0.032;0.217] 0.117 [0.033;0.20] 0.156 [0.093;0.219] Female −0.020 [-0.056; 0.016] −0.015 [-0.052; 0.021] −0.021 [-0.057; 0.016] −0.023 [-0.059; 0.013] Cohabiting 0.015 [-0.023; 0.053] 0.016 [-0.023; 0.055] 0.025 [-0.016; 0.066] 0.023 [-0.016; 0.061] Immigrant 0.090 [0.014;0.166] 0.090 [0.012;0.167] 0.079 [0.00;0.158] 0.081 [0.004;0.157] Age <59 0.025 [-0.015; 0.064] −0.005 [-0.056; 0.046] 0.026 [-0.013; 0.066] 0.018 [-0.022; 0.057] Age 60–69 (base) Age 70+ 0.061 [0.002;0.119] 0.080 [0.017;0.143] 0.054 [-0.006; 0.114] 0.064 [0.006;0.123] Diabetes diagnosis 0–2 yrs (base = 2–4) 0.023 [-0.019; 0.065] 0.024 [-0.017; 0.066] 0.023 [-0.019; 0.065] 0.023 [-0.019; 0.064] Comorbidity index = 0 (base) Comorbidity index ≥1 0.017 [-0.024; 0.058] 0.017 [-0.025; 0.059] 0.016 [-0.025; 0.057] 0.015 [-0.026; 0.056] Health care region: North −0.128 [-0.187;-0.068] −0.109 [-0.173;-0.046] −0.112 [-0.177;-0.048] −0.126 [-0.185;-0.066] Health care region: Mid −0.102 [-0.155;-0.05] −0.079 [-0.137;-0.021] −0.082 [-0.14;-0.023] −0.100 [-0.153;-0.047] Health care region: South −0.069 [-0.123;-0.015] −0.045 [-0.104; 0.013] −0.049 [-0.108; 0.01] −0.070 [-0.124;-0.017] Health care region: Zealand −0.026 [-0.086; 0.035] 0.003 [-0.063; 0.070] 0.003 [-0.064; 0.07] −0.030 [-0.089; 0.03] Health care region: Capital (base) Education low 0.075 [0.024;0.125] 0.095 [0.040;0.150] 0.066 [0.013;0.12] 0.064 [0.014;0.114] Education medium 0.051 [0.008;0.094] 0.069 [0.022;0.116] 0.046 [0.002;0.091] 0.045 [0.002;0.088] Education missing −0.076 [-0.204; 0.052] −0.053 [-0.181; 0.075] −0.077 [-0.203; 0.049] −0.097 [-0.224; 0.031] Education high (base) Occuptation: low/unskilled manual 0.002 [-0.077; 0.081] Occuptation: basic skill 0.030 [-0.040; 0.100] Occuptation: medium skill (base) Occuptation: high skill/management 0.089 [0.007;0.172] Non-working: Transfer income 0.024 [-0.049; 0.097] Non-working: Retired −0.027 [-0.108; 0.053] Income quintile 1 0.022 [-0.048; 0.092] Income quintile 2 0.033 [-0.026; 0.093] Income quintile 3 0.040 [-0.016; 0.097] Income quintile 4 0.005 [-0.047; 0.058] Income quintile 5 (base) Urban 0.038 [-0.016; 0.093] 0.041 [-0.013; 0.096] Provincial −0.007 [-0.051; 0.037] −0.002 [-0.047; 0.043] Rural (base) Health care deprived financially (self-reported) 0.079 [0.016;0.142] Health care deprived geographically (self-reported) 0.083 [0.012;0.155] Note: display parameter estimates (β) and 95% confidence intervals (CL) computed with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors, significance at 5% is marked with bold.
For each of the DMP elements in the survey, those who reported being offered the given element had consistently and statistically significant higher levels of self-reported quality of care, as measured by average PACIC scores, compared with those who had not. For those with a large HCG, the mean patient assessment score was more than one unit (on a 5-point Likert scale) worse than for the rest (OSM 6).
On average, those experiencing a large HCG also score various aspects of caring for their health as more difficult ( Fig. 3 ). However, we also note that a higher proportion of the respondents with a large HCG report that the various items do not apply to them, compared with other respondents. For example, among those with a high healthcare gap, one in ten report that making recommended lifestyle changes is not relevant (‘does not apply’) compared to only 3.6% among those without a large HCG. At the same time, 39% find this aspect ‘quite’, ‘very’ or ‘extremely difficult’ compared with 27% in the group without a large HCG. Despite the higher proportions scoring ‘does not apply’, those experiencing a high DMP HCG did on average score these aspects of caring for their health as more difficult ( Fig. 3 ). Download: Download high-res image (236KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Comparing indicators of treatment burden for those with a large healthcare gap vs. those without . Note: items and response categories (denoted by colour codes) come from the MTBQ questionnaire ( Duncan et al., 2018 ). Responses of ‘very difficult’ and ‘extremely difficult’ were merged due to small numbers. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

Section: 4. Discussion

We computed an index of basic care elements derived from treatment guidelines for persons with T2DM and investigated overall distributions of gaps from this target. Acknowledging that there may be unobservable but legitimate reasons for health professionals to deviate to some extent from this care benchmark, we used multivariate regression analyses to investigate the characteristics of those with large gaps in care access. By focusing on the characteristics of those with large HCGs in the regression analyses, our conclusions are less sensitive to minor adjustments in the application of programme guidelines, which may be (legitimately) attributable to unobserved patient attributes.
Our results show that HCGs are common and can be quite large. Gaps are more prevalent and higher on average for persons characterised by various dimensions of low socio-economic resources (particularly lower education, and self-reported financial or geographical barriers - less clearly related with lower income). Our results suggest that inequalities arise at the early stage of opportunities to access DMP elements. Thereby our results add a new dimension to existing evidence that socio-economically disadvantaged have poorer diabetes care access and utilisation ( Grintsova et al., 2014 ; Terens et al., 2018 ), and that even in the Danish setting of comprehensive universal health coverage, education- and income related inequalities in utilisation of diabetes treatment exist ( Halling and Ladenburg, 2019 ; Olsen and Laudicella, 2019 ; Sortsø et al., 2017 ).
Stratification on occupational grouping and adjustment for age generated a more nuanced picture, suggesting that those in high-skill/management occupations and older persons may also have an increased probability of experiencing a large healthcare gap. At first glance, this may seem contradictory. However, this may indicate that there are several possible mechanisms for arriving at healthcare access gaps.
Evidence suggest that access to healthcare is shaped through complex interplay between individuals, health services and context ( Dixon-Woods et al., 2006 ). Patient reasons for non-attendance in e.g. diabetes education programs (part of the DMP) have been shown to be highly diverse and related to factors such as difficulty taking time off work, no perceived benefit, cultural or emotional barriers ( Horigan et al., 2017 ). Such factors may also influence offers of treatment. For some patients, the care coordinator (most often the GP) may assess that the patient does not need one or more of the items on the list. Mechanic (1995) describes such implicit rationing at the point of contact and while arguing for local discretion in medical decision-making, he conveys the criticism that implicit rationing may be subject to bias and subjective preferences. Reviews by Cookson et al. (2021) and Dixon-Woods et al. (2006) suggest various mechanisms through which socioeconomic characteristics may influence healthcare received, including through the practitioner's assessment of patient needs, abilities and expected benefit.
The care coordinator may also find that they lack healthcare options to match specific needs of individual patients. Fiscella and Sanders (2016) describe failure to respond to particular needs of various socially disadvantaged patients as a source of healthcare disparities. In the specific setting of diabetes management in Denmark, previous qualitative evidence suggest that for patients with complex healthcare needs (which may likely be related to socioeconomic factors), the GP may find that they lack relevant offers within the framework of DMPs ( Kristensen et al., 2018 ).
The suggested mechanisms are based on the intuition that for a treatment to be needed (and hence provided) it must have an expected benefit that outweighs the cost. If capacity to benefit is not present, then the treatment cannot be needed ( Culyer, 1995 ). However, this line of argument leans into a discussion about who are capable of assessing the expected capacity to benefit: the ‘gatekeeper’ health professional, fixed (policy) guidelines, the (specialised) provider, or the patient?
Finally, the local availability and suitability of healthcare resources – and the care coordinator's knowledge thereof – may be highly important in obtaining access ( Dixon-Woods et al., 2006 ). We find substantial regional differences in the probability of large HCGs. Each healthcare region has a specific organisational setup and implementation of DMPs, as well as specific structural features and, to some extent, a specific patient casemix , which may all result in different practices regarding use of DMP elements ( Vrangbæk, 2021 ), although the national political ambition is to reduce regional variation ( Ministry of Health, 2017 ).
Another indication of complexities in the mechanisms of healthcare access gaps is found in the polarisation in responses to self-care difficulties found within the group of persons with large healthcare gaps. Simultaneously we find higher proportions who find various treatment aspects irrelevant (“does not apply”), and higher proportions finding them more burdensome, compared with the rest of the respondents. This might indicate that on one hand, some may be in less need (or less motivated) for healthcare support on these dimensions; on the other hand, some may be more burdened, which may indicate a non-exhausted capacity to benefit from more (or different) healthcare support. Future research should focus on disentangling these different mechanisms.
This study is based on a nationwide survey with a good response rate supplemented by rich registry data. Respondents make up a reasonably large sample representing newly diagnosed persons with T2DM and provide a realistic snapshot of current T2DM treatment as perceived by the recipients of care. However, respondents were generally over-representing the higher socio-economic groups and our study thus suffers from well-known bias in terms of not being fully representative of the most disadvantaged in the population ( Demarest et al., 2013 ).
Another possible selection bias relates to the targeted population of persons with T2DM. As the sampling relies on various indicators of treatment for diabetes registered in national healthcare data, we exclude persons not receiving treatment on any of these indicators (diabetes related medication and/or hospital contact). This disregards those with T2DM seen only by GPs with no medication treatment. Some healthcare registrations may be subject to error or may be due to other indications, which may be the reason for the proportion of respondents reporting not having been diagnosed with diabetes or being diagnosed >4 years ago. However, the registry criteria applied correspond roughly to those used nationally to monitor type 2 diabetes prevalence in Denmark (as detailed in OSM 1) ( Danish Health Data Authority, 2018 ).
This study analyses the respondents’ accounts of having received a given treatment offer. The self-report could be biased by lack of recall and subjective perception of a given treatment offer. Previous research has documented discrepancies in provider and patient perspective (e.g. Yuncken et al., 2018 ). Therefore, the measured offers of treatment should be taken as follows: the experience of the respondent, that is, whether their contacts with the healthcare system have resulted in the perception that they received a distinguishable offer of the said treatment aspect. This has the strength of measuring exactly the result of the healthcare interaction, as perceived and recalled by the patient. Other empirical strategies, such as in-clinic observations and qualitative studies may be needed to uncover possible the extent and causes of recall bias or gaps between professional and patient experiences.
The HCG approach has the advantage of focusing attention on shortfalls of care. However, the results depend on the definition of needed healthcare. In this paper, we used treatment guidelines combined with reports of offered care (not utilisation). However, even though looking at a specific condition generally implies less heterogeneity in need ( Cookson et al., 2016 ), the guideline-prescribed care may be seen as recommendations allowing for discretionary local choices dependent on characteristics of the recipient of care. Hence, our computed HCGs should not be seen as a hard limit for horizontal equity but rather a means of focusing attention on where shortfalls in care exist and then further exploring the nature of these. Furthermore, it is not easy to decide what are and are not legitimate sources of variation. Even with settled value judgements on need and non-need factors, some of these may not be (perfectly) observed in data and may influence results through unobserved confounding ( Morris et al., 2005 ). Ultimately, any assumption identifying legitimate differences may be contestable, and any judgement on inequity is likely harder to arrive at than merely showing the existence of inequalities ( Cookson et al., 2016 ). An advantage of looking at a specific condition and using guidelines as an (albeit imprecise) reference point is that this facilitates a relatively straightforward and explicit interpretation of shortfalls which may facilitate discussion about whether the results express unfair inequalities in this specific context.
The overall components of care assessed here may differ in actual content and quality in different locations and do not necessarily reflect either sufficient or optimal care. For instance, the element of ‘education about diabetes’ was used to capture a minimal aspect of diabetes self-management education which is usually described in a more comprehensive way, covering both coping support and knowledge about T2DM ( Davies et al., 2018 ). Finally, the applied HCG method presumes an equal weighing together of components, which may or may not be justified from a clinical or patient perspective. However, the results showing that DMP elements are separately, and in sum, systematically associated with patient assessment of chronic illness care (PACIC) scores, suggests that they do capture shortfalls from DMP healthcare targets.
The Danish DMPs are based on the ‘The Chronic Care Model’ which stresses the patient role in developing ‘confidence and skills to manage their condition’ ( Wagner et al., 2001 : 66). Our results suggest that there are inequalities in opportunity to access DMP elements of care and that these are associated with various indicators of disadvantage; socio-economic, self-care, and care quality.
For disease management interventions, socio-economic conditions may contribute to define need – with lower level of personal, social, and economic resources indicating more (or different) care and support ( Danish Health Authority, 2012 ). Therefore, the observed association between large HCGs and lower education, and other indicators of socio-economic disadvantage as well as regional differences, would not appear to be in accordance with equitable DMP care; especially considering that we provide supporting evidence that our operationalisation of large healthcare gaps is associated with lower quality of care.
This paper suggests that inequalities arise already at the early stage of perceived offers of multiple components of care. However, it is also clear from the results that different mechanisms are at play, and that while significant and important, the socio-economic variables only account for relatively small differences compared with the total variation observed (in line with observations in Elkeles et al., 2009 ; Olsen and Laudicella, 2019 ).
Inequity in the processes of healthcare distribution may well be important in its own right, but it is only part of an account of whether healthcare provision in the realm of T2DM can be considered equitable. Healthcare access constraints may be considered particularly unjust if they contribute to avoidable differences in opportunities to avoid loss of quality and quantity of life, thus affecting capability to achieve good health ( Sen, 2002 ; Ruger, 2010 ). Future research should aim to further assess the links and mechanisms between access, use and outcomes. As Tenand et al. (2020, p. 1161) point out: ‘inequity calls for different policy responses depending on the stage at which it arises’; be it at the stage of initial contact between patient and provider, in the care prescribed and/or the uptake ( Tenand et al., 2020 ) or in the conversion of healthcare input to outcomes ( Chiappero-Martinetti et al., 2019 ).

Section: Credit statement

Ina Tapager: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Writing. Kim Rose Olsen: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Karsten Vrangbæk: Conceptualization, Writing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Bendix Carstensen, Kristian Schultz Hansen, Ingelise Andersen, Henrik Brønnum-Hansen, Anne Mette Bender and Charlotte Ørsted Hougaard for collaboration, advice and assistance. We thank Statistics Denmark's survey division (DST Survey) for carrying out the survey data collection. Finally, we thank participants at seminars at the Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen for helpful comments and questions. This study was funded by the Novo Nordisk Foundation (EQUIP project (IT, KV), NNF17OC0026590 and PINCH project (KRO), NNF18OC0033978 ). The funder had no role in the design, analysis or reporting. The views and interpretations expressed are solely those of the authors.
