Title: Does price-cap regulation work for increasing access to contraceptives? Aggregate- and pharmacy-level evidence from Colombia


Abstract: Abstract

Price caps through international reference pricing are widely used worldwide but not so commonly in over-the-counter markets. We study the short-term effects of a price cap regulation for oral contraceptives in Colombia, a market dominated by the presence of several branded generics with multiple active ingredients. Most of the regulated products were fourth-generation contraceptives , and the Colombian health benefits plan only covers second-generation ones, resulting in a de facto over-the-counter market. Our aim is to establish whether the regulation triggered a competitive response within and across product categories, by price levels and regulatory status. The panel data analysis of quarterly level data for 52 drugs (and 79 drugs in an expanded sample without transactions for some quarters) reveals a massive expansion of transactions, for the directly regulated products that were formerly the most expensive, and for the indirectly regulated (i.e., a regulated ingredient) among those with an intermediate price. Although this price reduction could have led to a crowd out of the publicly provided contraceptives, we show that this is not the case. Since the information system cannot trace the final consumers’ purchases, we complement our analysis with an audit study involving 213 pharmacies in Bogota. We find that the price reduction was effectively transmitted to the final consumers.

Section: 1. Introduction

Several Latin American countries are among the leaders in teenage pregnancy rates in the World, and one of the determinants is the lack of access to safe contraceptive methods ( Pan American Health OrganizationUnited Nations Population Fund and United Nations Children’s Fund, 2016 ; United Nations, 2020 ). Despite the interventions at the school level on sexual and reproductive health, the final determinant is the affordability of promoted methods ( UNESCO, 2017 ; World Health Organization, 2011 ). For instance, a hike in the high price of oral contraceptives in Chile resulted in higher conceptions from unmarried mothers and worse outcomes at birth and later on in the life of those children ( Rau et al., 2021 ).
In this paper, we study the short-term consequences of a contraceptive price regulation in Colombia, which drove down prices of regulated products by an average of 61% ( Ministerio de Salud y Protección SocialMinSalud, 2019 ). The national oral contraceptive market is characterized by the dominance of branded generics known for the large price differentials with respect to non-branded products. Hence, price caps on leading contraceptive products constitute an appealing policy instrument ( World Health Organization, 2015 ). Whereas most of the literature on price controls in pharmaceutical markets focuses on the medium- and long-term incentives for innovation ( Costa-Font et al., 2014 ; Danzon and Chao, 2000 ), this is a second-order concern in the contraceptives market. We focus on the less studied short-term effects. Our first-order concerns relate to availability and substitutability. Price regulations are effective to the extent that product coverage is maintained. In the case of a shortage of specific brands, the reduced price dispersion is a signal that could make patients aware that they can substitute for another brand with a lower price and identical components.
Since 2013, a cornerstone policy in Colombia for containing health expenditures has been to set maximum prices based on the price paid for the same products in other countries, a strategy known as International Reference Pricing ( Acosta et al., 2014 ; Bardey et al., 2021 ; Prada et al., 2018 ; Sood et al., 2008 ; Von der Schulenburg et al., 2011 ). This policy was initially directed to highly concentrated markets, where few laboratories control expensive medications for rare or high-cost diseases, largely affecting the health insurance budget. In 2018, the National Medicines Pricing Commission (NMPC) implemented this policy in the contraceptive market, which is primarily private. The argument was that contraceptives were not a threat to the government's budget but were relevant for out-of-pocket expenditures. The policy applies to a reduced set of products that could be found in the reference countries and for which there was a high market concentration at the active principle level. Between 2018 and 2019, the NMPC regulated 60 product presentations, including 49 oral contraceptives , nine emergency contraceptives, and two implants.
Colombians typically face low out-of-pocket expenditures as drugs are included in the compulsory insurance plan ( Guerrero et al., 2015 ). Yet, 80% of all contraceptive sales occur through private pharmacies where patients face open market prices without any reimbursement as if they were an over-the-counter market. One reason is that fourth-generation contraceptives are frequently prescribed by obstetrician-gynecologists and are not included as part of Colombia's Health Benefits Plan (HBP). Regulating these technologies might improve access, but it can also crowd out the public provision of contraceptives if the convenience component is small and patients believe that newer contraceptive generations are preferable, regardless of the patient's profile. We show in this study that this was not the case.
We combine the use of administrative data with an audit study. In our first exercise, we exploit the aggregate administrative data available at the wholesale transactions level. We estimate how the regulation affects prices and quantities for regulated and non-regulated products from different price categories. We fit linear panel models over time series of average prices and traded quantities at the wholesale level of the products' presentations available in the market. We find a price reduction for two types of products: regulated products and non-regulated products with direct competitors because they share an active ingredient. Throughout the rest of this paper, we will refer to the latter product type as having a “regulated ingredient”. By contrast, products in which no active ingredient was regulated do not change their price. We also observe a massive expansion of regulated products’ sales and a relevant reduction of sales of non-regulated drugs.
In our second exercise, we employ the audit methodology to determine if the price reduction from the regulation passed to the patients. The Colombian information system cannot trace the final consumers' purchases, leaving a blind spot for arguing that the regulation might be ineffective because pharmacies would keep the profit from the price reduction. We aim to shed light on this issue by employing the simulated client methodology (SCM). The SCM is handy in low- and middle-income countries characterized by low monitoring capacity and the low quality of administrative data sources ( Das et al., 2018 ; Kwan et al., 2019 ; Madden et al., 1997 ; Watson et al., 2006 ). This methodology has been used to study the abuse of antibiotic prescriptions ( Currie et al., 2011 ; Miller and Goodman, 2016 ; Smith, 2009 ; Wafula et al., 2012 ), providers’ selection of health plans based on geographic cues ( Bauhoff, 2012 ), and differences among private and public health care providers ( Das et al., 2016 ). In Colombia, it revealed that 80% of the sampled pharmacies do not request a prescription for delivering antibiotics ( Vacca et al., 2011 ).
We audited the price and availability data of six brands of oral contraceptives , including two different active components and three price levels. These brands accounted for 31.6% of total oral contraceptives sales value (and 13% of sold units) among all the transactions between laboratories and commercial distributors in the two years before the regulation. Our audit visits included 213 pharmacies before and after the regulation, to understand the impacts of the price cap at a more disaggregated level ( Andia et al., 2022 ). The data was collected in Bogotá, a city of 8 million inhabitants with substantial income inequality and nearly 3000 pharmacies. In each audit, the simulated clients asked for the price and availability of three brands with the same components. We find that, although the price reductions were transmitted to the final consumer, there was also a reduction in the availability of high- and mid-price regulated products that, at least for the audited brands, does not seem to be compensated for the expansion of the low-price products.

Section: 2. Methods

The Colombian HBP dictates an explicit list of health technologies that insurers must provide to their users. Every Colombian must be affiliated to a compulsory health insurance company, either by contributing to an insurance premium collected via a payroll tax or under a subsidized premium provided by the Government to the poorest population. Patients who access products via compulsory health insurance–the institutional channel–hand over a co-payment which depends on the income bracket of the user. The medication must be collected periodically in a specific network of pharmacies having a contract with the insurance company. These prescriptions are supposed to be specified by their active ingredient (chemical components), and neither patients nor prescribers can choose a brand or specific product. This is why patients buy both prescribed and over-the-counter products in private pharmacies at market prices, the commercial channel. Besides, supplemental voluntary private insurance covers less than 6% of the Colombian population ( Casabianca et al., 2022 ). No subsidies or reimbursements for products outside inpatient care are covered in these plans. In the institutional channel, transactions are covered with public resources; in the commercial channel, medicines are paid with the private resources of the agents.
On top of selling products not included in the HBP or prescribed by a private insurance physician, pharmacies reduce three main costs for patients: bureaucracy costs (as prescriptions usually must be requested periodically), moral costs (e.g., fear of feeling ashamed by physicians), and transaction costs (e.g., attending a specific institutional pharmacy for delivery). Despite the large availability of pharmacies, they rarely ask for the actual prescription ( Andia et al., 2022 ; Vacca et al., 2011 ).
The International Reference Pricing strategy defines a maximum price for a designated set of products to be directly regulated. This benchmark price is based on the 25th percentile of the distribution of prices of the same commercial product in a set of referenced countries (for more details, see Circular 03/2013 of the Health Ministry).
To monitor the regulation, laboratories, whole-sellers, and large distributors must report all transactions to the Colombian drug price information system–SISMED, for its acronym in Spanish. Transactions include both regulated and non-regulated products distributed through institutional and commercial channels.
The NMPC defines the basket of products to be regulated. There is no automatic rule for inclusion, but the central criterion is that the relevant market is highly concentrated, defined as having a Herfindahl-Hirschman Index greater than 2500. A relevant market is defined as the set of drugs that compete with each other, having identical compositions, doses, and similar formulas. Typically, markets are defined based on the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System (ATC) code, which is defined over the active ingredient, not the commercial product. Any product can be regulated as long as the international reference price distribution can be calculated. A market product will be regulated if the average price, as reported to SISMED, is above the international reference price. Therefore, a relevant market can have both regulated and not regulated products. The price cap is usually announced six months before it enters into force. While there is no appeal against the decision, the NMPC can amend minor details after hearing from the stakeholders.
Oral contraceptives are classified into “generations” ( Bitzer, 2015 ). Fourth-generation contraceptives, the more recent to the date of this study, include Dienogest or Drospirenone as progestine . Introducing new progestins aimed at reducing adverse effects such as acne, oily skin , hair growth, and venous thrombosis ( Sitruk-Ware et al., 2012 ). By the time of the regulation, products including fourth-generation active ingredients were the most expensive available products, and they were not part of the HBP (Health Ministry, Resolución 5857 , 2018). All contraceptives require a prescription by a physician, and as a result, they cannot be advertised or sold directly to the consumer in a supermarket.
In Colombia, the drug registry is maintained by the Colombian National Institute of Food and Drug Safety (INVIMA). This registry provides information about each drug presentation licensed in Colombia. Drug presentation is defined as a unique combination of the drug name, dosage, and commercial description. This information is organized through a unique drug code or CUM, for its acronym in Spanish. For contraceptives, the registry also includes information about the brand name (which can be associated with more than one CUM), its manufacturing laboratory, regulation status, route of administration (i.e., oral, injectable, emergency, and patch contraceptives), and commercial status (i.e., medical sample or common drug). Up to June 2019, there were 749 active CUM: 492 oral contraceptives, 132 patches/implants/injections contraceptives, and 125 emergency contraceptives.
The vertical differentiation model is a common framework for analyzing price sensitivity in pharmaceutical markets . Generally, it assumes that customers are divided between loyal and non-loyal to the target of branded products ( Frank and Salkever, 1992 ). Original products have high prices as they retain loyal customers, whereas generics have low prices due to the strong competition for non-loyal customers. In this context, all contraceptives in the market were off-patent drugs, but none of them were non-branded generics. This behavior results from generic producers’ competition for loyal customers ( Wiggins and Maness, 2004 ): laboratories spend on marketing resources to establish a brand. Therefore, we expect consumers to respond to price drops. We also expect that non-regulated brands will anticipate such reductions and adjust. Yet, we do not know if the competition occurs within ingredients (consumers substituting products of the same chemical component) or if it expands between ingredients and generations.
The primary source of information is SISMED. It contains monthly contraceptive prices and sales. These transactions represent purchases from wholesalers in the institutional channel, including government institutions, insurers, and health providers; on the other hand, supermarkets, large pharmacy chains, and pharmaceutical wholesale intermediaries constitute the commercial channel. Currently, Colombia does not have an information system at the consumer level (as there are no reimbursement mechanisms for patients) or transactions between large purchasers and small retail pharmacies. We consider the commercial channel alone, given that our goal is to understand the private market, where almost all the regulated products are sold. Also, we consider only primary transactions. That is, sales done by the laboratories which manufactured or imported the drug. Although SISMED information is self-reported by the entities, high-quality data is guaranteed by sanctions to institutions with poor-quality reports. For the period of study, 2017Q1-2019Q3, we aggregate these registries, originally issued each month, and compute the weighted average price quarterly. We thus minimize the noise from strategic inventories on the monthly reporting frequency. We provide additional details about SISMED, and our use and aggregation of this information, in online Appendix B .
There are 79 product presentations registered within the relevant ATC classification codes, for which there has been at least one transaction since 2017Q1. We limit the analysis to those products for which there was at least one registered transaction at the national level every year between 2017Q1 and 2019Q3. The final sample includes 52 product presentations. This selection rule lets us understand the price dynamics associated with the regulation among products transacted in the market before and after the regulation, with a quarterly frequency. Fig. 1 summarizes the selection procedure. The characteristics of these restricted sample products are reported in Table 1 , while the characteristics of the non-restricted sample are available in Table A1 . The main difference dwells in the proportion of fourth-generation contraceptives and the percentage of regulated brands, and both are larger in the restricted sample. We will show that our main results do not vary across the restricted and non-restricted samples. This table is in Appendix A , like every other table and figure indexed by “A.” hereafter. We avoid mentioning the Appendix label for brevity. Download: Download high-res image (279KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Flowchart for the selection of contraceptives for the analysis. Notes : The first exclusion criterion applies to drugs not transacted in the period of analysis, starting in 2017. The second exclusion criterion applies to drugs that were not transacted at least once a year in the analysis period. Black bars represent excluded units. Table 1 . Characteristics of products within price ranges before the regulation - 2018Q4. # Products (CUM): 52 #ATC: 15 Price Categories Bottom Intermediate Top ≤ 5.45 (5.45; 14.84] > 14.84 Commercial description (Brands) 11/52 29/52 12/52 Active ingredients (ATC code) 5 12 5 Laboratories 9 9 5 Average price (USD) 3.41 9.98 17.39 Average price with respect to benchmark 0.26 0.78 1.37 Fourth generation (%) 0 55.17 75 Quarters since the product started to be active 42.93 34.86 33.37 Quarters since the product was registered 61.43 47.53 39.14 Market share units (%) 47.51 31.35 21.12 Market share sales value (%) 16.34 38.20 45.44 Regulated brands (%) 27.27 51.72 33.33 Regulated units (%) 28.73 76.84 70.81 Regulated sales value (%) 28.17 72.98 66.61 Notes: For this analysis, we used data from 2018Q4, the last period before the regulation. We aggregated sales and sales values by manufacturer (laboratory) in each market. Quarters since the product started to be active refers to the first transaction date, and Quarters since the product was registered refers to the date when it was registered in SISMED for future commercial purposes. Both are counted backwards, with 2019Q1 as final quarter. Benchmark value is 41,908 COP, corresponding to US$12.69 according to an average exchange rate of 3300 COP/USD between 2018Q4 and 2019Q1.
We employ the distribution of prices before the regulation to classify contraceptives on three price categories: Bottom ( < 5.45 USD), Intermediate (5.45–14.84 USD) and Top ( > 14.84 USD). For comparability, bear in mind that the average exchange rate was 3300 COP/USD on average. This distribution is displayed in Figure A1 . The cutoffs correspond to the upper values of the first and third quartiles. Consequently, the Intermediate price category accounts for roughly half of the regulated products. We opted for this partition as the price distribution shows a “hole” without any brand, around 8.5 to 10 USD. Hence, we preferred tackling this “anomaly” by putting away from this area the cutoffs defining this price category.
These price ranges allow us to connect our two exercises. We select six contraceptive brands for the audit study, explained in detail in Section 2.2 . The two low-price brands belong to the Intermediate price category, and they are used to define a benchmark price . This benchmark allows us to use the same numerary in both statistical analyses and is obtained from the low-price audited brands ( Dienille and Drospera ), yielding 41,908 COP (about US$12.69). The average price of all products in the Intermediate category is virtually identical to the average price of these two low-price brands, as is shown in Table 1 .
Table 1 reports some market-related characteristics of the selected products by price range. This classification allows us to identify four patterns before the regulation period (2018Q4). This is the reference period because we had reports for all 52 contraceptives. First, price differences are considerable across categories. The ratio of average prices between the Top and Bottom price categories is almost five. Second, fourth-generation contraceptives are absent from the Bottom price category, while they account for about half and two-thirds of products in the Intermediate and Top price categories, respectively. Third, the Bottom category accounts for 47.5% of the market units despite having only 21.1% of the brands. Fourth, in terms of regulated units and regulated sales value, the Top price category was affected with higher intensity by the price-cap regulation.
We formally analyze changes in prices and quantities after the regulation for the 52 product presentations with two linear panel fixed effects specifications. Equation (1) considers mean differences per price category, interacted with a structural break of the dependent variable after the regulation: (1) Y i t = α + ∑ j = 1 3 β j ⋅ P C j i × A t + ∑ k = 1 3 γ k q t k + ∑ j = 1 3 η j ⋅ t × P C j i + γ i + u i t
When the outcomes of interest are prices, Y it corresponds to the average price per unit of the product presentation i in quarter t , as relative to the benchmark value described above. When the outcome of interest is quantities, Y it corresponds to the logarithm of the total sold units of i in t .
As for the regressors, PC ji is a categorical variable capturing the price category j of product i (i.e., j = 1 for Bottom , j = 2 for Intermediate , and j = 3 for Top ). The period after the regulation is indicated by the binary variable A t , which takes the value of 1 from 2019Q1 onward. The equation also includes quarter dummies ( q tk ), a linear trend specific per product ( η s ), and the product presentation fixed effects, γ i . Thus, our coefficient of interest, β j , represents the jump in the price/quantities after the regulation started, conditional on a linear trend, seasonal effects, and net of time-invariant characteristics of each product presentation. The interaction terms in Eq. (1) allow that the average jumps differ between price bands and that trends could differ between groups. These bands are not meant to represent relevant markets but give the model some flexibility to capture heterogeneous effects between price bands. This flexibility lets us rule out mean reversion. Fig. 2 suggests that neither differential trends nor mean reversion constitute an issue. Moreover, this figure also lets us see that, for each price band, the trends for prices and traded quantities differ by regulatory status. We aim to capture this variation within each price band with the model presented in Equation (2) . Here, R hi allows us to differentiate products without any type of regulation ( h = 1) from those with a “regulated-ingredient” according to our previous definition ( h = 2), and from those directly regulated ( h = 3). This categorization will allow us to understand whether the regulation had a pure “mechanical” effect, decreasing the price of directly affected products, or whether it induced a competitive response on other oral contraceptives that are sufficiently similar. (2) Y i t = α + ∑ j = 1 3 ∑ h = 1 3 β j h ⋅ P C j i × R h i × A t + ∑ k = 1 3 γ k q t k + ∑ j = 1 3 η j ⋅ t × P C j i + γ i + u i t Download: Download high-res image (657KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Wholesale level quarterly average prices according to price category and regulation status. Note: The first vertical dashed line corresponds to the regulation announcement in 2018Q3 (6 August). The second vertical dashed line corresponds to the quarter when the regulation started (2019Q1). Shaded bars correspond to the periods in which the audit study was conducted.
A potential limitation of this analysis concerning products included in the explicit HBP (several second-generation contraceptives) is a potential crowding-out of the institutional channel in favor of the commercial channel. If it is the case, the analysis above will suffer from a change in the composition of the market. Thus, we explore if there is a break in the trend for the share of products sold through the commercial channel. We do so at the aggregate and the product level using a specification similar to equation (1) .
We use the SCM ( Kwan et al., 2019 ) as a complementary exercise to the wholesale analysis. By visiting pharmacies, we gather additional data that let us understand whether the price reduction passed through to the consumers (a critical point since the pharmaceutical industry cast doubt on this effect), and whether the availability of the audited brands changed after the regulation. The audit took place in Bogotá, a city with a wide SES distribution. Hence, we also studied whether the products in the different price categories were targeted to specific SES levels and whether this targeting strategy changed due to the regulation.
The data collection was carried out in two periods: right before the regulation and a couple of quarters after. Fig. 2 illustrates this timing. The shaded bars represent data collection points before (labeled as SCM1) and after the regulation (labeled as SCM2). Panel (a) confirms that price adjustments were effective at the due date of the regulation, allowing us to check whether this price adjustment was transmitted to pharmacies. Panel (b) evidences the increasing of sold units of intermediate and bottom regulated contraceptives.
We devise a standardized script for collecting the prices and availability of six contraceptive brands with two different progestins. Table 2 lists the six brands included in the study. Each column represents a progestin ( Dienogest or Drosperinone ). Within each column, we selected a high-, mid-, and low-price brand. The high-price products and one of the mid-price products ( Bellaface ) were classified in the Top price category in the wholesale analysis, which together account for 27.8% of the market share (in sales) among all oral contraceptives. Our selection aimed to maximize their availability before the regulation started. The other three audited brands were classified in the Intermediate price category and account for 3.7% of the market share. Since the two brands sharing a row were from the same pharmaceutical distributor, the complementary mid-price brand, Yaxibelle , was selected by meeting this criterion. Finally, the brands selected to represent the low-price segment met the condition of having the same distributor and completing the active ingredients from each treatment. Below each brand name in Table 2 , we also report its exact pharmaceutical ingredients, validating that drugs within a column are essentially the same regardless of the market segment they belong to. Table 2 . Selected contraceptive brands for the audit study. Brand name in italics. Pharmaceutical manufacturer in parenthesis. Market share of each brand (in sales) is reported in squared brackets. The International Nonpropietary Name (INN), enabling the identification of active pharmaceutical ingredients, appears below each brand name in parenthesis, in a smaller font. Market segment Brand Regulated? Dienogest Drosperinone High-price Qlaira (Bayer) [5.0%] Yasminiq (Bayer) [10.2%] No-Yes a (dienogest/estradiol valerate) (drospirenone/ethinylestradiol) Mid-price Bellaface (Abbott-Lafrancol) [12.6%] Yaxibelle (Abbott-Lafrancol) [3.6%] Yes-Yes (dienogest/ethinylestradiol) (drospirenone/ethinylestradiol) Low-price Dienille (Exeltis) [0.06%] Drospera (Exeltis) [0.01%] No–No (dienogest/ethinylestradiol) (drospirenone/ethinylestradiol) a By the time of the announcement of the price cap regulation, Qlaira was not listed among the regulated brands despite its price: the active substance dienogest and estrogen, whose pharmaceutical form is in tablet or capsule, belongs to the relevant market 602, however, Qlaira (Bayer) and Evely (Lafrancol) have an estrogen that has a different pharmacokinetic profile than the others, which made it necessary to create the relevant market 602b. Qlaira was regulated 9 months later after correcting this mistake. On the other hand, Yasminiq was included in the regulation, but the pharmaceutical distributor reduce its price some weeks before the regulation took place.
Fig. 3 displays, for each product presentation, the mapping of prices before (horizontal axis) and after the regulation (vertical axis). The marker shape for each product corresponds to the definition of the variable R hi in Equation (2) . The six audited brands appear labeled in this figure. Download: Download high-res image (302KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Prices before and after the regulation registered in SISMED. Note: Prices before and after the regulation for all the 52 products in our final sample, selected as described in Figure 1 . Blue squares correspond to the regulated products (N=22), green triangles for regulated ingredients (N=17), and red circles to the non-regulated products (N=13).
The six brands chosen in the audit experiment are tagged.
We sampled pharmacies based on their distance to the stations of the city's mass transportation system, Transmilenio. We aimed to audit pharmacies located in areas with a considerable influx of people, securing a sufficient inventory rotation that allows owners to rapidly incorporate the price cap regulation with the new stocks. The initial inventory of pharmacies was completed using Google Maps, including 298 pharmacies. We visited all the 298 registered locations, but, in situ , we learned that some of the pharmacies were moved or were permanently closed. Consequently, we audited 213 (71.5%) pharmacies in our initial inventory.
We randomly assigned two features that varied in each audit. First, the progestin. Since we visited each pharmacy once, we either have information regarding the availability and prices of Qlaira , Bellaface , and Dienille in the Dienogest treatment; or this same information for Yasminiq , Yaxibelle , and Drospera in the Drosperinone treatment. The second dimension we randomly varied was the gender of the simulated client.
We conducted the audits in December 2018, right before the price cap regulation took place. Research assistants acting as potential buyers worked in pairs, typically one woman and one man, and were assigned to one of the mass transport system zones. Once a pre-assigned pharmacy was located, the simulated client entered and employed the script to collect the information. If customers were waiting in the pharmacy, the simulated client left and revisited it 5–10 min later.
We employ a script with three advantages. First, it allows us to interact with pharmacy vendors systematically and blindly. This feature is essential in the context of the new regulation: sellers might avoid audits from pharmaceutical companies and government offices and, therefore, might be reluctant to provide long lists of prices or simply misreport prices. Second, it allows us to collect information on prices and availability for three contraceptive brands per audited pharmacy. Third, regardless of the gender of the simulated client, the seller could infer that the contraceptive pills were not for herself or himself. The script says: Good morning/afternoon, the Physician prescribed to my younger sister these pills called [name of the high-price brand] . I was told that these other two brands have the same effect, and they are cheaper. [The buyer shows a handwritten piece of paper with the three names of the brands sharing the same active component.] Do you have them? How much they cost? [The buyer writes down the prices either (i) on the piece of paper, or (ii) on her/his cellphone.]
The three brands were mentioned from the most to the least expensive (before the price regulation). The main reason is that it becomes more credible to further ask about the cheaper brands.
We conducted the follow-up collection three months after the initial data gathering. The purpose was to study what occurred with the availability and the prices of the six audited brands. Due to resource constraints, during this second stage, we combined two collection methods: in-presence visits to sixty percent of the originally audited pharmacies and telephone calls to the remaining pharmacies.
We employed again the script described above. Using the same protocol, including the script, is advantageous because both waves of data collection are as similar as possible. On the other hand, using the same script has the disadvantage of increasing the chances of being detected by the pharmacy's vendor. Research assistants acting as simulated clients were reassigned to different areas of the city, ensuring that the vendor did not recognize the client from a past interaction. Moreover, we argue that the chances of detection remain low because three months have passed between the pre- and post-regulation audits. Moreover, 48% of the pharmacies had two or more vendors at the initial visit.
We gathered the telephone numbers of the pharmacies in the pre-regulation audits and used them in the post-regulation audits. Since the logistic cost of phone audits was lower, we did not employ the script described in Section 2.2.2 . Columns 1 and 2 in Table A2 reveal that the only feature in which phone audited pharmacies differ is that they were less representative of the western area of the city (where pharmacies and Transmilenio stations were sparser and therefore costlier to collect data in-presence).
We called a pharmacy and asked for the availability and price of the three initially audited brands. We made separate calls for each brand, calling on different days to minimize the chance that phone respondents learned about the audit. We tried up to three times in case a call was not answered. After the third failed attempt, we labeled the drug store as unreachable by phone. It occurred in 35.6% of the pharmacies. Columns 3 and 4 in Table A2 reveal that pharmacies using an electronic cash register (instead of a computer) were less likely to be reachable by phone. As a conjecture, these lower investments in technology are positively correlated with lower use of selling mechanisms different from in-person transactions, reducing their use of the phone (or line numbers may be outdated). All the phone calls were made by two research assistants, one woman and one man, who did not participate in the in-presence audits in either of the stages.
We will take as the unit of observation an audited brand i , in pharmacy j , at time t ∈ {Before, After}. We will consider two dependent variables for each brand: price and availability. We perform a statistical analysis similar to eq. (2) , with a difference-in-difference analysis where the dimensions of interest are price categories (i.e., high-, mid-, and low-price) interacted with the regulation stage (i.e., before and after). Moreover, since the high-price category includes a regulated and a non-regulated product, we also include this variation in the regression. In a second specification, we study the interplay between socioeconomic status (high vs. low) and the regulation stage, leaving out price categories.

Section: 3. Results

Table 3 shows changes in prices and quantities sold based on administrative records. Columns 1 and 2 refer to the average price per product, and columns 3 to 4 refer to the logarithm of quantities as the dependent variable. Table 3 . Regulation effects by price category at wholesale level. Empty Cell (1) (2) (3) (4) Relative price Ln(Quantity) Top × After −0.490*** (0.140) −0.0115 (0.244) Interm. × After −0.364*** (0.0502) 0.186 (0.124) Bottom × After −0.0858** (0.0345) −0.0797 (0.215) Top × Non-regulated × After −0.0540* (0.0294) −0.466** (0.196) Top × Reg. Ingredient × After −0.349* (0.197) −0.0807 (0.382) Top × Reg. Product × After −1.003*** (0.0464) 0.424* (0.231) Interm. × Non-regulated × After −0.0599 (0.0477) −0.286* (0.162) Interm. × Reg. Ingredient × After −0.442*** (0.122) 0.626** (0.277) Interm. × Reg. Product × After −0.467*** (0.0363) 0.191 (0.151) Bottom × Non-regulated × After −0.0330 (0.0276) −0.300* (0.164) Bottom × Reg. Ingredient × After −0.0759 (0.0573) −0.0235 (0.150) Bottom × Reg. Product × After −0.173*** (0.0157) 0.0718 (0.480) Constant 0.777*** (0.0367) 0.775*** (0.0350) 9.059*** (0.133) 9.054*** (0.132) Observations 551 551 551 551 Number of drugs 52 52 52 52 R-squared 0.496 0.720 0.0288 0.126 Adjusted R-squared 0.488 0.712 0.0126 0.101 Notes: All regressions include a price-level specific linear trend, quarter seasonal dummies, and drug fixed effects. Clustered standard errors by drug level are shown in parentheses. Significance levels: *p < 0.1; **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01.
Column 1 reveals sizeable reductions with respect to the benchmark price. Relative to the pre-intervention average, we observe reductions of 0.49 for products in the Top category, equivalent to a 35.7% reduction of the category's mean price, reported in Table 1 . The price reductions for the Intermediate and Bottom categories were 0.36 (46.6%) and 0.08 (33%), respectively. Column 2 reveals differences after separating products by regulation type.
Prices did not change much for contraceptives whose active ingredients were not regulated. The average reduction for regulated products in the Top category was 1.00 (92%). For regulated ingredients, the point estimate of the reduction was 0.35 (27.4%), but the estimate is less precise. For products in the Intermediate category, the price reduction for directly regulated products was equivalent to 0.46 (78%). For regulated-ingredients, this reduction was 0.44 (55%). For products in the Bottom category, the price reduction of regulated products was 0.17 (73%) with respect to the pre-regulation mean price.
As for quantities, Column 3 reveals an increase in the Intermediate price category, although they are imprecisely estimated. Column 4 reveals that once the products are separated by regulation type, the traded quantities of regulated products in the Top and Intermediate price categories increased by 52.8% and 87%, respectively. These large increases are evident in Fig. 2 . By contrast, for non-regulated products, there is a reduction in the traded quantities. They fell by 59%, 33% and 35% in the Top , Intermediate , and Bottom price categories, respectively. The same patterns are observed when considering the non-restricted sample with 79 products (see Table A3 ). Moreover, the positive effect of the regulation is more pronounced if the drugs are weighted in the regression by their sales at the start of our period of analysis (i.e., two periods before the regulation). Table A4 confirms that the regulation would look even more effective by focusing on the more popular pre-regulation contraceptives, according to their market share.
When we divide the drugs by regulatory status (i.e., non-regulated, regulated ingredient, and regulated product), omitting price categories, the aggregate effect reveals that prices significantly dropped for regulated products and for regulated ingredients (see Table A5 ). There is also a small, though statistically significant, reduction in the price of non-regulated products. In terms of traded quantities, there was a significant expansion for regulated products (28%) and an equivalent drop for non-regulated ones (−31%). Moreover, in Table A6 , we employ a narrower definition by considering both progestin-estrogen combinations, yielding similar results.
Being aware of the increase in traded contraceptives whose price is affected by the regulation, a further question is whether the market share allocated through the commercial channel increased as well. This outcome might result from a shift in the individual's cost-benefit analysis of receiving the contraceptives through their HBP: if prices in pharmacies dropped, some patients might prefer to buy them directly and avoid waiting times and other non-monetary costs associated with the institutional channel. Fig. 4 uses monthly data to show that the market share of the commercial channel remained stable after the regulation, around 55–65%. This visual inspection is validated through the regression results reported in Table A7 . Aggregating all the contraceptives, the market share seems to increase by 5.8 percentage points. Nonetheless, regressions at the drug-quarter level allow us to study second- and third-generation contraceptives, the only ones covered in the HBP. For this subsample of interest, the market share of the commercial channel did not change with the regulation, suggesting that, in the short run, there was no substitution between the commercial and institutional channels. Download: Download high-res image (352KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Oral contraceptives' market share belonging to the commercial channel. Notes : The dashed dark red line corresponds to the start of the regulation on January 2019.
A reader's potential concern is whether the reported results for prices and quantities at the wholesale level are preserved if the thresholds of the price categories are redefined or if the drugs included in the analysis are divided into a different number of categories. We refer below to the results of these robustness checks, leaving the full display of results in the Appendix.
First, we report the regression results with three alternative threshold definitions in Table A8 . The first two models (columns 3–4 and 5–6) alter the threshold between the Bottom and Intermediate categories to 6.66 and 8.48 USD, respectively. These thresholds follow the modal values observed in the price distribution displayed in Figure A1 . The third model (columns 7–8) uses as thresholds the first and second tertiles of the price distribution before the regulation. The results are qualitatively similar to Table 3 .
Second, we report in Table A9 the regression results when the drugs are divided into two categories and when the analysis is performed without dividing these drugs by price categories. Following the “natural” partition of drugs reported in Figure A1 , we use 9 USD as the threshold to define the Top and Bottom categories. Again, the results are similar to Table 3 , with a larger price decrease in the Top category. We complement this robustness check with a sensitivity analysis of the threshold location, reported in Figure A3 . After the regulation, the coefficients of interest remain relatively stable, except for the price in the Bottom category. Although it is always negative and statistically significant, panel (b) in this figure reveals a downward trend for this coefficient as the threshold increases. This high sensitivity to the threshold suggests an added value of using three categories in our main analysis.
We performed an additional analysis, dividing the drugs by generations (fourth-generation compared to previous ones). This analysis is important not only because the fourth-generation is not covered in the HBP but also because drug class is a natural unit in an analysis of pharmaceutical regulation . Although generations is a broad grouping category, an analysis at the ATC code level will be too specific given that for 11/15 of the relevant ATC codes, the maximum number of brands is 2, and for 6/15 of them there is a single laboratory per ATC code (see Table A10 ). The results, reported in Table A11 , reveal that the price drop from regulated ingredients is driven by fourth-generation drugs. For regulated products, the price drop in the fourth-generation is almost twice the drop from past generations. Regarding traded quantities, there is a decrease for non-regulated products from past generations, but the increase for regulated products is not statistically significant, regardless of the generation.
We validate whether the wholesale price reduction is also encountered at the pharmacy level three months after the regulation. The left panel in Fig. 5 depicts the observed prices before (in black) and after the regulation (in gray). The average price dropped for mid- and low-price brands. By contrast, the non-regulated high-price brand maintained its pre-regulation price. The interpretation of the regulated high-price brand, Yasminiq , is more convoluted. Its pharmaceutical distributor decreased the prices in the pharmacies before the regulation started to operate. Consequently, its average pre-regulation price falls below the average prices of the mid-price brands at the same moment. To give an additional idea of the variation in the prices for Yasminiq before the regulation, the standard deviation of its prices is 5.49 USD. In comparison, this deviation for the other audited brands is between 0.82 USD and 2.74 USD. Download: Download high-res image (354KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 5 . Average prices (left panel) and availability (right panel) of the six audited brands. Note: *Average price and availability for Yasminiq before the regulation is displayed with a different color because the pharmaceutical distributor reduced the prices before the regulation started to operate. We use information before December 18 th as the “before regulation” period for Yasminiq . The dashed horizontal line represents the average price of contraceptives in the Intermediate price category before the regulation.
Recall that Qlaira and Yasminiq , the high-price brands, have the same pharmaceutical distributor. Their observed prices suggest a complex pricing strategy in the context of post-regulation for this laboratory. The non-regulated product maintained its price, even if brands with the same active component set an average price that considerably fell below the price cap. On the other hand, the regulated one decreased its price below the mid-price brands, even some weeks before the regulation started to apply.
Table 4 confirms the price reduction associated with the regulation observed in the left panel of Fig. 5 . Columns 1 and 2 reveal that the effects are evident for all the contraceptive categories, except for the non-regulated high-price brand. The statistical comparisons of coefficients, reported at the bottom of the table, confirm that the largest price drops occur for the mid-price contraceptives, whose difference with respect to high- and low-price products is statistically significant. Columns 3 and 4 report an analysis to validate price differences by SES levels. The price reduction did not differ between High and Low SES pharmacies. Table 4 . Price effects across market segments and SES Level after regulation based on pharmacy-level data. Empty Cell Price (1) (2) (3) (4) High-price non-regulated × After −0.0539 (0.0550) 0.0821 (0.105) High-price regulated × After −0.339*** (0.0815) −0.282** (0.125) Mid-price × After −0.892*** (0.0361) −0.748*** (0.0778) Low-price × After −0.442*** (0.0411) −0.319*** (0.0735) SES Level: High × After −0.484*** (0.0491) −0.383*** (0.107) SES Level: Low × After −0.475*** (0.0372) −0.290*** (0.0742) Constant 0.992*** (0.0790) −1.761 (1.419) 1.238*** (0.0732) 0.643 (0.542) Observations 522 522 522 522 R-squared 0.768 0.859 0.679 0.792 Adjusted R-squared 0.743 0.765 0.648 0.654 Controls ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Pharmacy FE ✓ ✓ Differences between coefficients after the regulation [ p − values] (Low-end) - (High-end Regulated) −0.103 [0.276] −0.0367 [0.769] (Low-end) - (Mid-range) 0.450 [ < 0.0001] 0.428 [ < 0.0001] (High-end Regulated) - (Mid-range) 0.553 [ < 0.0001] 0.465 [0.0002] SES Level: Low - High 0.00824 [0.880] 0.0932 [0.341] Notes: *p < 0.1; **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01. Clustered standard errors by drugstore are shown in parenthesis. The dependent variable in all specifications is the relative price quoted by the pharmacy's regent. Controls included: Socioeconomic status wherein drugstores were located, contraceptives availability, drugstores zone, experimenter identification, seller gender, seller age, chain, and store size.
An attentive reader might wonder how the early price reduction of Yasminiq would affect the estimated coefficients. We performed a robustness exercise in which we reassigned for Yasminiq the value of the variable After , indicating the starting day of the regulation. We artificially shifted backward the starting day of the regulation for Yasminiq up to twelve days, altering the proportion of observations for which this brand was observed before and after the regulation. The results of this robustness exercise are displayed in Figure A4 . In eleven out of twelve regressions, the point estimate from our original computation falls within the confidence interval of the re-estimated coefficient of interest ( Yasminiq × After Regulation ).
Results from Table 3 , indicating an increase in the transacted quantities of regulated products at the wholesale level, would suggest a similar pattern at the pharmacy level. Nevertheless, the right panel in Fig. 5 shows that this is not the case for the audited brands. We observe that product availability decreases after the regulation for the high- and mid-price brands. We conjecture that this decrease in availability obeys a destocking pattern triggered by the belief that the price cap regulation was temporary. This belief may be sustained by previous failed attempts to implement price regulation laws in Colombia (two recent episodes, 2009–2010 and 2018, are described in Appendix C ). By contrast, for the low-price brands, we either observe an increase in availability ( Drospera ) or no difference at all ( Dienille ).
An important concern is whether price controls backfired, reducing the regulated contraceptives’ availability in poorer areas. Table A12 reveals that the reduction in availability was larger in Low SES areas. This reduction is statistically significant in two out of three models. In Appendix D , we complement this statistical analysis with three maps (see Figures A5, A6, and A7 ) depicting the spatial availability of high-, mid-, and low-price brands in Bogotá, before and after the regulation.

Section: 4. Discussion

Oral contraceptives have two features usually absent in most regulated pharmaceuticals. First, it has no originators but no “pure generics”: all products are branded generics, but some invest more in brand positioning than others. It means that (i) the main policy concern is not the usual arguments on dynamic incentives to recover investments in research and development of new molecules ( Danzon and Chao, 2000 ), and (ii) it is not clear whether patients know about the existence of a substitute for the prescribed product.
Second, the regulation is applied across multiple contraceptive generations, but the Colombian HBP only includes second-generation contraceptives. Since, by construction, the price-cap regulation reduced the price spread, variations in market share may have two welfare-relevant effects. On the one hand, a scenario of low loyalty combined with the belief that newer-generation (and previously expensive) contraceptives are better might have crowded out the institutional channel, increasing pocket expenditures. Our wholesale results validate that this crowding-out did not occur in the short term. On the other hand, a lower price spread may have increased substitution between brands offering the same estrogen-progestin combination since more similar prices could reduce the erroneous signal of a positive correlation between price and quality. Our audit results suggest that substitution is low for market leaders within each ATC ( Qlaira , the non-regulated high-price brand). In contrast, market followers do react to potential substitution by decreasing prices even in the component, not the brand, is regulated ( Dienille and Drospera , the low-price brands). This latter result is also observed at the wholesale level.
How do our results speak to the existing literature? The previous evidence focuses on the medium- and long-term effects of pharmaceutical regulations . Namely, future exit or entry of generics and incentives for the development of new molecules ( Costa-Font et al., 2014 ; Zhang et al., 2016 ). Since we can only discuss short-term effects, we cannot say much about the entry and exit of oral contraceptives. The single cue we can interpret in this direction is the anticipated price reduction of Bayer's Yasminiq . The former high-price brands may try to expand their sales volume to compensate for the profit reduction due to the price cap. If substitutability is low, large producers may opt for decreasing competition within the ATC5 level (by driving out of the market less known brands) and expand to additional ATC5 groups, aiming to capture consumers loyal to the producer's name. For instance, the same producer of the mid-price audited brands registered a new product in 2019, Bellanew , with a slightly different active component ( Estradiol Hemihydrate/Dienogest ).
Besides, most of the evidence of the consequences of price regulation in the pharmaceutical domain relates to developed countries ( Danzon and Chao, 2000 ), where the reimbursement mechanisms allow a transparent implementation of other regulations such as reference pricing ( Brekke et al., 2009 ) and originate data where traceability goes from the producer to the final user. In the context of a developing country, our audit study is helpful because the trace with administrative data is lost at the pharmacy level. Our evidence that the price reduction reaches the final consumer is important to contrast the argument from producers, who argued that the price reduction might be kept by the pharmacies, making regulation ineffective.
We close this discussion by acknowledging a limitation in our analysis. Although price reductions are evident and connect our wholesale and audit analysis results, the connection between the “macro” and “micro” results for quantities is less straightforward. The main issue is that the stocking behavior can be strategic for distributors, pharmacies, and patients. Even worse, this stocking behavior is not readily observable at any three levels. The following analysis is purely speculative but can still illustrate our point. Distributors may have opted to raise their stock to anticipate higher prices in the future. Pharmacies could spatially reallocate inventories to respond to the demand of customers that they may consider more loyal to a brand or more willing to accumulate several units. Consumers may stock units to respond to the belief that the regulation may be temporary or because they expect other consumers to engage in this stocking behavior. These conjectures point to the observed limited substitutability, an outcome that may change in the medium run. Unfortunately, we cannot explore nor disentangle from an actual consumer demand expansion with the data from the first year after the regulation.

Section: 5. Conclusions

Our analysis at the wholesale level yields three main results. First, following the price cut, there was a massive expansion of transacted products, especially in the regulated products of the Top price category and the products with a regulated ingredient in the Intermediate category. Second, the price of products with a regulated ingredient dropped, whereas the price for non-regulated products with a different active ingredient was not affected. This result suggests that distributors consider active principles as non-substitutable, and active ingredients constitute the appropriate, relevant market (even though, for most women, all oral contraceptives are therapeutic substitutes). Third, there is no evidence of a crowding-out of the institutional channel in favor of the commercial channel. Hence, women using mandatory health insurance did not decide to start buying products in private pharmacies.
On the other hand, our analysis at the pharmacy level reveals that price reductions were passed from the wholesale level to the consumers for regulated and non-regulated products. Changes in the availability, which we can only observe for the six audited brands covering 31% of all the oral contraceptive sales, suggest that mid- and high-price regulated fourth-generation contraceptives may face some scarcity after the regulation, especially in poor areas. In terms of public health, this pattern is probably positive: if the scarcity of “marketed” generics increases substitution within the same ATC category, the welfare gains from this regulation could be even larger by increasing the sales of the (formerly) cheaper products. In terms of policy goals, only aggregate scarcity should be a concern. Thus, price regulation needs to be complemented with policy efforts to encourage substitution within the same ATC, such as the enforcement of non-branded prescriptions. As a caveat of our results, it remains unclear whether the same availability pattern occurred for contraceptives from previous generations, the ones covered in the HBP.
The first year of this regulation seems to provide a net gain to final customers in the market, despite the lack of customer substitution towards equivalent though less recognized and cheaper branded generics. Brand loyalty appears to be fundamental in our finding that the institutional channel was not crowded-out by the price drop of fourth-generation contraceptives, which are not included in the HBP. The small convenience component of oral contraceptives deserves further attention in future research, not only for a retrospective analysis but also as an element for policy design when price regulations can drastically alter the public and private market shares.

Section: Credit author statement

Tatiana Andia : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, César Mantilla : Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Álvaro Morales : Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Resources, Writing – review & editing, Santiago Ortiz : Software, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Paul Rodríguez-Lesmes : Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

Section: Funding/support

We acknowledge funding from the program Fulbright-Colciencias and Colombia Cientifica – Alianza EFI 60185 contract FP44842- 220–2018 , funded by The World Bank through the Scientific Ecosystems, managed by the Colombian Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MINCIENCIAS) .

Section: Declarations of interest

None reported.

Section: Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the members of Salud Visible (Universidad de los Andes), Universities Allied for Essential Medicines (Universidad Nacional), and Jóvenes Investigadores team from Universidad del Rosario for taking part as simulated clients: Juan Pablo Baquero, Emilia Cárdenas, Liliana Cortés, Nicolas Currea, Sara Delgado, María Camila Díaz, Diana Jany, Karen Liseth Franco, Daniela González, Christian Leal, Daniela López, Kevin López, Luisa Medi-eta, Valentina Muñoz Bernal, Elsy Ramírez, Gustavo Rojano, Steffanny Romero, Juliana Sánchez, Andrea Juliana Silva, Pablo Toro, Jhonathan Vanegas, María Gabriela Vargas, Juan Pablo Vega, Santiago Villanueva, and Juan Diego Zapata. Medical advice from Marta Mantilla M.D. on contraceptive patients' profiles was very helpful.
