Title: “We are to be like machines…fill the bed before it gets cold ”: Exploring the emotional geographies of healthcare providers caring for dying residents in long-term care facilities


Abstract: Abstract

The end-of-life context is imbued with emotions, with death and dying transforming everyday places, like long-term care facilities, into entirely new emotional topographies that can evoke profound effects on those who live and work within these settings. Despite their significant role, healthcare providers' emotions and their interconnections with ‘place’ have received relatively little attention from researchers, including geographers of care and caregiving. This secondary thematic analysis attempts to address this notable gap by exploring the emotional geographies of healthcare providers caring for dying residents in four long-term care facilities in western Canada. By drawing upon interview and focus group data with administrators (n = 12) and direct care provider (n = 80) participants, findings reveal that experiences of caring for dying residents were often charged with negative emotions (e.g., distress, frustration, grief). These emotions were not only influenced by social and physical aspects of ‘place’, but the temporal process of caring for a dying resident, which included: (1) Identifying a resident as in need of a palliative approach to care; (2) Actively dying; and (3) Following a resident's death. Findings indicate that providers' emotions shifted in scale at each of these temporal phases, ranging from association with the facility as a whole to the micro-scale of the body. Broader structural forces that influence the physical and social place of long-term care facilities were also found to shape experiences of emotional labor among staff. With an increasing number of deaths occurring within long-term care facilities throughout the Global North, such findings contribute critical experiential knowledge that can inform policy and programs on ways to help combat staff burnout, facilitate worker satisfaction, and foster resilience among long-term care providers, ensuring they receive the necessary supports to continue fulfilling this valuable caring role.

Section: 1. Emotional geographies of care

The places and spaces that we inhabit, occupy, and traverse in our daily lives evoke emotions within us, while at the same time emotions shape our experiences of these places and spaces ( Bondi et al., 2012 ). The linkages between emotions and place is highly complex, particularly because neither fit neatly into categorical boxes and because both are often experienced in fluid and dynamic ways that are difficult to define and/or untangle ( Parr et al., 2005 ). Despite this complexity, emotions are undoubtedly relevant to place-based experiences and in fact, infuse and inform all aspects of our lived realities ( Smith et al., 2016 ). Generally, emotions are defined as dynamic, embodied, and relational complexes of feelings and bodily sensations that are experienced within specific times, places, socio-cultural contexts, and dynamics of power ( Davidson and Milligan, 2004 ; Burkitt, 2014 ; Parr et al., 2005 ; Smith et al., 2016 ; Ahmed, 2004 ; Thien, 2005 ). Smith and colleagues state ( Smith et al., 2009 ) that emotions are amongst the most important ways in which we are both connected with, as well as disconnected from our world. Expanding on the relational aspect, Burkitt (2014) emphasizes that although emotions are first registered by our bodies, expressed emotions are, in fact, referring to relationships between people and their environment. Considering that our emotions are what makes places, people, and incidents meaningful ( Smith et al., 2016 ), geographers have increasingly begun exploring the interconnections between place, emotion, and affect, resulting in what has been described as a relatively recent ‘emotional turn’ in the field ( Bondi et al., 2012 ).
While human geography researchers' interests in emotions have surged ( Bondi et al., 2012 ), health geographers, particularly those working in the areas of geographies of care and caregiving, have been slower to embrace this line of inquiry ( Bondi, 2008 ). Typically, researchers working in these areas have focused on highlighting the critical role that space and place play in the social organization and exchange of care (e.g., Milligan, 2012 , Kearns and Barnett, 2000 , Skinner et al., 2015 ), leaving the interconnected significance of ‘emotions’ and dimension of ‘time’ under-acknowledged. For example, little geography of care and caregiving research explicitly or systematically considers the linkages between the spatial and temporal processes of caregiving. As a result, the importance of the timescale of the human lifecourse and changes in the associated needs for particular types of care (e.g., pediatric , geriatric , palliative, etc.), dynamics related to differing stages or trajectories of diseases or illnesses, the effects of embodied temporalities and habituations on care routines (e.g., sleeping, eating, etc.), the development and evolution of care relationships, and the role of memory remain either implicit, or absent all together ( Bowlby, 2012 ). Importantly, emotions are inherently linked to these temporal processes of care exchanges, particularly in the end-of-life context where people are approaching the end of their lifecourse, vulnerability and disease/illness severity increases, new care rhythms and routines are created, more intense and often intimate care relationships are developed, and after death occurs, the emotional impacts of grief and memory may be experienced by caregivers. Hence, while the experiences of care exchanges are undoubtedly shaped by the places in which they occur, there is a need for geographers of care and caregiving to simultaneously consider the temporal and emotional dimensions of care in order to capture a more nuanced understanding of these complex lived experiences and identify needs for support.
Although there is little research that explicitly explores the connections of place, care, emotion, and time, some do examine aspects of this intersection. For example, Milligan (2005) , applies an emotio-spatial hermeneutic framework to examine how emotion and the affective entity of informal caregiving for frail older people manifests and is experienced when the site of care shifts from the private spaces of the home to the semipublic space of the residential care home. Expanding on the cultural and emotional experience and meaning of ‘home’, Milligan (2005) found that those who were relocated to a residential care home did not ever ‘feel at home’ there due to various place-based aspects, such as the lack of perceived privacy that results from having no locks on doors. Andrews (2011) explored the emotion of fear in regard to needle phobia and how the act of inserting a needle into the body, and the healthcare settings where such procedures take place, combine to result in a spatial affect. More recently, Herron and Skinner (2013) examined the importance and implications of emotions for older people and their caregivers in the rural Canadian context. They found that across multiple scales, care relationships, expectations, and responsibilities were negotiated, revealing that emotions are central, yet often-overlooked, within these care relationships ( Herron and Skinner, 2013 ). Despite recognition that place, emotions, care, and time are inherently confluent, no research to our knowledge has explored their interrelationship in the context of care at the end-of-life, which is a significant omission considering the emotional milieu that typically surrounds death and dying. As such, there is a need for more health and healthcare geographers, and other social scientists, to begin considering how places intersect with the ways in which care providers' experience, navigate, and manage their emotions across the trajectory of caregiving, including the process of caring for those at the end-of-life.

Section: 2. Emotional labor at the end-of-life

Undeniably, death and dying can produce emotionally laden ‘carescapes’ ( Bowlby, 2012 ; Ivanova et al., 2016 ). Formal care providers are not immune to these emotive contexts, yet despite how they ‘feel’, are often expected to manage and align their emotions according to professional expectations ( Funk et al., 2017 ; Mann, 2005 ; Grandey, 2000 ). This emotional work that healthcare providers do as a requirement of their job is defined as emotional labor ( Funk et al., 2017 ; Mann, 2005 ). More specifically, emotional labor is “the process of regulating both feelings and expressions for the organizational goals” ( Grandey, 2000 , pg.97). This regulation of emotional expression generally occurs as a result of ‘display rules’ from within particular work environments , which implicitly or explicitly dictate the proper emotional expression of staff ( Bagdasarov and Connelly, 2013 ). Display rules are prevalent in caring professions , demanding that employees exhibit positive emotions and/or suppress negative ones, regardless of their true feelings ( Bagdasarov and Connelly, 2013 ). Although emotional labor is critical to high-quality care, it is generally an “under-appreciated aspect of caring work” ( Henderson, 2001 , pg. 130), resulting in providers being ordered to care in a society that typically fails to adequately value caring ( Funk et al., 2017 ; Pandey and Singh, 2016 ).
The emotional labor endured by formal healthcare providers at the end-of-life has been found to cause high levels of stress that can impact their health and wellbeing ( Ingebretsen and Sagbakken, 2016 ; Funk et al., 2017 ; Mann, 2005 ; Waskiewich et al., 2012 ; Karlsson et al., 2017 ). This is especially so when particular events evoke deeply felt negative emotions in providers, who must then find ways to move beyond the emotion to carry on with their work ( Bagdasarov and Connelly, 2013 ). Funk and colleagues ( Funk et al., 2017 ) describe the emotional difficulties that healthcare workers providing care for dying patients and their families experience, which resulted in emotional detachment as a common strategy to cope. Organizational expectations placed on healthcare staff, particularly nurses, to carry on as normal after the death of a patient are claimed to lead to increased levels of stress and ultimately, to result in grief becoming disenfranchised if its expression is not permitted ( Wakefield, 2000 ). If grief remains unrecognized and unaddressed while being experienced chronically and cumulatively, it can lead to complete emotional, spiritual, and physical exhaustion, commonly referred to as ‘compassion fatigue’ ( Houck, 2014 ). Evidence suggests that prolonged exposure to compassion fatigue and all that it evokes leads health professionals to view their employment duties as being in direct competition with their distress, resulting in decreased job satisfaction and many leaving their profession altogether ( Houck, 2014 ). At the same time, compassion fatigue decreases quality of care and puts patients at increased risk due to circumstances associated with low staffing, errors, abuse, and neglect, as well as poor caring relationships ( Nolte et al., 2017 ).
As masking true emotions tends to equate professionalism, the emotional labor endured by healthcare professionals often remains invisible, even in the end-of-life context ( Funk et al., 2017 ). This is particularly so in settings like LTC facilities, which typically are not specialized in palliative care due to death and dying being ‘traditionally’ viewed as an event that takes place elsewhere, like hospital or hospice settings. However, with the increasing desire of many to die within familiar settings (e.g., home, community settings) ( Skinner and Joseph, 2011 ; Morris S et al., 2007 ; Rainsford et al., 2016 ) and with evidence pointing to the increasing number of deaths that are now occurring within LTC facilities ( Honinx et al., 2019 ; Marcella and Kelley, 2015 ; Quality Palliative Care in Long Term Care QPC-LTC Alliance, 2017 ), a dire need exists to develop and formalize LTC palliative care programs in order to address needs and implement necessary supports for both dying residents and LTC staff ( Marcella and Kelley, 2015 , Quality Palliative Care in Long Term Care QPC-LTC Alliance, 2017 ). This includes recognizing the personal and emotional impacts that death and dying may have on those fulfilling the valuable role of care provision for LTC residents at the end-of-life ( Marcella and Kelley, 2015 ; Funk et al., 2017 ).

Section: 3. Study overview

This secondary analysis is based upon data collected for a larger implementation science project that aimed to identify the best approaches for successfully integrating a palliative approach to care in LTC settings in order to improve care provider capacity, care satisfaction, and end-of-life outcomes. Our multi-professional research team is comprised of members working in the local health authority's end-of-life program, four different LTC facilities (that became our study sites), and the local university. This study contributes to a larger Canada-wide project (Seniors – Adding Life to Years) that was developed by researchers, care providers, care administrators, policy makers, older adults and their families from across Canada, which aims to improve all aspects of care in long-term care facilities ( Keefe et al., 2020 ). Ethics approval for this study was obtained from the local University and Health Research Ethics Boards.

Section: 4. Data collection

The study took place in a western Canadian region with data collection occurring from April 2016 to October 2018. All LTC facilities within this particular region were initially considered as potential study sites, but were then purposely selected based upon: geographic location where a Palliative Care Specialist Physician and Nurse would both be available; urban and rural representation; differing ownership type (i.e., funded publicly or privately); similar number of residents to allow for comparison; differing models of physician care (e.g., integrated interdisciplinary care , primary care); and having no formalized palliative care program in place. From this criteria, six differing LTC facilities were invited to participate through formal letters. Four LTC facilities (total of n = 539 LTC beds) consented to participate and became sites for our study. See Table 1 for more details on these participating facilities’ characteristics. Table 1 . Facility characteristics. Facility Characteristics LTC #1 LTC #2 LTC #3 LTC #4 Location Larger urban area Larger urban area Smaller urban area Smaller urban area Building environment 1-story building 2 garden accesses, Lounges, on-site parking 7-story complex care tower with an adjoining 42-bed assisted living building, exterior patio & garden/pond area 5-linked buildings with a central corridor; gardens between each building, fireside lounge 1-story building with interior courtyards providing residential care & one hospice unit Ownership Provincial Government Private Affiliate Private Affiliate Provincial Government Number of resident beds − 72 publicly subsidized beds − 185 publicly subsidized beds − 32 private pay beds − 160 publicly subsidized beds − 90 publicly subsidized beds Number of rooms - 9 private rooms - 14 semi-private - 9 (4-bed ward rooms) - 217 complex care rooms - 195 private rooms - 11 semi-private - 42 assisted living - 160 complex care rooms -106 private rooms - 50 assisted living - 58 private rooms - 3 semi-private - 9 multi-person - 2 respite beds - 5 hospice units Care Provided Complex care Complex care; dementia care Complex care; dementia care Complex care; respite care; transitional care Average length of resident stay 14 months unknown 14 months 14 months Ratio of Care Providers to Residents Health Care Aides Days - 1:6 Days - 1:8 Days - 6:40 Days - 1:8 Evenings - 1:12 Evenings - 1:8 Evenings - 5:40 Evenings - 1:10 Nights - 1:36 Nights - 1 per unit Nights - 5:180 Nights - 1:28 Licensed Practical Nurses Days - 1:36 Days - 1:37 Days - 1:40 Days - 3:35 Evenings - 1:36 Evenings - 1:37 Evenings - 1:40 Evenings - 2:85 Nights - 0 Nights - 1 per 2 units Nights - 1:80 (Mon-Fri); 1:160 (Sat-Sun) Nights - 1:85 Registered Nurses Days - 1:72 Days - 1:217 Days - 1:160 Days - 1–2:85 Evenings - 1:72 Evenings - 1:217 Evenings - 1:160 Evenings - 1:85 Nights - 1:72 Nights - 1:217 Nights - on call Nights - 1:85
Three participant groups from each LTC facility site were sought for recruitment: (1) LTC administrators (e.g., directors of care, managers); (2) direct care providers (e.g., nurses, social workers, care aides); and (3) family members of residents. For the purpose of the current analysis, only data from the first two participant groups were used. Purposeful recruitment began with LTC administrator participants from the four LTC facilities selected as the study sites. Identified managers, directors, and administrators who had in-depth knowledge of the current end-of-life care context in their respective facilities were invited to participate in two semi-structured interviews that would be conducted at two different times in the data collection process. Potential direct care provider participants were then identified by LTC administrators and invited to participate in the study. Additional direct care providers were recruited through study information presentations at staff meetings in all four LTC facilities. Consenting direct care providers from each facility were invited to participate in two focus group interviews, which took place at two different times during the data collection process. Focus group interviews were scheduled into daytime schedules by LTC administrators in order to encourage participation and minimize occupational impacts as greater numbers of staff were present at those time. However, this meant that evening and weekend staff were not able to participate, and due to the low care ratios at these times, may have differing experiences then those presented herein. Overall, the study included 12 LTC administrator participants and 80 direct care provider participants. Occupational groupings for the direct care provider participants are provided in Table 2 . Table 2 . Direct Care Provider participants by occupational groupings. Occupational Groupings Number of Participants Residential Care Attendant 15 Licensed Practical Nurse 15 Health Care Aide 13 Registered Nurse 10 Recreation 7 MEDA (Health Care Aide with 2-week medication administration course) 4 Social Worker 4 Occupational Therapist 3 Other (e.g., Dietician, Recreational Therapist, etc.) 9 TOTAL 80
Data collection involved two semi-structured interviews with each LTC administrator, which lasted 60 min on average. The first interview took place at the beginning of the data collection process (Phase 1) and inquired into their facility's current end-of-life care context, organizational strategies for providing care at the end-of-life, and perceived facilitators and barriers to integrating a palliative approach to care. The second interview took place at the end of the data collection process (Phase 2) and inquired into any changes experienced in their LTC facility since the initial interview. Data collection with direct care providers involved two focus group interviews which also took place at both Phase 1 and 2 at each LTC site (n = 16 focus groups with 80 attendees total). In order to address potential conflicts or power differentials among the direct care providers, participants were separated into two groups with one comprised of clinical leadership staff (e.g., RNs, LPNs , allied health professionals, team leaders) and the other of direct care staff (e.g., care aides). Focus group interviews lasted 90 min on average and inquired into the current end-of-life care context, experiences providing end-of-life care for residents, perceived confidence, comfort, and capacity to provide quality end-of-life care, and needs for support. All interviews and focus groups were digitally recorded, transcribed verbatim, and entered into NVivo™ for analysis.

Section: 5. Analysis

An interpretive inquiry-thematic method was employed, which focuses on understanding (interpreting) the meanings, purposes, and intentions (interpretations) people give to their own actions and interactions with others ( Smith and Given, 2008 ). Thematic analysis involves both inductively and deductively reviewing and coding data in order to explore existing research goals as well as any issues that are emergent, and sometimes unanticipated, from the dataset via the identification of patterns, which become categories (i.e., codes) for analysis ( Fereday and Muir-Cochrane, 2006 ; Ayres and Given, 2008 ).
Development of the coding scheme involved a detailed review of five randomly selected transcripts by all research team members to identify emerging themes. Once consensus was achieved regarding the emerging themes, data were then coded according to these themes as first-level (i.e., bucket) nodes. Although ‘emotions’ were not identified as a primary area of inquiry by the original study aims, they emerged as a significant thematic finding in the data set. Three research team members then reviewed ten pages of randomly selected data from the ‘emotions’ node in order to further refine the coding scheme. It was at this stage of the analytic process that the temporal dimension of the dying trajectory and geography (particular place-based qualities of the LTC facilities) were found to be highly implicated in the emotional experiences of participants. Consistent with thematic analysis, the data coded into the ‘emotions’ node was compared and contrasted against existing emotional geography and ‘time-space dimensions of care’ literature in order to determine the scope of our themes and the novelty of our findings (e.g., Bowlby, 2012 , Bondi, 2008 , Davidson and Milligan, 2004 , Herron and Skinner, 2013 , McKie et al., 2002 ). The coding scheme was further refined to capture these findings, which became the focus of the current analysis. To enhance analytic rigor, multiple investigators were involved in each step of the analytic process to provide feedback and enhance interpretations, thus contributing to the reliability of the findings.

Section: 6. Findings

Participants commonly shared their perspectives and experiences of delivering end-of-life care to residents, providing rich descriptions of emotionally-charged events throughout their narratives. Although participants from both participant groups articulated/expressed emotions of pride, satisfaction, devotion, and love, the majority of direct care providers participants shared experiences that tended to be associated with negative emotions, including frustration, anger, disempowerment, injustice, distress, guilt, anxiety, fear, sorrow, and grief. Closer analysis of these findings revealed that these articulated emotional experiences were highly influenced by the physical and social place where care was provided and the differing temporal phases of the dying trajectory, which involved three critical moments in time: (1) Identifying a resident as on a dying trajectory; (2) Actively dying; and (3) Following a resident's death. Although experiences of place, emotion, care, and time are dynamic and highly interconnected, we have chosen to organise and present our findings according to the abovementioned temporal phases in order to emphasize the ‘time-space’ dimension of end-of-life care ( Bowlby, 2012 ) and to facilitate the elucidation of participants' emotional geographies, which tended to shift at each of these particular times.

Section: 7. Identifying a resident as on a dying trajectory

LTC facilities are relatively unique care environments because they involve highly intimate interactions (e.g., personal, social, and emotional) with residents over extended periods of time (e.g., months to years) within an institutional setting. Such temporal/social contexts allow for relationships of care and emotional ties to develop, grow, and evolve between residents and direct care providers. Findings indicate that when direct care providers first learned that a resident was on a dying trajectory, they often experienced profound emotions. Participants often referred to residents as being ‘like family’, as this direct care provider from LTC#3 shared: “ End of life is extremely emotional, not only for the family, but also for the care aides, nurses looking after these people. We establish a relationship like family … The facility is very fortunate to have a large group of dedicated loving people that come every day and genuinely love these residents regardless of the situation.”
Similarly, this direct care provider from LTC#2 shared, “ Of course, residents that you've been caring for years that become [identified as] palliative, is emotionally hard” . While the relationships of care described above may be reflective of these providers and the particular work culture of these facilities, it was found that participants from all four LTC facilities felt that building close, trusting relationships with residents was important to both their own emotional well-being and to providing quality care. Such findings illustrate how the spatial/temporal context of the LTC facility setting shapes the type of care relationships that develop within them, as well as the emotional experiences that result when direct care providers learn of a resident's impending death.
Once residents were identified as dying, some care providers described a shift in their place-based experiences of LTC facilities, particularly in regard to the purpose of the facility and the emotional meanings attributed to it. Many participants expressed a desire for these newly identified residents to be in more comforting, pleasant, and smaller-scale environments, reminiscent of home-like settings, regardless of whether the residents desired such a setting or not. Those working in larger, more institutional LTC facilities expressed they felt “ heavy”, “ sad ”, and a sense of helplessness as they believed the physical environment of their building was not conducive to quality palliative care. For example, direct care providers from LTC #3 shared during a focus group: “For the palliative residents, smaller is better … when they come here, to a large facility, they have huge hallways to walk and … it doesn't feel like a home, it feels like residential care … the elderly are just being pushed into a large centre rather than having the quality of a smaller, more caring facility”. “Yeah it feels more like being managed than cared for sometimes”. “And it's very hard and sad to see”.
These findings indicate that once a resident is identified to be in need of a palliative approach to care, providers' emotional experiences of the LTC facilities they work in shifts, with the institutional aesthetics and the quality of care often associated with such spaces becoming amplified. It is at this point in time that goals of care also subtly shift from long-term, complex care to a palliative approach to care; however, the LTC care environment remains the same. It was this dissonance between the new goals of care and same care setting that evoked negative emotions among participants who no longer felt the ‘place’ of the LTC facility reflected the quality of care and peaceful environment required.
The shift in goals of care that occur once a resident is identified as on a dying trajectory (e.g., the need to address physical, psycho-social, emotional, and spiritual pain and suffering) was found to also result in a shift in direct care providers' desire to be more ‘present’ with these residents, particularly if they did not have family or friends nearby. Many expressed, emotionally, their frustration and distress over their inability to take time to provide what they perceived as quality palliative care to residents because of the general work culture of LTC facilities (e.g., incessant heavy workloads, staffing shortages). As explained by a direct care provider from LTC #3, it is distressing when “…you're short staffed, you're trying to run around to care for all the people that are up and about and moving around” and you have a palliative resident who is bedridden and “ you're almost feeling like that person … is being neglected” . Taken together, these findings illuminate how the physical/social place of LTC facilities intersects with the emotional experiences of direct care providers once they learn a resident has been identified as dying, with many expressing a sense of sadness regarding their impending death and helplessness in regard to their inability to provide what they perceive to be quality care and a ‘therapeutic’ environment for these residents' final years/months of life.

Section: 8. Caring for actively dying residents

In the previous thematic finding, emotional experiences tended to be associated with the broader scale of the LTC facility as a whole. However, once a resident began actively dying, which is the final phase of the dying process (often taking place over days or hours), emotional geographies tended to hone in and focus on particular spaces within LTC facilities, such as the rooms that dying residents were occupying. Findings indicate that emotions associated to these rooms/spaces became significantly amplified for care providers. Participants explained how they felt immense guilt, sadness, and despair when residents were not provided with a ‘private’ room to die. For participants, dying residents' rooms became, in a sense, sanctified spaces that were compromised due to a lack of privacy and disturbances from others (e.g., residents living with dementia that tend to frequently “wander in”). A direct care provider from LTC #4 shared that for them, a difficult death was characterized as being: “ …when it's in a shared four-bed room, family are crowded around the bed, curtains wrapped around them because there's no room. Loud, aggressive residents in that room with dementia while somebody's trying to pass, and near the nurse's station or where all the activity is happening and all the noise is”.
This same facility, (LTC #4), however, also has two designated palliative rooms for residents to move to. Participants from this facility consistently stated that, while two rooms/beds did not adequately meet the need of their facility, those residents who had the opportunity to die in these private spaces were able to achieve a ‘good death’. This direct care provider shared: “ From my point of view, I think all the good ones [deaths] that I've experienced have been in private rooms where there is peacefulness, we have a chance to go and look into them and take the time to spend with them more … taking care of them and giving them bed baths or bed washes or mouthwash and things like that.”
Despite this facility having two palliative care rooms, the reality is that the majority of residents still die within shared-room settings, which when witnessed by care provider participants, amplified their sense of helplessness and distress due to their inability to facilitate what they perceived to be a death with dignity.
While residents were actively dying, providers’ emotional geographies narrowed further to the scale of the body, with many direct care providers expressing distress in their inability to be at the bedside of dying residents and “stroke their forehead” and/or “ hold their hand”. Due to the busy, fast-paced work environment of LTC facilities, participants shared that they experienced guilt and moral distress for not being able to be physically present to support residents during their final moments of life. As a direct care provider from LTC #3 explains: “ I don't even have time to spend at an actively dying resident's bedside … And that's really difficult when you've spent quite a bit of time with these residents, you do build up a therapeutic relationship with them and it's a little heartbreaking because you want to be able to spend the time there and you just can't .”
Describing her work as “ a very emotional job”, a direct care provider from LTC #4 said “ I don't think that anybody should ever have to die alone”, but due to their busy schedules, it does happen, as some residents may die without anyone, including care staff, present . From these findings, it becomes clear that participants are experiencing various emotions, which are inherently linked to the social and physical places/spaces where residents are actively dying and who is, or is not, present during residents' final hours of life.

Section: 9. Following a resident's death

After a resident's death, the space where the death occurred was found to trigger memories and evoke significant emotions of grief and sadness. However, due to the high demand for LTC beds, staff are expected to swiftly clean out the late resident's room in order to make space for incoming residents. This task of cleaning out rooms was described as being incredibly distressing, as one care provider from LTC#1 expressed: “ We are to be like machines. Fill the bed before it gets cold”. Others from LTC#1 explained, “We've got to clear that room out within 8 h” “Next day, that next person [resident] is in.” “Eight hours man, boom. Like now.” This finding emphasizes the professional expectations placed on staff to simply continue on with work as usual, despite any grief they may be experiencing from the passing of a resident or any emotional attachment they may have to the space/room in which the late resident inhabited and/or died. The expectation to welcome new residents into these rooms was also found to be challenging for participants, including this direct care provider from LTC#2 who shared: “I recently experienced [the] loss of my resident. A few days later, a new resident moved into the room. I was still feeling grief. It was hard to adjust to the change”. Many shared how they wished to have more time to grieve deaths and acknowledge the places/rooms where deaths occur, as well as the support and resources required to respectfully collect belongings, such as folding and packing the late resident's clothes and placing special belongings in boxes. Rather, participants explained that current protocol directs them to place all the resident's belongings into large plastic bags; a task perceived as incredibly difficult, hurtful, and disrespectful to not only the resident who passed, but all other residents who may be watching them fulfill this task.
Following a death, participants shared how they experienced a particular pressure to portray themselves, or to ‘display’ their emotions in particular ways, depending upon who was present. For example, direct care providers expressed feeling expectations to portray themselves as efficient, capable, and professional to co-workers and managers (e.g., supressing any grief), yet at the same time, caring, compassionate, and respectful (e.g., displaying grief) to other residents in the facility. This emotional work, or ‘surface acting’, was found to be challenging for participants, like this direct care providers from LTC #1 who commented that when feeling watched by the roommates of residents who died, imagined the roommates to be thinking “ …that's going to happen to me when I'm gone, you know. I've been here, I'm forgotten, they've already filled my bed within 12 h … And that's how my stuff's being treated”. Navigating this context was reported as emotionally heavy for direct care providers, evoking profound feelings of guilt , injustice, and frustration as well as fear that their actions will be perceived poorly by other residents, jeopardizing therapeutic relationships that they may have developed with them.
Despite the need for time, space, and/or ritual to process grief, this was often not provided or permitted for LTC staff. The stressful, fast-paced work environment and rapid influx of new residents once a bed became ‘available’ was found to hinder their capacity to cope, negatively affecting their emotional wellbeing and potentially contributing to compassion fatigue/burnout. As a mechanism for self-preservation, providers may create boundaries in order to maintain an emotional distance from residents. A manager from LTC#4 shared his perception that staff in his facility had become “ a little bit desensitized ” as he had observed them conversing with each other about their upcoming holidays, while providing physical care to residents who may be facing the end-of-life. In light of the compounded grief that many providers described experiencing and the professional pressure they feel to suppress it, desensitization to residents, end-of-life, and the place they occupy when providing this care may be a result.

Section: 10. Discussion

The experience of death and dying, as Maddrell (2016) explains, holds the potential to transform everyday places into entirely new emotional topographies, altering how they are perceived, experienced, and navigated. For example, death, dying, and bereavement can shift our emotional geographies, insofar that artefacts, people, and places take on new and heightened significance ( Maddrell, 2016 ) at particular times along the palliative trajectory. Our findings build upon this work to offer a more nuanced, place-based perspective on the experience of providing care to dying residents in LTC facilities. More specifically, our findings highlight the importance of emotional geographies in the everyday work of LTC providers, the nuanced shifts that occur across the temporal process of dying, and the emotional labor endured throughout. Not only do these findings raise important questions about the implications of emotions for better understanding the experiences of care provision for dying residents in LTC facilities, but also how the attributes of place in turn shape these experiences, and how to implement policies that will better support staff in fulfilling this valuable role.
For the burgeoning field of emotional geographies, our findings provide novel insight into the process of death and dying and the interconnected spatial terrains of emotions that formal care providers navigate in the LTC setting. Building upon previous work, the physical and social environments of LTC facilities were found to play significant roles in shaping providers' emotional experiences of caring for dying residents, which in turn, affected their sense of time and space, sense of self (e.g., how they felt in their roles), their relation to others (e.g., feelings toward residents and colleagues) and their capacity to provide what they perceive as quality care ( Davidson and Milligan, 2004 ; Burkitt, 2014 ). Participant's emotions were found to be ‘situated’ at multiple geographic scales, ranging from the building/facility as a whole to specific rooms, beds, and finally, the body. The intensity of emotions, and scale/place where they were situated, fluctuated across time as residents progressed along the palliative trajectory, carving out new emotional ‘carescapes’ ( Bowlby, 2012 ; Ivanova et al., 2016 ; Stevenson et al., 2016 ). Interestingly, this shift in scales across the palliative trajectory mirrors the diminishing scale of the personal mobility and functionality of dying residents, whose world continually shrinks from the facility, to the room, to the space of the body as death draws near. After death, emotions expanded once again to the scale of the room, with emotional geographies of memory triggering grief. Taken together, these findings offer an empirical example of how “ places are never merely backdrops for action or containers for the past. They are fluid mosaics and moments of memory, matter, metaphor, scene, and experience, which create and mediate social spaces and temporalities ” ( Till, 2005 ) (pg. 8). Furthermore, these findings highlight how the emotions tied to particular places are dynamic and fluid, fluctuating in intensity and scale across the end-of-life ‘carescape’.
While we have attempted to anchor the emotional geographies of participants to LTC facilities as workplaces, and places of living and dying, it is important to acknowledge that emotions are not bounded, but rather are relational, occurring within ‘places’ but also the spaces between social interactions, which are infused by dynamics of power ( Ahmed, 2004 ). Considering this, it becomes clear that the broader structural forces (e.g., political, socio-cultural, economic) that direct how LTC facilities are designed, organized, and run ultimately shape the experiences of those who work within them. Our findings demonstrate that organizational imperatives and the resource constraints of LTC facilities contributed significantly to the emotional labor endured by participants. For example, a dissonance was found to exist between true emotive experiences and professional expectations, whereby the onus was placed on workers to simply “ be like machines ” and manage and repress any grief or sadness in order to get the job done. This finding highlights how the chronically stressful work environment of LTC facilities today generate socio-emotional impacts that too often become ‘taken for granted’, marginalized, and obscured. It also highlights the disjuncture that exists between organizational/professional expectations regarding ‘display’ rules and care providers' own perceptions of quality care, which in this study tended to align more closely with nurturing, caring, and compassionate ‘emotional’ rules ( Franzosa et al., 2018 ). This tension became challenging for participants to navigate and overcome, resulting in feelings of frustration and disrespect when only their professional roles were acknowledged. Similar to many other professional settings, LTC facilities tend to devalue authentic emotions ( Rodriquez, 2012 ), despite evidence that emotional relationships can improve staff satisfaction, create a sense of meaning and dignity in the workplace, and enhance residents' health ( Rodriquez, 2012 ). As such, there is a dire need to recognize and acknowledge the emotional labor providers consistently endure in traditionally deemed non-palliative settings, like LTC facilities, in order to minimize moral distress , create meaningful supports, and facilitate resilience.
While more research is needed, these findings offer a first step towards uncovering some potential implications regarding how the structural/institutional context of LTC facilities effect the well-being of their staff. Overall, our findings point to the importance of supporting the emotional labor of LTC employees, while enhancing understandings on the significance of ‘place’ for human experience. For example, the critical role of ‘place’ and design at the outset of facility construction should be considered in order to ensure it reflects the ‘vision/goals of care’ desired (e.g., greater significance given to private rooms, smaller-scale feel), something that has rarely occurred for LTC facilities within Canada ( Kane and West, 2005 ). Supporting LTC facility staff also requires a supportive work environment that acknowledges the emotional, as well as the physical, demands of care. For example, job descriptions and care plans could include measures of emotional labor and provide mental health and peer support as well as greater mentorship and training, such as workshops that occur ‘on-site’ that focus on managing emotions, compounded and complicated grief, and bereavement . Resources could also be designated to allow some staff flexibility in their scheduling, and fewer residents per worker, in order to provide the necessary time to meet end-of-life care needs. Allowing the space, and honoring the need for ritual, grief, and bereavement after death, may not only be beneficial for staff, but also other residents. Of course, in suggesting these recommendations, we acknowledge the evermore austere policy and resource environment in which LTC facilities in Canada are situated, despite the incessantly growing demand that exists to provide facility-based care for a rapid aging population. However, even small steps can make a profound impact on the well-being of LTC care providers who have been increasingly pressured to do more with less.

Section: 11. Limitations

Although emotions emerged as a significant finding during the analytic process, the primary objectives of this study were not to explore the emotional geographies of providers. Thus, experiences of emotion and affect were not specifically probed during interviews, resulting in only those emotional expressions that were openly articulated and shared by participants being included in this analysis. Additionally, the context in which data was collected (i.e., one-on-one interviews with the LTC administrator participants and focus groups with direct care providers) likely played a role in the privacy permitted and participants' comfort levels expressing emotions. As these findings are based only upon the emotional discourses evident in the transcripts, they are not meant to be ‘true’ or ‘inclusive’ representations of all the emotions that may have actually been experienced by participants. As such, future research is needed, perhaps using differing methods such as time-geographical diary methods, photovoice, digital storytelling, or ethnography, to examine the complex interconnections between place, emotions, time, and care in the end-of-life context more closely.

Section: 12. Conclusion

Given that care providers within LTC facility settings will increasingly be called upon to provide care for a growing number of residents approaching the end-of-life, it becomes critical that adequate supports are in place to ensure they are able to do their job with minimal risk to their own personal health and wellbeing. Doing so, however, will require employers, organizations, and local governments to acknowledge and address both the physical and emotional labor they endure daily. Recognizing the significance of ‘place’, and the multiple ways in which it shapes the emotional geographies of end-of-life experiences across the palliative trajectory, from identification to bereavement , can help to inform the development of meaningful programs and policies aimed at mitigating distress, burden, and compassion fatigue among staff. Considering the disproportionate number of deaths LTC facilities are currently witnessing due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and their vulnerability to potential future contagions, it has never been more imperative to re-examine the conditions healthcare staff are expected to work in, and the emotional toll providing care to dying residents may take on their wellbeing in these settings, to ensure these providers are able to continue fulfilling this valuable caring role not only for today, but also the years to come.

Section: Credit author statement

Melissa Giesbrecht : Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Kelli Stajduhar : Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Formal analysis, Writing- Review & Editing, Funding acquisition. Denise Cloutier : Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing- Review & Editing. Carren Dujela : Project administration, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing.

Section: Acknowledgements

This research was funded by the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research, Vancouver, Canada:#16738; and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Ottawa, Canada : #145401.
