Title: Tract level associations between historical residential redlining and contemporary fatal encounters with police


Abstract: Abstract

How does structural racism influence where people are killed during encounters with police? We analyzed geo-located incidents of fatal encounters with police that occurred between 2000 and 2020 in Census tracts that received a classification by the Home Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC) during the 1930's. Statistical models show that incidents of fatal encounters with police in formerly redlined areas are 66% more likely than in zones that received the most favorable “A” rating. These differences remain even when tract historical and contemporary racial compositions, along with contemporary economic conditions, are taken into account. The effects of contemporary racial composition and economic conditions overshadow the effect of zone classifications only in areas with high proportions of Black residents or residents in poverty (>60% or >30% respectively). These findings provide evidence of structural biases in policing rooted in historical segregation policies.

Section: 1. Introduction

Policing and residential segregation play key roles in maintaining structural inequalities between people of color and white people in the United States. Fatal encounters with police are a leading cause of death among young men ( Edwards et al., 2019 ), and the increased risk of being killed by police on the basis of race is now a well-documented indicator of race based inequalities in the United States ( Alang et al., 2017 ; Edwards et al., 2019 ; Ross, 2015 ; Ross et al., 2020 ; Schwartz and Jahn, 2020 ; Thomas et al., 2021 ). Residential segregation, along with the many inequalities in access to resources and essential services caused by it ( Aaronson et al., 2021a ; Nardone et al., 2020 ), is rooted in political decisions and institutions at the municipal, state, and federal levels ( Logan and Molotoch, 1987 ; Massey and Denton, 1990 ; Sampson, 2021 ). In the US, one such institution was the Home Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC), whose historic evaluations of neighborhoods beginning in the 1930's are the most well-known and accessible example of what is contemporarily known as “redlining” ( Jackson, 1980 ). These evaluations still have an enduring effect on the segregation patterns of American cities ( Faber, 2020 ). Contemporarily, at least 25% of the US population across 192 cities live in areas that received an HOLC evaluation, and while the practice was officially outlawed by the Fair Housing Act in 1968, the effects of redlining are evident today in disparities in wealth accumulation, access to resources, and public health across zones that received different classifications ( Appel and Nickerson, 2016 ; Hoffman et al., 2020 ; Lynch et al., 2021 ; McClure et al., 2019 ; Nardone et al., 2020 ).
Recent scholarly attention on structural racism makes clear that the existent contemporary disparities in society are not solely the result of the private prejudices held by individuals, but are also the result of policies implemented at various levels of government, laws, social norms and economic systems that produce and maintain race-based group differences ( Bonilla-Silva, 1997 ; Ray, 2019 ). Therefore, while the increased likelihood of experiencing criminal justice contact by people of color is due, at least in part, to the biases and personal characteristics of individual police officers ( Ba et al., 2021 ; Pierson et al., 2020 ; Roscigno and Preito-Hodge, 2021 ), structural and institutional factors are also important when explaining fatal encounters with the police.
Using geo-located incidents from the Fatal Encounters Database we analyze different HOLC zone classifications at the tract level, with historical and contemporary data from the US Census. We show that redlining correlates with the higher incidences of fatal encounters with law enforcement. Furthermore, historic and contemporary racial compositions, as well as contemporary economic conditions in Census tracts also predict the incidence of fatal encounters with the police, but the relationship between historic HOLC classification and fatal encounters with the police remains after taking these factors into account. We frame this analysis of police violence as a public health issue and place it alongside other issues of structural inequality and structural racism ( Mesic et al., 2018 ; Jacobs and Britt, 1979 ; Violence Subnational Collaborators, 2021 ).

Section: 2. Recent research on fatal encounters with the police

Recent research on police violence has shown that fatal encounters with police are now a leading cause of death for young men ( Edwards et al., 2019 ), and that the risk of being killed by police is highest for young black men ( Lett et al., 2021 ; Schwartz and Jahn, 2020 ). Adding to this public health problem, studies also show that despite reliable data only recently being made available, fatal encounters with police have become more likely in the last 20 years ( Edwards et al., 2019 ; Violence Subnational Collaborators, 2021 ). There is a considerable amount of national geographical variation in rates of fatal encounters as well, with the highest overall rates in the Southwest United States, however, interestingly the black-white inequalities in fatal encounters with the police are highest in the Midwestern and Northeastern states ( Schwartz and Jahn, 2020 ).
Beyond mapping systematic geographic differences in fatal encounters, other research into police use of force that may result in a fatality often focus on the personal biases of the police themselves. Police are, for example, on average more racist and far more likely to believe that they should have the right to use physical force than the general public ( Roscigno and Preito-Hodge, 2021 ). The behavioral manifestations of this are evident in the well documented disparities in police stops ( Pierson et al., 2020 ), though these disparities may be mitigated by increasing more police that are women and people of color ( Ba et al., 2021 ). There is also burgeoning evidence that the massive mobilization of people during the Black Lives Matter movement in recent years has resulted in a reduced likelihood fatal encounters where those protests took place ( Olzak, 2021 ). These studies provide important information, but the literature has not yet been able to establish an empirical link between specific racist policies resulting from aspects of structural racism, such as neighborhood redlining, to the occurrence of fatal encounters in the United States, or more specifically, whether practices defined as structurally racist predict where they will occur.

Section: 3. Redlined areas as a predictor of fatal encounters with the police

Despite there being no universally agreed upon definition of structural racism, we follow previous scholarly work that commonly refer to societal aspects that produce hierarchical life outcomes for different groups based on race. These aspects of society are often mutually reinforcing and include (non-exhaustively) housing, criminal justice , finance , education, media, voting, and healthcare. Importantly, while individuals’ prejudices are often related to these institutions especially in their creation, structures are able to exert their discriminatory influence independent of the individual biases of the people that inhabit them ( Bonilla-Silva, 1997 ). Applied to fatal encounters with the police, the HOLC is one important organizational dimension of structural racism. Through the classification system it created, the HOLC legitimized the unequal distribution of resources, thereby diminishing the agency and worsening the life chances of the people living in redlined areas ( Ray, 2019 ).
To briefly illustrate how this was done, the HOLC was created in1933 as a part of the New Deal in order to alleviate the financial burden facing home owners, and help them to avoid foreclosure. Operating under the also recently created Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB), the HOLC introduced the practice of long-term housing mortgage ( Jackson, 1980 ). A uniform system of appraisal based on the racial and socioeconomic characteristics of neighborhoods, as well as on housing sales trends and the quality of the housing stock, was developed and employed in cities across the nation ( Jackson, 1980 ). To determine which homes were to receive loans from the HOLC, the corporation created maps assigning grades to different neighborhoods to reflect their “mortgage risk” ( Nelson and Ayers, 2019 ). Neighborhoods deemed to have minimal risk were awarded an “A” rating, those areas that were still desirable received a “B” rating, those determined to be “declining” received a “C” rating, and finally neighborhoods determined to be “hazardous” received a “D” rating. HOLC neighborhood appraisals were shared with and used by subsidiary banking agencies throughout the entire federal banking system ( Jackson, 1980 ; Woods, 2012 ). Through the 1937 Joint Committee of Appraisal and Mortgage Analysis, the HOLC appraisal techniques were also shared with the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), influencing the latter's mortgage underwriting policies for the following decades ( Woods, 2012 ).
Redlining practices meant that the racial composition of a neighborhood was a key determinant of access to credit for its residents ( Aaronson et al., 2021a , 2021b ). This effectively shut down the flow of investments into minority and poor neighborhoods ( Appel and Nickerson, 2016 ) and legitimized the unequal distribution of resources to those areas for an official period of approximately 35 years. However, even after the practice was officially discontinued, government-produced neighborhood ratings still factored into lending decisions by federally insured loans and private lending decisions ( Massey and Denton, 1990 ; Taggart and Smith, 1981 ). This practice represented a “racialized decoupling” of the formal rules of lending ( Ray, 2019 ). Accordingly, residents of formerly redlined areas still had lower access to credit more than 40 years after redlining was officially abolished ( Faber, 2021 ), thus contributing the economic dimension of structural racism at work in American cities.
The racialized differential access to resources initiated by redlining described above translated into several long-lasting effects on racial and social disparities. To illustrate the breadth of these effects, previous research has shown that residents in formerly redlined areas are, for example, more exposed to poverty ( Aaronson et al., 2021b ; Appel and Nickerson, 2016 ), violence ( Benns et al., 2020 ; Jacoby et al., 2018 ), environmentally hazardous conditions ( Hoffman et al., 2020 ), poorer health ( Lynch et al., 2021 ; McClure et al., 2019 ; Nardone et al., 2020 ), decreased social mobility ( Aaronson et al., 2021a ), and lower life expectancy ( Graetz and Esposito, 2021 ).
Given their long lasting effects on other racial and social disparities, it is possible that the assignment of an HOLC classification is also related to the likelihood of fatal encounters with the police. There are, however, multiple possible mechanisms at work to explain this relationship. First, the material outcomes of resource deprivation associated with the economic consequences of the HOLC classifications created the pre-conditions for increased crime rates, which lead to more encounters with the police that may result in fatalities ( Sciandra et al., 2013 ). Second, since individuals’ perceptions of disorder are shaped by socioeconomic contexts ( Sampson and Raudenbush, 2016 ), the labeling of areas within cities by the HOLC as “hazardous”, combined with the material outcomes caused by depriving them of resources, may have contributed to the idea that redlined areas are unsafe. Over time these perceptions of unsafety in what become known as the “bad” parts of town can become embedded in the cultural memory of cities, adding a relevant cultural dimension to the structural factors that contribute to where police allocate their resources. Absent any concerted effort to upend these neighborhood hierarchies, path dependence suggests these mechanisms should have long term consequences.
Police officers often operate independently in the field, and the way that they approach situations is informed by both their personal experiences and perceptions about the neighborhood contexts where their encounters with the public take place ( Klinger, 1997 ). This means that the outcomes of interactions with police, such as fatal encounters, should account for neighborhood contexts ( Lautenschlager and Omori, 2018 ; Parker et al., 2008 ). However, above and beyond shaping individual officers’ perceptions of the areas they are policing, neighborhood characteristics, including their historically redlined status along with perceived or observed crime rates, also influence how agencies select which areas should be targeted with more aggressive policing activities. Adding to the informed behavior of individual police and agencies, neighborhood specific predictive policing algorithms built on skewed data create feedback loops of increased and more violent policing in areas dominated by minorities ( Richardson et al., 2019 ), even as mounting evidence shows that such models can be inaccurate ( Connealy, 2019 ). One example of how the legacy of redlining informed policing practices are the safety injunction maps against gang activity in Los Angeles , CA, which largely follow the areas designated by the HOLC as hazardous ( Bloch and Phillips, 2021 ).
These mutually re-enforcing organizational, economic, and cultural dimensions of structural racism implicated in the HOLC classifications provide motivation for why we believe that path-dependent processes lead to higher incidences of fatal encounters with the police in historically redlined neighborhoods at the tract level. Further evidence of these path dependent processes is found in the persistent disparities between HOLC zones, as shown by metrics such as racial composition, house values, and home ownership (see for example ( Aaronson et al., 2021b )).
However, we are aware that even though previous literature underscores the persistent impact that of historical factors like redlining have on present demographic and economic conditions, in some areas contemporary conditions a have changed over time. This is the case in places where, for example, through processes of gentrification historically black neighborhoods are have become more homogeneously white. We take these factors into account in our statistical modeling, and show that the relationship between HOLC zones and fatal encounters remains when their historical and contemporary racial and socioeconomic compositions are considered. Additionally, these effects are moderated in some tracts by contemporary conditions, showing how past and present conditions work together to predict where fatal encounters with the police will occur.

Section: 4. Materials and methods

Our analysis makes use of three separate data sources: the Fatal Encounters data for counts of people whose deaths involved interactions with the police including geocoded information on where the incident occurred ( Burghart, 2020 ; Finch et al., 2019 ), geocoded data on the HOLC neighborhood grades produced by the Mapping Inequality Project ( Nelson and Ayers, 2019 ) using historical maps and documents created by the HOLC, the US Census TIGER/Line geospatial data ( Ruggles et al., 2021 ; U.S. Census Bureau, 2002 ) and the 2015 American Community Survey for demographic information on the characteristics of areas at the tract level. Our merging procedure first involved matching the geocoded locations of police involved deaths with the US Census tracts, then merging that with the geospatial data that included the HOLC grades. Since the HOLC maps used a different geographical unit, we matched each current census tract with the HOLC graded zone which overlapped with the tract population weighted centroid . The population weighted centroid (or center of population) of a census tract is the point with geographical coordinates corresponding to the average coordinates for the whole population in that tract. Using population weighted centroids matches tracts to the HOLC zones where most of the tract population is likely to reside and is a method implemented in previous studies using the HOLC data ( Nardone et al., 2020 ). After this merging process we removed the graded tracts that had no residents and tracts whose population weighted centroids fell outside the HOLC graded zones, resulting in a tract level dataset that enables the comparison between the numbers of people that died in interactions with the police between the different historical HOLC grades. The final dataset included 11,361 census tracts across 192 cities. The tract level data on historical racial composition comes from the 1930's census and was provided by IPUMS National Historical Geographical Information System ( Manson et al., 2021 ). Tract-level counts by race for that historical census were only available for 5090 census tracts over 15 cities. For a more detailed description of the data and merging procedures see the Appendix .
To capture the most possible incidents of fatal encounters with police, and to follow the recommendations in previous studies to treat fatal encounters with police as an issue of public health ( Alang et al., 2017 ; Bailey et al., 2021 ; Bassett, 2015 ; Krieger et al., 2015 ; Violence Subnational Collaborators, 2021 ), we have included all unique observations available in the Fatal Encounters database across a 20 year period from the beginning of their data collection cutoff time (2000) until the data was accessed for this analysis (2020). We do not adjudicate between encounters where the police might have intentionally or unintentionally used lethal force (for instance between a case reported as a “shooting” incident or an incident reported as “suicide”). We understand that this is a deviation from previous scholarship that has analyzed these data ( Edwards et al., 2019 ; Schwartz and Jahn, 2020 ), but the determination of which deaths were the result of intentional versus unintentional use of force is made by the data coders based on news reports of the incidents which have not been checked for validity. Additionally, since the Fatal Encounters data is largely based on local media reports the records become slightly less reliable further into the past since older digitized records of incidents are less complete ( Finch et al., 2019 ). It is possible that those missing records did not occur at random, introducing a systematic pattern that could skew the analysis. While it is our view that all deaths that occur during interactions with police are a part of the same public health problem and therefore should be included in the analysis, we have nevertheless conducted robustness checks using data which exclude unintentional use of force incidents and those incidents that occurred before 2010 and include these in the Appendix. Exclusions of these types do not substantially alter the results of the analysis. After merging the geo-located coordinates from the Fatal Encounters database with the HOLC graded census tracts there were a total of 5414 deaths across the 11,361 census tracts.
We present maps showing kernel density estimates for select cities to exemplify the spatial relationship between HOLC grades and the incidence of fatal encounters. These maps use the observed fatal encounter data points to estimate the incidence of fatal encounters over the entire area. The density estimations are shown as a heat map layer color coded by decile, with darker colors showing higher densities. To reduce noise while preserving relevant visual information in the maps, we set the bandwidth parameter of the smoothing function separately for each city using an approach proposed by Scott (1992) . The densities were estimated using the original geocoded Fatal Encounters data points, which are also included in the maps.
To test the relationship between HOLC grades and fatal encounters with police we present point estimates from a Hierarchal Bayesian Negative Binomial (HBNB) model with city-level random intercepts and tract-level population offsets ( Bürkner, 2017 , 2018 ). However, when estimating the effect of historical characteristics on contemporary outcomes there are potential mediating and confounding factors that should be accounted for (see for example: Acharya, Blackwell and Sen ( Acharya et al., 2016 )). In an attempt to parse out the historical versus contemporary forms of structural racism at work in the diverging likelihood of fatal encounters with the police, we model fatal encounters with the police in two ways. First it is known that the grade a tract received was largely influenced by the demographic characteristics of the area before the creation of the HOLC, and therefore the differences we see in incidence rates could be due to segregation patterns that predate the HOLC, this would represent a pre-treatment confounder. In an attempt to control for this we present models with two specifications in Fig. 3 : (Top) are point estimates of Incident Rate Ratios from a model which includes all tracts that received a classification with three contemporary demographic (percent Black, percent Hispanic, and percent Asian) and two economic controls (percent of residents in poverty and the log median income/1000). Then (Bottom) point estimates of Incidence Rate Rations of a model which adds the pre-HOLC designation demographic data from 1930 in two measures (percent Black and percent immigrant). This data was only available for 15 cities, comprising 2164 incidents in 5090 tracts most of which are the major urban centers in the Midwest and on the east coast. Second, changes in the demographic make-up of neighborhoods in the decades since the creation of the HOLC, through gentrification for example, present a post-treatment mediating factor which might influence the effect of the HOLC zones on the likelihood of fatal encounters with the police. We control for this by conditioning the HOLC grades on contemporary characteristics in the census tracts ( Fig. 4 ). These conditional effects are also from HNBN models with the same nesting structure as the point estimates, but with the HOLC grade effect conditioned on the different demographic (percent Black, percent Hispanic) and economic (percentage of residents in poverty) factors. As robustness checks we present models with alternative dispersal patterns, case selection criteria, and the exclusion of tracts that could be possible outliers. The results of all of these analyses in tabular format are available in the Appendix.

Section: 5. Results

Fig. 1 displays the average number of fatal encounters adjusted for population that occurred in HOLC grade classification in cities with 40 fatal encounters or more. Among these cities there is a clear pattern of more fatal encounters with police in places that received lower HOLC grades. There is, for example, no city with on average more fatal encounters in the “A” grades than the “D” grades, with the highest concentrations of fatal encounters occurring in the “D” grades across cities. Furthermore, in the top 100 most deadly census tracts 53 of them are “D” zones, 38 are “C” zones, 8 are “B” zones and only one is an “A” zone (adjusted for population see Appendix). Download: Download high-res image (538KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Tract level averages of fatal encounters per 100,000 people with police in 40 most deadly cities with an HOLC grade adjusted for population.
As a visual example of where fatal encounters occur in cities, we have chosen to display the bivariate association between the spatial distribution of fatal encounters with the police and census tract HOLC grades in three of the 192 cities examined in Fig. 2 . The areas with higher density of fatal encounters largely overlap with the census tracts covered by HOLC grades C and D, while most grades A and B have lower incidences. This pattern is present in both smaller cities (of which Oklahoma City is our example, left), more population-dense cities like Chicago (center), and cities with a larger urban sprawl like Los Angeles (right). Download: Download high-res image (984KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Spatial distribution of census tracts by HOLC grade classification (top row) and the deciles of a kernel density estimates of fatal encounters with police (bottom row). From left to right: Oklahoma City (left), Chicago (center), and Los Angeles (right). Dots show the location of Fatal Encounters. Download: Download high-res image (518KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Estimates from two HBNB models with city-level random intercepts and population offsets. Top: model with the full sample of 192 cities HOLC classifications, proportions of residents in of different demographic characteristics, and income classifications. Bottom: Model with the reduced sample of 15 cities with available historical tract level data and the addition of historical demographics for percent. Download: Download high-res image (654KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Conditional effects of HOLC Grade with Proportions of Residents that are in Poverty, Hispanic, and Black.
Moving to our multivariate analyses , Fig. 3 shows estimated incidence rate ratios from two HBNB models with city level random intercepts and tract level population offsets. The top model includes all available tracts classified by the HOLC as well as proportions of residents of different demographic characteristics and income classifications. The model predicts monotonically increasing higher incidences of fatal encounters with police for all HOLC grades lower then ‘A’ (‘B’ IRR = 1.28 CI = 1.06- 1.53 ; ‘C’ IRR = 1.44 CI = 1.20-1.73 ; ‘D’ IRR = 1.66 CI = 1.37-1.99 ). On the higher end, with fatal encounters with the police are 66% more likely in formerly redlined areas than the most favorable ‘A’ rating. High percentages of residents that are Black or Hispanic also predict more fatal encounters with police ( Black IRR = 2.89 CI = 2.45-3.39; Hispanic IRR = 1.52 CI = 1.26-1.84 ). However, high percentages of Asian residents negatively predicts fatal encounters with police ( Asian IRR = 0.56 CI = 0.36-0.85 ). Finally, higher proportions of residents in poverty predict higher incidences ( Poverty IRR: 2.98 CI = 1.62-5.53) , and the higher median income in tracts predict lower incidences ( (log) Median income IRR: 0.7 CI = 0.61-0.81 )of fatal encounters with police.
To account for the demographic compositions of neighborhoods before the creation of the HOLC grades, the bottom model ( Fig. 3 ) includes the tracts where historical demographic data was also available. Reducing the sample in this way did influence the estimates, however the same pattern remains with each HOLC grade predicting higher incidences of fatal encounters with police. In contrast, the percentages of Black residents and residents that were immigrants in the 1930's are not strong predictors of contemporary fatal encounters with the police ( 1930 Percent Black IRR: 1.13 CI = 0.80-1.59, 1930 Percent Immigrant IRR: 0.82 CI = 0.43-1.62 ), suggesting that the relationship between HOLC grades and fatal encounters with the police is due to the path dependence of the creation of the grades, rather than the path dependence of pre-existing demographic characteristics of the neighborhoods alone.
To account for the demographic characteristics of the neighborhoods after the creation of the HOLC Grades, the conditional effects of HOLC Grades against the proportions of residents that are in poverty (top left), Hispanic (top right), and Black (bottom left) are shown in Fig. 4 . These effects come from the model estimated using the full set of census tracts. The top left panel of Fig. 4 shows that the formerly redlined zones have consistently high risk of fatal encounters with police even where there are contemporarily few people living in poverty, however the differences in conditional estimates between redlined tracts and the other grades converge with increasing levels of poverty. In a similar vein, the top right panel of Fig. 4 shows that the conditional estimates for the different HOLC grades begin to converge with increased proportions of Hispanic residents, with “A” zones converging with the others in tracts with around 50% Hispanic residents. Finally, the bottom left panel of Fig. 4 shows that the effect of HOLC grades conditioned on proportions of Black residents is more pronounced in tracts with smaller shares of Black residents, and that “B” and “C” zones converge with “D” zones in Census tracts that have upwards of 60% Black residents. “A” tracts with high levels of Black residents are more deadly than those with low levels, however, unlike the two previous examples, the “A” tracts do not converge with the other zones even in tracts where the share of Black residents is greater than 60%.

Section: 6. Discussion

Our analyses show how historical factors commonly associated with structural racism can influence the likelihood fatal encounters with the police. Whereas previous literature has focused on the likelihood of individuals to be killed by police, biases of individual police officers, or contemporary police policies targeted at mitigating use of force; this study shifts the focus to the historically racist policies that produced conditions which predict where police violence might occur. Our results show that people are more likely to die during encounters with the police in Census tracts that received a “D”, or “redlined” classification, than in tracts that received a more favorable rating from the HOLC. This finding remains after taking into account the proportion of black and immigrant residents that lived in the tracts prior to the creation of the HOLC grades, and after accounting for present-day demographic and socioeconomic composition.
In line with previous literature, proportions of residents living in poverty, residents that are Hispanic, and residents that are Black are also substantial predictors of tracts that are likely to have incidences of fatal encounters with the police. We also show a convergence in the likelihood of fatal encounters with police, where the effect of the HOLC grades diminish in tracts with higher proportions of people in poverty, residents that are Hispanic, and residents that are Black. We see this as evidence that both historical structural factors as well as contemporary demographic conditions work together to predict where fatal encounters with the police occur. An example of this being that the most dangerous census tracts are those that were formerly redlined and still have high proportions of Black residents.
It is possible that encounters with police, conditioned by areas with high crime, are responsible for the differences in the incidences of fatal encounters with police between census tracts ( Cesario et al., 2018 ). However, police encounters are themselves sources of bias, both in terms of where the police conduct their activities, and whether the public report crimes at all, so conditioning risk estimates on crime introduces these biases in any analysis of deaths during interactions ( Ross et al., 2018 , 2020 ). While imperfect, conditioning estimates on populations at the local level is the better option to capture potential encounters.
Previous literature has noted that police behave differently depending on different neighborhood contexts ( Smith, 1986 ; Terrill and Reisig, 2016 ), and our analysis provides empirical evidence for the historical and structural foundations of those findings. The HOLC codes established a basis for neighborhood hierarchies and set forth a path for cities to distribute resources, further racially segregate their neighborhoods, and solidify norms about what areas are more problematic. This process imprinted a stamp on the collective memory of the cities that received the codes and continues to inform how police should behave in different areas. It also created the material and socioeconomic pre-conditions for crime in those neighborhoods ( Sampson et al., 1997 ; Sciandra et al., 2013 ). Although this study is unable to pinpoint the exact mechanism linking the HOLC categorization to the incidence of fatal encounters with the police, we provide first evidence of a robust correlation between the racist policy of historical redlining and police violence. Future work should attempt to identify the mechanism behind the associations reported here. A first line of inquiry could focus on how neighborhood reputation informs policing decisions. A second line of inquiry could focus on the extent to which different rates of encounters with police in areas with high crime rates are responsible for the differences in the incidence of fatal encounters between tracts. However, due to the inherent bias in registered and reported criminal activity, following this second line of inquiry would require considerably improved data on police activity rather than relying solely on crime data.
Relatedly, data availability also limited the scope of our analysis to only include fatal encounters with police, the most extreme sort of police uses of force, precluding an analysis of other use of force types, stops, surveillance, and other interactions that did not ultimately end in a fatality. No official government data source can be used to reliably compare different areas, types of police violence, or trends over time. This lack of official data presents a considerable challenge in reducing police violence ( Violence Subnational Collaborators, 2021 ). We echo the call of previous researchers and activist groups for the Bureau of Justice Statistics to renew efforts to collect this information from local, state and federal agencies. Better and more reliable data collection must accompany any meaningful policy change to address police violence so its progress can be tracked over time.
Finally, regardless of the actual mechanisms linking HOLC classifications to police violence, our results stress the importance of addressing neighborhood inequalities, a significant contributor to structural racism. Recently, in response to the Black Lives Matter movement protests against police violence, the Obama and Trump administrations have proposed their own initiatives to investigate and possibly curb fatal encounters with police ( Preito-Hodge and Tomaskovic-Devey, 2021 ). Additionally, following the massive public protests that culminated after the killing of George Floyd, congress introduced the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act in February 2021 with the expressed support of the Biden administration ( “Statement By President Joe Biden On Police Reform Negotiations,” 2021 ). If passed, this legislation would impose new data collection requirements on use of force incidents like those recommended here and in previous studies on police violence. It also lowers the criminal intent standard to convict law enforcement officers and codifies into law the restrictions some of the executive orders put in place, limiting the use of no-knock warrants and chokeholds ( Bass, 2021 ). These new measures will assuredly improve policing in the United States overall by raising standards and increasing the possibility for accountability. However, in light of the findings included in this study which evidence the importance of broader structural conditions that produce racist policies and reinforce racialized assumptions about crime, to further reduce the incidents of fatal encounters with police, policies will need to go beyond implicit bias education, de-escalation training, and other restrictions on the behavior of individual officers.

Section: Author contributions

The idea for this paper was the product of many long conversations between the two authors. GKC merged the HOLC grades to contemporary census maps, JM designed the analysis, GKC and JM conducted the analysis and produced figures, GKC and JM produced the text.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

We have no competing interests to disclose.

Section: Acknowledgments

Evolution of Prejudice project ( 2016-07177 ), FORTE, the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life, and Welfare .
