Title: Destined for Greatness: A Family-Based Stress Management Intervention for African-American Mothers and their Children


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Rationale

African-American mothers in the U.S. experience high rates of stress, placing them at risk for depression, anxiety, and preterm births, and their children at risk for poor social-emotional development later in childhood. Yet, few studies have developed and tested family-based interventions that target optimal management of stress in this population.

Abstract_Section: Objective

The current mixed methods study examined whether a six-week family-based intervention (e.g., cognitive behavioral stress management intervention component for mothers and mindfulness-based kindness curriculum for their children) was effective in improving psychosocial outcomes among low-income African-American mothers and increasing prosocial behaviors in their children.

Abstract_Section: Method

Seventy-two mothers (28% pregnant, 72% postpartum) completed pre- and post-intervention assessments of stress, depression, anxiety, and self-efficacy for stress management. Prosocial behaviors for 38 of their children (3–10 years of age) were also assessed via mother's self-report and two observational child assessments of sharing and helping behaviors. Qualitative interviews at post-intervention and reunion focus groups (up to two years later) were also conducted.

Abstract_Section: Results

Mothers showed significant reductions in perceived stress , depressive symptoms, and anxiety, as well as improved self-efficacy for stress management at post-intervention. Although observational assessments of children's sharing and helping behaviors did not change, mothers' qualitative responses indicated improvements in their child's prosocial behaviors at home. Qualitative responses also revealed unique stressors that mothers experienced, the short- and long-term impact of these interventions on mothers and their children, and program recommendations.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

These results support the efficacy of family-based stress management interventions in this at-risk population.

Section: 1. Introduction

Stressors occurring during critical periods in one's life, such as when one becomes a mother, could affect not only the mother's health but also that of her child. Of particular concern are African-American mothers, who experience higher rates and severity of stress compared to non-Hispanic white mothers due to adversities experienced with balancing their multiple identities as being women, Black, and a mother, which has been examined through the Superwoman Schema ( APA, 2017 ; Rosenthal and Lobel, 2011 ). The Superwoman Schema describes African-American women as feeling compelled to take on a superhuman role to be an image of strength, suppressing their emotions, not showing vulnerability, and feeling obligated to help others before themselves due to historical and lifetime experiences with discrimination ( Woods-Giscombé, 2010 ). According to the weathering hypothesis, the cumulative effect of taking on a superwoman role can cause African-American mothers' biological stress response systems to rapidly deteriorate and lead to poorer health, such as elevated levels of stress, depression, and anxiety, as well as impaired immune system responses ( Allen et al., 2019 ; Geronimus, 2013 ; Sheffield and Giscombe, 2019 ). These results suggest that the unique stressors experienced by African-American mothers may place them at particular risk for adverse health outcomes, such as depression and anxiety.
Indeed, African-American mothers have higher rates of depression compared to non-Hispanic white mothers both during pregnancy (28% vs. 16%; Orr et al., 2006 ) and at postpartum (12% vs. 7%; Rich-Edwards et al., 2006 ), with 55%–58% of African-American mothers also experiencing comorbid anxiety symptoms ( Boyd and Tervo-Clemmens, 2013 ; Chapman et al., 2012 ). In turn, these higher rates of depression and anxiety have been associated with the outcomes of African-American women having twice the rate of preterm birth and low infant birthweight as non-Hispanic white women, regardless of income or education level ( Institute of Medicine, 2007 ); thereby placing their infants at greater risk for social-emotional and behavioral impairments later in childhood ( Schmeer et al., 2020 ). Indeed, studies have shown that children of low-income African-American mothers with depression and anxiety exhibit social-emotional problems and greater internalizing and externalizing behavioral problems in early childhood ( Boyd et al., 2011 ; Riley et al., 2009 ). Collectively, these findings suggest that the chronic stressors experienced by African-American mothers negatively affects their health, as well as that of their children, and highlight the pressing need to develop and test interventions that target optimal management of stress in this population.
Group-based cognitive behavioral stress management (CBSM; combination of cognitive coping and relaxation training) has been shown to be one of the most effective and recommended psychological intervention modalities for reducing stress, depression, and anxiety ( APA, 2017 ; National Research Council & Institute of Medicine, 2009 ). However, its efficacy among ethnic minority women has been mixed, demonstrating greater intervention effects for reducing depression but not anxiety during pregnancy ( Nillni et al., 2018 ; Ponting et al., 2020 ). Fewer studies have examined CBSM efficacy among African-American mothers, showing guided imagery and diaphragmatic breathing to result in lower perceived stress and anxiety ( Jallo et al., 2009 , Wesley, 2006 ), and group-based CBSM to result in lower perceived stress and depression during pregnancy ( Jesse et al., 2015 ; Urizar et al., 2019b ). Despite these promising results, they focus on CBSM effects during pregnancy and do not extend to the postpartum period, where adverse outcomes persist for low-income African-American mothers and their children due to continued exposure to chronic stressors (e.g., food insecurity, trauma, discrimination), as well as lack of social support and self-efficacy in managing these stressors ( Schmeer et al., 2020 ). In particular, low-income African-American mothers who continue to experience depression and anxiety during the postpartum period struggle with having the resources, guidance, and structure needed to promote their children's social-emotional development ( Boyd et al., 2011 ). These disparities point to the need for family-based stress management interventions that also promote coping skills in African-American children, such as those focused on enhancing prosocial behaviors .
Prosocial behaviors are voluntary actions that are intended to help or benefit another individual, such as helping, comforting, sharing, and cooperating ( Eisenberg and Mussen, 1989 ). Children develop prosocial behaviors as young as 12 months of age and carry these behaviors with them throughout their lifespan ( Warneken and Tomasello, 2009 ). Reinforcing children's prosocial behaviors during their preschool and elementary school years is particularly important given the plasticity of their brains to learn new information during this critical period of development ( Sohr-Preston and Scaramella, 2006 ). The development of prosocial behaviors in toddlers and children has been associated with improvements in the quality of their peer relationships, their psychological well-being, and their academic performance ( Spivak et al., 2015 ). Yet, these skills are not always taught or modeled at home, particularly among children of chronically stressed or depressed mothers ( Brett et al., 2020 ). Therefore, it is imperative to implement programs that promote children's prosocial behaviors to aid in their adjustment to different social and educational settings.
To date, prosocial behavior interventions have largely been implemented in preschool settings and have shown improvements in children's prosocial behaviors, emotional well-being, and academic readiness ( Flook, 2015 ; Raver, 2012 ). One such intervention is a kindness curriculum developed by Flook (2015) which incorporated children's literature, music, and movement to teach and practice concepts related to mindfulness , kindness, compassion, and emotion regulation to preschool-aged children. Results showed significant improvements in children's social-emotional development (i.e., sharing behaviors, attention, empathy). Despite these promising results, few studies have tested such interventions in African-American children and have focused largely on school-based models to deliver this curriculum with teacher reports of children's prosocial behaviors that may not reflect interactions that these children have with their siblings and parents at home. Furthermore, investigators have advocated for family-based interventions that focus on children's prosocial behavior interventions to be paired with mothers' stress management interventions to reinforce emotion regulation and coping skills covered in both programs in light of recent research demonstrating that adding a parenting component is more likely to benefit children who exhibit behavioral problems ( Epstein et al., 2015 ).
The current mixed methods study examined whether a six-week family-based intervention [i.e., CBSM for mothers and a mindfulness-based kindness curriculum (MBKC) for children] was effective in improving psychosocial outcomes among low-income African-American mothers and in increasing prosocial behaviors in their children. Specifically, we hypothesized that mothers participating in the CBSM intervention component would demonstrate lower perceived stress, depression, and anxiety levels, as well as increased self-efficacy for stress management, at post-intervention. Additionally, children participating in the MBKC intervention component would exhibit greater prosocial behaviors (e.g., sharing, helping) at post-intervention. Finally, qualitative assessments were conducted to provide context on the types of stressors that mothers experienced, the short- and long-term impact of these interventions on mothers and their children, and recommendations for program improvements.

Section: 2. Method

Women were recruited between 2016 and 2018 from prenatal centers and community-based health organizations in southern California that serve low-income African-American mothers and their children. Recruitment occurred either through print-based advertising, social media, and/or by health care provider referrals. Women who were interested in the study were invited to attend a group orientation session that took place in the same community center where the intervention programs for mothers and their children would take place. The orientation session informed participants on the purpose, eligibility, and requirements of the study with mothers completing an eligibility screener. Eligibility criteria included being 18 years of age or older, self-identify as being African-American or Black, being a mother of a child under 18 years of age or an expectant mother in their second trimester of pregnancy, and being free of any major psychiatric disorders (e.g., major depression). Children had to be between 2 and 17 years of age to participate in the MBKC intervention although child-care was provided for children under two years of age. Eligible mothers signed a consent form to participate in the study with their children. All study procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board at California State University, Long Beach.
The Transparent Reporting of Evaluation with Nonrandomized Designs (TREND) diagram of study recruitment, enrollment, and retention appears in Fig. 1 . Intervention efficacy was evaluated using an embedded, mixed methods, experimental pretest-posttest design. Seventy-two mothers completed baseline assessments of stress, anxiety, depression, and self-efficacy at the group orientation session. Furthermore, 38 children were administered baseline assessments of their prosocial behaviors (i.e., sharing and helping) by research staff who did not participate in the intervention. Mothers also completed an evaluation of their child's prosocial behaviors. After completing the group orientation and baseline assessments, mothers and their children were invited to participate in a six-week intervention program (described below). The intervention program was taught consecutively to eight separate cohorts of mothers and children over a two-year recruitment period. Post-intervention assessments for mothers and their children were conducted by research staff who did not participate in the intervention on the final week of their respective six-week programs and included the same assessments that were completed at baseline. Additionally, mothers completed an open-ended questionnaire to gather their feedback about the program. There was a 76%–79% retention rate (29 of 38 children; 57 of 72 mothers) at post-intervention ( Fig. 1 ). Mothers received $50 in gift cards for completing the baseline and post-intervention assessments (one $25 gift card for each assessment completed). Download: Download high-res image (796KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Study enrollment and retention flow diagram.
After the last cohort of mothers and their children completed their six-week intervention, mothers and children from all eight cohorts were invited to participate in a follow-up reunion that took place on one day to assess the post-intervention effects of these programs on mothers and their children, as well as to gather additional program feedback. A total of 17 mothers and 7 children participated in the reunion (12% were first time mothers; 82% of reunion mothers had children who participated in the MBKC intervention) and were not significantly different on any study characteristics or outcomes compared to those who did not participate in the reunion. Focus groups and qualitative interviews were conducted by research staff who did not participate in the intervention. Focus groups were conducted with the mothers, while qualitative interviews were completed with each child and were video recorded and transcribed by the research team. Mothers received a $25 gift card for participating in the reunion assessment.
Stress Management for Mothers. Mothers participated in a six-week, group-based, CBSM intervention called Destined for Greatness that taught cognitive-behavioral coping strategies and relaxation techniques to address stressors experienced during pregnancy or motherhood (e.g., concerns about their baby's health, financial strain). Course content was taught from a detailed training manual ( Urizar et al., 2015 ) by three trained African-American social workers who were also mothers and had extensive experience facilitating group-based interventions. The CBSM intervention was adapted from Urizar and colleagues' ( 2019a , 2019b ) SMART Moms Program that has been effective in reducing stress among low-income mothers (see online supplementary file for description of course content). This course was taught to eight separate cohorts of six to 12 mothers once a week for 2 h at a local community family center and was offered during the day to accommodate the operating hours of the center. Transportation and childcare were provided upon request. Each week, mothers practiced relaxation skills in the beginning of the class (e.g., diaphragmatic breathing, guided imagery, progressive muscle relaxation) to learn how to manage physiological stress responses, and then participated in interactive activities (e.g., creating goals, physical props to practice coping and relaxation techniques) and class discussions to enhance comprehension of course content. Mothers practiced these skills at home and recorded their experience on an activity log as a weekly homework assignment that was collected and discussed the following week. Group facilitators documented the number of classes attended.
Mindfulness-Based Kindness Curriculum for Children. Children participated in a six-week, group-based, MBKC intervention that promoted prosocial behaviors, social-emotional development, and taught coping strategies and relaxation techniques to manage one's emotions. Course content was taught from a detailed training manual ( Dunne et al., 2015 ) by two to four trained class instructors per cohort (undergraduate students who had extensive experience caring for young children) who were supervised by the same social workers who facilitated the mothers' CBSM intervention. The children's program was adapted from Flook's ( 2015 ) MBKC intervention that has been effective in improving children's prosocial behaviors and social-emotional development (see online supplementary file for description of course content). This course was taught to seven separate cohorts of two to 12 children once a week for 2 h on the same days, times, and location as their mother's CBSM intervention. During the program, children participated in art projects, storytelling, physical activity , and relaxation techniques (e.g., mindfulness, diaphragmatic breathing) that were aimed at improving their prosocial behaviors and emotion regulation. Although different-aged children were included in the same class sessions, class activities were modified for these different age groups with class instructors assigned to lead each age group in completing their activities. Prosocial behaviors were reinforced through class activities that publicly recognized small acts of kindness. At the end of each class, instructors allotted time for the children to share their class projects with their mothers to encourage them to reinforce the lessons learned with their child at home. Class instructors documented the number of classes attended by each child.
Sociodemographics . A sociodemographic questionnaire assessed for maternal characteristics such as age, parity, total years of education, annual household income, and marital status. Child characteristics, such as age and gender, were also recorded.
Perceived Stress . Perceived stress was assessed using the 14-item version of the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-14; Cohen and Williamson, 1988 ). The PSS-14 measures the degree to which situations in one's life over the past month were appraised as stressful, with higher scores (range = 0–56) reflecting higher stress levels ( α range = 0.78–0.82).
Depression. Depression was assessed using the 10-item Edinburg Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS; Cox et al., 1987 ). The EPDS measures clinical depressive symptoms in mothers, with higher scores (range = 0–30) reflecting higher depression levels ( α range = 0.79–0.84). A score of 13 or higher has been used as a cut off score to indicate a possible incidence of depression.
Anxiety. Anxiety was assessed using the 10-item state anxiety subscale of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI-S; Spielberger et al., 1983 ). The STAI-S measures the intensity of feelings of anxiety at a particular moment in time, with higher scores (range = 10–40) reflecting higher anxiety levels ( α range = 0.87–0.88).
Self-Efficacy. Mother's self-efficacy for stress management was assessed using the 13-item Measure of Current Status Scale (MOCS; Carver, 2006 ). The MOCS assesses the level of confidence one has in being able to engage in several coping skills and relaxation techniques and consists of four subscales (relaxation, stress awareness, assertiveness, coping). Total scores were calculated by summing items for each subscale, with higher scores (range = 0–20) indicating having more confidence in using relaxation, awareness, assertiveness, and coping to manage their stress ( α range = 0.60–0.87). Additionally, a six-item Self-Efficacy for Stress-Management (SESM) measure was used to assess mothers' confidence to manage their stress during different scenarios at post-intervention when compared to their confidence level at baseline on a 5-point Likert scale of 0 (‘Much Less Sure’) to 4 (‘Much More Sure’; adapted from Barriers Self-Efficacy Scale; McAuley, 1992 ). A total score was calculated by averaging the scores on the six items, with higher scores (range = 0–4; scores ≥ 3 = ‘somewhat/much more sure’) reflecting more confidence to manage their stress ( α = 0.85).
Child Prosocial Behaviors. Mothers reported their children's prosocial behaviors using the 6-item Child Evaluation Questionnaire (CEQ; Warneken and Tomasello, 2009 ). Each item was rated on a 5-point Likert scale of 0 (‘Never’) to 4 (‘Very Often’). A total score was derived by averaging the scores on the six items, with higher scores (range = 0–4) reflecting more prosocial behaviors such as sharing, gratitude, and kindness ( α range = 0.83–0.88). In addition to mothers' self-report, research staff who did not participate in the intervention conducted two observational assessments with each child to assess their sharing and helping behaviors. In the sharing task ( Flook, 2015 ), each child would go into a separate room with an experimenter. Envelopes were set up on a desk with the word “me” written on one and a silhouette of a gender-matched child on another. The child would then select from a set of 10 stickers. They were told that they could keep as many stickers as they would like in the “me” envelope and give as many stickers away as they would like in the other. At the end of the task, the experimenter would give the child the “me” envelope to take home, and the number of stickers in the other envelope was counted and subtracted by ten to calculate the number of stickers kept by the children. Higher scores (range = 0–10) indicated less sharing behavior (i.e., more stickers kept by the child). In the helping task ( Warneken and Tomasello, 2009 ), the experimenter and the child walked toward an interview room. While walking ahead of the child, the experimenter held a large stack of books in their arms and “accidently” dropped a large marker on the floor. No verbal or non-verbal cues were given by the experimenter regarding the marker to see if the child would pick up the marker (score of 1) or not (score of 0). A second experimenter sat nearby to observe and code the child's behavior.
Mother and Child Qualitative Interviews. At post-intervention, mothers completed a written, semi-structured, open-ended questionnaire to assess stressors they experienced and to gather program feedback. At the reunion, two focus groups were videotaped and transcribed to assess mothers’ experiences during the program, post-intervention experiences, and program feedback. For both qualitative assessments, the following open-ended questions were asked: 1. What types of stressors have you experienced? 2. What changes, if any, have you noticed in your life as a result of your participation in the stress management program? 3. What changes, if any, have you noticed in your children's lives as a result of their participation in the MBKC program? 4. In what ways have you applied the topics and skills that you learned from this program in your daily life? 5. What recommendations do you have to make this program better for future mothers?
At the reunion, children who attended the MBKC intervention participated in a one-on-one semi-structured interview where they were asked “What do you remember about the class?” These interviews were video recorded and transcribed.
An a priori power analysis was conducted using G*Power to ensure an adequate sample size was obtained ( Faul et al., 2009 ). Based on the medium to large effect sizes found in past research of CBSM and MBKC intervention effects on maternal stress and depression ( Jesse et al., 2015 ; Urizar et al., 2019b ; Wesley, 2006 ) and children's prosocial behaviors ( Flook, 2015 ), a sample size of approximately 36–64 participants was needed in order to obtain statistical power at the recommended 0.80 level at an alpha level of 0.05.
Quantitative Analysis . Pearson product-moment correlation and ANOVA analyses were used to identify possible covariates (i.e., number of children, number of classes attended, pregnancy status, cohort group, child age, and child gender) on study outcomes. No covariates were significantly associated with any of the study outcomes and were not included in subsequent analyses. Paired samples t -test analyses tested for within-group changes in mothers' (perceived stress, depression, anxiety, self-efficacy) and their children's (prosocial behaviors, sharing task) outcomes from baseline to post-intervention. Chi-square analyses were used to test whether children's helping behaviors at baseline (yes/no) were significantly different from these behaviors at six weeks post-intervention (yes/no). Effect sizes were presented as Cohen's d for the paired samples t -test analyses and as Cramér's V for the chi-square analyses. Values of .10–.20, 0.30-0.50, and 0.50-0.80 represent a small, medium, and large effect size, respectively ( Cohen, 1988 ). Pearson correlations examined associations between changes in study outcomes from baseline to post-intervention. Case-wise deletion of missing data was used in all analyses (76%–79% post-intervention retention rate).
Qualitative Analyses . An inductive thematic analysis approach was used to analyze interview transcripts ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ). Potential themes and subthemes were developed from marginal codes, which were used as a codebook. Four independent coders pilot tested the codebook on 50% of interview transcripts. Further revisions to codes and definitions were made to accurately capture participants' experiences through group discussions. During the second phase of qualitative analyses, two independent coders were paired and utilized the codebook created in the first phase to apply codes to excerpts. Any disagreements on application of codes were resolved through a group discussion until consensus was reached. The last half of the coded transcripts were assessed for level of agreement in codes applied using Cohen's kappa. Interrater reliability was strong ( k = .82). Given that the same open-ended questions were used for the mothers' written qualitative questionnaire at post-intervention and focus group at the reunion, similar themes and subthemes emerged and were described together in the qualitative results section below. The number of excerpts for each theme/subtheme are presented in Table 2 by qualitative assessment (post-intervention qualitative questionnaire vs. reunion focus group).

Section: 3. Results

Mothers were, on average, 29 years of age ( SD = 5.52; range = 19–43 years) and their children were six years of age ( SD = 1.71; range = 3–10 years; 49% 3–5 years old, 51% 6–10 years old; 57% girls). The majority of mothers were single (68%), unemployed (58%), and had an annual family income of less than $20,000 per year (77%). In addition, most mothers (85%) had some college education or less (47% some college; 38% high school education or less) and had at least one child (83%) with 28% of women being pregnant during the study. On average, mothers and their children attended four of six classes (63%) of their respective interventions. Seventeen of the 72 mothers (24%) and seven of the 38 children (18%) participated in the reunion focus group, with the average time elapsed since completing their interventions being one year (range = 2 months to 2 years).
Approximately 50% of women had elevated levels of stress at baseline (PSS score ≥30). Additionally, 50% of women reported having elevated depressive symptoms (EPDS score ≥13) and 51% reported having elevated anxiety at baseline (STAI score ≥22). Paired samples t -test analyses showed that mothers’ stress levels [ t (56) = 5.33, p < 0.001), d = 0.71], depressive symptoms [ t (56) = 7.23, p < 0.001, d = 0.96], and anxiety levels [ t (56) = 4.61, p < 0.001, d = 0.61] significantly decreased from baseline to post-intervention (see Fig. 2 a). Download: Download high-res image (256KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Cognitive behavioral stress management (CBSM) intervention effects on the psychosocial outcomes of African-American mothers.
Results also showed that mothers' confidence in using stress management techniques significantly increased from baseline to post-intervention (see Fig. 2 b). Specifically, mothers’ confidence in using relaxation skills when stressed [relaxation subscale; t (56) = -8.00, p < 0.001, d = 1.06], in recognizing when their body is physically tense during times of stress [awareness subscale; t (56) = -5.66, p < 0.001, d = 0.75], in being more assertive to communicate their needs to others [assertive subscale; t (56) = -5.66, p < 0.001, d = 0.75], and in coping with their stress during difficult situations [coping subscale; t (55) = -6.16, p < 0.001, d = 0.82] significantly increased from baseline to post-intervention. Approximately 72% of women also reported feeling more confident in managing their stress during specific difficult situations (e.g., when having problems with their children) at post-intervention compared to baseline (≥3 on the SESM).
Paired samples t -test analyses revealed that there was no significant change in children's prosocial behaviors per their mother's report [ t (37) = -0.74, p = 0.464, d = 0.12]. Of note, 78% of children were already engaging in prosocial behaviors at baseline, with 80% of children engaging in these behaviors at post-intervention (CEQ score ≥3). Further, there was no significant change in children's sharing behaviors from baseline to post-intervention [ t (26) = -0.77, p = 0.446, d = 0.12], with children keeping approximately six ( SD = 3.62) stickers at both time points. Finally, there was no significant change in children's helping behaviors from baseline to post-intervention [χ 2 (2, 27) = 4.49, p = 0.106, V = 0.39]. Of note, 58% of children helped to pick up the dropped marker at baseline compared to 71% of children at post-intervention.
Pearson correlation analyses revealed that increased levels of maternal self-efficacy were significantly associated with decreased stress [ r (57) = -0.47, p < 0.001], depressive symptoms [ r (57) = -0.51, p < 0.001], and anxiety levels [ r (57) = -0.45, p < 0.001)] in mothers from baseline to post-intervention. Results also showed that mothers who had increased confidence in using assertive communication had children who demonstrated increased sharing behaviors from baseline to post-intervention [ r (54) = 0.35, p = 0.023]. No other significant associations were found between maternal and child outcomes ( p > 0.05; see Table 1 ). Table 1 . Pearson correlation analyses between post-intervention study outcomes for low-income African-American mothers and their children participating in a family-based stress management intervention. Empty Cell Empty Cell 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1. Perceived stress – 2. Depression .697*** – 3. Anxiety .679*** .659*** – 4. Confidence in stress awareness -.363** -.469*** -.410** – 5. Confidence in relaxation -.387** -.390** -.427** .640*** – 6. Confidence in assertiveness -.470*** -.507*** -.652*** .545*** .454*** – 7. Confidence in coping -.433** -.457*** -.420** .777*** .574*** .638*** – 8. Child prosocial behaviors -.148 .014 -.083 .179 .111 .055 .127 – 9. Child sharing behaviors -.052 -.056 -.074 .061 .105 .350* .069 .235* – Note. Scores reflect pre-to post-intervention changes in study outcomes; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
Qualitative interviews at post-intervention and the reunion focus groups focused on unveiling the types of stressors that mothers experienced, any benefits that they or their children experienced due to their respective programs, and any program feedback. Three main themes emerged: Types of Stressors (5 subthemes), Participant Outcomes (2 subthemes), and Suggested Program Changes (4 subthemes). Major theme and subtheme definitions, sample quotes, and the number of mothers who spoke on particular themes are presented below and in Table 2 . Table 2 . Mother's qualitative themes at post-intervention and the reunion follow-up. Parent Code Child Code N Post-Intervention (Reunion) Definition Life Stressors 53 (49) Participant mentions a situation that directly impacts/affects them Health Concerns 8 (9) Participant mentions any experienced health-related problems that are stressful to them Child as a Stressor 11 (9) Participant mentions anything related to their children's health, behavior, or development that is stressful Financial Stress 19 (2) Participant mentions finances as a big stressor in their life Social Interactions 10 (20) Participant mentions a negative interaction with an individual(s)/authority figure OR being judged negatively by others Lack of Support 5 (9) Participant mentions not having support from an individual(s) or during a situation Participant Outcomes 112 (68) Participant mentions a change in their or their child's life after completing the program Mothers' Improvements 18 (57) Participant mentions using social support OR a positive change in their views, behaviors, or physiological/mental health outcomes Children's Improvements 94 (11) Participant mentions how their child has helped them manage their stress using class materials, supported them with their pregnancy, OR how the child has engaged in more positive behaviors on their own or with others Suggested Program Changes 19 (31) Participant mentions that they feel the program could benefit from particular changes Suggestions on Mother's Program 6 (11) Participant mentions that the mother's program topics can be adjusted/moved around OR that new topics or activities for mothers should be added Suggestions on Child's Program 4 (7) Participant mentions that the MBKC intervention should be adjusted or have different activities added to it for their child Change Length of Program 8 (4) Participant mentions that the length of the program should be changed Interactive Activities with Family/Children 1 (9) Participant mentions that the program should invite their child, their significant other, the child's father, or other family members to the class
Mothers reported experiencing several stressors, including negative social interactions with others, health concerns, stressors related to caring for their children, not having enough support from others, and experiencing financial difficulties (see Fig. 3 for a visual representation of the most common stressors experienced). Each of these subthemes for types of stressors are described in more detail below. Download: Download high-res image (924KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Word clouds of most common stressors experienced by African-American mothers (Left) and program benefits for mothers and their children at post-intervention (Right).
Social Interactions. One of the most commonly reported stressors was experiencing negative social interactions with others. At post-intervention, these included having relationship problems and communication issues with their significant other that sometimes involved domestic abuse. One of the mothers mentioned how her children's father would verbally abuse her while drunk. At the reunion, mothers discussed experiencing prejudice, negative judgments from society, and dealing with people who fail to understand their situation or actions. They mentioned that people would call them crazy or belligerent without understanding the context for their actions, which made them feel irritated and stressed. Mothers also said that non-Black people would judge their character and question their ability to be a good mother towards their children. One mother even mentioned how they had to deal with her partner's family who had prejudices about her being Black. “I have to deal with [my baby's father's] family. They're Mexican and I think they got something against me being Black.”
Health Concerns. Another common stressor was related to experiencing health problems. At post-intervention, mothers mentioned concerns about being sick, having iron deficiencies, and experiencing sleep problems. In terms of their mental health , they mentioned ruminating about personal situations that constantly caused them to feel distressed. At the reunion, mothers discussed concerns about lack of sleep and experiencing signs of depression. They stated that they would not do anything besides stay at home all day and that they felt a lack of interest in taking part in social activities. “The house makes me depressed. I literally, like I sit in the house, unless I go to the grocery store or run an errand […] I sit in the house, I don't even watch TV. I just sit and play with her [my daughter].”
Child as a Stressor. Another common stressor reported by mothers related to taking care of their children. At post-intervention, mothers talked about their children's behavioral issues, such as ADHD , and how having to constantly manage these behaviors was stressful. At the reunion, mothers had similar experiences but also mentioned how some of their children had insomnia, which made caring for them difficult. They also talked about dealing with their children's problems at school, such as having to talk to their teachers about conflicts that their children were having with other kids. “I feel like … well maybe if [the children] wasn't special needs, it wouldn't be that bad. I just can't say ‘Oh, go watch TV’ because they're ( makes running back and forth motion) along with a 7 year old with insomnia who'll just get up between 12, 3, and 5 [in the morning] ‘Momma, what are you doing?’ and literally just stare at you. I'm like dude why are you looking at me? So yeah, this is no joke.”
Lack of Support. Mothers at both time points also discussed how not having a consistent support system in times of need led them to feeling stressed. Specifically, mothers mentioned not having enough instrumental or emotional support , resulting in them having to take care of their children by themselves and not having anyone to vent to about their problems. One mother even mentioned how she had to go through an abortion by herself. Not having a support system also led some mothers to being unable to take care of themselves and resulted in poor hygiene. “My baby's father will be [home] and I gotta wait til my daughter gets home [so I can] shower, eat, and he right there. Like today I couldn't shower, he was there all day but I had to wait for my 7 year old just to help me [watch the baby].”
Financial Stress. Concerns about finances were also prevalent for mothers at post-intervention and at the reunion. At post-intervention, mothers talked about having to deal with not having enough money to pay bills. They also discussed dealing with unemployment and having a hard time finding proper housing. “I looked into shelters and stuff but like they got a waiting list and my family live in Tennessee, so um, like I don't have nowhere else to go. Either stay there or be on the streets. I'm not about to be on the streets.”
Several mothers discussed the positive changes in their life and/or their child's life as a result of participating in their respective programs. These program benefits included examples of how mothers and their children utilized class lessons and activities to support one another (see Fig. 3 for a visual representation of the benefits that mothers and children experienced). Each of these subthemes for participant outcomes are described in more detail below.
Mothers’ Improvements. All of the mothers at post-intervention and at the reunion mentioned a positive change in their life following completion of the program. Several mothers described using specific class techniques they learned to help manage their stress, such as modifying negative thoughts, guided imagery, mindfulness, and using assertive communication. At the reunion, mothers described still using certain class techniques, such as diaphragmatic breathing, visualized social support, and using the stress squeeze ball to relieve their stress. During the reunion, several mothers also mentioned how they implement more self-care, have better communication (especially with their significant other), have improved health (lower blood pressure and better sleep), and have developed close friendships with the other women who participated in the program. “I got more friends. I remember when I came I didn't have no friends so at least we've all been trying to keep up with each other through text so that's been good.”
Children's Improvements. At both post-intervention and the reunion, mothers mentioned the improvements they saw in their children's behaviors and how eager their children were to participate in the classes. Mothers reported that their children were more helpful, got along better with others, and shared more as a result of their participation in the MBKC intervention. They also mentioned that their children had better communication skills and were more affectionate with their mothers by giving them more hugs and kisses. At the reunion, mothers described how their children used materials they made in their classes, such as the glitter jar (used to teach mindfulness) or breathing buddies (used to teach diaphragmatic breathing) to remind themselves and their mothers to manage their stress. Below, a mother discussed how her son utilized techniques he learned in class to help her calm down. “[My son] tells me the same thing like “Here mommy, get the [stress] ball. It's okay.” [We don't know if I'm having a boy or a girl] He'll rub my belly like […] “you're stressing my brother or my sister out.” He'll say, “Calm down, you want something to drink? What you want?” He'll start doing this, doing that, doing this so it was like really crazy that you just said that because they [children] pay attention more than you think. They really do. Blew me away.”
Several mothers also gave recommendations on how to improve the CBSM and MBKC interventions. For the mothers' CBSM intervention, these suggestions included increasing the length of the program, adding other class topics, and including interactive activities with their child and significant other. For the children's MBKC intervention, mothers recommended including more lessons tailored for the younger children in the class and incorporating more topics on African-American history in the learning plan. Each of these subthemes for suggested program changes are described in more detail below.
Suggestions on Mothers’ CBSM Program. At post-intervention, mothers recommended adding physical activity , such as yoga, to the CBSM intervention and incorporating history lessons on African-American culture into the curriculum. At the reunion, mothers recommended adding a class that would combine mindfulness and diaphragmatic breathing. They also indicated that lessons dedicated to domestic violence and postpartum depression would be great topics to include. Finally, mothers recommended bringing in guest speakers (e.g., African-American mothers) to come and discuss their life stories so that they can draw inspiration from them. “As far as like mothers who have been um how do I say accelerated into succeeding in all that they want to do, have them come back and give a demonstration. Come back and speak on the struggles and the trials that they went through and how they came over it so that other mothers that are going through it can see that I can get to the point I can get out of this dark area and get into the light like she did.”
Mothers also recommended having more class activities that included other family members. At post-intervention, mothers suggested having a class dedicated to completing activities with their children so they can have a better understanding of how they interact with them. At the reunion, mothers recommended a parent-child swapping activity during class time to gain a better perspective on other parenting styles. They also suggested having a couple's workshop with an emphasis on communication. “Couple's workshop, not even necessary to be here, but just to know how to interact when certain conversations come up or a blended family workshop. Like okay, example, I'm not with my daughter's dad, I'm with my boyfriend now, so my thing was just blend the two together and it took a long time [a year and a half] for my daughter to get use to him … it wasn't the fact that it wasn't her dad. It was the fact that my boyfriend looks Caucasian and it took a minute for her to be like ( make facial expression), “He looks different from me.”
Finally, mothers at both time points suggested increasing the length of the program to 12 weeks. A few mothers even stated that having class twice a week would be beneficial. At the reunion, mothers recommended to connect with each other outside of the program via text messaging and by having an ongoing support group. “And I think yeah, and then I think of we should have more sessions. You said after this reunion, nobody knows when there's going to be the next one, so maybe we can meet up more often or you know, we at least, we try to keep together through our text messages. But I think that I don't want that to fade away.”
Suggestions on Children's MBKC Program. At both time points, mothers recommended having more tailored activities for different age groups of children and indicated that the parents should be shown what the children learned after each class. At the reunion, mothers gave specific suggestions such as having music time for the kids and having age-based communication lessons. Mothers also suggested incorporating lessons on African-American history so that their children would learn about the contributions of important historical figures (e.g., Rosa Parks, Martin Luther King Jr., George Washington Carver). “Maybe a little more history as far as the Black African-American go. Teach it to the children, you know what I'm saying? Who is George Washington Carver? Who did this? Who did that? You know what I'm saying, certain things like that. Rosa Parks, you feel me? Y'all wanna take our children and do things with them. Do something like that so when they come in here, they'll know their Black culture.”
At the reunion, there were seven children who took part in a one-on-one qualitative interview to gather information on what class topics and activities they recalled and continued using after completing the MBKC intervention. Content analysis revealed that the top class activity that all of the children remembered was shaking a glitter jar filled with water to represent how they feel inside when they get upset, angry or frustrated and how when the glitter settles down, it represents how they feel when they are calm and relaxed. This arts and crafts activity was used to teach children emotion regulation with several children mentioning that they still used their glitter jar. The next class activity remembered the most by children was using breathing buddies (i.e., placing stuffed animals on their stomachs) to help teach them how to use diaphragmatic breathing to feel more calm and relaxed by watching the stuffed animal move with their stomachs with each breath. Children mentioning both of these activities were notable given that they occurred two months to two years after they completed the program.

Section: 4. Discussion

The current mixed methods study is one of the first to examine whether a six-week CBSM intervention was effective in improving psychosocial outcomes among low-income African-American mothers and whether a MBKC intervention was effective in increasing prosocial behaviors in their children. As hypothesized, results indicated that mothers participating in CBSM demonstrated significant reductions in perceived stress, depressive symptoms, and anxiety levels at six-weeks post-intervention. These results are consistent with one previous study of a six-week, group-based CBSM intervention that was effective in reducing depressive symptoms in African-American women during pregnancy ( Jesse et al., 2015 ). The current results extend these findings for perceived stress and anxiety in African-American mothers during pregnancy and the postpartum period, where the need for stress management persists given the continued exposure to chronic stressors in this at-risk population ( Schmeer et al., 2020 ). Mothers in our sample reported experiencing several major stressors, such as feeling mistreated by non-Black members of society who often questioned their ability to be a good mother towards their children. Many women also discussed struggling to balance different roles in taking care of their children and caring for their own health, while having limited support from others. These results support the superwoman schema often experienced by African-American mothers, particularly aspects related to putting others before themselves and maintaining an image of strength under adverse circumstances. These unique stressors place African-American mothers at greater risk for poor mental health outcomes and further illustrates the need for CBSM programs to help provide coping skills and resources to facilitate stress management ( Allen et al., 2019 ; Sheffield and Giscombe, 2019 ).
Results also demonstrated significant improvements in mothers' self-efficacy for stress management at post-intervention. Specifically, mothers reported feeling more confident in being aware of their physical signs of stress, being more assertive when communicating their needs to others, and in using CBSM relaxation and coping skills when stressed. In particular, mothers felt more confident in managing their stress when experiencing problems with their significant other (72%), when struggling financially (73%), and when experiencing problems with their children (82%). These improvements in self-efficacy were associated with significant reductions in perceived stress, depression, and anxiety at post-intervention. Qualitatively, mothers attributed these improvements to having a better understanding of different types of stressors and learning the corresponding coping strategies that could help manage these situations, as well as having a better support system. These results are consistent with that of a prenatal CBSM intervention that was effective in increasing low-income mothers’ confidence in using relaxation and coping skills, leading to significant reductions in negative mood during pregnancy ( Urizar et al., 2019a ). Collectively, these results help to identify the mechanisms by which CBSM interventions may help to improve health outcomes among African-American mothers.
In regards to the MBKC intervention, quantitative results revealed no significant improvements in children's prosocial behaviors as assessed by mother's self-report and two observational assessments of sharing and helping behaviors. It is noteworthy that 78% of children already exhibited prosocial behaviors (e.g., comforting, sharing, helping) at baseline per their mother's report. Prior research has found similar results among low-income African-American children of depressed mothers, suggesting that they may adapt to high stress environments by showing greater comforting and supportive behaviors towards their mothers; however, this may vary by aspects of the caregiving environment with the presence of higher parental nurturance or more secure child attachment attenuating any adverse effects that maternal stress may have on children's prosocial behaviors ( Brett et al., 2020 ). Future studies may want to examine MBKC intervention effects among children with more problematic prosocial behaviors and other social-emotional indicators (e.g., internalizing, externalizing behaviors) at baseline. Such studies should also take the caregiving environment into account to examine the short- and long-term impact that children's comforting and supportive behaviors towards their mothers may have on their development.
Contrary to our quantitative results, mothers identified short- and long-term improvements in their child's prosocial behaviors that they attributed to the MBKC intervention. Specifically, mothers described how their children shared and helped more at home, got along better with others, and were more affectionate with their mothers, often using class props they made (e.g., glitter jar) to remind themselves and their mothers how to cope when stressed. These qualitative findings may reflect mothers' reinforcement of children's prosocial behaviors and use of emotion regulation strategies , particularly in high-stress situations ( Garner, 2006 ). Given these results, additional studies are needed to better understand the mechanisms and contextual factors through which MBKC interventions may improve African-American children's prosocial behaviors across different age groups (preschool and school-aged children), settings (school vs. community-based), treatment dosages (short- vs. longer-term interventions; Gibson et al., 2015 ), and types of prosocial behavior outcomes (teacher/parent report vs. observational assessments).
Several limitations merit mention. First, our results were limited to examining pre- to post-intervention changes in maternal and child outcomes given that there was no control group. Randomized control trials are needed to determine whether the CBSM and MBKC interventions lead to better maternal and child outcomes compared to standard care. Nevertheless, this is one of the first studies to examine the effects of a family-based intervention on improving mental health and developmental outcomes among low-income African-American mothers and their children. Second, this study did not include fathers' participation in the CBSM intervention. As demonstrated from previous studies, the father's parenting role can have an important influence on mothers' stress levels and their children's prosocial behaviors ( Gryczkowski et al., 2018 ). Third, the six-week intervention period, while demonstrating medium to large effect sizes for maternal outcomes, showed small to medium effect sizes for increasing children's prosocial behaviors. Longer intervention periods, as requested by mothers in the study, are indicated to more thoroughly assess the sustained impacts of these interventions. Similarly, the current study did not differentiate between shorter versus longer term intervention outcomes. Therefore, more distinct longitudinal post-intervention evaluation periods may assist to better determine long term intervention effects. Fourth, the two observational assessments of child sharing and helping behaviors may not have been sensitive enough to document changes in these behaviors for all children in our sample given that they have largely been used with preschool-aged children ( Flook, 2015 ; Warneken and Tomasello, 2009 ). Therefore, alternate versions of these assessments are warranted when examining MBKC intervention effects across different age groups. Finally, first-time pregnant mothers (17%) vs. multiparous mothers (83%) who participated in the study, as well as those mothers and children who participated in the reunion focus group (12% first-time mothers) vs. those who did not participate in the reunion, may have had different intervention experiences that were not represented, highlighting the need for mixed methods studies with larger sample sizes to examine intervention effects for both first time and multiparous African-American mothers.

Section: 5. Conclusions and implications

In summary, our results suggest that community-based CBSM interventions are effective in reducing perceived stress, depressive symptoms, and anxiety levels, as well as improving self-efficacy for stress management, in both pregnant and non-pregnant, low-income African-American mothers. While a concurrent MBKC intervention for their children did not demonstrate quantitative improvements in prosocial behaviors, mothers described improvements in their child's sharing and helping behaviors at home, with their children demonstrating long-term recall of the topics they learned up to two years after the program ended. Furthermore, results related to improvements in mothers' self-efficacy for stress management were associated with improved maternal (lower stress, depression, and anxiety) and child outcomes (increased sharing behaviors), helping to identify possible mechanisms by which CBSM interventions provide multiple benefits for African-American mothers and their children.
These results have important implications for helping to reduce the adverse effects that chronic stressors have on the health of African-American families. Few studies have developed and tested family-based interventions that target optimal management of stress in this population. This is a pressing need given the higher rates of depression and anxiety, as well as preterm births, among African-American mothers, placing their children at greater risk for poor social-emotional development later in childhood ( Schmeer et al., 2020 ). Given these disparities in health outcomes and in access to prevention programs, community-based interventions are needed to reach African-American women during pregnancy and postpartum and provide them with the necessary skills and knowledge to facilitate stress management. Similarly, offering African-American children a parallel MBKC program, while their mothers are participating in stress management, can offer multiple benefits to model and reinforce children's use of prosocial behaviors within a child-care infrastructure while providing mothers with dedicated time for self-care. Such interventions should be tailored to the cultural resources, strengths, and history that African-American women and their families have to manage stress and promote their children's prosocial behaviors. Results from the current study potentially address existing barriers (limited resources and training) to providing CBSM and MBKC interventions for African-American mothers and their children by providing manualized programs that can be delivered by health care professionals and paraprofessionals (e.g., social workers, OBGYNs, community health workers). Randomized controlled studies are now needed to demonstrate the potential long-term benefits of these interventions, as well as to identify the mechanisms by which these interventions lead to optimal health outcomes in this population.

Section: Credit author statement

Guido Urizar: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Resources, Writing-Original Draft, Visualization, Supervision, Funding Acquisition. Vivian Nguyen : Formal Analysis, Data Curation, Investigation, Project Administration, Writing-Original Draft. Jason Devera : Formal Analysis, Data Curation, Investigation, Validation, Writing-Original Draft. Alexa Saquillo: Formal Analysis, Data Curation, Investigation, Validation, Writing-Original Draft. Lauren Dunne: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Project Administration, Writing-Original Draft. Cynthia Brayboy: Conceptualization, Methodology, Project Administration, Writing-Reviewing and Editing. Angela Dixon-Hamlett: Conceptualization, Methodology, Project Administration, Writing-Reviewing and Editing. Veronica Clanton-Higgins: Conceptualization, Methodology, Project Administration, Writing-Reviewing and Editing. Gwendolyn Manning: Conceptualization, Resources, Visualization, Supervision, Funding Acquisition, Writing-Reviewing and Editing.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

None.

Section: Acknowledgements

This study was conducted at the Long Beach Department of Health and Human Services, Black Infant Health Program and California State University, Long Beach. This work was supported by a March of Dimes Community Service Grant (Gwendolyn Manning, PI) and by a National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grant ( UL1GM118979 ; TL4GM118980 ; RL5GM118978 ; Guido Urizar, PI) from the National Institutes of Health . The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of Stephanie Fields and members of the PRO-Health Research Lab for their instrumental support in data collection.
