Title: Patient-accessible online health records: Reconfigurations of clinical rhythms and doctors’ front- and backstage spaces


Abstract: Abstract

With patients' increasing online access to medical information traditionally contained within healthcare institutions, researchers have argued that the spaces of medicine are increasingly becoming blurred, allowing patients to sidestep their doctors and challenge their prior information dominance. In this context, Sweden has recently been spotlighted as it allows its inhabitants to continually access medical record content online. Based on an interview study on Swedish doctors' clinical experiences of the patient-accessible online health record, this paper expands on the theme of emergent medical information spaces accessible to laypersons online by arguing that this not only may challenge the traditional spaces of medicine but can impose on its temporal orders too. We detail doctors' attitudes toward the patient-accessible online health record, patients as continually updated record readers, and how this may transform clinical work rhythms and affect doctors' perceptions of the boundary between front- and backstage spaces. We moreover show how doctors can avoid “inappropriate intrusion” into the record by delaying patient access, but also that doctors can experience patients opposing to adapt to doctors' preferred pace and instead attempting to control the clinical rhythm. By intertwining clinical rhythms with doctors’ front- and backstage, this paper contributes with an extended analysis of the emergent spaces of online medical information, adding a temporal layer. The paper furthermore enlarges the existing sociological body on historical developments of medical records and adds a piece to the so-far piecemeal social science literature on how online records may affect the medical profession .

Section: 1. Introduction

Medical sociologists have taken a great interest in the digitalization of medical information and what this entails to patients. Much work has studied how the doctor–patient relation is reconfigured by patients accessing medical information online and the possibilities for this to impact the authority of medicine ( Broom, 2005 ; Henwood et al., 2003 ; Lupton, 2017 ; Miah and Rich, 2008 ). In an oft-cited paper, Nettleton and Burrows (2003) frame this in geographical terms as an “e-scaped medicine” where medical knowledge is no longer “being concealed within the institutional domains of medicine” (179) but is increasingly accessible to citizens online, for instance through state-sponsored health portals, virtual self-help groups, and commercial websites, making the spaces of medical knowledge more diffuse. With access to medical information online, which previously used to be contained within the healthcare institutions, it is argued that patients may now sidestep their doctors and challenge their prior information dominance ( Broom, 2005 ; Jutel, 2009 ; Lupton, 2017 ).
This paper adds layers to these emerging spaces of medicine. However, we will notably infuse them with a temporal dimension and do so from the position of medical professionals through an interview study on Swedish doctors' experience from the country's nationwide introduction of a patient-accessible online health record (henceforth “the online record”). Today many million patients in the United States and Europe can speedily access medical records through various online services, which its proponents have described as a “global movement” with the potential to establish a “more truly collaboration between patients and clinicians” ( Walker et al., 2015 :1). In this context, Sweden has been spotlighted as world-leading because almost all persons above the age of 16 years may continually access record content online through the country's national health portal ( Armstrong, 2017 ).
However, to doctors the medical record is seminal to performing their work and managing their patients, and therefore any changes in the usage and purpose of the record can impact their practice, affecting clinical work and the doctor–patient relationship ( Berg, 1996 ; Berg and Bowker, 1997 ). Considering this and that online records allow patients' continual access to updated record information, this paper extends the theme of emerging medical information spaces made accessible to laypersons online by arguing that this not only may challenge the traditional spaces of medicine but can impose on its temporal orders too. Therefore, we will intertwine an analysis of how the introduction of the online record may contribute to the “e-scape” of medical information, reconfiguring the spaces of medicine and doctors' historical information dominance – with a temporal ditto. To develop our argument, we build upon Goffman’s (1959) work on the division between front- and backstage performances and Zerubavel’s (1979) accounts of the temporal patterning of healthcare. This will be further combined with an understanding of the medical record as deserving a sociological eye by recognizing the ways the record partakes in intertwining and coordinating the organization of medicine and its patients as well as their distinct geographies and temporalities, and as being infused with knowledge, power, and politics ( Berg, 1996 ; Berg and Bowker, 1997 ; Garfinkel, 1967 ; Heath and Luff, 1996 ).
Patient continual admittance to medical records challenges well-established doctor–patient role where the doctor is used to be in charge of assembling information, deciding what is important, and choosing the proper time for notifying the patient. Akerkar and Bichile (2004) address this as a changing doctor–patient dynamic, stating that the internet and patients’ access to records allow patients to bypass doctors as information filters, questioning “the traditional responsibility of the health care providers to integrate all the sources of medical information and convey to the patient at the time of consultation” (121). Thus, letting the patient access the record introduces challenges around both what information should be accessed and the timing of its release ( Vikkelsø, 2010 ).
The growing body of health and medical informatics research on online records, which almost completely dominates the research field around online records (but see Petersson and Backman, 2021 ; Erlingsdóttir et al., 2019 ; Wibe et al., 2011 , Winthereik, 2008 for social science perspectives on its effects on medical professionals) has observed that doctors commonly view themselves as guardians of medical information and responsible for the proper timing of its release concerning patients. Hence, research has remarked that doctors and patients can have divergent views on both what information should be released and when ( D'Costa et al., 2020 ), since it may be preferable if doctors review information before patient access ( Halamka et al., 2008 ), and some information should perhaps not be communicated to patients through the record at any point in time ( Alpert et al., 2018 ). Whereas this literature points to problems around timing, it is mainly descriptive and does not link such temporal effects in any sustained way to the organization of medicine and the powers and knowledge that infuse the spaces of clinical work, the doctor–patient relationship, and the medical record. Hence, a theoretically informed analysis of such issues is currently lacking in the literature. To address these issues, we chose to turn to some classical sociological work.
Goffman’s (1959) seminal work on front- and backstage behavior differentiates between individuals' performances “frontstage” when they know others are watching and strive for full acceptance of one's role performance versus the more composed, relaxed, informal behavior when they are “backstage.” However, backstage is not synonymous with “off stage.” Rather, although there is no audience backstage, one is still surrounded by colleagues and preparing for the next performance ( Goffman, 1959 ). Hence, doctors' front stage is where they perform their professional role, including showing patients that they are competent and respectful and will do what is best for the patient. Goffman (1959) refers to this as performing to the audience, an idealized view of such encounters. By contrast, the backstage is where doctors are out of patients' sight, thinking aloud, being frank with peers regarding patients, and being unconcerned about being “presentable” to patients. In this context, medical records can be considered among the most prominent medical backstage spaces. Weiss (1997) for instance highlights how doctors treat medical records as “backstage” materials versus patients due to how doctors perceive records to be tentative and disclose ambiguity, uncertainty, and personal bias; they are also understood to enact professional power and authority.
Doctors using the backstage region to prepare themselves for their frontstage performances with patients and records being considered backstage material due to being tentative highlight that temporalities are involved. Thus, records are in motion, and if and not least when doctors should release information to patients comprise moments of consideration ( Vikkelsø, 2010 ).
In his classical work on the patterns of hospital life, Zerubavel (1979) highlighted how rhythms structured the hospital―for instance, the cyclic nature of work schedules, the patterning of the week and its days, and recurrent medical routines and their pacing such as the sequencing of tests and the reading and filling out of charts at various intervals. Berg and Bowker (1997) furthermore contend that doctors devise the record to morph patients and their bodies into a tempo suited to the time zones of the clinic. Rhythms can thus be viewed as more or less stabilized patterns of actions that actors orient themselves toward and become familiar with, which creates predictability ( Zerubavel, 1979 ). These temporal compositions can also be related to doctors' shift between back- and frontstage regions according to the rhythms of their work, for instance, by the scheduling of patient visits, periods of record reading and writing, the order of procedures, etc. These rhythms, hence, affect medical information management by helping staff orient themselves and assist in guiding healthcare personnel's need for information and its timing―the “right information at the right time” ( Reddy and Dourish, 2002 ).
However, Zerubavel's account is quite deterministic regarding how temporal rhythms “structure” hospital life in a bureaucratic way, subsuming all and everyone to this patterning and reducing patients to bodies to be healed according to these temporal orders. Others have instead emphasized how rhythms can be abandoned, renegotiated, and involved in temporal conflicts between actors ( Jackson et al., 2011 ). Not least can changes in technology and the affordances they allow create unexpected temporal dis/junctures in healthcare work organization , affecting professional boundaries and client relationships ( Strauss et al., 1985 : 282). In the light of this, the introduction of online record has the potential to create novel temporal junctures, affecting the rhythms of medical work due to how it includes patients as accompanying record readers. Doctors can no longer treat the record as an exclusive backstage region vis-á-vis their patients as patients may now access the record as it unfolds, straining doctors' control of the “proper” timing for information sharing with patients according to established rhythms.
Official sanctioning of the Swedish online record began around 2012. The same year a joint action plan to advance e-health with online records was launched by the Swedish county councils, regions, and municipals responsible for administrating national healthcare ( CeHis, 2012 ). One target for strengthening citizens' participation and engagement in their health through access to personal health data was to allow online record information by 2014. The Inera company―owned by the Swedish Associations of Local Authorities and Regions and tasked with the digitalization of the Swedish welfare sector―became responsible for investigating how online record access could be achieved. Inera initiated feasibility studies on citizens' and medical professionals' perspectives. The reports produced ( Inera 2011 , 2012a ) stressed that patients already had legal rights to access paper record copies, though they seldom did so, possibly because the process was cumbersome. These reports also emphasized that as early as 1982, the Swedish National Board of Health and Welfare mandated that the public should understand the record's medical language, but healthcare professionals continued using jargon and rarely considered patients' literacy. So whereas the reports questioned the justification for doctors to treat the record as part of their backstage space, patients' legal right to access records was rarely translated into practice – records where considered very much as back-office material by doctors.
The issue of timely patient access to record information was a central concern. The final report ( Inera, 2012b ) emphasized the importance of considering both patients' needs for transparency and involvement and healthcare professionals' needs for medical records that subsume all pertinent patient information for ongoing assessments and actions. The investigators suggested that an online record should align with the wishes of the Swedish Medical Association by including a “respite” [rådrum]—a design feature giving doctors 14 days before patients could access recorded notes. This would allow healthcare professionals to address their preliminary findings and working hypotheses before patients could access the information, ameliorating doctors' concerns about patients reading early notes and reducing patients’ worries about irrelevant possibilities. The respite design became negotiable to include in the system, meaning once the online record was released regions could choose to endorse or reject this feature (i.e., a 14-day respite or none at all). Our study region applied this feature during the study period, but it should also be noted that fewer regions apply this feature.

Section: 2. Materials and methods

The authors interviewed doctors in one of Sweden's 21 healthcare regions between September 2018 and December 2019. When interviews began, the region's online record system had been running for approximately two years. Initially, three doctor groups were selected: general practitioners (GPs), psychiatrists (PSs), and accident and emergency room (ER) doctors. GPs were chosen because they work with many patients with various conditions and therefore likely to provide a broad range of examples. ER doctors were selected because our regional contact raised the issue of “frequent attenders” (i.e., patients who seek frequent emergency medical care), who were suspected as being regular readers of their records (however, this was unconfirmed by our informants). PSs were included because they were expected to experience challenges from potentially highly sensitive record information. We also interviewed one pediatrician, who explained that certain challenges may arise for pediatricians since it is the guardian who accesses the patient records, rather than the patient/child; thus, we decided to add pediatric informants (PDs). We approached some doctors through our regional contact, who acted as a gatekeeper to grant initial access, and other informants directly ( McCurdy et al., 2005 ). Cumulatively, our strategies involved sending study information by email, presenting the study during staff meetings (this was also done by managers), and contacting additional doctors based on recommendations by primary informants.
Thirty doctors took part in individual semi-structured interviews (11 GPs, six PSs, five pediatricians, and eight ER doctors; there were eight women and 22 men, aged 28–66 years). Doctors were informed about the study purpose and data handling, including that they could withdraw their participation at any time, after which they signed informed consent . The study was approved by the Central Ethics Review Board in Gothenburg (DNR 496-18). Interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim, and each doctor was given the opportunity to read the transcript of their interview. The quotes have been edited and translated to English by the authors.
Coding of empirical material was inspired by constructive grounded theory and done line by line using an inductive approach ( Charmaz, 2014 ). The authors continuously discussed codes between them. The temporal dimension emphasis was added after a few interviews had been conducted and a works-in-progress seminar participant raised the issue of patients entering the record mid-narrative. This prompted us to conduct focused coding on time-related aspects ( Charmaz, 2003 ; Martin and Turner, 1986 ). Herein, five codes were aggregated: temporality, instantaneousness, paper copies as a barrier, paper copies versus online records, and efficiency. The efficiency dimension is, however, not pursued in this paper but deals with doctors' perception about whether the online record saves or consumes their time. For instance, saving time via patients reviewing their online record instead of contacting them, or consuming time by doctors spending more time on carefully writing record entries as patients now might read them (cf. Erlingsdóttir et al., 2019 ). When the other categories were analyzed, we found a common temporal theme relating to the boundary between the front- and backstage in all categories. In the next section, we therefore present our analysis following a temporal route in which doctors are initially ahead of patients regarding the record (conducting a so-called secrecy examination before handing out paper copies of the record to patients and the 14-day respite feature to counter the instantaneousness of online record) and achieve some temporal control over organizing the backstage region. We end Section 3 with scenarios when patients are in time with or ahead of doctors in accessing record information (doctors' perceptions of patients’ simultaneous access to record information and when patients access record information before their doctors).

Section: 3. Findings

Our discussion of the empirical material is divided into four parts. First, doctors' comparisons between handing out paper copies of the record to patients―the traditional way of giving patients access to the record―and online records are detailed; they were asked to compare the situations before and after the introduction of online record. Second, we discuss doctors' views on the 14-day respite feature and how this may be used to achieve some temporal control over re-organizing the backstage region, making it more presentable to patients once it is transformed to a frontstage region, i.e. before back-office material is released as notes for patients to access online, transforming them into front office matter. Third, we focus on doctors' perceptions of patients’ simultaneous access to record information—i.e., when the boundary blurs between the back- and front stages concerning medical records . The final section includes accounts of when the temporal roles of doctors and patients are reversed to the point that patients access record information before their doctors.
We asked doctors whether they perceive differences between patients receiving copies of their records versus using the online record. Some argued that there is no principal difference and questioned the introduction of the online record since patients already had legal access to records. Others, however, saw the online record as a shift from one formal system to another, a reorganization accompanied by changes regarding the pacing and sequencing of their work.
Doctors commonly described the practice of patients requesting copies as a “barrier” that was removed by the advent of online record. To obtain paper copies, patients had to submit a formal application. An appointed healthcare professional [verksamhetsansvarig] would then respond to the request by conducting a secrecy examination [menprövning], as stipulated by the law, to establish whether disclosing the information in the record would cause damage , either to the patient or any other person mentioned in the record. If the information that can cause damage to a person is found, the copy of the record may only be released with a reservation, i.e., masking the specific information that may cause damage. Doctors explained that few patients (specific patient groups) bothered to go through this process (e.g., dissatisfied patients or those who believed they were malpractice victims). ER-13: well, it's simply the accessibility […] now the patient's record is perhaps a few clicks away, before you often had to make a personal visit to the hospital or you had to complete a form, or demand to see the record, it was a cumbersome process […] I don't believe there were a great many who accessed their records but in those cases someone was really dissatisfied or had some kind of suspicions about something not being properly carried out.
Doctors also explained that the commencement of the secrecy examination process meant they received forewarning about what was going on, and were hence reminded about the patient and case, regaining some temporal control. GP-3: I guess I still believe that you should not be able to read your record online, you know, the patient always has the right to receive record copies but […] then I receive a notification about their request for copies.
The procedure of handing out copies was occasionally associated with a special routine, giving the patient the option of discussing the copies with healthcare staff. Being notified of the patient's copy request and having the opportunity to read the record, doctors could prepare to interact with the patient. This gave doctors the chance to listen and respond to patients' arguments. GP-4: You know, the patients have always been entitled to read their record, but […] I think the regulations at the time stipulated that when the patient got in touch and asked to have their record sent to them, you were required to ask — do you wish someone to read it with you? Precisely to avoid misunderstandings, so we have moved from something with a quite clear focus on avoiding misunderstandings to a situation of complete freedom, it's a very wide spectrum, you know.
Doctors used the past tense to describe patients going through the process of applying for copies to access records. They noted that the whole course of events for patients to gain copies meant that they normally received their access after their medical episode. PS-8: There are individuals who, during periods, are very much immersed in their emotions or their disease, and perhaps are not at all agreeing with the doctor, and who might experience a strong arousal when they see how the doctor has interpreted a conversation, whereas a couple of weeks later when they have calmed down, and receive copies, they might not be as dramatic to read.
In sum, according to doctors, the procedure behind providing copies by request prevented most patients from ever reading their notes. Record notes were essentially treated as backstage material, kept in the back-office region and rarely viewed by patients, confirming both Weiss' (1997) and Ineras’ (2011 ; 2012a) depiction of records as traditionally treated as very much the property of the medical profession . However, in the few cases in which patients requested copies, doctors associated this with the routine of an incoming application and the following necessary secrecy examination, which gave doctors a chance to read the record before the patient, updating themselves on the case, and when this process was finished―preparing the copies for handing out to the patient. All this made it possible for doctors to “manipulate” time ( Fox, 1999 : 1317) in their favor to fit their preferred rhythm due to being in control of the process, its tempo, and sequencing of events, avoiding any surprises by their privileged access to the record―receiving a head start versus the patient. By also having the possibility to schedule a meeting with the patient, they had the opportunity of reading the record together with the patient―and through being prepared on the record content, correcting any “misunderstandings” ( Sterponi et al., 2017 ). Furthermore, when patients finally received their copies, they normally did so after their healthcare episode, when the temporal course of events was already set in the record.
The issue of when patients see notes was impacted by the 14-day respite programmed into the system in this region. Though some doctors saw no significant difference between patients reading only signed notes versus unsigned notes, the opposite was also true. Recurrent concerns among doctors were their distrust of the functioning of the preprogrammed 14-day rule and associated signing function, and their reported experiences of patients being able to read doctors’ notes with no apparent restrictions. These were also the reasons why some doctors sometimes did not see the significance of the respite feature. PD-23: I don't like this uncertainty, “what is it they can view and not, and when is it released” […] I could enter my dad's record and view unsigned [notes], it was completely crazy, really remarkable, and it was so unpredictable. It created a sense of uncertainty.
Connected to this, doctors argued for the importance of being in control of signing notes, emphasizing that they see unsigned notes as notes in progress and, therefore, want to be in control of when a note was ready for release. PS-26: I believe that the patient has the right to know what is written and have a greater possibility of influence , if there is something that is not correct, to be able to easily verify it online […] but, to us these documents can be unsigned, awaiting us correcting them, the note is not finished, and is supposed to be edited.
The change in working procedure noted by this doctor not only concerned accuracy in a medical sense but also included considering that patients were now potential notes readers. Thus, the 14-day lapse was also used to adjust one's writing to better suit the extended audience, acknowledging the difference between communicating with peers and having a patient readership. ER-16: It can look very different in writing from when I speak, it can seem like I'm grumpy and angry, that I just think that this is just shitty, but this is not at all what I think. I just said it in a different emotional context that wasn't captured by the written word, and then you can refine it differently and I believe that this has great importance, to me at least, perhaps it's because I'm sloppy, I don't know […] but I process my notes during these fourteen days […] so that they become a more official and coherent text, you know, and so that it is like balanced somehow.
Doctors could also use the option to postpone patient access to notes for 14 days as a window of opportunity for further investigation, noting tentative hypotheses, and either confirming their suspicions before signing or at least allowing more time to gather more information, alternatively eliminating them. In the latter case, doctors could remove notes, preventing the patient from ever knowing about a failed hypothesis. PD-23: In most cases there are no peculiarities, however I basically think it's good, it gives a respite, if you have an ongoing medical investigation of a child […] where you might have written “brain tumor” […] although you actually do not really believe this to be the case, then it's comforting to have this time to contact the parents, perhaps you need to gather some different things.
To conclude, doctors sometimes use the 14-day respite to retain control over the record and its emerging course. This creates a temporal window for doctors to clean the record, making it presentable for patients, such as by allowing speculation to progress into diagnosis (or not) and adapting their professional, technical language for patients, which might otherwise be perceived as “potentially shocking” ( Hughes, 1971 : 289). The privilege to sign and release notes gives doctors a temporal upper hand, which they can use to stall the proceeding of their work before it becomes accessible to patients. By taking these actions, doctors can adapt the system to achieve a tempo better suited to medical professionals' preferences ( Georgiou et al., 2011 )―the preferred rhythm of their clinical work. The professional tempo inscribed by the preprogrammed 14-day signing feature becomes most explicit when it malfunctions, sometimes affecting information management practices of doctors as according to them patient then accesses the information at the wrong time. This may result in what Goffman (1959 : 209) refers to as “inopportune intrusions”―i.e., when a backstage performance is witnessed by someone who is not supposed to see it.
Doctors using the 14-day respite in the aforementioned ways when writing records emphasizes that the record is no longer considered a nearly exclusive backstage space. Instead, doctors recognize how the previous uniqueness of patients reading notes is now commonplace, making them consider this when writing their notes (see also Petersson and Backman, 2021 ).
Doctors associated the introduction of the online record with a shift in why patients partook of information from their records. While in the past, patients received paper copies to review how things had been documented, it has now become a tool for patients who wish to be in sync with the doctor. This was described as a transformative change in the record's purpose and who controlled it. PD-23: Previously we foremost handed out record copies when someone was pissed off, or believed that we had made a mistake, or wanted to be sure that some things were actually documented, and now it's more of a tool for families and patients to keep track of the care the child receives and to keep abreast of what is going on.
This could create the uncomfortable sense of patients being inside the doctors’ minds as they understood the record as an extension of their cognitive process—a space for ongoing reasoning back and forth until reaching a conclusion (e.g., a diagnosis). GP-17: Perhaps I don't always want the patient to know what I'm thinking today, because it can be about my suspicions about something that may not be relevant after all.
However, others considered having the patient take part in their train of thought as an improvement in the patient–doctor relationship, aligning with measures they already took to be more patient-centered. PD-22: I believe that this open record aligns quite well with an increasingly patient centered, or person centered work, which I think I have practiced for quite a while at the pediatric clinic […] I hope that we are less critical of this because in some ways they are a part of this investigation too, one who should be part of my thoughts I believe, as much as possible.
Doctors also saw that continuous involvement of patients might improve their safety, such as the patient taking responsibility for record monitoring. From this perspective, doctors could regard patients' reading of the record as assisting in spotting possible chart errors and ensuring that medical queries were not forgotten. Moreover, doctors perceived that patient involvement could increase patients’ interest in their health. As such, the record could work as a memory pool for both the doctor and patient. PD-2: The patient has the possibility to monitor themselves. If I become ill or something happens, if things are forgotten for some reason […] they become an extra safety measure in the system.
Interviewer: You mean that the patient becomes an extra control … PD-2: mmm […] and also likely to become more involved by how they can keep abreast and perhaps become increasingly interested in their own condition.
However, opinions that online records could improve the doctor–patient relationship by allowing patients to remain continuously up-to-date with their doctors existed alongside concerns about risks to the doctor–patient relationship from patients being too abreast. The following quote captures this view, emphasizing the need to develop a relationship with the patient and, as a professional, deciding how and when information should be presented. GP-4: If you consider this right to be involved in decision making , or participation, that you should have the same opportunities to be involved in your care, then it's very attractive if you can read and see everything […] but we don't really think like that, but much more in the manner of how participation […] demands continuity, that you know the doctor, and vice versa, and that you can have some sort of relation and appraise the situation […] that you filter the information differently depending on the relationship with the patient. Like out of what disease they have, and their abilities to process a decision, you tailor it differently and also time-wise, step by step or all at the same time, depending on who you are facing.
Although the system is inscribed with the respite feature (though not always trusted by doctors), the swiftness with which patients may now access chart information can make them practically appear to be mind readers. Whereas records have long been a source for retrospective inspection of the adequacy of actions, e.g., by peers, governmental bodies ( Garfinkel, 1967 ), and, as we have seen, sometimes even patients, such inspections have differed from having the company of patients as the actions happen . In these instances, the idea of a fixed division between front- and backstage regions arguably becomes invalid as doctors experience that their notes are immediately transformed into front office material for patients to view. It creates a mixed response. On the one hand, doctors might see it as improved information management—the timely nature of the record allowing the patient to be on par with the doctor, viewing patients' access to doctors' thoughts, and sharing identical information for promoting patient-centeredness and involvement for the good of both patients and medicine. In such instances, doctors are positive to allow patients' access to record content transforming the clinical rhythm to become more patient-oriented. On the other hand, doctors also advocate for the “stand by” position, meaning that they believe they alone should control information sharing, according to clinical rhythms supervised by medicine. In detailing how doctors produce patients’ medical course through the record, Berg and Bowker (1997) point at how this is not necessarily a linear history; things happen, and take unexpected turns, which often make the record and the narrative emergent. These occurrences can make the record a precarious space, and whereas to doctors they are usually a familiar part of the rhythms of clinical work, doctors do not necessarily expect patients to realize this, making doctors cautious about what information to share with patients and when, perceiving such decisions as a matter of exercising professional judgment.
Another quandary doctors face regarding the online record and its design is lagging behind their patients. Sometimes this occurs when patients read things that their doctors know but did not expect the patient to have accessed yet, and hence giving rise to situations that the doctor is not always prepared for. Other times, patients read things their doctor has not yet seen. This is common when tests ordered by the doctor are analyzed in a different department and hence signed off by another healthcare professional. This leads to situations where who accesses the test result first depends on who visits the chart the fastest—the patient or the doctor. Again, doctors had different reactions concerning these temporal dimensions. One line of argument supporting patients’ access to information, such as test results, was that they would be better informed and prepared when seeing the doctor. ER-15: There are these [patients] at the wards who receive their test results, and then an hour later the round arrives and they [the patients] already know the test results […] and that is of course a shift in the power balance […] but on the other hand I don't think that matters […] initially you just get surprised, because you're not used to that, but […] if the patient has a greater understanding of their test result, of course the easier it is to explain to them how you're thinking about [the results].
Another argument for supporting patients’ reading of their chart information—even though this could throw both the patient and doctor off balance—was that it could be better for patients to initially process and contemplate such information in familiar surroundings, like at home. ER-12: Well, I have heard from colleagues about the patient being scheduled for an office visit to be told about cancer but the patient already knew by reading the record […] that's hardly always optimal but for some it could be superb because then they have had the possibility of processing it at home and then they arrive for the visit and are fully focused on what to do, whereas there are others who perhaps can't tackle it the same way, so that's a sort of a gamble introduced there.
Other doctors strongly advised against abandoning patients to read chart information about serious illness on their own, as it may cause an overwhelming crisis. Instead, they strongly advised seeing the patients and having staff at hand, prepared to deal with patients being potentially agitated. GP-31: As you know, you're not allowed to inform patients about serious illness by phone. It's not good to do that at all […] they can be shocked, some don't accept the illness, sometimes they react by screaming, crying a lot, fainting. For this reason, it's good that they turn up here and see a doctor, for instance with nurses around, and prepared if something should happen, you never know.
Another consequence of patients accessing record information in ways unanticipated by doctors is that patients can get a head start. For instance, while doctors are waiting for the mail to arrive from another hospital, the patient could access the information through the online record, taking doctors by surprise. This could put the doctor in the position of not having a care plan prepared. In such instance, doctors might experience loss of power, while the patient could push for immediate activation of a plan that did not yet exist as in the following case where an ER doctor reflect on what this may involve at the specialist clinic where this doctor works outside of the ER: ER-24: It's perhaps not what you find that is controversial, it's more like the controversial is [mimics patients voice] “what do we do now?” “I don't want to wait ‘till next week, we have do decide what to do now” sort of. And perhaps then, I've sort of lost some control over, so to speak, the ability to plan time-wise. I mean, how do you say, the cat is out of the box, out of its cage, and then, well the controversial cases are placed higher up on the agenda.
This case shows that we have moved far beyond procedures associated with doctor's temporal control over granting patients access to copies after an official application and secrecy examination. By contrast, patients are sometimes in the driver's seat and setting the rhythm, pushing for the doctors to catch up, whereby doctors can experience a shift in temporal powers toward patients. In such instances, Berg and Bowker’s (1997) assertion that doctors deploy the record in ways that subsume patients to the timetable of clinical work seems to be invalid as doctors perceive record content and its accessibility being used by the patient to align the doctor to the timetable of the patient. Some doctors understand this as constituting bad information management, for instance, losing authority to control the “right time to tell” ( Derbez, 2018 ). Other doctors perceive these changes as undramatic, and some understand them as temporal progress toward a more symmetrical doctor–patient relationship.

Section: 4. Concluding discussion

Frankenberg (1988) has described medicine as a “waiting culture,” pointing to temporal asymmetries in the doctor–patient relationship. Patients are accustomed to adapting to the rhythms of the medicine―to sit in waiting rooms, await the diagnosis, and be told what to do next. Nevertheless, patients in many countries can nowadays access a doctor by tapping an app on their phone and immediately receive information regarding their medical issue and its solution. Such developments point to reconfigurations of the temporal orders of the organization of medicine and the doctor–patient relationship. It is thus not only the spaces of medicine that seem more diffuse today by medical information being accessible online to laypersons as claimed by Nettleton and Burrows (2003) , but as we have argued in the case of the Swedish online record―their temporalities too. In developing and adding a temporal argument to the claims about the increasing dispersion of medical information, we have not set aside space for time but instead attended to the interrelation of time and space and how they shape each other. To achieve this, we have, in a convoluted way, combined Goffman’s (1959) work on front- and backstage performances with Zerubavel’s (1979) conceptualization of the rhythms accompanying the administration and practicing of clinical work. This moved the issue of timing in the case of online record research from the descriptive attention it has received in the health and medical informatics literature into a theoretically informed analysis. It has enabled us to attend to how the introduction of the online record impacts the rhythms of clinical work and obtain a more thorough understanding of doctors' perception of the timeliness of record information release―when and why they believe their work in the record should be kept backstage or it to be ready to treat as front office material to disclose to patients.
Our empirical findings show that doctors have mixed attitudes to this new purpose of the record, the role of the patients as a continually updated record reader, and how it transforms the rhythms of clinical work. They can, on the one hand, support patients' easy access to the back-office region via the online record and the possibilities it opens up for a more temporally symmetrical relationship and see it as beneficially empowering patients, inviting patients to partake in shaping clinical rhythms. On the other hand, we have also conveyed that the medical record can be highly time sensitive, not least when uncertainty prospers. Berg and Goorman (1999) have stressed that medical information is always tied to its production context, including temporalities. Hence, time in the record cannot be reduced to simple time units without a frame of reference; instead, time extends to continual reinterpretation and reevaluation of old and new data and information back and forth, so doctors and their recorded narratives must adapt accordingly. Whereas doctors are accustomed to such temporalities and the ambiguities they may contain, our research shows that letting patients swiftly access what doctors used to consider part of their back-office region—the record—makes doctors consider how such temporal folding and unfolding might affect them and their patients. Doctors can hence be cautious about having patients shadowing their tentative thoughts and sketchy formulation in real time, risking exposure of delicate professional judgments but also of doctors' doubts. Doctors may also be wary of patients entering the backstage region to read the record without the doctor's support. Without the presence of a doctor, it instead becomes the patient's task to make sense of record information, which might expose patients to information doctors believe they cannot always comprehend or manage on their own, and doctors might, therefore, prefer to restrict patient access (cf. Petersson and Backman, 2021 ; cf. Wibe et al., 2011 ). Whether doctors are concerned about being exposed in their professional roles or that patients may suffer from exposure to distressing information, both issues highlight how doctors perceive a temporal mismatch ( Sterponi et al., 2019 ) in the doctor–patient relationship due to the patient's ability to level out temporal asymmetries by swiftly accessing record information. To doctors, this may provoke a sense that information has reached the patient at the wrong time.
As further shown through our study, doctors have been accustomed to taking advantage of regulations and routines for preserving much of their backstage boundary despite patients in Sweden for many decades being entitled access to the medical record. Using these mechanisms to their favor, doctors have found ways to avoid “inappropriate intrusion” ( Goffman, 1959 : 209) into the record by making it possible to temporally stall patient access, to make things more presentable to patients, transforming back-office material into a frontstage version. Similarly, the potential for swift patient access by newly configured records has been counterbalanced by the medical association's request for the respite feature. This makes it possible to reinstate at least some professional temporal control, with the opportunity to manage the patient's moment of access, such as allowing doctors to follow investigations through to completion before the patient can view the information. Yet, doctors cannot control the length of the respite or adjust it to a specific situation and patient, and the respite is also a feature that fewer and fewer regions endorse. Furthermore, doctors' considerations about respite malfunctions and processes that allow patients to access information before their doctors, such as test results, exemplify how doctors sometimes are taken off-guard and lose some of their temporal control to patients who make use of the record in ways that make it possible for them to bypass the clinical rhythm. We have accordingly demonstrated that doctors may experience that patients resist Berg and Bowker’s (1997) depiction of patients as being morphed into the time zones devised by doctors through the record and how doctors can instead face patients attempting to take control over the clinical rhythm. This addresses how patients may use the record to oppose a position where they are supposed to await the doctor. It further connects to Zerubavel’s (1979) treatment of patients as more or less simply bodies to be healed, as it shows that regardless of whether doctors are positive to these changes, patients' access to the online record can yield them powers to intervene into clinical rhythms.
This paper focuses on how doctors are affected by patients as continual readers of the record and adds to the historical development of medical records as analyzed by previous sociologically informed research. This research has highlighted how records not only are used by doctors for medical matters but have a variety of purposes, have shifted from paper to electronic formats, and have an increasingly extended circle of users such as nurses, medical secretaries, clerks, and management, as well as researchers and governmental agencies, and how this affects doctors and the record in various ways (cf. Berg and Bowker, 1997 ; Garfinkel, 1967 ; Greenhalgh et al., 2009 ; Heath and Luff, 1996 ; Sterponi et al., 2017 ). However, these actors are operating within the confines of the healthcare system, and they use the record as part of their work. In our research, we have taken on the transformation of the record as also something continually used by the very subject the record engages―the patient―and how this can present doctors with a new set of challenges. To patients, record information is not about work but about their health and wellbeing and is therefore highly personal and not seldom of an existential kind. When the patient is invited to keep medically updated through the record, doctors' use of the record as a space for turning patients’ problems into a clinically manageable problem ( Berg, 1996 ) can encounter difficulties as doctors find that the medical record has taken on a new role and emerged as a space to be used by doctors and patients to also build and maintain a fruitful doctor–patient relationship.
This paper adds a piece to the piecemeal social science literature about online records, focusing on the entanglement of space and time in the context of the doctor–patient relationship and the medical record. Further social science research could, for instance, study how the doctor–patient relationship may be affected by the online record in the case of chronic conditions such as diabetes, COPD , and asthma, and where specialists may be well-acquainted with patients being continually up to date about their condition. Also, whereas this paper has touched upon how doctors may see advantages in patients being continually updated about their health, it would be valuable to see studies in what regard doctors commit themselves as “users” of the online record, attempting to actively use it to improve care. Lastly, our research wishes to attest to the importance of studying the temporal dimensions of the digitalization of healthcare, which increasingly targets patients and healthcare staff as a user of various around the clock-available online services and web-connected health technologies .

Section: 5. Limitations

Some study limitations bear consideration. Our sample consisted of doctors who volunteered to participate. It is possible that those whose experiences with online records were more problematic were preferentially motivated to participate. We do not consider this a major limitation, since the interviewed doctors also shared stories about the online record improving their patient relations and making their work easier. Furthermore, as Morse (2007 : 231) emphasized in the context of grounded theory , researchers should strive for “excellent participants,” among whom a defining quality is having something to say about the phenomena under study and having reflected on it. Informants who feel they have nothing to say may thus be expected not to volunteer, whereas those who have thought about the phenomena might be more prone to do so, seeing it as an opportunity to express their reflections. It is also possible that experiences and opinions differ among specialists or departments and that the results may not represent the larger medical community. Nevertheless, our study contributes a novel, albeit contextualized, understanding of both the interrelation of space and time and medical work, and the influence of the online medical record on doctors. However, the empirical material also indicates that doctors’ reactions to the online record and issues of temporality can be shaped by how they perceive the doctor–patient relationship. For instance, ER doctors occasionally compared their short, sudden encounters with patients they saw only once with those of GPs, who frequently build long-term patient relationships. Such nuanced differences should be studied further in line with our proposal for studying the role of the online record in cases of chronic conditions.

Section: Author contributions

Jesper Peterson: Project administration – lead; Conceptualization – lead; Writing – original draft – lead; Writing – review & editing – lead; Funding acquisition – equal; Methodology – equal; Investigation – equal; Revision–lead. Christel Backman: Funding acquisition – equal; Methodology – equal; Investigation – equal; Writing – original draft – supporting; Writing – review & editing – supportive; revision–supportive.

Section: Acknowledgement

We wish to show our gratitude to Nils- Erik Petersson who suggested that this study should be carried out, the participating doctors for setting aside time to be interviewed, the region representative who welcomed us to do the study, the participants at the Work-in-Progress seminar arranged by the Science & Technology Studies group at our department and where the theme of temporality was first discussed – and lastly to the journal's reviewers for their constructive comments on how to improve the paper.
