Title: A sociological autopsy lens on older adult suicide in rural Australia: Addressing health, psychosocial factors and care practices at the intersection of policies and institutions


Abstract: Abstract

This paper examines the interrelationship between suicide, health, socioeconomic, and psychosocial factors in contributing to suicide in older adults in rural Australia. Drawing on a coronial dataset of suicide cases and a mixed methods sociological autopsy approach, our study integrated a quantitative analysis of 792 suicide cases with a qualitative analysis of medico-legal reports from 30 cases. The sociological autopsy provided novel insights into the entanglement of policy and service provision at the state-level with individual end-of-life decisions. Particular attention is drawn to age and gendered dimensions of suicide, especially in relation to health and social issues. The study showed a continuity between suicide and the patterning of an individual's life course, including experiences and consequences of inequality and marginality; a desire to meet culturally–normative ideals of autonomy ; and a fragmented, under-funded, and intimidating social care system that offered limited options.

Section: 1. Introduction

Globally, suicide rates are highest in people aged 70 years and older ( Ritchie et al., 2015 ). With an ageing global population, the number of older adults dying by suicide is likely to increase, making it a growing social concern. Epidemiological research has identified similar suicide risk factors for older adults to those that apply to other age groups including mental illness, declining physical health, bereavement , financial difficulties, and social isolation ( Conejero et al., 2018 ; Price and Howard, 2020 ). Additionally, factors specific to older adults such as retirement, neurocognitive impairment, loss of independence, functional disability, terminal illness , chronic pain, and institutionalization have also been identified ( Conejero et al., 2018 ; Price and Howard, 2020 ). Despite a tendency for research to focus on identifying broad risk and protective factors, a small body of work has argued the importance of understanding suicide in older adults as a heterogeneous phenomenon with notable age-specific differences between the ‘young old’, ‘middle old’, and ‘oldest old’ ( Koo et al., 2017 ; Sinyor et al., 2016 ).
In many countries, rates of suicide among older adults are higher in rural than urban areas ( Hirsch and Cukrowicz, 2014 ). Rurality can be considered a contributor to suicide due to inequalities in health and social service provision and ongoing demographic and economic transformations that have changed work and family life. The out-migration of younger adults to cities for education and employment , coupled with a shrinking social service sector , and the restructuring of the agricultural and mining industries have led to the weakening of intergenerational, economic, and social supports, with significant implications for mental health and wellbeing ( Chan et al., 2015 ; Kotey, 2015 ). At the same time, changing public opinion about older adults maintaining control over their life in the context of life-threatening illness, and the passing of assisted dying laws in a number of countries complicates the issue, reflecting the multifaceted and complex character of suicide among older adults ( Bonnewyn et al., 2009 ).
Despite these complexities, most research on suicide in later life is premised on the understanding that the desire to die indicates an underlying pathology, and that prevention is just and necessary ( Richards, 2017 ; van Wijngaarden et al., 2014 ). To this end, strategies that focus on risk assessment and reduction, including improvements to wellbeing and social connectedness , are considered key to suicide prevention ( Lapierre et al., 2011 ). The denial of agency and the imperative of prevention inherent in these approaches are particularly significant for older adults ( van Wijngaarden et al., 2014 ). The presumption that the desire to die is abnormal has been challenged by the concept of rational suicide which argues that suicide can be a defensible choice, especially where a person's fundamental interests, values, or purposes in life are thwarted, as in the case of a life-threatening illness ( Gramaglia et al., 2019 ). Rational suicide, however, remains controversial, and subject to ongoing disagreement over its definition and applicability. Some authors have drawn attention to the inseparability of emotion and reason in decision making ( Richards, 2017 ), while others have questioned its use in sanctioning elective death, especially when premised on a highly individualistic view of morality that judges it solely a matter of autonomy and personal choice ( Prado, 2013 ).
What emerges from the literature on suicide in older adults, therefore, are diverse descriptions of factors, life circumstances, biographies, personal characteristics, and motivations, coupled with varied perceptions of permissiveness. Because experiences of ageing interact with meaning-making practices and governmental processes for the organization, administration, and care of ageing populations , there is a need for analysis of suicide among older adults that addresses the multi-scale individual, social, and political processes that contribute to the decision to hasten death ( Neilson, 2012 ). As part of a larger research program exploring the multifactorial determinants of suicide in rural Australia, the objectives of this paper are twofold: i) to advance understanding of the interrelationship between suicide, health, socioeconomic, and psychosocial factors in contributing to suicide in older adults, and ii) to interrogate the social structures, circumstances, and practices that produce these interrelationships.

Section: 2. Bridging constructionist and objectivist approaches: a sociological autopsy of suicide

The question of whether coronial data corresponds with factual knowledge of individual cases, or whether the need to establish intent leads to filtered accounts based on common sense assumptions about reasonable cause reflects the methodological divide that has troubled approaches to the study of suicide ( Atkinson, 1978 ; Fincham et al., 2011 ). This tension between objective facts and their representation is a feature of complex social problems such as suicide. Throughout this debate, important questions are raised about the contexts in which people engage in practical reasoning about suicide and the authority of descriptions ( Atkinson, 1978 ). For Fincham et al. (2011) , the multiple, partial, and fragmentary accounts of suicidal individuals, family, friends, and, ultimately, police and coroners, mitigate against the possibility of a singular and coherent explanation of a suicidal event.
This subjective dimension of inquest evidence does not diminish its validity; nor rule out the possibility that reasonably objective judgements about suicide can be reached ( Scourfield et al., 2012 ). As an alternative to the frequently posited divide between constructionist and objectivist ontologies, Fincham et al. (2011) have proposed a mixed methods dual paradigms sociological autopsy approach. This approach takes seriously the way evidence is constructed, as well as the substance of the evidence in relation to the circumstances, beliefs, and actions of suicidal individuals. Through complementary theoretical lenses, sociopolitical structures that shape personal experiences such as those constituted by laws, policies, and social institutions can be assessed objectively, while also addressing individual meanings and motivations.
This analysis complements and extends work by Fincham et al. (2011) : problematizing the relationship between agency, structure, and suicide, and exploring the tension between simplification and complexity that is at the heart of suicide research and prevention. The primacy of intentionality to the classification of a death as suicide implies personal agency ( Münster and Broz, 2015 ). In seeking to explain the multifactorial etiology of suicide, however, biomedical and social determinants of health frameworks obscure or deny agency. In turn, interpretivist perspectives that focus on the meanings and values of acting persons often fail to acknowledge societal arrangements of power that simultaneously shape and constrain people's social and material contexts, and their exposure to adverse psychosocial conditions ( Krieger, 2008 ). A sociological autopsy approach that combines interpretive and structural analyses offers complimentary perspectives for rethinking the situational and structural aspects of suicide and how knowledge about suicide is produced ( Fincham et al., 2011 ).

Section: 3. Suicide data from the National Coronial Information System

This study is based on data on suicide deaths investigated by Australian coroners and transferred to the National Coronial Information System (NCIS) for storage and analysis. Deaths recorded in the NCIS with the International Classification of Diseases – Tenth Revision (ICD-10) code for intentional self-harm were interpreted as suicide ( World Health Organization, 2016 ). The NCIS includes coded data with basic demographic information (sex, birth year, postcode of usual residence, marital status, country of birth, employment status, and occupation) and cause of death details (time, location, postcode of incident and death, and mechanism/object/substance causing injury). The NCIS also holds supplementary non-coded data in the form of medico-legal reports (coroner's findings, autopsy, toxicology, and police reports) from the coronial investigation. Information in these reports is collected from health and police records, as well as from evidence provided by treating health or other professionals, family, and friends, including any suicide notes left by the deceased. Reports are text-only and attached to individual cases as a searchable PDF. Police reports and coroner's findings are narrative in form, while autopsy and toxicology reports follow a prescribed format in reporting results of tests performed. While all cases have demographic data, not all have additional reports since certain procedures may not be performed or reports filed.
Data from closed cases of suicide of persons aged 60 years and over residing in rural Australia were extracted from the NCIS for the years 2010–2015. In this article, we define rural as all areas outside of Australia's major cities as defined by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (2019) . Data were categorized by residential postcode using Australian Statistical Geography Standard Remoteness Area Codes. This divides rural Australia into four remoteness classes according to population and distance to services: 1) Inner Regional Australia, 2) Outer Regional Australia, 3) Remote Australia, and 4) Very Remote Australia ( Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2018 ). In recognition of the economic, social, environmental, and cultural diversity of areas traditionally classified as ‘rural’, we collected data from four states (New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania). Because suicide in rural Australia is a relatively rare event in sparsely populated areas, the inclusion of data for six years ensured a representative sample of suicides of people aged 60 years and over.
Based on the above criteria, 792 suicide cases were identified. Each had basic case record data including sex, date of birth, and place of residence, yet data on marital status, employment status, and country of birth was missing in 5–10% of cases. There were 71 cases (9.0%) with case record data only and no medico-legal reports. The quality of medico-legal reports varied, with data on health, socioeconomic, and psychosocial circumstances partial or missing in many cases. Human research ethics restrictions on the collection of data on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples meant that indigeneity was excluded from data analysis.
Our study employed a qualitatively-driven mixed methods approach that enabled variable-based as well as case-based analyses. To facilitate variable-based analysis, a coding frame was developed jointly by the first two authors following a preliminary reading of medico-legal reports during data extraction. These were developed by consensus using ICD–10 Z-Codes for potential health hazards relating to socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances ( World Health Organization, 2016 ), with some modifications made to streamline data management. Additional codes were developed with specific relevance to suicide in older adults such as physical and mental health history, health service visits, and end-of-life issues. Together with the core dataset of demographic variables, this framework created a structure for quantitative data analysis ( Scourfield et al., 2012 ).
For the qualitative analysis, 30 suicide cases were selected. The sample included a male and female from each age cohort and from each state to satisfy a maximum variation strategy but based on quality of information provided in medico-legal reports. Quality was assessed as the completeness of the data available, and the level of description provided for the examination of micro-level decisions and macro-level policies and practice. In one state (South Australia), it was not possible to meet this aim and so additional cases from Queensland and Tasmania were selected to ensure equal representation by sex and age cohort. Because of the higher number of suicides occurring in inner and outer regional areas in comparison to remote areas, additional cases from remote and very remote areas were included. Due to the varying quality of medico-legal reports and the low numbers of suicides in remote and very remote areas, especially among women, all remote and very remote cases came from Queensland. The demographic characteristics of sampled cases are described in Table 1 . Table 1 . Sample demographics of rural suicide cases, 2010–2015, age >60 years in New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania. Empty Cell Whole cohort n (% of 792 cases) Qualitative sample (n = 30) Age 60-69 390 (49.2) 11 70-79 227 (28.7) 10 80 and over 175 (22.1) 9 Sex Male 646 (81.6) 16 Female 146 (18.4) 14 State New South Wales 273 (34.5) 6 Queensland 343 (43.3) 13 Tasmania 106 (13.4) 8 South Australia 70 (8.8) 3 Geographic location Inner Regional Australia 480 (60.6) 19 Outer Regional Australia 268 (33.8) 6 Remote and Very Remote Australia 44 (5.6) 5 Marital status Married 356 (44.9) 15 Divorced 99 (12.5) 4 Separated 56 (7.1) 2 Never married 59 (7.4) 2 Widowed 146 (18.4) 7 Missing data 76 (9.6) Employment status Retired/Pensioner 579 (73.1) 27 Employed 117 (14.8) 2 Unemployed 45 (5.7) 1 Other 9 (1.1) Missing data 42 (5.3)
Reports provide a unique but problematic source of knowledge about suicide. Intent is crucial to a legal definition of suicide, and consequently, investigation centers on finding evidence of suicidal intent via instances of expressed intent (suicide notes or threats) or observed intent (behaviors such as a previous suicide attempt or preparations such as making funeral or financial arrangements) ( Jowett et al., 2018 ). Precipitants of suicide such as a history of mental illness, relationship breakdown, financial strain, or other stressful life events are also important indicators ( Jowett et al., 2018 ). The gathering of evidence may therefore reflect, and in turn be weighted toward, issues that are consistent with common sense justifications for suicide from the standpoint of witnesses, police, and coroners ( Fincham et al., 2011 ). Following Fincham et al. (2011) , we contend that the interpretive schemes drawn on by professionals and others about what might reasonably compel someone to suicide should not be dismissed as common sense theorizing. Rather, we see these as sharing broad similarities with those drawn on by individuals experiencing significant distress, despair , hopelessness, or meaninglessness. At the same time, we recognize the potential dangers of reducing analysis to mono-causal explanations and seek to preserve the complexity and tensions inherent in suicide and suicide data by highlighting its constructed nature.
The study was approved by the Justice Human Research Ethics Committee of the Department of Justice and Community Safety and the University of Newcastle Human Research Ethics Committee.

Section: 4. Data analysis

This mixed methods study begins by applying a constructionist lens to examine the inherently interpretive dimension of coronial evidence and the construction of knowledge about suicide ( Scourfield et al., 2012 ). Thereafter, we move towards a more objectivist approach, identifying quantitative trends across demographic, health, socioeconomic, and psychosocial factors to provide an outline of the contexts in which suicide occurred among older adult Australians living in rural areas ( Fincham et al., 2011 ). We then qualitatively describe subjects' experiences in order to understand the contextual specifics, and the interplay between individual experience and the cultural, institutional, and socioeconomic processes and practices that shaped suicidal thoughts and action ( Mason, 2006 ).
Three researchers coded the medico-legal reports to develop a dataset of health, socioeconomic, and psychosocial variables combined with demographic data. Factors including mental and physical health status, health service use, toxicology, socioeconomic, and psychosocial circumstances are presented as proportions by age and sex cohort with 95% confidence intervals based on margin of error. The chi-square test and the Mantel Haenszel chi–square trend test were used to determine proportion differences and linear trends by age and sex. Analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics 25.
Medico-legal reports were read separately by the first two authors. We used these reports as a source of qualitative data providing detailed insights into the circumstances in which individual suicide took place, as well as the ways in which suicide narratives were constructed by witnesses, police, and coroners. Applying these insights, we sought to make judgements about individual end-of-life decisions and the social and structural contexts in which they occurred, while recognizing that different modes of relating and ordering evidence within medico-legal reports may generate, expel, or suppress the multiplicity of suicide ( Fincham et al., 2011 ; Mol and Law, 2002 ). Data coding, analysis, and interpretation involved a recursive and reflexive process that was systematic and analytic, yet oriented toward constant discovery and comparison of situations, settings, relationships, and meanings ( Altheide et al., 2008 ). First, an inductive approach was applied whereby coding focused on identifying recurring themes. Any differences in interpretation or categorization were discussed and resolved collaboratively, helping to ensure reliability and validity. This led to the construction of a coding scheme of descriptive categories for labeling and grouping the data that was applied to the 30 cases ( Ritchie et al., 2005 ). Although analysis was inductive reflecting evidence from medico-legal reports, our attention was also drawn to findings emerging from the statistical analysis such as notable differences by age or sex. On completion, we moved to broader descriptive and explanatory analyses, introducing theoretical concepts and frameworks to generate explanations that connected the dynamics of individual experience, intention, and action with underlying social structures and practices ( Lewis and Ritchie, 2003 ). Data was managed using NVivo 12 as it allowed team-based coding, as well as the identification and comparison of patterns and irregularities across codes, and with reference to age and gender ( Ritchie et al., 2005 ). To ensure compliance with NCIS data access and reporting conditions, specific ages have been removed and details from reports summarized rather than quoted directly to limit potential identification.

Section: 5. Between simplification and complexity: the interpretation and construction of evidence about suicide

In contrast to the constructionist approach of Fincham et al. (2011) that explores the silences contained in case records that result from investigators focused questioning and efforts by next-of-kin to minimize any sense of moral responsibility, we pursue an alternative line of inquiry to explore the tension between simplification and complexity that is at the heart of medico-legal reports.
In reconstructing the events that lead to suicide, police and coroners are concerned with establishing that the death is intentional and self-inflicted. As such, certain categories of evidence are needed to build a tenable explanation ( Atkinson, 1978 ). This information is not predetermined but requires coroners and police to examine records and ask questions of medical professionals, next-of-kin, and available witnesses ( Timmermans, 2005 ). Different modes of relating and ordering this material mean that experiences of very different kinds coexisted in medico-legal reports. On occasions, these simplified suicide, portraying distress through gender-congruent norms. In cases 5 and 11, for example, suicide was seen to imply feminine impulsivity and emotional turmoil ( Jaworski, 2014 ). Reports focused on heated arguments with family members earlier in the day, but suicidal intentions appeared otherwise opaque. Simplification was also pronounced in cases where informants sought to reduce the intricacies of a person's life, and the problems experienced in that life, to factors considered amenable to intervention. Poor adherence to treatment regimens was reported in four cases and appeared to stand for various problems, with the implication being that if persons had complied with treatment, then their suicide might likely have been averted.
Suicide prevention is full of practical and scientific simplifications that reduce complex realities to a small number of discrete, identifiable, and intervenable factors. Stories of suicide, however, are layered, tangled, and textured, and it is difficult to grasp the myriad connections in any one case ( Bowker and Star, 2000 ). It is also possible for different and contradictory accounts to exist simultaneously. In case 11, for example, the representation of suicide as an impulsive mistake was brought into question by reference to a previous suicide attempt, thus blurring conventional gender norms that view female suicide as emotional and impulsive rather than an affirmation of agency and intent ( Jaworski, 2014 ). In case 7, information about medication compliance was destabilized by reports that the deceased had seen a counsellor two days prior to death. This suggests that issues related to treatment extended beyond matters of non-compliance to challenges associated with identifying significant indicators of suicide risk, and the realistic role of medication in preventing suicide.
Such simplifications do not necessarily suppress the complexities of suicide, but rather push them to the margins, offering the reader glimpses of the complex and unpredictable nature of suicide ( Mol and Law, 2002 ). For Mol and Law (2002) , the intellectual challenge is grasping how different ways of ordering evidence come together, and whether they do so comfortably, in tension, or both. Our research found that medico-legal reports revealed modes of ordering evidence that allowed the simple to coexist with the complex, with some coroners disposed toward compiling lists of events and circumstances considered important to the suicide. Reports drew attention to the complex interplay between suicide and health, cultural, and socioeconomic factors that were common among our study population. The orderly abstractions of suicide research and prevention drawn upon by some informants in highlighting the role of help–seeking and treatment adherence stood in tension with descriptions of the harms and/or inadequacies of the treatment and care provided. There was also a critical tension between the persistent desire to die expressed by some participants and the imperative of prevention that prevailed in the testimonies of health professionals. This raises the question of how professional approaches to suicide prevention understand the challenges of old age, and how such issues are best addressed in policy and practice. Because they involve negotiating the tension between the ambiguous and taken-for-granted concepts and categories of suicide to determine the scope of policy and practice, decisions about how much detail is needed in a description of suicide are epistemologically, politically, and ethically significant ( Bowker and Star, 2000 ).

Section: 6. A sociological autopsy of suicide in older adults – the rural picture

Table 1 describes the demographics for the whole cohort. Apart from the sex ratio, the proportions within the whole group were indicative of rural demographics. Male suicides outnumbered female suicides by slightly more than four-to-one across all areas. This exceeded the national suicide figures of three-to-one for the same period ( Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2016 ). Just under one-half of all suicides occurred in the youngest age group 60–69 years. Most cases were retired, (73%) with only small proportions still employed (15%) or unemployed (6%).
Less than one-third of the study population were reported as having a diagnosed mental disorder (31%), with the majority of these diagnosed with depression (92%). Women were more likely to be diagnosed and treated than men despite similar rates of mental health and primary care service visits in the six weeks before death ( Fig. 1 ). Diagnosis of mental disorders decreased significantly with age ( Fig. 2 ). This fits with previous research and cautions against viewing suicide in older adults as a homogenous phenomenon in which mental disorders are emphasized disproportionately ( Koo et al., 2017 ). Download: Download high-res image (689KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Proportions of health, socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances by sex in the whole cohort (n = 792). (A) Mental health status (B) Mental health treatment (C) Health service visits in the 6 weeks before death (D) Socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances. Download: Download high-res image (877KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Proportions of health, socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances by age in the whole cohort (n = 792). (A) Health status, (B) Health service visits in the 6 weeks before death, (C) Mental health treatment, (D) Socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances.
Qualitative analysis enabled us to further investigate complexities in how mental disorders appeared in different contexts. In particular, the way that diagnostic assessments were complicated by behavioral and personal characteristics. Bereavement was associated with a diagnosis of mental disorder in four cases, although this was often accompanied by physical illness, disability, suicidal thoughts, and/or concerns over institutionalization. In case 24, a female in her 80s with a history of depression and suicidal thoughts following the death of her husband was faced with the prospect of entering residential care due to co-occurring physical health problems. She had told a health care worker that she was unwilling to do this. Expressions of despair and recurrent suicidal thoughts in the context of family conflict, bereavement, relocation, chronic illness , and opioid dependency impinged on the psychiatric diagnosis of a female in her 60s. Threatening self-harm, she was assessed by health professionals as having poor self-care and had been living in chaotic circumstances that, in view of her cigarette smoking, were deemed to pose a fire-risk. In case 17, the ability of a female in her 70s to live her life fully following a postoperative disability appeared to provide the context for psychiatric diagnosis. She was reported by her general practitioner to have withdrawn socially due to her discomfort around others. This, in turn, led to her becoming increasingly depressed.
The enmeshment of complex affective states , biological dysfunction, life events and chronic stressors , coupled with chronic suicidal thoughts and self-harm, posed significant challenges to health professionals. Yet viewing these as prima facie indicators of mental disorders for which hospitalization and medication were considered appropriate treatment, meant that related social problems were not adequately addressed. Even for those with serious and persistent mental illnesses such as psychotic disorders , mental illness was unlikely to be the main precipitating factor . This was the case for a male in his 70s who was experiencing major worry and anguish as a result of increasing health issues, associated declining capability due to age, and occupational pressures related to farming in drought conditions. Concerns about the ongoing viability of his farm in the context of these circumstances point to a conflict between a desired and expected future that shifts attention away from mental illness towards the meanings that people attach to things in their life that are important ( Gavin and Rogers, 2006 ).
Chronic physical illness was present in 54.6% of cases and increased significantly with age ( Fig. 2 ). While chronic physical illnesses are debilitating, they are more likely to lead to suicide when they cause functional disabilities, threatening independence and quality of life ( Gramaglia et al., 2019 ; Koo et al., 2017 ). Physical and psychosocial suffering related to chronic physical illness was widely implicated in our qualitative sample. In two cases, this related to a diagnosable terminal illness , but in eighteen others was linked to functional decline and pain. Participants’ decisions were therefore prompted as much by present suffering as they were by fears or uncertainty about the future ( Richards, 2017 ). Both categories were included in coding and classifying cases as end-of-life issues, which we defined as involving palliative care , a terminal or end-stage disease expected to result in the physical incapacity or death of a person in the immediate future, and/or evidence of research or discussion by the deceased on euthanasia. Just over 10% of males and 16% of females in the study were identified as having an end-of-life issue. This proportion increased significantly with age ( Fig. 2 ).
We can discern two contrasting positions from the literature on old age, end-of-life decision making , and suicide that illustrate an ambiguous tension. The first holds that existential suffering resulting from accumulated age-related losses is as significant as physical suffering, and, consequently, that relief is ethically justifiable grounds for suicide if it threatens an individual's independence, dignity, and purpose in later life ( Gramaglia et al., 2019 ; Richards, 2017 ). The second is critical of what it perceives as questionable cultural attitudes toward dependency and the loss of meaning and purpose in later life that pass judgements on both the quality of life in older adults, and the constitutive features of a ‘good death’ in Western society ( Richards, 2017 ; van Wijngaarden et al., 2015 ). This tension was evident in cases where expressions of free choice and self-determination were linked to feelings of hopelessness and dependency on social institutions. In two cases, suicide notes cited in coroner's reports indicated an increasing inability to manage everyday tasks (including driving and self-care), ongoing pain, and a decline in bodily functions. In these cases, fear of dependence on others was seen as intolerable and contrary to an ethic of self-reliance.
The desire to control the manner and timing of death was evident from the deliberative action taken by individuals to end their lives in response to rapidly changing situations. At the same time, the rationalization of suicide in terms of an inability to live independently indicated the influence of social and structural contexts that may have limited choices and increased feelings of hopelessness ( Byng et al., 2015 ). If the basis for end-of-life decisions in the context of chronic physical illness is that the decision be ‘free’ or ‘voluntary’ ( Prado, 2003 ), it is questionable just how free that decision can be when aged care services are under-resourced, poorly managed, and associated with significant harms ( Commonwealth of Australia, 2019 ). This illustrates what Byng et al. (2015) have termed ‘restricted agency’, whereby the assertion of control arises in the face of a corresponding loss of control over one's life, and diminished possibilities in relation to treatment and care. In other words, suicide becomes a “paradoxical act of autonomy” ( van Wijngaarden et al., 2014 : 205), yet one in which participants' freedom to wrest control of their lives from the negative effects of medical authority was seen as all-important ( Prado, 2003 ). This was true across participant characteristics (sex and age), suggesting that the desire to control one's death was more closely related to Western individualistic ideals of independence, dignity, self-determination, and personal identity rather than specific masculine norms of power and control that have been argued elsewhere ( Fässberg et al., 2016 ; van Wijngaarden et al., 2014 ).
Control of death is commonly associated with the notion of ‘dying well’, yet the concept of an ideal death as one that is well-planned, takes place at home, and that is predicated on an acceptance of death did not always reflect the realities of the dying process ( Cottrell and Duggleby, 2016 ). In two cases, evidence indicated that the dying process likely occurred in the presence of others, and at a time and place chosen by participants. Both were female, and both had sought information from Exit International. Two additional cases, also female, made reference to Exit International, although these deaths appeared to have occurred alone. Methods of suicide in these cases were consistent with those advocated by this organization for peacefully and reliably ending one's life.
In most cases involving end-of-life matters, dying took place alone, employed violent methods such as the use of firearms, hanging, and cutting, and appeared constrained by access to physician-assisted suicide or euthanasia. At the time of writing, voluntary assisted dying legislation has been passed in four Australian states (although not in effect during the study period). Legislative requirements in these jurisdictions mean that only persons with an advanced, progressive, and terminal condition likely to cause death within twelve months can access voluntary assisted dying ( Government of Western Australia, 2020 ; Parliament of Victoria, 2017 ). Those living with debilitating conditions over many years are ineligible. These laws restricted choices about how and where older adults in our study died. This can be seen vividly in the case of a female in her 70s whose health and mobility were declining and who had unsuccessfully requested a pentobarbital prescription from her general practitioner. She subsequently used a more violent method which the coroner acknowledged had not allowed her to pass away peacefully.
In these cases, we see a blurring of the line “between ‘living with’ and ‘dying of’ frailty” in old age that affects the way in which end-of-life care is provided for older adults experiencing incremental deterioration over several years but with no diagnosable terminal illness ( Richards, 2017 : 7). Such accounts draw our attention to the invisibility of the dying experiences of older adults that are glossed over by the valorization of autonomy , rationality, and choice in the right-to-die literature, but equally by the pathologizing of suicide and the imperative of prevention in the suicide literature. As Naomi Richards (2017: 10) has argued, “we should accept that death is not a tragedy in every situation. Rather, it is the manner of our death … which can be the real tragedy.”
The study identified various, often overlapping socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances. Housing and economic factors, relationship conflict, and separation were more prevalent in the youngest old ( Fig. 2 ), while the recent death of a family member or friend, end-of-life issues, and problems of adjustment to life-cycle transitions increased significantly with age ( Fig. 2 ). End-of-life issues and issues related to loss and bereavement were proportionately higher in women than men ( Fig. 1 ). These findings illustrate the different life events that impact various stages of the ageing process ( Koo et al., 2017 ), but also their gendered contexts. The convergence of diverse socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances played out differently across age categories. Adjustment to life cycle transitions, for example, were more commonly associated with bereavement and perceived threats of institutionalization among the more elderly, while in younger age groups it was more likely to be the result of the transition to retirement and related housing and economic factors.
The cumulative effects of age, gender, place, and economic, health and social inequalities on shaping experiences of suicidal distress were evident in our qualitative sample, especially in relation to male suicide. Case 15 involved a male in his 70s who had recently retired. Since this time, he had experienced difficulties in paying the rent, and had been hospitalized for a progressive respiratory disease . These financial and health difficulties meant he would be forced to move into residential aged care, which was against his wishes. Here, the combined impact of low aged–pension rates, inflated local rental housing costs, and limited options for at-home health care translated into significant poverty and lifestyle deprivation for the deceased ( Delfani et al., 2015 ).
Case 30 drew attention to the multifaceted effects of social exclusion on different areas of life – exclusion from health services due to challenging behavior leading to poor physical health outcomes, and transport exclusion leading to an inability to access alternative health care services and support networks. Cross-cutting processes of disadvantage and exclusion such as these can function as “tipping points into precarity”, as older adults perceive their lives to be changing for the worse and have diminished opportunities and resources to combat them ( Walsh et al., 2017 : 92). Efforts to address the socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances of suicide in rural Australia must therefore acknowledge the structural inequities that marginalize older adults, and, in particular, the way practices and policies produce particular combinations of circumstances that generate distress ( Hankivsky and Christoffersen, 2008 ).
Just under one-third of cases (30%) were receiving treatment for a mental disorder, with the vast majority of these receiving medication (97%). Medication use was significantly higher among women than men ( Fig. 1 ). This was demonstrated by toxicology results which showed higher rates of antidepressant, benzodiazepine , and antipsychotic usage among women. Research has shown that women are more likely to have been diagnosed with, and prescribed medication for mood disorders than men ( Ussher, 2010 ). This is often attributed to men's reticence to seek help and communicate symptoms ( Seidler et al., 2016 ), although our study showed no significant differences in mental health or primary care service visits by sex in the six weeks before death ( Fig. 1 ). This is not to suggest that diagnosis and care were not infused with gendered assumptions about culturally appropriate expressions of emotion and behavior ( Owens and Lambert, 2012 ). This was most evident in cases of somatic distress that, together with ‘unresolved grief’, was constructed as depression in the case of a woman in her 70s; as well as in three cases of repeated self-injurious behavior where interpretations about methods, emotions, and the (un)ambivalence of the act accorded with assumptions about masculine and feminine characteristics ( Canetto, 2017 ).
Given that the issues identified by our study were largely socioeconomic and psychosocial, the prevalence of pharmacological treatments appears to reflect a narrow view of the problems and needs of older adults. Rurality has been associated with higher levels of pharmacological treatments and lower levels of psychological-based therapies ( Fitzpatrick et al., 2021 ). We speculate that this is linked to mental health policies that focus on primary care interventions in rural areas due to a shortage of specialists, and to organizational and structural factors that impede the quality and timeliness of care ( Brunero et al., 2018 ). High rates of psychotropic dispensing to older Australians may also be a factor ( Harrison et al., 2020 ). Despite their modest therapeutic benefit, the availability of alternative treatments for those displaying recurrent suicidal thoughts and actions was poor. For example, a male in his 70s with a long history of contact with mental health services had been treated with multiple antidepressant and antipsychotic medications with a cited medical report documenting no improvement to the deceased's mental health.
In three cases where persons were viewed as actively suicidal, care was largely reactionary and custodial, with interventions aimed at safeguarding them from risk of harm through Involuntary Treatment Orders (ITOs). Care that addressed the highly complex and sophisticated needs of this age group was not provided. In case 8, a female in her 60s was placed under two ITOs over an eight-month period. During this time, she also presented to hospital on numerous occasions with further admissions for issues related to a chronic respiratory condition. It was only in the last week of her life that a consumer assessment was prepared and it was recommended that she receive community care including social support. In case 13, the deceased's high suicide risk resulted in confinement in a residential aged-care facility despite its unproven and potentially negative effects ( Goodman et al., 2012 ). This type of non-consensual practice is not uncommon in Australia under jurisdictional mental health acts, and remains ethically and clinically contentious both for its coercive paternalism and poor patient outcomes ( Goodman et al., 2012 ; Light et al., 2012 ).
The abrogation of a person's right to consent to treatment based on considerations of risk, harm, and safety illustrates the relationship between the medicalization of suicide and social control. This was most pronounced in case 21 where self-harm and the refusal of treatment in the context of intense prolonged grief and physical pain was deemed pathological, resulting in detention and coercive electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) under the Mental Health Act. This dictated the paternalistic overriding of the deceased's expressed emotional experience and reasoning about his future. Claims made by the treating psychiatrist that the deceased's distress was evidence of major depressive disorder and impaired insight, and, therefore, warranting coercive treatment, highlight disparate tendencies in the law that uphold the right to refuse medical treatment while at the same time curtailing the autonomy of persons to make death-decisions ( Callaghan et al., 2013 ). These ethical and legal tensions mark the boundaries of individual freedom and state power, with the individual's desires about life and death subject to processes of medical and state regulation. Here, detention and coercive treatment were assumed to deliver benefit, even when it violated the deceased's body, human rights, and dignity.
In the absence of a suicide attempt, the limits of suicide risk assessment and what could be known about an individual's likelihood of suicide was apparent in a number of cases. Expressions of suicidal thoughts and plans were commonplace, both in the context of discussions with family and friends, but also with health professionals. In case 28, a male in his 80s who had been hospitalized for complex needs relating to bereavement, coping, and alcohol withdrawal was given permission to go on day leave. This was despite his family's and nursing staff's concern about his suicidal intent, and knowledge that he had access to lethal means of self-harm at home. In case 22, a male in his 80s suffering extensive and chronic pain had raised the subject of suicide with his general practitioner. The treating physician acknowledged that the desire to end one's life was common among sufferers of chronic back pain . He also claimed he was experienced in diagnosing depression, and that his training and experience led him to conclude that the deceased was not clinically depressed. Evidence suggested that the practitioner had failed to take these comments seriously because of this assessment.
Previous research has found that older adults are more likely to communicate feelings of hopelessness and suicidality before death, as well as receive treatment from a medical specialist ( De Leo et al., 2013 ). Taken in combination with the findings above, we might speculate on the continued prioritizing by researchers, practitioners, and policy makers of risk assessment in current suicide prevention strategies for older adults, especially depression screening and treatment. The ability to diagnose and treat mental illness is not believed to be the most important issue in preventing suicide among older adults ( Kjølseth et al., 2010a ). Nonetheless, a disproportionate emphasis is placed on the medical and technical aspects of care, rather than on issues relating to existential distress in the context of physical and psychosocial suffering ( Kissane, 2004 ; Kjølseth et al., 2010b ). This is the case in rural Australia where reforms focus predominantly on workforce planning and service accessibility rather than on processes of care; and where mental health planning, funding arrangements, and demands for efficiency constrain service provider efforts to develop alternative and novel approaches ( Henderson et al., 2019 ).
Our study has some limitations that must be acknowledged. In categories with partial or unavailable data (e.g. mental and physical health diagnosis and treatment; socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances) there was potential risk of bias in the quantitative analysis. The sampling of medico-legal reports for qualitative analysis based on the quality of data may have also resulted in the exclusion of some individuals or groups unlikely to be represented, such as the socially isolated or marginalized. Adopting a mixed methods analysis, we aimed to overcome these limitations by providing a statistical overview of issues related to suicide in older adults and some age– and sex–related trends, while refining and explaining these results by exploring medico-legal reports in greater depth ( Ivankova et al., 2006 ).

Section: 7. Conclusion

The study confirmed important age and gendered dimensions of suicide in older adults. Mental illness, relationship problems, housing, and economic issues decreased with age, while physical illness, end-of-life issues, and adjustment to life cycle transitions such as those associated with bereavement and perceived threats of institutionalization increased with age. Diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders were proportionately higher in women than men, as were end-of-life issues and problems related to loss and bereavement.
The impact of current policies and practices on social conditions , forms of care, and the ways people experience the transitions into old age were widely implicated in the suicides of older adults in our study. Older adults living in rural Australia face a forbidding, confusing, and difficult to navigate aged care system. The workings of the system are challenging to those older adults in our study who, confronted with their declining capability, struggled to live independently and stay in their homes. Criteria for determining eligibility for, and delays in obtaining, home care have been cited as reasons for the premature and unnecessary admission of older adults into residential aged care facilities in Australia. In rural areas, this is further complicated by difficulties in finding service providers able to deliver home care ( Commonwealth of Australia, 2019 ). In cases involving sudden traumatic events such as the loss of a loved one or hospitalization, feelings of loss, fear, despair, and hopelessness may be magnified by the exigencies of time, place, income, and poor health that determine the degree of choice and control that people have over their lives ( Moen, 2013 ). Further research that examines how deprivation, institutionalization, and social exclusion shape suicidality and end-of-life decisions is needed to better understand how these relate to other forms of oppression such as ageism , sexism, and sanism ( Baril, 2021 ).
Much of the rational suicide literature in the context of later life accords significant moral weight to concepts of autonomy, capacity, and individual choice. These concepts invariably become transformed into ways of understanding and assessing end-of-life concerns, distracting us from the actual situations that create the need for choices and avoiding the messy realities of suicide ( Drought and Koenig, 2002 ). By acknowledging experiences of ageing, old age, and their entanglement with governmental and institutional contexts prone to simplification and medicalization, we are better able to explore the dimensions of care and social life in which the decision to hasten death is made meaningful. To this end, Baril's (2017) criticism of the imperative of prevention that delegitimizes suicidal people's voices is important. Not only does it leave many older adults with unmet needs, it creates harmful environments and consequences. Pragmatic and compassionate approaches that promote the dignity of risk, and that support suicidal people using a harm reduction approach may therefore be a useful complement to existing suicide prevention strategies for older adults.

Section: Author statement

Scott J. Fitzpatrick: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration. Donna Read: Methodology, Data curation, Investigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Project administration. Bronwyn K. Brew: Methodology, Data curation, Investigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft. David Perkins: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

None.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to acknowledge Mr Nic Powell for his assistance with the project and the Department of Justice and Community Safety for providing access to the National Coronial Information System.
