Title: Social-spatial network structures and community ties of egocentric sex and confidant networks: A Chicago case study


Abstract: Abstract

Exploring how sexual and confidant networks overlap spatially and socially could facilitate a better understanding of sexually transmitted infection risk, as well as help identify areas for interventions. This study aims to examine how a sexual and peer-affiliate network is impacted or shaped by interconnected social relationships and spatial patterns. We used data collected from a sample of 618 young black men who have sex with men (YBMSM) and transgender women in Chicago (2013–2014) that includes partner and confidant links, geolocations, and pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) awareness. We spatialize different types of social networks and examine joint social-spatial community ties to both identify and differentiate social-spatial behavioral patterns. We explore the spatial structures of the social network by comparing ego-alter network residence patterns, visualizing ego-alter community ties in aggregate, and grouping different types of dyad relationships based on their spatial structure. Findings showed overlapping social and sexual networks. Egos with partners residing in more resourced communities furthest away, with wider alter-ego power differentials, also tended to be at greatest risk. Identifying the social-spatial structures of community ties is critical to enhance our understanding of the spatial context of social relationships, and further distill risk heterogeneity in vulnerable populations within an equitable health framework.

Section: 1. Introduction

Networks are shaped within social and spatial contexts, and thus cannot be explained by geography or social characteristics alone ( Doreian and Conto, 2012 , Scellato et al., 2010 ). Friends tend to live near each other – even in the digital age – though heterogeneity across these social networks demonstrates that multiple elements influence connections created across space ( Scellato et al., 2010 ; Wang et al., 2015 ; Leskovec and Horvitz, 2008 ; Hecht and Moxley, 2009 ; Preciado et al., 2012 ). While not the only factor connecting friends, geography often influences friendships, albeit in complex ways ( Bunnell et al., 2012 , Cronin, 2015 ). While measuring Euclidean distance between partners or peers is the standard in social network analysis , making more explicit how behaviors shift across social and spatial structures could provide a more enriched view. For example, existing hypotheses of cities and social networks consider competing approaches regarding how and why social connections are maintained in proximal or distal ways. Distal social connections can expose individuals, or egos, to new knowledge and information, whereas proximal connections may strengthen tightly connected social bonds that further social validation ( Wang et al., 2015 ; Centola and Macy, 2007 ). Traveling further to maintain social relationships may cost more in time and monetary expense, though commonalities between network members may reduce or overcome these barriers. A spatial-social network approach can consider new types of question to extend our understanding of complex behaviors, like how sexual versus friendship networks overlap in geographic space. Virtual socialization through social media can further complicate the relationship between spatial and social networks.
Exploring how sexual and confidant networks overlap spatially and socially could facilitate a better understanding of sexually transmitted infection risk, as well as help identify areas for interventions. These insights may be especially crucial in reducing risk for vulnerable populations impacted by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), as individual characteristics alone (such as behaviors and socioeconomic status) are not sufficient in explaining racial disparities in HIV among men who have sex with men (MSM) ( Duncan et al., 2019 ). Young black men who have sex with men (YBMSM) in the United States are of one of the only subgroups with rising HIV incidence, with Cook County (Chicago) and other urban areas recognized as priority jurisdictions for ending the epidemic ( HRSA, 2019 ). A meta-analysis investigating racial disparities of HIV populations by Millett et al. (2012) found that BMSM were less likely to access, use, and remain adherent to available therapies and thus less likely to achieve better outcomes compared with other MSM groups. Housing stability is a persistent challenge for many YBMSM, with almost a third or more of cohort participants experiencing some form of instability ( Duncan et al., 2019 ; Bouris et al., 2017 ). Social networks are critical to providing support and promote risk reduction behaviors ( Bouris et al., 2013 , Bouris et al., 2017 ), though neighborhood and built environment interactions also have significant associations with characteristics that improve outcomes, like PrEP awareness ( Chen et al., 2019 ). For example, YBMSM with a trusted parental figure were more likely to use PrEP ( Duncan et al., 2019 ).
More complex, socio-ecological conceptual models are thus being adapted within epidemiological studies to capture the influence of neighborhood and social networks on individuals impacted by HIV and STI transmissions. Social network-based interventions, like the TRIP project by Nikolopoulos et al. (2016) , have emerged to target resources and therapies to at-risk or recently infected individuals. How structural features of neighborhood environments impact, shape, or reinforce social networks and disease incidence trends remains unknown. Rather than focusing on dyadic behaviors alone, how distinct subpopulations or bridging populations interact with neighborhoods and place may be critical to further this understanding ( Youm et al., 2009 ).
Research making explicit spatial structures of social networks is very limited, though early studies uncover new dimensions of STI transmission risk. Gesink et al. (2018) explored the spatial architectures of egocentric MSM networks to better understand STI epidemics in Toronto, Canada. The egocentric sexual networks of participants were mapped, with geosexual archetypes identified based on place of recent sexual activity (e.g. at home, partner's home, public venues or spaces) and differentiated as distinct types: hosters , house-callers , privates , rovers , travellers , and geoflexibles . Participants who hosted sex at their home or had sex at public venues/spaces (and to a lesser extent, those who had sex in a variety of locations) were identified as most likely to have a history of syphilis and HIV, and thus most likely to benefit from interventions to reduce STI transmission, as compared to other geosexual archetypes. Logan et al. (2016) explored social and spatial dimensions of STI transmission within vulnerable groups in Winnipeg, linking social connections with identified places of risk activities. When considering only the social network, 8% of participants were connected with one other person; when considering a socio-spatial network, 50% were connected with one other person through shared risk activity sites. These studies focus on activity spaces as a means of stratifying social network structures, or how individual places impact or may stratify social connections.
Investigating the spatial structures of social flows remains a critical and understudied area in this domain. Social flows are defined as human-centric activities or agent-based decisions to connect places through movement ( Andris, 2016 ; Andris et al., 2018 ). Social flows thus reflect intentionality ( Andris et al., 2018 ) with emergent spatial patterns that may give insight into the heterogeneity of underlying population behaviors, as well as a better understanding of how and what characteristics attract or repel movement. Are spatial behaviors of sexual-social flows different from friend or confidant-social flows, and if so, what may drive that interaction? Do high-degree network members use specific parts of the city more than others? Do distinct spatial-social flows exist, and if so, do they possess differing risk behaviors, disease incidence, or other network characteristics? Understanding the spatial structural properties of social flows may be critical to facilitating new insight in these areas. Yet when movement and directionality between egos and alters is not available, we can use community ties (ie. connections between the communities of the ego and alter) to facilitate new insight. While the locations in which ego-alters meet to hang out is not known, the community structures and neighborhood influence of their residence remains. Thus, spatial structures of communities, and ties between communities, may shed insight on the geographies of social connections.
This study aims to examine how sexual and peer-affiliate networks are impacted or shaped by interconnected social relationships and spatial patterns. We incorporate data from a representative sample of a vulnerable population, young black men who have sex with men (YBMSM) and transgender women, within the City of Chicago as our case study . Previous work explored how built environment exposures were associated with different types of social networks and health outcomes within this sample ( Chen et al., 2019 ). Neighborhood educational attainment, primary care density, and sexual network member spatial proximity were associated with greater awareness of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) awareness, whereas MSM density was unexpectedly associated with less awareness, when controlling for individual and sexual networks. PrEP is an important HIV prevention modality that prevents HIV acquisition among HIV negative persons who take the medicine regularly and is a pillar of ending the epidemic initiatives in the United States. Following this classic social network analysis with built environment considerations, new questions emerged to help detangle the complexity and nuance of the study population. In this study, we spatialize different types of social networks (sexual partners and peers) and examine joint social-spatial effects to both identify and differentiate social-spatial behavioral patterns. We explore the spatial structures of the social network by comparing ego-alter network residence patterns, visualizing ego-alter community ties in aggregate, and grouping different types of dyad relationships based on their spatial structure. We are specifically interested in how spatial proximity impacts these structures, and thus may influence HIV transmission or information diffusion of prevention modalities. We hypothesize that spatial patterns would diverge between social and sexual partner networks, meaning ties to alter communities will be different according to type of social relationship.
From the authors’ understandings, this is the first application in medical geography or public health literatures to construct, evaluate, and compare both spatial domains and social flows between individuals, their confidants, and sexual partners in the HIV-vulnerable subpopulation of YBMSM. While previous work by Chen et al. (2019) demonstrated that distance between partners was associated with HIV prevention modality awareness in this population, and uncovered neighborhood associations and partnership characteristics, the relationships between and across space had not been fully investigated. Social network analysis studies tend to miss complex spatial relationships that may obfuscate understandings and interpretations, whereas related GIScience work often misses opportunities for nuanced applications in public health research in data limited settings. This analysis thus incorporates methods appropriate for both data limitations and conceptual work that further facilitate deeper understanding in the data generating process of spatial-social dynamics within HIV-vulnerable populations.

Section: 2. Methods

Data. We used data collected from a representative sample of 618 young black men who have sex with men (YBMSM) and transgender women (8% of total sample) in Chicago collected from June 2013 to May 2014 that were recruited into the UConnect study using respondent driven sampling (RDS). Respondents were eligible for the study if they identified as black or African American, were born male, were between 16 and 29 years of age, reported at least one male sex partner within the last 24 months, resided or spent most of their time on the South Side of Chicago, and gave informed consent at the time of the interview ( Khanna et al., 2015 ; Behler et al., 2018 ). Data used in our analysis includes partner and confidant links, geolocations, participant and sex partner characteristics, and dyad behaviors. Participant characteristics included unemployment, housing instability, PrEP awareness, age, number of confidant names, and house/ball membership. Sex partner characteristics include more than ten years older than ego, non-Hispanic Black, unemployment, and main partner status. Participant-sex partner dyad behaviors include serodiscordant or sersostatus unknown relationships, condomless anal sex, sex drug use, group sex , give money/drugs/shelter/other goods in exchange sex, receive money/drugs/shelter/other goods in exchange sex, first meetup through a mobile app, and first meetup through someone both knew. We did not include HIV status as we used a status-neutral approach that recognizes the social and behavioral context may be similar regardless of HIV status. All study procedures and data use were approved by the institutional IRB. Individual-level data geocodes include location of ego (ie. respondent), partner (ie. sexual relationship), and confidant (ie. social relationship).
Confidants or peers were identified by respondents as persons within their close network of social relationships, or people with whom they discuss things that were important to them. Partners were identified as sexual relationships within the last six months. Egos with overlapping partner and confidant network members were removed to retain a distinct dataset of egos with sexual or social relationships. Ego, partner, and confidant locations were spatially joined with Chicago community areas ( City of Chicago, 2013 ) to contextualize each location within a neighborhood boundary for additional analysis when obscuring individual-level location was required for privacy concerns. There were 607 persons total (98.2%) with non-overlapping connections, and 575 persons (93.0%) reside within Chicago communities. Of this subset (575 persons) there are 508 unique egos with confidant ties (88.3%), and 430 unique egos with sexual ties (74.8%). There were 953 distinct links/ties between egos and confidants, and 856 distinct links/ties between egos and sexual partners, as several egos had multiple confidants and partners.
Study Setting. The study setting is within the City of Chicago. The North, West, and South sides of Chicago represent substantially different community contexts--areas with varied incomes and racial/ethnic demographics. The North side is comprised of higher income, white majority areas and includes a historical, thriving gay enclave on the Northern coast in the Lakeview community. The West side is diverse overall but with heterogeneous income, racial, and ethnic distributions. The South side is likewise complex, but generally comprised of lower income and non-Hispanic Black majority groups. We use Roosevelt Road as a North-South divide, and generalize all areas South accordingly. West side community areas include Austin and Humboldt Park. Fig. 2 provides a reference map of Chicago highlighting several of these features.
Kernel Density Estimate Analysis. Point pattern analysis techniques often seek to determine optimal distances of clustering between observations. This requires a random sample of the population of interest, which was not available with uConnect data. Traditional point pattern analyses were not directly applicable because of the biased spatial distribution of sampling. We anticipate data clustering in the South Side, near the university medical center where recruitment was established, and with South Side residence being a requirement for inclusion in the dataset. Due to these constraints, our goal was to compare the wider spatial distributions of the patterns between groups. We expect egos and confidants/partners to thus be clustered around the same region as a whole, and are interested in both overlapping and diverging patterns between social and sexual groups. Diverging patterns across network types may reflect different processes or phenomena driving social or sexual connections, whereas overlapping networks may suggest highly integrated networks.
To determine the spatial distributions of ego/participants' communities and their sexual partners or peer/confidants' communities for further comparison, we model each community residence location by relationship type using a kernel density estimate (KDE) as an exploratory spatial data analysis method. That means we have KDEs for participants' communities, participants' sexual partners' communities, and participants' confidants’ communities, respectively. Kernel density estimates provide a geostatistical probability surface of a population, derived from the point locations of the individuals of the population. Kernel density estimates emerged from the ecological literature to define and characterize populations, and are increasingly used in other applied settings as well as for visualization techniques ( Carlos et al., 2010 ; Bornmann and Waltman, 2011 ). We use the actual coordinates of residence to proxy location, rather than aggregate to a neighborhood, to better estimate spatial ranges of sample population distributions. KDEs are sensitive to parameter input including the kernel function, which determines key characteristics of the geostatistical surface, and h , a smoothing parameter or bandwidth. We thus test multiple kernels (bivariate normal and Epanechnikov) and bandwidths, and consider the presence of multimodal spatial distributions. We used HREF, the reference bandwidth, as the h when calculating the kernel density function, as well as a least square cross validation approach (LSCV). For LSCV, we plotted cross validation runs against h parameters to determine an optimal bandwidth parameter. This point pattern analysis technique builds a geostatistical probability surface from an accumulation of individual locations, facilitating a discovery of regional trends that are not beholden to administrative unit boundaries.
We initially used HREF, the reference bandwidth, as our h when calculating the kernel density function; while this method is generally supported it is sensitive to multi-modal location distributions and tends to estimate a larger range. While the least square cross validation approach (LSCV) used next didn't converge, the plot of cross validation runs against h parameters to determine an optimal bandwidth parameter proved useful. For confidants' and partners' locations, h was optimal at 0.01 units using the “elbow” method, and for egos' locations, it was optimal at 0.005 units, noting a tighter distribution overall. Because we wanted to generate four microplots across all dyadic community pairs for comparison, we selected 0.01 as the h parameter directly. We used a bivariate normal kernel for all maps in the final figure ( Fig. 3 ), as the Epanechnikov kernel proved too spiky when using the optimal bandwidth. Additional figures of KDE parameter exploration can be found in the Supplementary Materials. We used the adehabitat R package for KDE calculation, and tmap for visualization ( Calenge, 2011 ; Tennekes, 2018 ).
Network Geovisualization . We define connections between ego residence and sexual partner or confidant residence as a “community tie” to capture the role of neighborhoods' structural factors in the social interactions between egos and their partners or confidents. Movement can occur between ego and their partner/confidants’ residential locations composing social flows between communities, though the directionality and documented instances of movement was not collected. Because of the data limitations, we take an exploratory approach and tempered interpretation of findings . We compute and visualize a Spatial-Social Network in aggregate to examine community ties across different types of networks in Chicago neighborhoods. To maintain the privacy of individual locations and linked flows, we use community area aggregate data. Community ties were thus calculated as distances between community area centroids of ego residence and partner/confidant residence locations. We develop a geo-network visualization for both network types (ego-confidant and ego-partner) to examine how ties may differ across relationship types. Ego-confidant networks represent the relationship between the participant and confidant, whereas ego-partner networks identify participant and sexual partner relationships. We used the dplyr R package to develop a spatial network and count number of ties as “flows” ( Wickham et al., 2015 ), and leaflet and tmap R packages to visualize the final network ( Cheng et al., 2017 , Tennekes, 2018 ).
Regime Construction & Community Tie Analysis. To determine structural spatial patterns within dyadic relationships and associated social characteristics, we conducted an additional analysis of community ties. Following the discovery of spatial trends in the network geovisualization, we first defined local ties as connections between residences up to two community areas away. As illustrated in Fig. 1 , local ties are characterized as “within,” (ego community is the same as the confidant/partner community); 1st order (ego community neighbors confidant/partner community), or 2nd order (ego community is the neighbor of neighboring confidant/partner community). Distal relationships were characterized as occurring more than 2 neighboring community areas away with confidant/partner residence on either North, West, or South sides of the city. Additionally, we established six specific tie regimes ( Andris, 2016 ): within community area ( Andris et al., 2018 ), first order neighbor ( Anselin, 1996 ), second order neighbor ( Anselin et al., 2006 ), distal community ties to the South side (i.e. more than two neighborhoods away) ( Balaji et al., 2012 ), distal community ties to the West side, and ( Bauermeister et al., 2016 ) distal community ties to the North side. These regimes capture the (a) community ties between the ego and alter (i.e., confidant or sexual partner) and (b) their sexual partners' respective neighborhoods. Accordingly, within distal community ties, we account for sexual partners’ domicile context (North, West, or South side of Chicago). Download: Download high-res image (592KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Operationalizing Neighbors with Spatial Weights. Local community ties are characterized as “within,” (ego community is the same as the destination community); 1st order (ego community neighbors destination community), or 2nd order (ego community is the neighbor of neighboring confidant/partner community). Download: Download high-res image (2MB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Reference Map of Chicago , highlighting community areas and key landmarks. Download: Download high-res image (801KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Grid of Spatial-Social Network Kernel Density Maps, by type of relationship (confidant and sexual partners) and ego or alter residence.
Neighbors were made explicit as spatial weight matrices using first and second order queen contiguity (without lower orders included) using the spatial statistical software, GeoDa version 1.12 ( Anselin et al., 2006 ). Tie neighbor relationship using spatial weight references was then encoded manually, specifying each local-distal tie structure as a categorical variable in the area-level dataset. We merged the tie category back to individual-level data, and then summarized social and risk characteristics for the sample, as stratified by community tie architecture. We use a Chi-squared ANOVA test to identify significant variation (p < 0.05) between community tie regimes: within community area, first order neighbor, second order neighbor, distal ties to the South side, distal ties to the West side, and distal ties to the North side. We used this approach because we hypothesized the residence of distal ties may inform why participants (egos) have confidant/partners residing further away within their network relationships.
Sensitivity Analysis . We conduct sensitivity analysis to evaluate how sensitive the neighbor tie analysis findings are to potential measurement errors in the survey data regarding participant and sex partner characteristics, and participant-sex partner dyad behaviors. Specifically, we apply a sensitivity analysis technique that draws on a counterfactual framework and considers what happens to an inference when there are hypothetical changes to the data ( Frank et al., 2013 ; Xu et al., 2019 ). That is, we quantify the robustness of inference in terms of the number of cases that would have to be replaced with no effect cases to change the inference (the Robustness of Inference to Replacement [RIR]). In the scenario with dichotomous outcomes, one can also interpret case replacement as generating switches from treatment success to treatment failure, which is also known as fragility in the epidemiology literature ( Walsh et al., 2014 ). As such, we generate statements such as “you would need to replace xx treatment success cases with null effect cases (RIR = xx). This is equivalent to transferring zz cases from treatment success to treatment failure” ( Frank et al., 2021 ). We use the konfound R package (development version) to conduct the analysis ( Rosenberg et al., 2020 ).

Section: 3. Results

We found distinct spatial patterns that differed between sexual partners and confidant network groups. Ego-confidant community ties tended to occur within or nearby ego residence communities, whereas Ego-partner network relationships tended to also have more distal community ties. In the kernel density grid shown in Fig. 3 , egos across both types of relationship resided in similar areas on the South side of Chicago. The final map panel provides a much more detailed view of the study population, but at a scale that retains participant privacy. In Fig. 3 , a multimodal distribution for sexual partners' residence is pronounced across the West and North sides of the city. In contrast, peer or confidants’ residence remain clustered in the South Side area, but with less dense confidant/partner residing in the West and downtown section of the city.
Fig. 4 illustrates the community ties of ego pairs, by type of relationship. Differences in these ties between confidant and sexual relationship is even more pronounced, with more connections to confidant/partner communities in the North, West, and other parts of the South side emerging as distinct visual trends. For the Ego-confidant Network, eight of the top ten origin-destination pairs (when ordered by greatest number of ties) were within-area, meaning the confidant lives within the same community area as the ego. In contrast, only two were within-area ties in the top 10 count of the Ego-partner Network. When grouping community distal ties into North, South, and West region dummy variables, there was also a change in alters’ residence between network types: 81% of all confidant/partner ties are on the South Side for the confidant network, contrasting with only 69% for the sexual partner network. While the South Side had a reduction for sexual partners, the North and West sides saw an increase: 11% of all sexual partner residences are on the North side as compared to 7% of confidant residences, and 19% of sexual partner ties are on the West side as compared to 12% of the confidant network. Download: Download high-res image (646KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Community Tie Network: Ego-confidant Network (left) and Ego-partner Network (right) . Community area boundaries shown in gray. Dark purple lines show tie from ego-community to partner-community. Dark purple circles within several community areas represent tie within the community area (i.e. both ego and alter reside within the same area). Ego-confidant network includes 953 pairs; Ego-partner network includes 856 pairs. Flows weighted by 2 for visualization clarity. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Half of all ties from egos to sexual partners were “local”, meaning the alter residence was either within the community area or the first or second-order neighboring area. 98% of these local ties occurred on the South Side of the region. In contrast, distal ties were distributed across different regions, with the majority having confidants/partners residing on far sides of the city; only 38% of distal ties paired Southern areas to other Southern areas. Another 38% of distal ties paired partners from South to West, and the remaining 23% paired partners from South to North. See Table 1 for a breakdown of binary local and distal tie directions (measured as individual-level ties) for the sexual network. Table 1 . Local and Distal Community Tie by region, type, and proportion of tie type. Empty Cell Region Proportion Across all Ties (N, %) Proportion Within Local/Distal Ties (%) Local: less than two communities away S to S 427 (49.9%) 97.9% of all local ties N to W 9 (1.1%) 2.1% Distal: more than two communities away S to S 161 (18.8%) 38.3% of all distal ties S to W 161 (18.8%) 38.3% S to N 98 (11.4%) 23.3%
Social network characteristics varied across six community tie regimes (see Table 2 ). Participant characteristics remained similar across tie spatial structures, with no significant variation across unemployment status or housing instability of participants, PrEP awareness, age, number of confidant names (proxying higher degree social networks), or house/ballroom membership. House or ballrooms serve as queer kinship spaces in YBMSM populations ( Young et al., 2017 ). However, there were multiple significant factors when considering sex partner characteristics, including their race (p < 0.0001), relative age (p = 0.0017), and employment status (p = 0.0298). Local sex partners had higher unemployment rates and were Non-Hispanic black, similar to participant population characteristics . Distal ties linked to the North side were characterized with significantly more sex partners greater than ten years old than the ego, and fewer of these partners were unemployed or non-Hispanic black. Participant-sex partner dyad behaviors varied in significance across tie regimes. Group sex , sex drug use, and condomless anal sex did not vary significantly across groups. Fewer than one fifth of partners met through a mobile application with no significant variation across all groups, however meeting through someone both partners knew was significant (p = 0.0267), with local partner pairs more likely to have this type of connection. Few participants gave money, drugs, shelter, or other good in exchange for sex, however there was significant variation in participants receiving goods in exchange for sex (p = 0.0012) across community tie regimes, accounting for 17.35% of distal ties linked to the North side as compared to only 3.23% of within-area ties. There were no significant differences across MSM and transgender individuals, however this lack of variation may be attributed to differences in sample size . There was also no significant difference of network ties for bisexual egos. Approximately half of dyads had a serodiscordant or serostatus unknown partnership, with no significant variation. Table 2 . Descriptive stats of ego and sexual partner characteristics stratified by neighbor order, characterized as either local (2nd degree neighbor or less) vs distal (greater than 2nd degree neighbor) type. Empty Cell Tie type to sex partner community of residence Local tie Distal tie (>2nd order neighbor) Across All Tie Regimes Within community area First order neighbor Second order neighbor South side West side North side Chi-square test/ANOVA, Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell P values n (%) n (%) n (%) n (%) n (%) n (%) Empty Cell Participant characteristics n = 106 n = 105 n = 134 n = 123 n = 111 n = 83 Unemployed 50 52 68 59 52 41 .9903 (47.17) (49.52) (50.75) (47.97) (46.85) (49.40) Housing instability 28 21 29 34 28 25 .5571 (26.42) Cronin (2015) (21.64) (27.64) (25.23) (30.12) PrEP awareness 55 41 54 52 47 38 .4473 (51.89) (39.05) (40.30) (42.28) (42.34) (45.78) Age (mean, SD) 22.7 22.5 23.0 23.0 23.0 23.2 .638 (3.18) (3.20) (3.21) (3.02) (2.98) (3.10) Number of confidants named (SD) 2.8 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 .978 (1.31) (1.19) (1.21) (1.24) (1.31) (1.2) House/ball membership 16 21 21 19 13 13 .2254 (12.90) (15.79) (11.73) (11.80) (8.07) (13.27) Sex partner characteristics n = 124 n = 133 n = 179 n = 161 n = 161 n = 98 ≥10 years old than ego [YC1] 7 12 12 11 17 20 .0017 (5.65) (9.02) (6.70) (6.83) (10.56) (20.41) Non-Hispanic black 115 126 170 155 148 72 <.0001 (92.74) (94.74) (94.97) (96.27) (91.93) (73.47) Unemployed 51 47 54 45 58 31 .1912 (41.13) (35.34) (30.17) (27.95) (36.02) (31.63) Main partner 41 49 49 50 46 28 .5247 (33.06) (36.84) (27.37) (31.06) (28.57) (28.57) Participant-sex partner dyad behaviors n = 124 n = 133 n = 179 n = 161 n = 161 n = 98 Serodiscordant or serostatus unknown partnership 52 47 64 59 61 35 .8896 (41.94) (35.34) (35.75) (36.65) (37.89) (35.71) Condomless anal sex 30 43 47 45 49 16 .1062 (24.19) (32.33) (26.26) (27.95) (30.43) (16.33) Sex drug use 41 41 70 58 50 32 .564 (33.06) (30.83) (39.11) (36.02) (31.06) (32.65) Give money/drugs/shelter/other goods in exchange sex 3 3 5 1 1 2 .4849 (2.42) (2.26) (2.79) (.62) (.62) (2.04) Receive money/drugs/shelter/other goods in exchange sex 4 6 17 13 9 17 .0015 (3.23) (4.51) (9.5) (8.07) (5.59) (17.35) First meetup through mobile app 16 24 26 22 28 13 .7642 (12.9) (18.05) (14.53) (13.66) (17.39) (13.27) First meetup through someone both knew 50 43 72 57 41 27 .0337 (40.32) (32.33) (40.22) (35.4) (25.47) (27.55)
In addition, robustness checks and sensitivity analysis offer further support for these six regimes, as they showed significant variations across these regimes in several key aspects, including differences in sex partner characteristics and participant-sex partner dyad behaviors. Variations across different tie regimes (identified by chi-square tests) are robust to potential bias in measurement errors. For example, 20 of 98 sex partners within the distal North side tie regime were at least 10 years older than the participant (20.4%). In contrast, only 12 of 179 (6.7%) of the sex partners within the second-order neighbor tie regime were 10 years older than the participant. The difference between these two groups is statistically significant with a p value of 0.001. To invalidate or call into question this inference, 7 of the 20 distal North side ties where the sex partner is at least 10 years older than the participant would need to be ties in which either these sex partners are younger or participants are, in reality, older than their respective reported age in the survey (i.e., sex partner is < 10 years older than the participant).
Another significant difference among these regimes is how these partners first met. For instance, while about 40% (72 of 179) of sex partners and participants in the second order local tie regime first met through someone they both knew, just over a quarter of partners (41 of 161) in the distal West tie regime met through a shared acquaintance. Using a chi-square test, the difference between these two tie regimes is significantly different with p-value of 0.004. Applying a sensitivity analysis, this means that, to invalidate this inference, at least 8 distal ties to the West where the sex partners and ego did not meet through someone they both knew would need to be tied with the person met in a different way ties where they first met through a shared acquaintance. In other words, it seems very unlikely that potential measurement errors would change the interpretations of these results.

Section: 4. Discussion

Identifying the social-spatial structures of community ties is critical to enhance our understanding of the spatial context of social relationships, and further distill risk heterogeneity in vulnerable populations within an equitable health framework. While spatial patterns of ego communities were similar, community patterns were somewhat different across confidant and sexual networks, though still largely overlapping in space. This suggests that even with distinct social/sexual networks, people tend to build their lives locally, or more nearby their homes. At the same time, sexual network patterns diverged from social networks spatially, reaching more peripheral reaches of the city. Findings showed those who have confidants/partners residing in more resourced communities furthest away, with wider alter-ego power differentials, tended to be at greatest risk. Decomposing these structures is further essential to identifying varying risk in vulnerable populations.
Distance often predicts friendship: friends tend to live near each other, have longer conversations when living closer to each other, and inhabit neighborhoods similarly (e.g. Wang et al., 2015 ; Scellato et al., 2010 ; Leskovec and Horvitz, 2008 ; Hecht and Moxley, 2009 ). Among adolescents, living nearby has been identified as a distinct factor of friendship, not otherwise explained with social network dynamics or individual covariates alone ( Preciado et al., 2012 ). While distance as an attribute has effectively sorted friends from strangers when mining social media networks ( Zhang and Pang, 2015 ), geographic spaces and friendships remain complex and nuanced. For example, emotional bonds can be formed across friends that persist as they move geographically apart, forming distinct “geographies of intimacy” as navigated by Cronin (2014). Rivalries also have spatial components; for example, overlapping spatial boundaries are associated with heightened gang violence ( Radil et al., 2010 ). Some early work found that distance may be more important between enemies than friends, contributing to an “environmental spoiling” hypothesis that links place with disliked individuals ( Ebbesen et al., 1976 ). Yet the geographies of romantic relationships remain understudied in quantified terms, though preliminary work shows that spatial patterns in some behaviors shift according to type of interpersonal relationship . For example, Rahimi et al. (2017) uncovered distinct trends in the use of restaurants between family-outing and couple-dating behavior. Using Yelp data across multiple U.S. cities, romantic dates were more likely to occur in hot spot areas with ample nightlife options, whereas families tended to prefer outings outside the business district with better service and food quality . Exploring data from geosocial-networking apps that facilitate dating connections by locations serves as another emergent research trend, especially within MSM and transgender populations. Sexual partner selection was found to be a local phenomenon in urban areas ( Zenilman et al., 1999 ; Gindi et al., 2011 ), and may also demonstrate convection mixing by MSM in urban and peripheral/suburban areas ( Gesink et al., 2019 ). While clear trends have emerged from these analyses identifying types of applications used, time spent on devices, and other user characteristics ( Goedel and Duncan, 2015 ), an underlying assumption of “nearness” via location of partners remains. Our results suggest that while friends and partners may tend to live near each other overall, the concept of “nearness” is complex and may be different for different populations. Our findings demonstrate spatial heterogeneity across sexual social networks, as about half of confidant/partner resided in the same community as the ego. The remainder are connected across the wider region of the Southside, and in more distal Western and Northern regions. Yet most partner connections were made outside of mobile apps, suggesting a high overlap of sexual and social networks. This is reminiscent of findings by Rosenbaum et al. (2020) , which found that friendship networks helped identify syphilis and gonorrhea cases, also suggestive of overlapping networks.
Next, our results showed that individuals whose partner communities were the furthest away, in neighborhoods most dissimilar from their originating areas (mainly on the Northside), were more likely to have sex partners that were employed, from a different racial group (i.e. not non-Hispanic black), and at least ten years older than them. They were more likely to engage in transactional sex and less likely to have met their partner through a mutual social connection. Having a sexual partner ten years older or more has been linked as a risk factor for HIV-vulnerable groups in previous work ( Millett et al., 2012 ; Mustanski and Newcomb, 2013 ; Lancki et al., 2018). Transactional sex is also associated with increased vulnerability to HIV acquisition as well as differences in age, employment status, relationship status, anxiety symptoms, and overall greater socioeconomic disadvantage ( Bauermeister et al., 2016 , Bauermeister et al., 2017 ). The collective partner residence locations of these individuals were higher income, white-majority areas on the North side with extensive resources available tailored to MSM and other LGBTQ populations.
Previous work by Chen et al. (2019) found that sexual partners’ spatial proximity was associated with greater PrEP awareness, and hypothesized that these nearby interactions may facilitate stronger connections and diffusion of PrEP information. We found no significant change in PrEP awareness across community tie regimes, though ego-alter pairs residing in the same community had the highest rate of PrEP awareness overall (51%) (see Table 2 ). The positive effect of spatial proximity and information diffusion of PrEP awareness may thus decay rapidly with distance, suggesting a threshold effect. We likewise found no significant associations between number of confidants named (i.e. higher-degree network individuals), or house/ballroom membership in participant characteristics across community tie regimes. Additional partner dyad behaviors of interest, such as serodiscordant relationships, condomless anal sex, and sex drug use were not significantly different across tie regimes, highlighting that wider ego-alter geographies do not always vary with underlying factors of risk. While confidant network number or house membership was not significant across local/distal tie types, partner connections made through networks was significant, suggesting that the strength or quality of network may be more meaningful than the sum of connections.
There are multiple hypotheses as to why associations between ego/con or ego/sex partner ties differ according to community ties. One hypothesis is that egos travel to visit their friends or sexual partners. “Spatial polygamy” is documented as a common characteristic of YBMSM groups, meaning that participants are likely to spend time outside their community areas where they live like work, social, and sexual venues ( Chen et al., 2019 , Duncan et al., 2014 ), and is similar to the geoflexible spatial archetype identified in Gesink et al. (2018) . Duncan et al. (2014) found spatial polygamy patterns prevalent among urban YMSM, and we could see potential evidence supporting this hypothesis within this Chicago-based population of similar demographic patterns. At the same time, work by Gesink et al. (2018) demonstrates multiple spatial archetype patterns in MSM populations, with most individuals preferring proximate connections. While mobility and directionality of dyadic pairs was not reported in this paper's dataset, YBMSM traveling to the Northside gayborhood to access LGBTQ + resources and experiences is well documented ( Felner et al., 2020 , Felner and Ramirez-Valles, 2018 ). Movement between distal locations (e.g. downtown areas versus suburbs) due to complex social geographic processes, known as “convection mixing”, may be linked to the persistence of STI epidemics in some settings ( Gesink et al., 2020 ). If viewed as a spatial interaction and travel to partner communities occurs, there are multiple considerations that could motivate some individuals to identify partners in more distal locations, or, travel to more distal locations for sexual partners.
Geography may influence partner selection via ( Andris, 2016 ) localized search patterns to optimize partner availability locally ( Andris et al., 2018 ), density of partners locally, and ( Anselin, 1996 ) geosexual isolation impacts on mixing patterns in minoritized MSM populations ( Gesink et al., 2019 ). Our results suggest that power differentials between partners, and associations of structural neighborhood disparities of partners in differing locations may also influence partner selection processes. Thus, this process may also be viewed as functions that attract , e.g. desirable partner supply or diversity is absent locally, and/or desirable resources/relevant places are absent locally; and features that repel , e.g. desire to avoid local social groups or places, perhaps as an extension of social stigma , or a lack of supportive social groups locally. While some factors attract, a lack of resources and cohesive social groups locally may simultaneously “repel” individuals from relationships with individuals closer to ego communities. Research has shown that YBMSM visiting the Northside gayborhood to access social experiences or health services often experience racism, spatial stigmatization, and peer re-stigmatization due to associated place, race, and class ( Felner and Ramirez-Valles, 2018 , Rosenberg, 2017 ). An attraction to areas or partners with more resources may thus come at a cost for YBMSM, as heightened socioeconomic and power differentials between partners make this group especially vulnerable to engaging in connections with behavioral characteristics that increase risk of HIV transmission.
While exploratory, our findings suggest that integrating spatial signals of wider social and structural barriers – both at the individual and community scale – is crucial to further detangling the mechanisms of action. Future work should specify actualized movement between communities, rather than just community ties, to explore how resource disparities and social stigma influence social flow movement and magnify risk. The lack of critical resources such as HIV testing , prevention services, and antiretroviral therapies on Chicago's South Side where the core YBMSM population primarily resides ( Chen et al., 2019 ), reflects a trend of access disparity in similar populations ( Millett et al., 2012 ; Maulsby et al., 2014 ). In 2020, most of the South and West sides in Chicago remain service deserts for the minoritized LQTBQ community ( Rosentel et al., 2020 ). Same sex relationships further remain highly stigmatized in the families, religious communities, and African American communities in which YBMSM exist ( Balaji et al., 2012 ), and although decreasing over time, such stigma serves as a risk factor impacting HIV inequities ( Quinn and Dickson-Gomez, 2016 ; Barnes and Collins, 2019 ). BMSM individuals with more close family ties have been associated with reduced drug use, lower HIV risk, and increased prevention activities ( Schneider et al., 2012 ). Structural barriers faced by YBMSM and transgender women compromise complex individual and group-level interactions between resources, social influences, and contextual factors across a range of socioeconomic and cultural dimensions (see extensive review by Levy et al., 2014 ). More specifically, resources and social influences can be considered forms of power that operate through contextual factors ( Latkin et al., 2013 ). More research is needed to determine if concentrating resources in higher socioeconomic communities that are geographically and socially detached from marginalized, low socioeconomic MSM and transgender groups may pose challenges by magnifying multiple risk factors.
There are multiple limitations to our analysis that we attempted to minimize. First, we are limited to knowledge of ego and alter residence, rather than movement or directionality between. We proxy community ties as a spatial unit represented as a linear path, aggregated by community area, and limit interpretation as exploratory and hypotheses-generating rather than confirmatory. The actual social flow structure is both unique for each individual, non-linear, and has both movement and directionality. As discussed by Andris et al. (2018) , such representations may limit our understanding of actual phenomena at play. We nonetheless use this place-to-place community tie to uncover regional trends and spatial patterns, as well as retain privacy of individuals as governed by the IRB for the study. Furthermore, we did not have actual movements of participants; however, new protocol like the N2 Cohort Study (which includes this Chicago area population) incorporates GPS-tracks of participants and may shed new insight into underlying spatial behaviors when complete. While future research in this area is collecting participant movements, there is much we can do to make the most of the data that we have. This will facilitate more hypotheses to later test, model, and extend with more refined movement data. Additionally, because we removed dyadic pairs with overlapping sexual partner and confidant connections, we may have missed unique ties and associated participant, partner, and dyadic behavior characteristics. We also did not have information on use of public transit , ride-sharing, or car use by participants, which could have given insight into how place shapes behavior. That said, the data used in this analysis, with its limitations, still has unique features compared to most datasets used in similar GIScience research.
Additional strengths of our analysis include the sensitivity to parameter specification in the KDE analysis, and checking the robustness of results across the six social flow regimes identified using a counterfactual framework. Using a default reference bandwidth parameter in the kernel density analysis missed the multimodal distribution of sexual partner residences, an important feature framing our later findings. While much remained unknown regarding best parameter specification prior, identifying an optimal (and reasonable) bandwidth and kernel to facilitate comparisons across groups proved essential and accessible using opensource software like R. When six distinct community tie regimes were identified and tested in a later stage of analysis, using a counterfactual framework to test how inference may change due to data measurement issues highlighted the robustness of results. The exploratory spatial data analytic paradigm we use facilitates such insight and inquiry, seeking to impose minimal structure and instead uncover patterns and both generate and refine hypotheses ( Anselin, 1996 ). By linking GIScience with novel applications in public health , and connecting to wider statistical frameworks, the complex distillation of spatial effects may be better extended into mainstream sciences.
Our analysis sought to differentiate “spatial” and “social” dimensions of sexual and confidant networks in a Chicago-based marginalized population . We identified an isolated social population based on their spatial destination. It was a blend of social and spatial interactions that identified this group, easily missed if only imposing a spatial or social view. More specifically, our analysis identified a highly vulnerable group that may be socially isolated and more likely to travel further geographically for resources. Examining the spatial architectures of individuals and groups not only improved our understanding of the factors that drive and differentiate friendship and sexual relationships, they may also refine our knowledge of risk behaviors and identify priority groups for intervention. Stronger social cohesion or tighter networks could serve to mitigate risk factors that serve as alternatives for low-resourced settings. Culturally appropriate interventions that affirm individual and group identities may likewise be essential in further bolstering these networks ( Barnes and Collins, 2019 ). Finally, increased access to services remains an essential component to reducing disparities in YBMSM and transgender populations.

Section: Author contributions

Marynia Kolak: Conceptualization; Methodology; Investigation; Formal analysis; Visualization; Project administration; Roles/Writing - original draft; Yen-Tyng Chen: Conceptualization; Methodology; Investigation; Data curation; Formal analysis: Writing - review & editing. Qinyun Lin : Formal analysis; Methodology; Investigation; Validation, Resources, Writing - review & editing; John Schneider: Conceptualization; Funding acquisition; Investigation; Supervision: Writing - review & editing.

Section: Acknowledgments

We are grateful to the participants of the Uconnect study who provided their time for this research. The UConnect study was funded by the National Institute of Health [ R01 DA033875 ]. This analysis received funding from the National Institute of Health [ R01MH112406-04/NYC ], as part of the PrEP Uptake and Adherence Among Young Black MSM: Neighborhood and Network Determinants project. It also received funding from the National Institute on Drug Abuse [ U2CDA050098 ], as part of the Methodology and Advanced Analytics Resource Center for the JCOIN network.
