Title: “Dedicated to being healthy”: Young adults’ deployments of health-focused cultural capital


Abstract: Abstract

Performances of “health” through diet, exercise, and body size are an increasingly important form of cultural capital transmitted to children. Yet less is known about how socioeconomically privileged young people internalize and deploy that capital or how those less privileged manage their relative lack of capital. How does health-focused cultural capital acquired in childhood shape socioeconomic inequalities, health behaviors, and understandings of health in young adulthood? Our analysis of 113 interviews found that health-focused cultural capital acquired in early life reinforced young adults' socioeconomic and health advantages by helping them claim discipline and morality on the basis of their health behaviors and body size. Two key phenomena tended to be present among our many socioeconomically privileged but not our fewer less privileged participants: family socialization into classed diet- and exercise-related health behaviors resulting in a classed appearance of health (despite less-than-ideal behaviors), and cohesive life course narratives linking these behaviors to hard work and moral worth. Less socioeconomically privileged participants’ understandings of health and healthy behaviors were different, rarely linking health to worthiness and discipline. To understand the intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic attainment and health in US society, we must consider how behaviors and group-based norms, identities, and understandings of health coalesce in classed health lifestyles that convey cultural capital.

Section: 1. Introduction

In the US and many other countries, socioeconomic inequalities and health disparities have been widening in recent years ( Saez, 2008 ). They are also becoming more tightly linked ( Marmot et al., 2008 ), making it important to study how these forms of inequality may reinforce each other. Although considerable research has examined how socioeconomic status (SES) shapes people's health and vice versa, understanding how health is used discursively and interactionally by people from advantaged groups to reinforce socioeconomic inequalities is a relatively less studied area. Incorporating this perspective treats health as simultaneously an important resource for individuals that should be promoted and a cultural tool related to inequality that should be approached critically ( Mollborn et al., 2021a ). More research on advantaged groups is sorely needed for understanding health inequalities ( Link and García, 2021 ).
Researchers have found that health behaviors are an increasingly important domain for communicating cultural links between SES and morality, which can then justify and perpetuate socioeconomic inequalities ( Luna, 2019 ; Saguy and Gruys, 2010 ). In middle-to upper-middle-class settings, parents and communities socialize children into particular health behaviors to create a specific appearance of health that embodies advantaged social group membership and bestows cultural capital ( Mollborn et al., 2021a ). Because SES in turn strongly predicts health, this socialization has long-term implications for population health. Bourdieu (1986b) introduced cultural capital as an important noneconomic resource that is differentially available based on social class, often transmitted in early life, in which individuals enact culture to signal membership in a powerful group or deservingness of resources and social connections ( Khan, 2011 ; Lareau, 2011 ). Yet research has not examined how health-focused cultural capital acquired in childhood shapes people later in life.
Analyzing 113 qualitative interviews with young adults from a diversity of backgrounds but who were disproportionately raised in socioeconomically advantaged families and communities, we asked how health-focused cultural capital acquired in childhood shapes socioeconomic inequalities, health behaviors, and understandings of health in young adulthood . We found that specific forms of health-focused cultural capital acquired in early life reinforce socioeconomic and health advantages in young adulthood, giving class-privileged young people embodied and narrative tools for justifying their continued socioeconomic advantage that are less available to those who did not acquire this capital growing up. These differences result in disparate health lifestyles (defined as an individual's set of health behaviors undergirded by group-based norms and identities) that likely give rise to further socioeconomic and health inequalities. Our analyses develop an empirical understanding of health lifestyles as an integrated combination of behaviors, embodiment, identities, and narratives . The findings support a focus on health-focused cultural capital for understanding the strengthening relationship between and widening inequalities within socioeconomic status and health.

Section: 2. Background

Given rising levels of inequalities, it is increasingly important to understand how the intergenerational transmission of both social advantage and health may operate synergistically. Intensifying neoliberal trends that stress individuals’ responsibility for their own lives ( Charmaz, 2020 ; LeBesco, 2011 ; Luna, 2019 ) pressure parents to act agentically to instill advantages in their children that may bolster future socioeconomic attainment and health. The ideology of “intensive parenting” likely results in part from these pressures.
Intensive parenting, which disproportionately targets mothers, emphasizes deployment of resources including time, money, and emotional labor to raise children in accordance with dominant norms and maximize social advantages and future prospects ( Hamilton, 2016 ; Hays, 1996 ; Shirani et al., 2012 ). Parents who have more resources are better able to perform intensive parenting, which feeds children's acquisition of cultural capital ( Bourdieu, 1986b ). Often operating through embodiment and the gradual development of habitus, both of which are difficult to acquire quickly or later in life ( Bourdieu, 1986a ), cultural capital is particularly important for understanding class attainment ( Bourdieu, 1986b ). Effective cultural capital relies on creating distinctions between groups ( Luna, 2019 ), making it challenging for lower-status people to assert cultural capital in effective ways ( Turner, 2020 ). Yet because lower-status actors often seek to adopt the practices of higher-status actors in an effort to gain cultural capital, advantaged actors' cultural capital strategies need to “continually adapt and change” in order to be effective ( Carlisle et al., 2008 ; Ridgeway, 2014 :9). For health-focused cultural capital, the pace of this adaptation is constrained by the relative stability of medical information about healthy practices, which tends to inform elites' behaviors.
Thus, new forms of intensive parenting tend to move to the forefront over time. Today's intensive parenting socializes a “health-promoting actor” who will reap health advantages as a result ( Christensen, 2004 ). This focus has increased the importance of health-focused cultural capital processes for understanding how inequalities are perpetuated intergenerationally ( Mollborn et al., 2021a ). Abel (2008:2) defines “health-relevant cultural capital” as “comprising all culture-based resources that are available to people for acting in favour of their health.” Because we do not find that such cultural capital is consistently deployed to maximize health as Abel's definition emphasizes but is more likely to maximize socioeconomic advantage, we follow Mollborn et al. (2021a) in using the term “health-focused cultural capital.”
Health-focused cultural capital can convert social inequalities into health disparities by influencing people's behaviors, narratives , and understandings of health ( Abel, 2008 ). Intensive parenting efforts around health are infused particularly strongly with morality; for example, “good” mothering is linked to specific feeding practices, and mothers who deviate from these practices are judged ( Cairns et al., 2013 ; Elliott and Bowen, 2018 ). Research suggests that crucial aspects of health for being viewed as raising a “healthy” family are diet, exercise, and health status ( Williamson et al., 2018 ). This phenomenon reflects broader societal trends that have emphasized health as a moral good linked to hard work, discipline, and deservingness ( Cairns and Johnston, 2015 ; Luna, 2019 ).
A promising concept for research on health-focused cultural capital is health lifestyles . Theory articulates health lifestyles as patterns of health behaviors within individuals that are undergirded by group-based identities, norms, and understandings of health ( Cockerham, 2005 ; Krueger et al., 2009 ; Mollborn et al., 2021b ). Health lifestyles are a mechanism through which class and other characteristics can translate into health inequalities through group-level processes manifested in individuals ( Cockerham, 2020 ; Frohlich and Potvin, 1999 ). Health lifestyles are an interplay between social structure (social group memberships) and individual agency (enactments of health behaviors and their links to individual identities; Cockerham, 2005 ). Because they are imbued with symbolic power, health lifestyles can reinforce social inequalities ( Korp, 2008 ). A burgeoning empirical literature characterizes health lifestyles as an intergenerational phenomenon, in which parents, schools, peers, and communities socialize young people into patterns of health behaviors that are classed, gendered, and raced (e.g., Mollborn and Lawrence, 2018 ).
Theory recognizes that health lifestyles not only consist of individuals’ behaviors and the habitus that often drives them ( Bourdieu, 1986a ) but have group-based components including identities, norms, and understandings of health ( Cockerham, 2005 ; Krueger et al., 2009 ). Yet because data are lacking, group-based aspects are rarely studied. Teuscher et al. (2015) found that racially disadvantaged individuals framed health in a more social way that transcends specific health behaviors, focusing on the collective. Idler, Hudson, and Leventhal (1999) found that more inclusive definitions of health that incorporate social and psychological understandings predict people rating their own health more positively. Understandings of health may shape not only individuals, but also interactions in ways that matter for inequalities. The enactment of other facets of health lifestyles, such as identities, in interpersonal interaction can also reify existing social structures and perpetuate inequalities ( Stets and Burke, 2000 ). Our focus on health-focused cultural capital can help expand the health lifestyles concept to better understand its group-based components.
Our study focuses on how health-focused cultural capital plays out in the transition to adulthood, a life stage that encompasses young people's movement from adolescent social roles into adult ones ( Benson, 2014 ). The density of life transitions typically experienced in this life phase makes it developmentally sensitive and thus important to study ( Shanahan, 2000 ). Yet traditional role-based markers of adulthood have become harder to attain and more variable, spurring many to adopt self-focused understandings of adulthood ( Silva, 2012 ). Health and socioeconomic status reinforce each other across the transition to adulthood, generating inequalities ( Kane et al., 2018 ).
The life course perspective emphasizes both continuity and change as people age ( Elder, 1994 ). Research has found that health behaviors adopted in early life often persist into adulthood ( Stafford and Chiteji, 2012 ). The formation of habitus ( Bourdieu, 1986a ) or “routinized agency” ( Kohli, 2019 ) may help explain this stability. Yet changes experienced in the transition to adulthood can also transform health behaviors and lifestyles. Talukdar and Linders (2013) have shown how individuals make conscious decisions about portraying health behaviors. Curl, Lareau, and Wu (2018) found that upwardly class-mobile people often made changes to diet and health behaviors to bring them in line with higher-SES expectations.
Beyond continuity and change in health behaviors, young adults agentically activate cultural capital by choosing to use or not use strategies that were previously imparted by their families and communities ( Calarco, 2014 ). These decisions may depend on how much they have internalized norms they were taught earlier. Cultural capital strategies can include patterns of interaction, justifications of one's own behaviors, and constructions of the self through narratives honed in social situations ( Carlisle et al., 2008 ; Mason-Schrock, 1996 ). Thus, young adults may deploy health-focused cultural capital acquired in childhood, choose not to mimic strategies they were taught, or attempt to adopt other types of strategies (often, those of more advantaged groups). Research suggests that classed deployments likely matter for perpetuating social inequalities ( Calarco, 2014 ; Kaufman, 2003 ). These processes are complicated by an empirical puzzle: In early young adulthood, class-advantaged people tend to adopt lifestyles consisting of less healthy behaviors than do many less advantaged individuals—but by later young adulthood, with the exception of binge drinking , class-advantaged people tend to have healthier lifestyles ( Lawrence et al., 2020 ). Contending with health-focused cultural capital in young adulthood entails understanding how the foundation for class advantage in health lifestyles can be laid even while class-privileged young adults are engaging in many unhealthy behaviors. Using a health lifestyles lens to examine how health-focused cultural capital acquired in childhood shapes young adults allows us to integrate agency and social structure to understand shifting intergenerational social inequalities across early life.

Section: 3. Method

Data were collected through 113 semi-structured peer interviews, lasting approximately 45 min, with young adults aged 18–25. Fifty-seven interviews, conducted in 2016, focused broadly on health and well-being. Another 56 interviews from 2018 had an expanded focus on technology use and health. Our data reflected typical advantages and disadvantages of peer interviews: Compared to being interviewed by an older adult stranger, peer interviewers' probe questions had more varying quality, but the resultant data often reflected a less managed presentation of self and more open disclosure with a familiar peer interviewer ( England et al., 2007 ; Tinkler, 2012 ). Undergraduate students in two senior-level sociology classes at a large western US public university chose to participate as interviewers, receiving mandatory training in qualitative interviewing techniques. Participants were recruited through interviewers' personal contacts and paid $10. The interview guide specified the main interview questions and suggested follow-up questions, and interviewers were instructed to create their own questions to probe interesting emergent themes. Interviewers asked about young adults' health lifestyles, including: what specific expectations their current and past social contacts have about health lifestyles, how their everyday life is different from or similar to their childhood and adolescence, what factors influence their own and their peers’ health, how they define “health” and “well-being,” and their specific health behaviors including technology use.
To complement recordings and transcripts, peer interviewers wrote notes describing the interviewee's non-verbal signs/behaviors, appearance, reactions during the interview, its setting, etc. All participants were assigned pseudonyms. A university institutional review board approved the project. The study design incorporated appropriate protections for course-based research, such as asking both student interviewers and participants for consent to use the interview in the research project, releasing consent forms to the project only after final grades were submitted, and offering students alternative assignments.
All 2016 and most 2018 participants were college students (89 percent overall), disproportionately from a large public university. 5 percent were college graduates, and 6 percent were neither. Participants’ average age was 21, and they were 60 percent female, 38 percent male, and 2 percent nonbinary. Twelve percent identified as Asian American , 8 percent as Latinx, 4 percent as multiracial, 2 percent as Black, 2 percent as other race, and three quarters as white. Seven percent reported being gay, bisexual, questioning, queer, pansexual, and/or asexual. Participants grew up in every US region and abroad, predominantly in the western US. Home communities were equally balanced between liberal and conservative. Average community SES, based on self-reported community wealth , fell between middle and upper middle class. Family SES was measured through occupation. About half had a mother in a professional/managerial occupation, compared to two thirds of fathers; 23 percent had no such parent. Combining community and family SES because research on health-focused cultural capital has identified both as important ( Mollborn et al., 2021a ), we coded 10 percent of participants as having lower-SES backgrounds, 31 percent mid or mixed, and 60 percent higher.
Using a grounded theory approach, we engaged in several stages of coding, manually and using NVivo qualitative analysis software ( Strauss and Corbin, 1998 ). Analyses followed an inductive strategy to guide coding and analytical procedures. We first closely examined and read complete transcripts, then used open coding to identify and categorize themes that emerged from data and searched for patterns related to participants’ narratives about health lifestyle development. Through this inductive strategy, we constructed focused analytic codes and developed additional codes as new themes emerged ( Silverman, 2015 ). The primary themes reported here emerged through this inductive approach. We compared transcripts and codes of participants with different SES levels to identify socioeconomic differences in socialization, behaviors, and narratives.
We viewed the interviews as opportunities for participants to construct narratives about their lives ( Holstein and Gubrium, 1995 ). Through accounts situated within social contexts, people create identities, justify their actions, and manage how others perceive them ( Swidler, 2001 ). In this constructivist approach, people's accounts are not expected to objectively report their behaviors. These narratives illuminate normative processes, individual and group identities, and inequalities. We presented data and conducted interpretive analyses to explore how and why participants said they have the health lifestyles they do. We did not seek to judge which behaviors or understandings were good or bad or whether moral claims were justified. Instead, we examined participants' sense-making processes and considered potential implications. Our approach followed Kramer and colleagues' ( 2017 ) conceptualization of social class as functioning in multiple ways simultaneously in young people's lives, through resources, interpersonal dynamics, and group identities. Sample composition did not allow us to disentangle race/ethnicity from socioeconomic processes, if indeed they can be disentangled in US culture ( Ortner, 1998 ). We separately analyzed higher-SES, lower-SES, and mid/mixed-SES participants. The last group's narratives tended to fit with one of the first two groups and were placed with the group in which they fit.

Section: 4. Results

Our analysis found that socioeconomic status shaped participants’ early life exposure to health-focused cultural capital and associated norms linking diet, exercise, and body size to moral worth, discipline, and hard work. In young adulthood, as expected, many socioeconomically advantaged participants did not follow these behavioral prescriptions. Instead, they used these understandings to construct narratives of their health lifestyles that both served to implicitly justify their continued advantage and had potential drawbacks. Less advantaged young adults, in contrast, talked about health using different understandings and less rehearsed narratives, rarely linking health to discipline and moral worth. Their resultant narrative strategies barred them from leveraging cultural capital that was available to their more advantaged peers.
Our previous research studied families in socioeconomically advantaged communities in the same geographic area as the current study. We found that parents managed children's body size and related health behaviors , especially diet and exercise , to instill health-focused cultural capital that could simultaneously yield future socioeconomic and health advantages ( Mollborn et al., 2021a ). These visible behaviors and body types served as symbols of class-based distinction, even as they sometimes led to problems for children's and parents' stress levels and well-being. Given their sociodemographic and geographic similarities to the children in that study, it was unsurprising that the current study's socioeconomically advantaged participants described having been subject to similar efforts from their own parents.
Class-advantaged participants' narratives about messages they had received around health growing up reflected these themes in a strikingly homogeneous way. Table 1 summarizes the demographic characteristics of quoted participants. Mary (higher-SES, White) said her parents taught her that “eating healthy is definitely something that you need to do, and something you need to be able to control, and something you probably—in the back of your head, you know what's good for you and what's not.” Mary emphasized different dimensions of her parents' socialization around health: They taught her how to behave, expected her behavior to be disciplined and controlled, and wanted her to internalize moral messages about health. Her parents' focus on physical health through diet was also typical, as eating behaviors are publicly observable, closely tied to cultural capital, and can influence the appearance of a child's body. Table 1 . Characteristics of quoted interview participants. Pseudonym Gender Race/ethnicity SES Sexual orientation College status Mary Female White Higher Heterosexual Student Pete Male White Higher Heterosexual Student Tom Male White Higher Heterosexual Student Alexa Female White Higher Heterosexual Student Patricia Female White Higher Lesbian Student Olivia Female White Mid/mixed Heterosexual Student Sean Male White Higher Heterosexual Student Allen Male White Higher Heterosexual Student Helen Female White Higher Heterosexual Student Kaley Female Asian American Higher Bisexual Student Robyn Female White Lower Heterosexual Student Brad Male Asian American Mid/mixed Heterosexual Student Andrew Male White Lower Gay Student Angelina Female Latinx Lower Heterosexual Student Ronald Male Black Lower Heterosexual Non-student Nicholas Male Latinx Lower Heterosexual Student Note: Article text reports the sociodemographic characteristics of the full sample.
Pete's (higher-SES, White) parents primarily emphasized physical health through exercise. He said they “encouraged me to play sports, so I think being in good shape sort of comes hand in hand with that.” Pete acknowledged that his parents' emphasis on participation in sports reflected an emphasis on his physical fitness, and playing sports also put him in contact with the socialization influences of coaches and team members. As was typical for class-advantaged participants, Mary's and Pete's narratives focused on their parents' and communities' careful management of a child's physical activity and/or diet more than other aspects of health or other health behaviors. These narratives reflected a gendered dynamic in which physical activity was often more relevant for young men's narratives and diet for young women. Some participants said their parents emphasized mental health , stress levels, or general well-being instead of or in addition to physical activity or diet, but the latter were frequently reported as parents' primary concerns.
Tom (higher-SES, White) wove together physical activity, diet, and well-being while exemplifying the body-focused parenting around health typical of socioeconomically advantaged participants. When asked whether he thought he was a healthy person, Tom answered: Yeah, I do. I think, I've been a triathlete since I was really young, and I think that's always kept me pretty physically healthy. … I grew up in a really health-conscious household. My mom preached healthy eating from the day I was born, pretty much. Like, I never had chips or Pop-Tarts or anything like that in my house when I was growing up. … And I started doing sports, I don't know, when I was like 7, and just never stopped.
Tom exemplified the “health-consciousness” of his upbringing by referring to specific foods—symbolically marked as lower-class—not available at home. Exercise and diet were prominent in the holistic definition of health Tom provided for his current life, reflecting early socialization: “I think being healthy is a combination of physical and mental wellness, like eating healthy, exercising, and also taking care of yourself mentally and having healthy relationships and all that good stuff.”
Implicit in some narratives and explicit in others are advantaged families' and communities' efforts to shape children's body size through focusing on specific health behaviors: physical activity and diet. Body size is increasingly linked to US social class and socioeconomic opportunities, and having the “right” body is a crucial form of cultural capital ( LeBesco, 2011 ; Luna, 2019 ). For example, Alexa (higher-SES, White) linked physical activity to achievement and fat to sloth when recounting health messages she internalized from childhood: If you're dedicated to being healthy and fit and stuff, then it shows that you can be dedicated to other things as well, if you put your mind to it. … I think some people, if they see themselves as fat, they're like, “Oh, there's nothing I can do about it.” And so they'll just continue to get fatter and fatter. So it just kind of depends on the personality that person has. If they realize that they're getting fat and then they start to do something about it, then that will start showing in their health.
Alexa started with a moral narrative by explicitly linking good health and physical fitness to “dedication” in other areas of life. She then characterized a large body as evidence that a person is unhealthy and lacks the discipline to “do something about it,” blaming them for their body size and linking it to other moral failings. For Alexa, then, morality, discipline, and commitment “show in your health” and can be determined by body size. Although Alexa summarized these dynamics more explicitly than some others, her account illuminated the assumptions that Mollborn et al. (2021a) found to be implicit in advantaged parents’ socialization of their children through diet and exercise.
A few participants, like Patricia (higher-SES, White), made this family agenda of regulating children's body size explicit, although her grandparents were the ones with an agenda: So I don't think my parents cared about my health at all. Well, my father somewhat did, but he had no power to, because my sister and I were overweight. … In my childhood I was fed everything I wanted. … I would eat McDonald's on a regular basis. It was bad. Like, my parents did not care about my health at all. They couldn't even take care of themselves. … My grandparents sort of did because my grandmother would bribe us and be like, “When you turn 16, we'll buy you a brand-new Mercedes if you lose fifty pounds.”
To Patricia, her “overweight” body was evidence of parental neglect. Other efforts her parents may have made toward fostering mental or physical health, body image, or well-being were absent from Patricia's narrative. Patricia said she lost 100 pounds later in high school, but “for myself” and not in response to her grandmother's bribe. This suggests that even though the bribe did not immediately work, Patricia internalized the messages and later self-regulated to attain her desired body size. Although Patricia's grandmother's apparent concern was Patricia's weight rather than health behaviors such as diet and exercise, Patricia interpreted the bribe as evidence of caring about Patricia's health.
Did socially advantaged participants actually internalize the emphasis families and communities placed on a nutritious diet, physical activity, and body size ? Our interviews suggest that many young adults internalized these norms and conformed to prescriptions around body size, even though their current diet and/or physical activity often did not meet standards acquired in childhood.
Many participants expressed appreciation that their parents had stressed diet, exercise, and/or body size, relating how those messages and habits persisted. Olivia (mid/mixed-SES, White) said of her parents, “being active was a pretty important part of their values for us,” and “they always tried to get me to eat fruits and vegetables.” She was physically active in childhood and later became even more active. Olivia said she started running in middle school “as a stress reliever, and then I just kind of got addicted to it and kept it up. It became a part of my life.” Olivia now firmly believes that “you have to eat a balanced diet and then also exercise.” Her young adult health lifestyle reflected this typical emphasis on diet and exercise, which she felt stemmed from parental socialization.
Even when young adults no longer behaved in accordance with parents' messages, they showed evidence of having internalized those messages. Sean (higher-SES, White) talked about his parents’ “healthy” messages and his “failure” to live up to them: I think they knew how important well-being and health were, and I was a very happy, healthy kid. Like, I played a lot of sports. … Now I don't do that. Um, and, I feel like my parents were trying to instill these habits in me. Like, they don't care which sport I do. I think they just wanted it to be like, “Hey, you find this enjoyable, keep it up. Like, it's good for you.” And now, I didn't keep it that up. So I'm not saying my parents failed. I'm just saying I didn't listen.
Sean did not want his parents to be judged as having socialized him badly, and his expressions of guilt underscored that he had internalized their messages despite not currently adhering to them.
As these examples suggest, higher-SES participants appeared to have felt a need to communicate a coherent and articulate narrative about their early health lifestyle development, its links to their current behavior (or their imagined future behavior if their current behavior was less than ideal), and its moral justification of their personal worth. Most advantaged participants clearly and fluently constructed such narratives. In contrast, as discussed below, disadvantaged participants did not often communicate these seemingly prepared narratives about their own health behaviors, how they learned them, and reasons for engaging in them.
Allen (higher-SES, White), who grew up advantaged but whose parents came from lower-SES backgrounds, provided one such coherent narrative: I think three of my four grandparents have diabetes. … I have always seen how diabetes affected them, so I've always tried to avoid—well, I didn't when I was younger, but now I'm kind of realizing different ways—one of the big things was culturally, they always drank a lot of soda. And so my parents always told me that's what gave them diabetes, so I try and cut back on that. One of my uncles I see pretty frequently is fairly overweight, and he's had some health issues, and I see how that affects him. So I try not to be overweight.
Allen's account illuminates complicated class dynamics. His grandparents and some relatives display diet behaviors and bodies that do not align with upper-middle-class norms. His class-mobile parents attributed the diabetes to their diets. These messages taught Allen to understand diet, body size, and diabetes in classed ways linked to morality and discipline. Allen implicitly blamed his relatively class-disadvantaged family for their health problems because of diet and body size, drawing a clear contrast to his own perceived efforts to avoid these problems through controlling his diet and attaining a thin body.
Participants frequently discussed such moral dimensions of internalizing these messages about physical activity, diet, and implicitly body size. Allen explicitly linked a “diet and exercise regimen,” which he deemed important for reasons described immediately above, to social class and body size: I think that one thing that I always, that I learned when I was a kid, was like, you just have to always work hard. Neither of my parents really came from big money. They had an okay childhood, but they were both kind of on the lower economic status growing up. So they always just taught me that you have to work. You can't slack off if you want to get what you want. … I guess working hard, like if you work out and adhere to a diet and exercise regimen, then you know you can get the body type you want or whatever. You know, you can be healthy.
Allen equated a person's body size with both healthiness and their diet and exercise regimen, which in turn represented their willingness to work hard. Implicitly, having a less desired body size revealed a problematic work ethic, and “being healthy” was evidence of being a hard worker. Allen internalized his parents' messages and subtly deployed them to imply that through hard work, he and his parents were deserving of social advantages.
Similarly, Helen (higher-SES, White) said her parents' requirement that she always play organized sports was “a hassle at the time, but now I appreciate it. They always emphasized having good health and starting those habits early, and just showed us what could happen if we let ourselves go.” Helen used the conclusion that she has not “let herself go” (a gendered phrase typically referring to body size) to justify why she had good health and was meeting her parents’ expectations.
As Allen, Helen, and others did above, linking a thin body to achievement, discipline, and hard work is a common US cultural narrative that lends justification to biases against large-bodied people in socioeconomic attainment and the workplace ( Evans et al., 2008 ). These same moral themes are used to justify socioeconomic inequality and class advantage. Through classed performances of diet and exercise, classed bodies, and the narratives that accompany them, our advantaged participants had learned to claim discipline and morality. Many advantaged participants seemed to consider their moral superiority to be warranted because their parents had taught them about hard work, achievement, and discipline. Interestingly, this was true even when their own current health behaviors deviated from these norms, as long as their body size conformed. Implicitly, in this perspective, others with different bodies, presumed health behaviors, and narratives are responsible for what is viewed as their poor “health” (even though many less advantaged participants did not buy into this body size-focused definition of health). Because this cultural logic is hegemonic in US society, it is a form of cultural capital that can be deployed by class-privileged participants to their own advantage through carefully articulated narratives—as long as their bodies and observable behaviors also match the narrative.
Although this specific combination of narratives and behaviors carries benefits for class-advantaged participants, it also brings risks. By talking about their own health primarily through linking diet, exercise, and body size to class and morality, advantaged participants may develop unhealthy relationships with their bodies and disregard broader conceptualizations of health and well-being , which could ultimately harm their health. A few class-advantaged participants, usually women, acknowledged this tension and its potential for damage.
For example, Kaley (higher-SES, Asian American) experienced body-focused pressure from her wealthy community and her extended family in her immigrant parents' country of origin. She said because her cousins still lived there, “I got that sort of message from my parents, like, ‘We want you to be skinny and pretty,’ because they're also comparing their kids to their siblings' kids.” Kaley said she developed an eating disorder in response to these pressures. She said, “So I got to college … [and] really had to figure that out. I think the first couple years I tried to recover from my eating disorder and, like, my vision of health.” After suffering a major injury that was likely a consequence of her eating disorder, Kaley said, “I knew that the only way for my body to recover would be for me to be healthy, but not in that obsessive sort of way.” She left her college sorority in an effort to reduce unhealthy body-focused pressures. For Kaley, changing her understanding of health from “obsessive” to something different from what her family and peers were communicating was fundamental for becoming healthy. This burden was more common among female participants.
In contrast to these narratives, less class-advantaged participants did not describe a similar focus on body size, diet, and exercise linked to discipline and morality when discussing their families and communities. Instead, they tended not to provide prepared-sounding narratives when asked to define health, discuss whether they were healthy, or describe parents' messages around health. Their answers often differed starkly from those of advantaged participants, feeling less rehearsed and reflecting different understandings of health. For example, when Robyn's (lower-SES, White) interviewer asked her, “Do you think about being healthy constantly or actively think about or try to achieve it?” Robyn replied, “Um, I don't think about it a lot.”
Unlike Robyn, Brad (mid/mixed-SES, Asian American) articulated a definite understanding of health, but it focused on different aspects of health compared to class-advantaged narratives. He said of his childhood, “I started to receive the basic value of washing my hands … learning a little about personal cleanliness and hygiene, and how it can be important to keep you from getting sick. So that was kind of instilled with me at that point.” This emphasis on health as hygiene and avoiding illness, rather than on physical appearance, diet, and physical activity, was more common among less advantaged participants. It reflects a more pragmatic approach in which being healthy is viewed as not being sick, the embodiment of health is not in focus, and avoidance of illness is parents’ perceived goal.
Andrew (lower-SES, White) spoke tentatively when his interviewer asked, “So, for you, what does it mean to be healthy?” He answered, “Um, I guess you can, like, split that up into physically and mentally. I don't know.” The interviewer then asked, “Well, do you think health is the same as well-being?” Andrew continued: Um, not necessarily. I, me personally, no. Or, I think healthy is the same as well-being, almost, or nearly synonymous. I think I would define, like, being healthy as being well. Which is kind of foolish, but like, one could assert that being healthy is just having nothing physically wrong with you, but also, I think, healthy is … for me, it's a more comprehensive and more wholesome sort of state of being. Where you're, you're physically okay, you're mentally feeling okay, but you're feeling one with yourself and your place within this world.
After some hesitation, Andrew portrayed health as a lack of illness but immediately questioned his own definition.
As in Andrew's account, another common theme among less advantaged participants was a broader understanding of health transcending the physical body. Angelina (lower-SES, Latinx) discussed having learned a broader definition of health unrelated to health behaviors in her class- and race-disadvantaged community: “Oh, just like living! Just having a roof over your head, being able to eat, just have friends and have a job, and be close to your family and be content with your own life. I think that's what health is.” Angelina's definition emphasized well-being and included otherwise taken-for-granted factors like food security , housing, social relationships , and being alive. When Ronald's (lower-SES, Black) interviewer asked what it means to be healthy, he focused on happiness and confidence: Um, to have internal happiness within yourself. That's a part of being healthy, because the more positive you think about yourself, the more opportunities you have. And the higher you think of yourself, the more higher other people will think of you too. Because if you have confidence in yourself—and if you don't have confidence in yourself, nobody will, you know what I'm saying?
According to Brad's, Andrew's, Angelina's, and Ronald's definitions, a person could have a large body or less-than-optimal nutrition or exercise yet still be healthy. To them, health is not an embodied, visible marker of class distinction. Parents' careful focus on children's physical activity and nutritious diet for the implicit purpose of regulating body size—with the attendant health-focused cultural capital that focus provides—was largely restricted to advantaged participants.
A few class-disadvantaged participants actively pushed back against class-advantaged understandings of health. Angelina, whose socially focused definition appears above, characterized her current, affluent college community as an “insane” place where “everybody is an athlete, and everybody eats, like, organically” but where people are “distant” and “disconnected.” In contrast, she talked about her community growing up as a place where people were healthy because they were “happy” and “content,” despite having less nutritious diets and less money.
Yet because many were college students, our class-disadvantaged participants were often experiencing class mobility. This showed up in their narratives. Angelina acknowledged that she had changed when moving to the advantaged community that she disparaged above, adopting a vegan diet that she advocated and said would be very hard to implement in her hometown. Angelina seemed to vacillate between describing her past versus her current life as healthier, while actively resisting narratives that reduced health to diet and exercise.
Nicholas (lower-SES, Latinx) shifted narratives as he described different points in his class journey. When asked what messages about health and well-being his family taught or modeled for him in childhood, Nicholas started by describing a hygiene-focused understanding typical of class-disadvantaged participants: “Definitely good models. My parents—just because my mom would always just get mad if I'm walking around the house barefoot, or if I'm not drinking enough water, or not taking care of my personal hygiene.” But when he started talking about how his parents' messages shaped him in college, Nicholas shifted toward a typical advantaged narrative. He continued: I knew that if I was eating too much of one food, like, “Oh, I'm definitely eating way too much eggs right now. Like, my cholesterol is definitely high right now.” It's just something that my parents taught me, I feel like, subconsciously. They didn't specifically tell me, like, don't eat too much of one food, don't eat too much of this, but just the way that I was grown up, like the diversity in food and the stuff that I was eating, I guess, made me realize that you kind of need to have this diversity in your food in order to be healthy, or to be physically healthy.
In his narrative about college, Nicholas worked to recast his parents' messages as “subconsciously” teaching him dominant values about nutrition, even as he acknowledged that they did not communicate these values. Nicholas sought to portray their health messaging according to the advantaged understandings he was now surrounded by. But he ended on the same holistic note as the class-disadvantaged participants above, praising “diversity in food” in a way that rang hollow and felt distinct from advantaged young adults’ accounts.
Upwardly mobile class-disadvantaged participants used various strategies to reconcile the different understandings of health they learned growing up with their current advantaged social contexts. These strategies ranged from accepting the dominant understanding of health by trying to adopt advantaged narratives and/or distance from disadvantaged understandings, to resisting the narrower dominant understanding, to rejecting the dominant understanding of health by pivoting to a positive focus on more inclusive understandings of health. Were these strategies successful in helping socioeconomically disadvantaged participants appear healthy in their advantaged new worlds? As our analyses have suggested above, we do not believe that most disadvantaged participants were able to deploy the same health-focused cultural capital that their advantaged peers did. This is not surprising, given that cultural capital is acquired slowly and most effectively in early life through the habitus ( Bourdieu, 1986b ). Although more multifaceted data would be needed to draw a firm conclusion, our analyses also suggest that a combination of body size, health behaviors, and health-related narratives, performed in specific ways, was necessary for fully accessing health-focused cultural capital. Socioeconomically advantaged participants knew how to behave, make their bodies look, and talk about the morality and discipline embedded in those performances in ways that expressed symbolic power and upheld their social privileges as deserved. This combination of talk, appearance, and behavior resulted from advantages acquired in childhood, which they internalized and learned to deploy as young adults.

Section: 5. Discussion

This study analyzed 113 interviews with young adults from a variety of family- and community-level socioeconomic backgrounds, but with a preponderance of class-, race-, and sexuality-advantaged participants, to understand how health-focused cultural capital acquired in childhood shapes understandings of health in young adulthood. Two key phenomena were present among our socioeconomically privileged but not our less privileged participants: family socialization into classed diet- and exercise-related health behaviors resulting in a classed appearance of health (despite less-than-ideal current behaviors), and cohesive life course narratives linking these behaviors to hard work and moral worth. Less socioeconomically privileged participants’ understandings of health and healthy behaviors were different, rarely linking health to worthiness and discipline. To understand intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic attainment and health in US society, we must consider how behaviors and group-based norms, identities, and understandings of health coalesce in classed health lifestyles.
Advantaged participants learned and internalized health lifestyles that were fundamentally different from those of less advantaged participants in two main ways. First, specific health behaviors were emphasized. Advantaged participants learned to focus on diet and physical activity with the goal of having a thin, fit body. Those with less advantage instead learned to focus on different or more inclusive ideas of health such as hygiene, an absence of illness, meeting survival needs, or social well-being. Second, advantaged participants deployed health lifestyle narratives that linked diet, exercise, and body size to hard work, discipline, and moral worth, claiming these characteristics due to their internalization of these messages even if their current health behaviors were not ideal. Less advantaged participants often lacked a rehearsed narrative and less frequently portrayed bodies and health behaviors as achievements and symbols of moral worth. To fit into their new advantaged contexts, they deployed different strategies, which fell short of providing the same health-related cultural capital that advantaged participants could access.
We thus found that a combination of body size, health behaviors, and health-related narratives was important for understanding the reproduction of social advantage through health-focused cultural capital. This combination of appearance, behaviors, and narratives linked to group norms and identities underscores the importance of health lifestyles for understanding how health-focused cultural capital works. Physical activity and diet can yield health advantages. But a disproportionate focus on attaining a certain kind of body can also carry health risks through eating disorders and mental health problems. Beyond health implications, these body ideals, behaviors, and narratives matter because they help shape and project people's identities and create class distinctions ( Bourdieu, 1986a ), transmitting cultural capital and justifying individuals' advantaged class position.
Our findings underscore the roles of not just health behaviors, but identities, narratives, norms, and understandings of health as core aspects of health lifestyles. Previous literature has theorized that they are part of health lifestyles ( Cockerham, 2005 ; Krueger et al., 2009 ), but empirical research has not documented these facets or how they integrate within health lifestyles. Nor has research emphasized the importance of embodiment, an aspect we found to be crucial. Findings showed that in teaching children health lifestyles, parents transmit not just specific health behaviors, but cultural logics supporting them and narratives linking health behaviors and bodies to moral worth and social class. Through health lifestyles, parents are teaching their children to be certain kinds of people in ways that signal class advantage and reinforce the child's moral worthiness to others, increasing their chances for socioeconomic success. Because cultural capital is cultivated early, the advantages it yields can be hard to replicate in later life.
This study's limitations include its disproportionate focus on college students and its relative lack of racial and sexual and gender identity diversity. Because our sample included few socioeconomically privileged people of color or white socioeconomically disadvantaged people, we could not articulate how race and ethnicity may intervene in these processes. Participants' accounts of socialization into health lifestyles were retrospective and thus influenced by their life experiences, and we only heard their own and not their parents' views on the messages about health parents sought to instill. A longitudinal study could be useful for understanding later implications of young adults' health lifestyle behaviors and narratives for their health, family relationships , and socioeconomic attainment. As these young people themselves become parents, they will socialize a new generation, so research needs to link young adult health lifestyles and understandings to those after childbearing. Finally, including mental health in analyses of health lifestyle formation and transmission is rare. Our participants usually brought up mental health, sometimes using it as a tool to justify other behaviors and narratives. Investigating this dynamic is an important avenue for future research.
Our findings suggest that to understand the implications of social class of origin for socioeconomic attainment and life course health in today's US society, we need to investigate cultural capital, understandings of health, and health lifestyles. Policy efforts to change health behaviors without also targeting people's identities, narratives, and normative influences are likely to have limited payoffs. Insights from the study of social class reproduction should be combined with those from the health disparities literature to better understand how class and health are intertwined throughout life. Such work can flesh out mechanisms linking social advantage to health, resulting in implications that can then be assessed in population-representative studies. Understanding health-related socialization processes in childhood has implications for health outcomes, social class, and social inequalities.

Section: Credit author statement

Stefanie Mollborn: Conceptualization; Methodology; Investigation; Formal analysis; Data curation; Project administration; Writing – original draft; writing-review and editing. Adenife Modile: Data curation; Formal analysis; Investigation; writing-review and editing.

Section: acknowledgements

This study was supported by US National Science Foundation grant SES 1423524 . We also thank the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD)-funded University of Colorado Population Center ( P2CHD066613 ) for development, administrative, and computing support. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NSF, NICHD, or the National Institutes. We thank Jennifer Pace, Bethany Rigles, Joshua Goode, Fred Pampel, Richard Jessor, Elizabeth Lawrence, Olowudara Oloyede, Kevin Le, Andrew Bennett, and Amber Bunner for their assistance.
