Title: Black boxes and information pathways: An actor-network theory approach to breast cancer survivorship care


Abstract: Abstract

Many women diagnosed with breast cancer today can expect to live long after completing their treatment. This growing population of survivors encounters distinct post-treatment health and information needs. Existing survivorship care models take information as a given, black boxing it. I use Actor-Network Theory to examine how information actually works for women after they complete breast cancer treatment, and how it shapes their understanding of survivorship . I draw on in-depth interviews with breast cancer survivors (n = 82) and a wide range of providers (n = 84) in a medically underserved region of Southern California. Black boxes and information pathways convey experiential dimensions of cancer care; they are also metaphoric constructs. The black box metaphor refers to the cancer experience as a container; the pathways metaphor refers to a journey. Each of these metaphors expresses salient dimensions of the cancer experience and has implications for post-treatment survivorship. When healthcare information flows smoothly and invisibly, its pathways become black boxed. Black boxes can be helpful when they function effectively. But since black boxes conceal their inner workings, it is challenging to intervene when difficulties arise. I provide three examples of difficulties that complicate women's transition to post-treatment survivorship: (1) when survivors fail to recognize treatment-related late effects, (2) do not understand they have a terminal diagnosis, or (3) worry that their treatment accomplished nothing. Contextualized within survivorship scholarship, this study recommends opening black boxes to examine how information pathways could connect women differently to improve survivorship care.

Section: 1. Introduction

Many women diagnosed with breast cancer today can expect to live long after completing their cancer treatment. But with increased longevity come many post-treatment needs, including psychosocial support and management of long-term treatment effects ( Jacobs and Shulman, 2017 ). In 2005, a landmark study recommended that cancer survivorship be established “as a distinct phase of cancer care” ( Hewitt et al., 2006 , p. 3). Today, establishment of a survivorship program (standard 4.8) is required for cancer program accreditation from the Commission on Cancer ( ACoS, 2019 ). Yet survivorship care remains inconsistent in quality and unsystematic in its implementation across healthcare systems ( Nekhlyudov et al., 2019 ).
Efforts have largely focused on how individuals transition from active cancer treatment to survivorship care, a transition generally accompanied by transfer of care from the oncologist to the primary care physician. Survivorship care plans were intended to facilitate this transition by providing information to survivors and their primary care physicians about the cancer treatments received, recommended future screenings, and anticipated adverse events ( Hahn and Ganz, 2011 ; Mayer et al., 2014 ). But numerous barriers encumber oncologists’ provision of survivorship care plans ( Blaes et al., 2020 ) as well as their uptake by primary care physicians ( Rubinstein et al., 2017 ).
Scholars now advocate a personalized pathways approach to survivorship care, recognizing that one-size-fits-all is neither successfully meeting post-treatment survivor needs nor sustainable for the oncology workforce ( Alfano et al., 2019 ). A pathways approach tailors survivorship care to individual needs, risks, and preferences ( Jefford et al., 2013 ); ideally, it incorporates patient-centered practices and survivor perspectives ( Mead et al., 2020 ).
However, the concept of care pathways has been criticized for the inherent tension between patient-centeredness and the organizational imperative to move patients through the healthcare system efficiently ( Pinder et al., 2005 ). Pathways make disease “navigable” ( Llewellyn et al., 2018 ); they suggest fixed destinations with a pre-specified order of steps ( Checkland et al., 2020 ). In contrast, the experience of cancer is like traversing a terrain in constant motion, responding to the “inherent uncertainty, … recalcitrance, and the multiple contingencies inevitable in the body's response to treatment” ( Llewellyn et al., 2018 , p. 416). Post-treatment survivorship does not necessarily mean resumption of a normal life; “doing normality” is an iterative enactment that requires hard work ( Plage, 2021 ). When cancer treatment ends, many feel unprepared for what lies ahead ( Mead et al., 2020 ).
I investigate how information works during the transition from breast cancer treatment to post-treatment, and how it shapes women's understanding of survivorship. Information plays a key role in both survivorship care plans and personalized pathways. But existing care models assume information as a given, black boxing it. Drawing on Actor-Network Theory, I trace the information pathways that enabled women to access post-treatment follow-up care and connect with needed resources. I then analyze the underlying metaphors that reveal how women experienced these pathways.
Actor-Network Theory enables me to question taken-for-granted assumptions about how information works in breast cancer and survivorship care. Information is commonly viewed as “some- thing (an object) that can be processed, stored, sent over, retrieved” ( Tsoukas, 1997 , p. 829). Instead, I consider information as a means of establishing relationships, a way of connecting people, processes, and things in an “actor-network.”
Actor-networks describe the connections that make up a particular pattern, effect, or web of relations observed in the world ( Latour, 1996 , p. 378; Law, 1992 , p. 381). These patterns cannot be separated from the practices that bring them into being. ANT provides a way of mapping how connections come to be established, and what holds them together over time ( Law and Singleton, 2013 ). Unlike technological networks (e.g., telephone or computer) in which predefined paths control circulation among dispersed elements—or care pathways in which predefined routes control circulation of patients through healthcare services—actor-networks do not start with stabilized connections. From an ANT perspective, durability and stability are not assumed a priori as properties of objects or systems, but instead seen as effortful and ongoing accomplishments ( Law, 1992 ).
A central ANT tenet is the parity between humans and non-humans in terms of moving action forward; action does not require human actors. An actant , in ANT terminology, is “[w]hatever acts or shifts actions” ( Akrich and Latour, 1992 , p. 259). As Latour (2005 , p. 71) explained: “[K]ettles ‘boil’ water, knives ‘cut’ meat, baskets ‘hold’ provisions, hammers ‘hit’ nails on the head …. Are those verbs not designating actions?” Accordingly, actor-networks are composed of heterogeneous materials. Through black boxing, the actor-network appears to act as a singular system rather than as “all the bits and pieces that make it up” ( Law, 1992 , p. 380).
In my analysis, I consider information as an actant in the heterogeneous actor-networks of breast cancer and survivorship care. Other scholars have used ANT to examine what documents ( Prior, 2008 ), or patient data ( Desai et al., 2017 ), do ; they argued that documents and data function as active agents in configuring relationships, not just as content. My use of ANT suggests that effective functioning of the breast cancer survivorship actor-network, as well as the circulation of information along its pathway connections, cannot be taken for granted; instead, these are both subjects for investigation. Tracing how people, objects, and information practices get connected within actor-networks enables us to understand how problems emerge at the transition from active cancer treatment, and to envision how information might connect women better to improve survivorship care.
When information travels without difficulties from person to person (doctors, nurses, patients) and facility to facility (primary care, oncology, diagnostic imaging), the connections along the way become invisible; we see only the end result: a tumor detected, or procedure ordered. The invisibility of information flow contributes to the black boxing of information pathways. Black boxing assumes information travels in uncomplicated, linear pathways; it simplifies complexity, and makes many elements appear to act as a unified whole ( Latour, 1987 ; Law, 1992 ). In science and technology studies, a black box refers to a system, or object, that can be described in terms of inputs and outputs while its inner workings remain invisible ( Pinch, 1992 , p. 488; Winner, 1993 , p. 365). Many of the objects we use in our daily lives such as televisions, computers, watches, and phones are black boxes; we take for granted that they work without necessarily understanding how they do so. In healthcare too, many complex processes have been labeled black boxes, for example, billing and insurance processes ( Sakowski et al., 2009 ), healthcare spending ( Cooper et al., 2016 ), and healthcare quality improvement ( Bate et al., 2008 ; Ramaswamy et al., 2018 ). The effective functioning of black boxes in cancer care has been variously described as care coordination ( Gorin et al., 2017 ), continuity of care ( Scheitler et al., 2018 ), or integrated service delivery ( Haire et al., 2013 ).
A black box must be opened to see the complexity of its inner workings and enable troubleshooting when problems occur. Opening a black box makes us realize that things might have been assembled, or connected, differently. Law (1992, pp. 386) pointed to the precariousness of ordering processes, rather than their necessity, inertness, or permanence. Opening a black box allows the assumptions that determine its internal connections to be examined: what was at stake and for whom, which decisions were made and which never even considered ( Winner, 1993 ). I employ ANT to open black boxes in breast cancer and survivorship care and examine the functioning of their information pathways.

Section: 2. Data and methods

I present selected findings from a larger qualitative study , using ANT to theorize breast cancer and survivorship care through a detailed case study ( Law and Singleton, 2013 ). The parent investigation supported multiple analyses across a range of services and care delivery contexts, grounded in both survivor and provider perspectives. Findings presented here reflect primarily survivor perspectives.
The study region comprised Riverside and San Bernardino counties in Southern California, a region covering 27,000 square miles with a combined population of approximately 4.6 million. Women in this region rely primarily on services in community-based settings rather than academic hospitals or comprehensive cancer centers. Access to these services is hindered by geographic distance, fragmentation of service delivery, and scarcity of providers.
My research benefited from firsthand insights I gained over six years working with the region's breast cancer survivors. As a volunteer with community-based organizations that provide supportive care as well as financial, legal, and transportation assistance, I frequently heard providers' frustration about getting information out to survivors; I also witnessed survivors' struggles to meet their needs. My initial research questions concerned how women learned about the survivorship services they received.
Breast cancer survivors were recruited through healthcare facilities , cancer organizations, and community events such as health fairs or breast cancer conferences. I defined survivors as women who had completed, or were still undergoing, treatment for breast cancer. A Spanish-language study coordinator enabled recruitment of monolingual Spanish speakers.
Service providers were recruited from a wide range of organizational settings, including healthcare facilities, nonprofit organizations, private businesses, and government agencies. I defined providers as individuals who worked or volunteered for organizations that offered services face-to-face, online, or via telephone to breast cancer survivors.
This study employed theoretical sampling, a concept derived from grounded theory ( Glaser and Strauss, 1967 ). Data collection was guided by concepts that emerged from the data, rather than predefined categories established in advance. Theoretical sampling ensures that as many factors as possible affecting variability of behavior—in this case, access and use of post-treatment services—have been included in the sample ( Fitzpatrick and Boulton, 1994 ). Data collection continues until theoretical saturation is reached, the point at which further data collection contributes little new information for developing the properties of categories ( Charmaz, 2006 ; Corbin and Strauss, 2008 ).
I initially sought variation among survivors along three dimensions: age at diagnosis, years since diagnosis, and geographic location (large cities, small towns , and desert communities). I anticipated these variations would reflect differences in survivors’ service seeking, use, and challenges. I soon realized there were other important considerations, such as differences in treatment experiences or long-term effects. Exploring as many dimensions of survivorship as possible enabled me to reach saturation in understanding the barriers survivors encounter when seeking care, and how information works in care delivery.
I conducted open-ended, semi-structured interviews 2011–2017 (in person, in both English and Spanish, average length 2 h) with 82 breast cancer survivors. Women ranged in age from 25 to 87, and from still in treatment to 41 years post-treatment; half self-identified as white, 26% as Latina, 15% as African American, and 8% as another racial category. Medical interpreters assisted with the Spanish interviews (12%). Interview questions focused on challenges and changes in women's lives since diagnosis, cancer-related services they needed and used as survivors, and how they had been referred to those services.
I also conducted interviews 2016–2017 (via phone, and in English only, average length 45 min) with 84 service providers from 71 organizations that support survivorship such as patient navigation, medical interpreting, transportation services, and psychosocial support . Interview questions focused on providers’ role, purpose and scope of services, service eligibility, and how access was accomplished.
All interviews utilized a flexible interview guide. Flexibility enabled probing for individual details and meanings, as well as following up on issues that emerged during the interviews ( Britten, 1995 ; Carter et al., 2009 ). Interviews were audio-recorded after obtaining consent from participants.
The university's Institutional Review Board approved all study procedures. To protect the privacy of research participants, each interview was assigned a unique alphanumeric code; survivors were also assigned a first-name pseudonym. When citing from service provider transcripts, only their role in service delivery is referenced (e.g., prosthesis fitter).
An iterative process ( DiCicco-Bloom and Crabtree, 2006 ) was used to analyze detailed transcripts of the audio-recorded interviews. Following the practices of other qualitative researchers ( Charmaz, 2006 ; Corbin and Strauss, 2008 ), this process began with a careful line-by-line reading of each transcript, using inductive categories to describe the data. The transcripts were then coded using Atlas.ti software. Data analysis proceeded by working back and forth between the coding, the original transcripts, and emerging interpretations. As theoretical ideas began to take shape, these ideas were tested and retested against the empirical data ( Pope et al., 2000 , p. 115).
While analyzing the interviews, I also mapped information pathways that connected each survivor with the cancer-related services she accessed. I began with a literal mapping of referral patterns between survivors and service sites. Through iterative analysis I gained an increasingly conceptual understanding of information pathways and how they sometimes function as black boxes.

Section: 3. Results

Black boxes can be very helpful when they work effectively and seamlessly to connect women with healthcare services. But black boxes don't always work. Drawing on my analysis of information pathways across all survivor interviews, I focus here on four women's experiences of black box breakdowns. I examine in depth how black boxes became operative, affecting their expectations of survivorship and service delivery during, and after, breast cancer treatment.
Surveillance for new or metastasized cancer is one essential component of survivorship care ( Hewitt et al., 2006 ). When Kimberly experienced troubling symptoms 18 years after breast cancer treatment, a PET (Positron Emission Tomography) scan confirmed her cancer had metastasized. Kimberly gave two accounts of the same procedure performed in different facilities. One PET scan was experienced as a black box, the other as a series of interconnected information pathways.
Kimberly described the following experience with her PET scan at a comprehensive cancer center: I can take a PET scan in the morning and see the doctor in the afternoon and it's [the PET scan result] already there.
Within this single sentence, the PET scan appears seamlessly connected with the doctor's appointment when the scan results were discussed. Since Kimberly had to drive 1.5–2 h to and from the cancer center, she appreciated being able to take care of both the scan and the oncology appointment on the same day. This convenience resulted from the successful functioning of a black box. How information travelled within the cancer center remained invisible; from Kimberly's perspective, information flow was straightforward and effortless.
Kimberly also recounted a PET scan she had received before transferring her care to the comprehensive cancer center: [I]n [20]13… at the end of the year I got um, I started having a lot of pain in my back and [was] tired and a whole bunch of stuff. So I went to Urgent Care . The doctor told me to tell my family practice doctor that … the cancer may have spread. And so then by the time I got to the oncologist it was 2014.
Asked why it had taken a month before she could see her oncologist, Kimberly explained: Well, because you have to go to the family doctor. And then um, she has to give you a referral to the uh, oncologist. And then uh, the oncologist has to order like a PET scan and something else that they use to, to test it. But then he has to send the referral back to the family practice doctor. And … the insurance has to approve it. And then uh, you make an appointment to go get the PET scan. So you gotta wait for the appointment. And then you have to go and get it. And then you have to wait till they get the test back. And then you have to [slight pause] … then the next step I think is … to make an appointment with the oncologist. And then, you know, he reads it and then he tells you. So it's sort of like a long process.
In this longer account, the black box has broken down, revealing many of the information pathways required to get from Urgent Care to the metastatic diagnosis ( Fig. 1 ). Download: Download high-res image (375KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Kimberly's PET scan perceived as complex information pathways.
The complexity of the information pathways was visible to Kimberly in the community setting, but not in the comprehensive cancer center ( Fig. 2 ). Long delays between stages of information transmission indicated that information pathways were functioning, but not optimally. Delay is one measure of sub-optimal functioning because of its negative correlation with cancer treatment outcomes ( Bleicher, 2018 ). Download: Download high-res image (140KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Kimberly's PET scan perceived as a black box.
Part of Kimberly's problem was due to the fragmentation of services across multiple actors and facilities—Urgent Care, primary care , oncology practice, insurance company, and the PET scan facility—a problem that besets American healthcare more generally ( Stange, 2009 ). Kimberly described her frustration at the “sort of like a long process” that was exacerbated by a breakdown in the PET scan equipment, causing a further one-week delay as she waited to hear if her cancer had metastasized.
It is important to note that many of the same information pathways would have been in place at the comprehensive cancer center. Kimberly's one-sentence account of the PET scan she received there elides the information exchanges that were visible to her in the community setting. At the comprehensive cancer center information pathways were all co-located within the same facility, led in and out of the same medical record system, and were of much shorter duration. Instead of waiting a month to get her PET scan results, Kimberly could get her PET scan results the very same afternoon.
The comparison between Kimberly's two PET scans reveals significant differences in how she perceived the functioning of information pathways across two care settings. Although information pathways were present in both settings, they were only visible in the community setting; once the black box was operative, they became invisible.
Kimberly's divergent PET scan experiences illustrate differences not only in how she perceived the functioning of information pathways, but also how she experienced her care. She was anxious about her care when information pathways were visibly complex, and felt confident when they functioned as black boxes. This is not to say that every woman experiences care in this way, but rather that information pathways and black boxes refer to real care experiences. They also function as metaphoric constructs.
Illness experience is often expressed through metaphors ( Kirmayer, 1992 ); conversely, metaphors also profoundly shape how illness is experienced ( Reisfield and Wilson, 2004 ). The black box metaphor results from conceptualizing the cancer experience as a container ; the pathways metaphor refers to conceptualizing the cancer experience as a journey . Each of these metaphors conveys salient dimensions of the cancer experience ( Table 1 ); each also has implications for post-treatment survivorship. Table 1 . Black-box-as-container and pathway-as-journey metaphors. Conceptual dimensions Metaphors Black-box-as-container Pathway-as-journey Goal accomplishment Within the confines of the box At the end of the pathway Duration Finite Progressive Complexity Invisible Visible Effort Taken-for-granted functioning Functioning requires exertion Parts/whole relationship Unified whole Sequence
The black box metaphor suggests that breast cancer treatment is a bounded experience set off from the rest of life; it is something that can be over and done with. There is an expectation that treatment will have accomplished something specific, namely that one is “done” because treatment has cured the cancer and restored the patient to health.
For example, Stacie spoke about her cancer in the following way: “Done that. And we've been through that, it's all good, let's move on.” She asserted, “I never use the word ‘remission.’” There was a quick intake of breath and a stuttering over the “I,” then a pause, and the word “n—e—v—e—r” elongated. “To me, I'm cured, it's gone,” she declared. For Beth, cancer treatment was something you have taken care of, “not a lot different than [short pause] dental surgery .” Cynthia explained, “I did surgery, um, chemo, radiation, everything. And I was done, everything was cool.”
The black box metaphor influenced the thinking of many cancer survivors, including those who continued to struggle with treatment-related issues post-treatment. Peggy conveyed some ambivalence about being “done” with treatment: I say it was over but I guess it's not really over. The stress of knowing the cancer was gone was over. But [hesitation] I still had self-esteem and body awareness problems because of the mastectomy . And so I’m still dealing with some of that.
If we envision cancer treatment as contained within a black box, then emerging from treatment we are indeed “done.” But for some survivors, the line between treatment and the end of treatment becomes blurred through ongoing management of long-term side effects or late effects developed after treatment. Charlene struggled with cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure , medical complications resulting from one of her chemotherapy drugs. She felt there was no “end” in sight. A year after completing cancer treatment she described herself as not yet a survivor, still on the hill, in the midst of her journey, “just muddling through.”
For some survivors like Charlene and Peggy, treatment-related issues did not stay within the black box after treatment ended. For these survivors, the cancer experience required a different metaphor, the pathway-as-journey metaphor.
Journeys trace lines of travel ( Ingold, 2016 , pp. 77–78) or define pathways ( Lakoff and Johnson, 2003 , p. 90); pathways suggest movement towards a specified goal. Venetta conveyed this understanding of cancer as a journey. She recognized that the road she had taken was not the same road as other survivors, but it would nevertheless get her to the same destination: “So, you know, whichever road you have to go down, [slight pause] we still have to meet at the same point …. At the end of the road is survival.”
For many women, the cancer journey connects where they are now (in cancer treatment) with where they want to be (survivors). As a mental health professional working with breast cancer survivors explained, I've come to view [cancer] as a journey in that where it begins is definitely not where it ends. In other words, their cancer experience changes them. They were one person in the beginning and have transformed into another along the way.
But unlike the seemingly automatic accomplishment within the black box, women perceived reaching the end of the cancer journey as an effortful accomplishment. Winona reported: “I could've, you know, give up. But I didn't. I decided that I had to hang on and fight.” Maricela related a similar sense of the effort required: [Y]ou keep going …. You continue with the treatment. Every treatment was something that caused too much fatigue, like wore you out …. But you’re able to meet goals that you never imagined you could.
What women assume is accomplished within the black box (curing cancer) is similar to the goal that awaits women at the end of their journey, namely restored health and survivorship. In this sense the black box and pathways metaphors overlap. As pointed out by Lakoff and Johnson (2003) , we often need two (or more) metaphors to convey multiple dimensions of the same concept. Each highlights different dimensions of the cancer experience: finitude (black-box-as-container) versus progression (pathway-as-journey).
In the following sections I discuss several difficulties that result from black boxing information pathways. Often these difficulties only become discernible much later, in hindsight, or after treatment ends. Difficulties arise from the conflicts, rather than overlaps, in meaning between the two metaphoric constructs, black-box-as-container and pathway-as-journey.
Stacie's story demonstrates several difficulties that can result from conceptualizing cancer treatment as contained within a black box, or as she phrased it, something “that's finished, definitely, definitely.” She was 43 when diagnosed with breast cancer; her cancer treatment put her into chemical menopause. After completing treatment she was unsure what was normal for her body, “because of the hormones … or, you know, the lack of hormones.” She described an emotional meltdown at Christmas when she was “just screaming at everybody and crying.”
It was Stacie's office assistant who suggested she consult a doctor. “[M]y assistant she's like, [her voice dropping to a whisper] go see the doctor and talk to them about depression. I'm like, really ?” The incredulity of Stacie's response indicates that it had not occurred to her she might be depressed. The assumption that everything concerning her cancer was over and done made it difficult for her to see any connection between her emotional state and her cancer treatment. She was confused about what was normal for a woman going through menopause, and what might be specific to her treatment-induced menopause.
Depression is common, but often unrecognized and untreated among women with breast cancer ( Fann et al., 2008 ). Since 2015, the American College of Surgeons' Commission on Cancer (CoC) has required that its accredited cancer programs implement psychosocial distress screening “at least one time during the patient's first course of treatment”; additional screenings are optional but not required (CoC, 2019, p. 43). If the screening indicates moderate or severe distress, patients must be provided psychosocial services, either on site or through referral to outside resources. Cancer centers are required to have an established procedure to inform patients how to access these resources. Psychosocial referrals triggered by the distress screening thus create a new information pathway.
However, not every cancer program obtains CoC accreditation. CoC-accredited hospitals treat about 70% of U.S. cancer patients, but these hospitals tend to be larger facilities in urban, rather than rural areas ( Bilimoria et al., 2009 ). Some community-based cancer programs lack trained psychosocial oncology personnel on a regular basis ( Buxton et al., 2014 , p. 51). This means that the cancer support services contained in the black box vary significantly by geography, and by cancer program.
Even with a distress screening in place, connections to mental health providers may fail for other reasons. One is a lack of available providers. As the director of a cancer support center in Stacie's region explained, “[S]eeking licensed personnel … it's a challenge,” especially “finding qualified licensed mental health professionals.” While California overall lacks a sufficient healthcare workforce to meet the needs of its population, behavioral health provider shortages are especially severe in Stacie's region ( California Future Health Workforce Commission, 2019 ).
Connections also fail when someone in the referral chain drops the ball. A hospital-based oncology nurse explained that she routinely administers the distress thermometer, asking her cancer patients to identify their level of distress from zero (no distress) to ten (extreme distress) ( NCCN, 2020 , pp. 13–15). If patients score too high, she communicates the results to their physicians. But she has little confidence this communication leads to psychosocial service referrals for her patients: “I actually have to write a letter [chuckles softly] because [primary care physicians] have no idea what [the distress screening] is.” So she took the additional step of mailing information to her patients directly. She felt it was important “just letting [patients] know they're not alone, you know, in having distress; that distress is normal when you're going through something like this.” This is precisely the type of reassurance that would have been helpful for Stacie.
Ideally, distress screening should be included in post-treatment survivorship care. However, in my data I observed that the information pathway linking distressed patients with psychosocial support terminated after treatment completion; it did not extend into post-treatment survivorship, which is when Stacie's depression occurred. Similar to Stacie, a substantial percentage of breast cancer survivors experience psychological distress after completing treatment ( Carreira et al., 2021 ).
Stacie's story illustrates several ways in which conceptualizing cancer treatment as a black box hinders information flow for post-treatment survivors. Not only did Stacie fail to recognize that her depression might be associated with her cancer treatment, so too did her providers. Additionally, the lack of information pathways connecting treatment with post-treatment reinforced the temporal boundaries of the black box.
Another difficulty occurs when information pathways lead into the black box but never exit. If the black box is perceived as containing the cancer experience, there is a problem if women get stuck inside the box. Donna experienced her treatment as unending. She longed to be done so she could get on with her life, but could not focus on the process of living while in treatment. Since the black box concealed how information pathways make connections, it was difficult for her to intervene when she needed help.
“It's taking so long this time,” Donna said, sniffling and wiping her eyes. She had been diagnosed with breast cancer in 2011. In 2014, her oncologist told her the cancer had recurred in her lung. Technically, recurrence was the correct designation; it refers to cancer that has returned, either in the same, or another, body organ after a period of time when it was not detected ( ACS, 2016 ). But the term was misleading in its everyday meaning. It suggested a discrete event with well-defined temporal contours, not the messy open-endedness of Donna's ongoing chemotherapy for metastatic cancer .
“It's taking so long,” Donna said again. When the cancer came a second time, she had to take early retirement from her physically demanding job. Donna and her husband had fallen behind in their mortgage payments and she worried about foreclosure. She did not qualify for Social Security (or Social Security Disability Insurance) because as a local government employee she had not paid into the Social Security system. When she finished her treatment, perhaps they would be able to sell their house and move out of California to be near her family.
Donna also wanted to redo her breast reconstruction. She could not bear to look at herself in the mirror; her husband told her the reconstruction looked like a “butcher job.” When she finished her treatment, Donna hoped to return to the relationship she had enjoyed with her husband before cancer. “Five years is a long time not having any relationship,” she said, meaning that it had been five years since they had had sex. “It's, it's taken a toll on our love life. Period. Stopped.”
Donna could neither repair the breast reconstruction, nor take care of the enormous hernia that had resulted from removing abdominal tissue to create her new breast, until she finished chemotherapy. She could not have surgery while her immune system was under attack. But Donna did not know when she would be finished with her treatment. “[I]t seems like it's taking a long time for it to go away,” she repeated again, and I did not have the heart to tell her she may never be “finished.” Donna's recurrence in her lung meant her cancer had metastasized; there would be no cure, no remission, only the hope of stabilization through ongoing treatment. For Donna, there would be no getting “over” or being “done” with cancer.
Donna's conceptualization of cancer treatment as something discrete and separate from normal living did not help her live with ongoing treatment. Nor did her focus on future actions and decisions she would take once she had finished chemotherapy enable her to connect with services that might make her present life more bearable. Such services could include financial assistance, transportation assistance, psychosocial counseling, or a cancer support group. Her extreme economizing, learning to “do without,” represented a strategy for getting through , not continuing on indefinitely. It was predicated on the assumption that there would be a time after treatment when everything would be different, and all her difficulties—financial, sexual, and physical—would be resolved.
Donna's story reveals a dual information blockage. For her part, Donna acknowledged, “you know, my problem is I don't ask. I, I'm very bad about it, asking [laughs].” On the other hand, by calling her cancer a recurrence instead of a metastasis, her oncologist did not facilitate communication about her prognosis. It is unclear whether her oncologist spoke euphemistically to soften the blow and make the diagnosis easier for Donna to hear—or perhaps to make the diagnosis easier for him to tell.
Good and colleagues (1994) described the foreshortened temporal horizons used by oncologists to instill hope in their patients and address the uncertainty of treatment outcomes. In these therapeutic narratives “the horizon of the future is deliberately blurred” and attention focused on “the moment,” with the moment “often defined in terms of each carefully calibrated stage in the course of treatment” ( Good et al., 1994 , p. 857). But the temporal foreshortening that encourages cancer patients to keep taking one small step after another to get through treatment hinders them from thinking clearly about the possibility of not getting through treatment.
Since the inner workings of the black box are not visible, patients have to rely on doctors' assertions that their cancer has been treated successfully. This is particularly true for chemotherapy; surgery is more tangible in terms of having “done something” to get rid of the cancer. Isabel's troubled communication with her doctor after chemotherapy led her to question what had actually transpired during her treatment; perhaps, she feared, nothing had been accomplished after all.
Isabel remembered that her doctor had “explained the whole thing, you know, the whole procedure, how it was going to be.” But she felt she was floating somewhere above her body, not really taking in the information. The doctor then left the room and the nurse, who was a breast cancer survivor herself, explained to Isabel and her husband: “[N]othing will change, you know, … everything will be the same, just a little bit different because of the breast. [Isabel touched both sides of her chest above her breasts as she spoke] But … everything's going to be the same.”
The nurse's reassurance that “everything's going to be the same” projected an already successfully completed cancer treatment and Isabel's exit from the black box. What was omitted was the possibility that her treatment might not be successful, or that after treatment everything might not be the same as before.
At the time of our interview, Isabel was still troubled by the conversation she had had with her physician after completing her chemotherapy. As she reported, she had said to her doctor: “What do you think? I'm fine?” …. He said, “No, I look at you the same way … I look at you the same way you came in.” I say, “What do you mean?” [Loud sniffle]. He says to me, "You’re the same way you came in.” Just like that. [Audible sigh].
Unlike the pre-treatment conversation in which the nurse's projection that “everything will be the same” was interpreted as hopeful and nurturing, Isabel perceived the physician's retrospective assessment that she was “the same way [she] came in” as deeply distressing. She sniffled through tears as she explained her interpretation to me: I was in shock and I couldn't believe what he was telling me. And I said, and I said to myself, “Well, then everything that I've been through, … so, [loud sniffle] what does it mean?” I said, “Didn't we do something good?”
Isabel's interpretation of a failed cancer treatment followed her oncologist's attempt to black box her treatment. I suggested to Isabel several alternate interpretations of what he had said. I thought the most likely interpretation was that Isabel's physician meant to reassure her that he still perceived her to be the same woman (i.e., not diminished because of having lost part of her breast). However, his equating before cancer and after cancer as if nothing had happened in between caused Isabel uncertainty about whether the hocus-pocus that should have occurred inside the black box to cure her cancer had actually taken place. “Didn't we do something good?” she asked her doctor, hoping to hear confirmation that she had come to some different place from where she started as a cancer patient.
Three years after completing her treatment, Isabel still had days when “those words come back from my oncologist [loud sniffle]. When I was done with um, with chemo … and I said, ‘Think I'm ok?’ He said, ‘No, I look at you the same way, to me, I look at you the same way you came in.’” If the black box were really empty, she feared that all her treatment had been for naught; she feared she still had cancer, or would soon relapse and have cancer again.
The assumption that once treatment is over, everything would go back to normal is prevalent not only in the thinking of many survivors but also, as in Isabel's story, fostered by many oncology providers. Yet for Isabel, the notion of returning to her pretreatment state was not a welcome return to normalcy. Instead, she worried she had failed to make progress along the pathway towards survivorship and was doomed to remain in her pretreatment (i.e., uncured) state.

Section: 4. Discussion

Black boxing makes information pathways appear linear and straightforward, facilitating patients’ movement from one service to the next during diagnosis and treatment. But since black boxes conceal their inner workings, it becomes challenging to intervene when difficulties arise during survivorship. Opening up the black box to examine its taken-for-granted assumptions ( Winner, 1993 ) enables us to observe whether, and how, information pathways are actually functioning; it also allows us to examine how survivors understand their post-treatment needs.
My analysis draws attention to three specific situations in which difficulties emerge: when survivors do not understand what their treatment accomplished; do not acknowledge a terminal diagnosis; or fail to see how their treatment might be connected to post-treatment symptoms. In such situations, it is not the black box per se that becomes problematic, but rather the way black boxing conceals the complexity of information pathways, their communicative function, and metaphorical significance.
In terms of function, black boxing can mask serious communication gaps between survivors and their providers, as evidenced, for example, by a missed depression diagnosis, inability to speak about the ramifications of terminal illness , or ambiguity about what the cancer treatment actually accomplished. These are not just patient-level misunderstandings that can be remedied with better information; nor are they merely interpersonal difficulties that can be improved with better physician communication. Within a fragmented and under-resourced healthcare system, as in the region I studied, information pathways may function poorly for reasons that have little to do with either individual women or their providers. For example, when information pathways connect through multiple providers and facilities, a survivor may be unable to get a referral if one provider does not acknowledge her need for services. Or pathways may dead-end if there are workforce shortages that make mental health services unobtainable.
Black box thinking is reinforced in popular and media representations depicting cancer as something that can be “beaten,” “cured,” or the “battle won.” Deborah Steinberg (2015 , p. 124) observed the “aspirational return to normal ” prevalent in US cancer discourses and advertising campaigns. She described this aspiration as “a twin fantasy that proposes that once you are done with cancer treatment, you are done with cancer; you are back to your proper life—not only the life that cancer interrupted, but indeed the life you were meant to have ” (emphasis in the original). But promoting return to normal life makes it difficult, both for women and their providers, to address post-treatment needs; black boxing disconnects information pathways that help women access services.
Black boxing not only shapes women's post-treatment expectations, it also has wider health policy implications. For example, the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation developed new episode-based payment models, including the Oncology Care Model and its successor, Oncology Care First. Intended to improve care quality and coordination while reducing cost ( Kline et al., 2017 ), these models bundle payments for all services during a predefined “episode” of care (e.g., chemotherapy). The concept of an episode suggests a unified whole with well-defined temporal boundaries, in other words, characteristics of the black-box-as-container metaphor; it downplays the processual and interconnected characteristics of care.
As metaphoric constructs, both black boxes and information pathways are useful for thinking about cancer and survivorship care. Metaphors structure our understanding by highlighting certain aspects of our experiences while downplaying others ( Lakoff and Johnson, 2003 ). They are particularly effective because they structure our understanding such that “we are often hard put to identify them as metaphors, much less to identify alternative metaphorical conceptions” ( Malone, 1999 , p. 17). Our metaphoric vision of cancer care is integral to how we envision potential solutions for existing problems. As Annas (1995 , pp. 744–745) insisted, the first step to reform the American healthcare system “is to devise a new metaphor to … help us develop a new conception of health care .” The prevalence of black box thinking hinders our ability to remedy problems when information pathways do not function well.

Section: 5. Conclusion: emerging from treatment

Emerging from cancer treatment, many women enter post-treatment survivorship with the expectation that the black box is still functioning—an expectation that is invariably disappointed in two respects. The first disappointment concerns the black box: If treatment is black boxed, it should be over and done, an experience disconnected from the rest of life. As discussed above, many women become disconcerted when treatment-related physical and/or psychosocial issues continue on long after treatment has been completed. The second disappointment concerns information pathways: Instead of smoothly functioning information pathways that direct survivors towards services for their post-treatment needs, many needs remain unmet ( Burg et al., 2015 ). Cancer patients “emerge from treatment with a case of tunnel vision. Many have been so focused on the next treatment step that they are overwhelmed when there is no clear ‘next step’ in survivorship” ( Argenbright et al., 2014 , pp. 46–47).
Discontinuity between breast cancer treatment and post-treatment is underscored by both the black box and information pathways metaphoric constructs. When the black-box-as-container metaphor is operative, women envision emerging from the black box in which treatment is contained, leaving treatment behind, and moving on. But this was clearly not the case for Isabel who worried that her treatment was ineffective; for Stacie who fell into depression after her treatment; or for Donna who waited for treatment to end, not realizing she would remain in treatment for the rest of her life. With the pathway-as-journey metaphor, women envision themselves moving through treatment towards the goal of completing it. They do not envision that the journey continues on, or that further effort will be required after reaching their goal of completing treatment. This emphasis on getting through to the end of treatment does not prepare survivors for getting on after treatment's end.
My analysis of black boxes and information pathways elucidates how information works for women transitioning from active breast cancer treatment to post-treatment survivorship. Rather than proposing a new model for survivorship care, I contribute a new way of thinking about information. If women experience their cancer treatment as black boxed, then opening these black boxes enables us to consider how information pathways might connect women differently to improve survivorship care.

Section: Credit author statement

Deborah Lefkowitz : Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Funding acquisition.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

None.

Section: Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health, United States under Award # F31CA192478 . The content is solely the author's responsibility and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. Data collection and analysis were conducted in the School of Social Ecology at the University of California, Irvine. I thank Martha Feldman and Lari Wenzel for many conversations and perceptive feedback as this analysis was emerging; Katharina Dittrich, Kaaryn Gustafson, Connor Hannigan, and Mike Rowe for their thoughtful comments on the subsequent manuscript; and all the women who generously shared their breast cancer experiences. I am grateful to Torsten Schmid for sparking my interest in using Actor-Network Theory in my research, and to Katharina Dittrich, Olga Petrovskaya, and Mike Rowe for ongoing conversations and shared readings on Actor-Network Theory. Finally, I thank the two anonymous reviewers for their valuable insights.
