Title: Patient participation in priority setting: Co-existing participant roles


Abstract: Abstract

Reflecting a ‘participatory turn’ in healthcare, a variety of activities have been adopted in many countries to harness the views of patients, relatives and service users. While celebrated as a way of empowering patients and increasing the legitimacy of decisions that impact on patient care, critics contend that practices of patient participation often fall short of the ideals they purport to implement. In this article, we investigate how patients' participation in medical priority setting corresponds with the regulative ideals of deliberation and how the practices of participation influence the ability of patients to make their voices heard. Building on document analysis and semi-structured interviews with 12 patient representatives and four scientific officers in the Danish Medicines Council, the analysis demonstrates that conflicting notions of valid knowledge constituted a main challenge for patient participation. The study contributes to the literature on patient participation through a conceptualization of four co-existing participant roles: 1) compliant keepers of experiential knowledge , 2) lay experts investing in evidence production, 3) knowledge translators engaged in alliance building, and 4) demonstrators promoting public contestation. We suggest that a main challenge for PP initiatives is to take into account this variation in patients' engagement.

Section: 1. Introduction

Patient participation (PP) is increasingly promoted as a way of making healthcare more responsive to patient needs and ensuring the legitimacy of decisions that affect patient care ( Moreira, 2012 ; Prainsack, 2011 ). PP has both individual and collective dimensions. This article focuses on the collective dimension and refers to PP as collective activities in which patients, relatives, service users or patient representatives are actively engaged to shape the development of healthcare services ( Castro et al., 2016 ). Based on a case study of PP in health technology assessment (HTA) in Denmark, the aim of the article is to investigate which regulative ideals inform the organization of PP and how the resulting practices of participation influence the ability of patients to make their voices heard. HTA is a multidisciplinary process and method used to determine the value of health technologies to inform clinical guidelines and reimbursement decisions (HTA Glossary, 2021 ). During the past decade, PP has expanded markedly in HTA, but it remains a challenge to conceptualize how PP makes a difference to the evaluation of new technologies ( Boothe, 2019 ; Gagnon et al., 2021 ). In a recent review of PP in HTA, Gagnon et al. (2021) found that PP is done mostly through consultation or other forms of indirect involvement. The Danish case provides an opportunity for empirical investigation of direct participation of patients and patient representatives in HTA processes.
While PP has emerged as an imperative for informed, transparent and accountable decisions, critics contend that PP activities often fall short of the deliberative ideals they purport to implement ( Culyer and Lomas, 2006 ; Hashem et al., 2018 ; Kerr et al., 2007 ). It has been argued that PP may be challenged by tokenism or used to legitimize decisions already made by power elites ( Daykin et al., 2004 ; Harrison and Mort, 1998 ; Hashem et al., 2018 ; Williams et al., 2014 ). Further, critique has been raised that patients are not always recognized as epistemic agents and therefore lack the social power to influence public decisions ( Moes et al., 2020 ). Critique is a precondition for the scrutiny and continued evolvement of PP ( Irwin et al., 2013 ). Still, we see a risk that scholarly debate may be stifled by binary positions that pay little attention to the varieties of engagement that characterize PP. Proponents and critics of PP tend to render practices ‘good’ or ‘bad’ based on the level of perceived citizen power ( Arnstein, 1969 ; van de Bovenkamp and Trappenburg, 2009 ) or on the accuracy of representation ( Martin, 2008b ). Disputes may recur without the parties acknowledging that they build on contrasting ideals of democracy ( Weale, 2016 ).
This article draws upon and adds to a growing sociological literature that conceives of PP as a multivalent phenomenon, which is deliberatively promoted and shaped through the interaction of organizational constraints and the agency of patients and patient representatives ( Hunter et al., 2016 ; Martin, 2008b ; Nielsen and Langstrup, 2018 ; van de Bovenkamp and Zuiderent-Jerak, 2015 ; Weale et al., 2016 ). The article contributes to the literature on PP by conceptualizing four participant roles that demonstrate the variation in patients’ engagement. Patients may participate as: 1) compliant keepers of experiential knowledge , 2) lay experts investing in evidence production, 3) knowledge translators engaged in alliance building, and 4) demonstrators promoting public contestation. Some participants enact various roles to increase the chances of making their voices heard, while others remain compliant keepers of experiential knowledge. Acknowledging this variation, we suggest that various engagement initiatives may be needed to facilitate equal opportunities for PP.
In the remainder of the article, we first situate our study in social science literature on PP. Then, we briefly describe our case and methodological approach. The subsequent analysis is structured in three parts. The first part outlines the main regulative ideals that inform the organization of PP in Danish HTA. The second part examines how these regulative ideals are reflected in patients’ experience of PP. The third part examines the tactics that patient participants use to make their voices heard, and how these tactics shape their role as participants.

Section: 2. Democratic legitimacy, knowledge and participant roles

Contrasting views on PP often reflect diverging ideas about democratic legitimacy. Juxtaposing consensual and agonistic theories of democracy , Weale (2016) argues that the role of patients in HTA and other forms of medical priority setting is understood differently depending on the underlying conception of legitimacy in public decision-making. Building on a Habermasian ideal of deliberative democracy , most prescriptive models of priority setting presume that PP should build on consensus among actors that are affected by prioritizations ( Abelson et al., 2003 ). For example, the widely adopted Accountability for Reasonableness framework prescribes that for participation to be legitimate, it should be inclusive, equal, reasoned and voluntary and should include all stakeholder groups for decisions ( Baltussen et al., 2017 ; Daniels and Sabin, 1997 , 2008 ). Further, formal procedures are meant to ensure equal opportunities for participation and prevent pressure from organized interests (understood as ‘lobbies’). In contrast to this perspective, agonistic theories build on the presumption that democracy consists of ongoing contestations among social groups ( Kapoor, 2002 ). According to this view, any putative consensus may close down controversy too easily and suppress rather than acknowledge differing viewpoints ( Mouffe, 2005 ). Hence, in agonistic theories, contestation – such as protests – are considered legitimate democratic responses in situations when ‘reasonableness is for losers’, i.e. when institutional procedures, aimed at reconciling conflicting interests or values, carry a risk of marginalizing certain perspectives whilst appearing impartial ( Weale, 2016 ). In this article, our aim is not to judge the participatory processes based on either consensual or agonistic theories of democracy. Rather, we use these theories to identify the regulative ideals that guide the organization of PP in Denmark.
Preceded by long-standing debate about the ability of ‘ordinary’ minds to engage with complex public issues ( Dewey, 1927 ; Lippmann, 1925 ), the current debate on patients' participation in HTA reflects diverging ideas about valid knowledge. Often, the knowledge contribution of patients is framed as ‘experiential knowledge’, i.e. a form of embodied knowledge derived from direct experience of illness ( Borkman, 1976 ; Moreira, 2015 ). In contrast, prevailing notions of medical ‘evidence’ spring from a positivist conception of knowledge where methodological rigor serves to detach the production of knowledge from subjective perspectives ( Dehue, 2016 ). In participatory processes that cut across established lines of expertise, tension may arise between these contrasting conceptions of knowledge ( Bucchi and Neresini, 2008 ; Moes et al., 2020 ). For the purpose of this article, the distinction between ‘experiential knowledge’ and medical ‘evidence’ enables us to identify the ideas about valid knowledge that inform the organization of PP and conceptualize patients' views on the knowledge they contribute with in HTA.
To conceptualize patients' engagement in PP initiatives, we combine two categorizations of patient roles in relation to medical technology and research. First, Nielsen and Langstrup (2018) provide a categorization of patient roles based on the goals patients express and the ‘tactics’ they adopt to shape technology development . Their notion of tactics builds on seminal work by De Certeau (1984) and alerts analytical attention to the active attempts of patients to deal with constraints in PP initiatives. For instance, patients who employ an ‘activist tactic’ seek to use or challenge existing PP frameworks to pursue their goals. By contrast, patients who employ a ‘tactic of compliance’ seek to minimize the resources spent on PP but dutifully stand up when asked to help. Second, we build upon Rabeharisoa's (2003) characterization of patient-professional relationships, which focuses on the types of knowledge contributions that are made and valued by patients and their organizations. In the ‘auxiliary model’, patients are characterized by their possession of experiential knowledge , which is considered fundamentally distinct from and secondary to the specialized knowledge of scientific experts, which tends to be framed as ‘evidence’. In the ‘partnership model’, by contrast, classical distinctions between lay and expert knowledge are transgressed ( Rabeharisoa, 2003 ). For example, patients may actively engage in research activities, build a network among scientists to shape the provision of medical ‘evidence’ and pave the way for new therapeutic options ( Epstein, 1998 ; Navon, 2019 ; Walker et al., 2018 ).

Section: 3. Methods

This article springs from a shared interest of the authors in how the role of patients and patient representatives can be understood and supported in relation to priority setting. Based on pilot observations and interviews in the Danish Medicines Council (DMC) conducted as part of a larger research project, Sarah Wadmann noted that varied ideas of the role and input of patients and patient representatives were expressed. To explore this issue further, the present study was planned collaboratively by the authors and the research was conducted by Mette Steffensen and Christina Matzen during their thesis work.
The DMC was established in 2017 and is responsible for evaluating the cost-effectiveness of specialized therapies and prioritizing their adoption in the publicly funded Danish healthcare system ( Wadmann and Kjellberg, 2019 ). Reflecting a dual rationale of democratic representation and technocratic expert input ( Martin, 2008b ), patients and employees of patient organizations participate directly in the processes of the DMC in two ways. First, they are part of disease-specific expert committees that are responsible for evaluating the clinical effectiveness of new therapies. In the expert committees, the patient representatives engage with medical and pharmacological experts, like in the technology appraisal committees of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in England ( Hashem et al., 2018 ) and the Expert Drug Advisory Committees in Canada ( Boothe, 2019 ). Second, patient organizations have two of the 16 seats on the Council of the DMC, which is responsible for issuing recommendations about the uptake and use of new therapies.
As Martin (2008a) contends, the analysis of official discourse alone is insufficient to understand how the role of patients or other ‘publics’ is constituted through participation initiatives. This study therefore rests on a combination of document analysis and interviews. The authors collaborated with the secretariat of the DMC and patient organizations to gain access to documents about the organization of PP and make interview agreements. To gain insights into the regulative ideals that guide the organization of PP in the DMC, we retrieved 14 policy documents from the websites of the DMC, the regional authorities, and patient organizations. The documents included the DMC's methods handbook, publicly available meeting minutes from the Council, formal descriptions of tasks, procedures and principles guiding the DMC, and information material targeted at patient participants. The documents were identified through an interview with two scientific officers employed by the DMC and ‘snowballing’ ( Bowen, 2009 ; Greenhalgh and Peacock, 2005 ).
To learn about the practices of PP, we conducted semi-structured interviews with 12 patient participants who were either members of the DMC's expert committees or the Council (ID1-12). Some of the patient participants had a managerial position while others were regular patient members in their patient organization. In addition, we interviewed four scientific officers employed by the DMC (ID13-16). The interviews were undertaken from February 2019 to October 2020. The informants received written information about the study and gave consent before the interviews were conducted. To reduce errors of recall, we required patient participants to have experience of participation in the DMC one year prior to the interview. In addition, we used a strategy of heterogeneity sampling (cf. Patton, 2015 :235) to include patient participants with various roles in patient organizations, and recruited these informants from patient organizations of varying size because earlier research suggests that the networks and organizational resources of patient participants can influence their engagement ( Lopes et al., 2015 ; Moreira, 2015 ). None of the informants refused to participate. Table 1 provides an overview of the characteristics of patient participants interviewed for this study. Table 1 . Characteristics of interviewed patient participants. Informant ID Participation in DMC Rare vs. common disease Role in patient organization a Source of experiential knowledge Patient organization member count Patient organization staff count #1 Expert committee Common Managerial Direct Unknown 1–10 #2 Expert committee Common Staff Indirect 50,000–100,000 50–100 #3 Expert committee Rare Patient member Direct 1000–5000 None #4 Expert committee Common Patient member Direct 1000–5000 1–10 #5 Expert committee Rare Managerial Direct 1000–5000 50–100 #6 Expert committee Rare Managerial Indirect 1000–5000 10–20 #7 Expert committee Mix Managerial Direct 5000–10,000 +100 #8 Expert committee Rare Managerial Direct 500-1000 None #9 Expert committee Common Patient member Direct 100–500 None #10 Expert committee Common Managerial Direct 100–500 None #11 b Council Mix Managerial Indirect +100,000 20–30 #12 b Council Mix Managerial Indirect +100,000 +100 a In the smaller patient organizations, the patient participants who held a managerial position were typically also patients themselves or relatives. b These were umbrella organizations for several patient organizations.
Based on Sarah Wadmann'spilot interviews with two of the patient participants and two of the scientific officers, we identified key themes that were explored systematically in the subsequent interviews. The themes included: practices of patient recruitment, organization of PP, meeting preparation, participation and knowledge contributions (interview guide available upon request). Most interviews were conducted virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic. While virtual interviewing has some disadvantages in relation to building rapport ( Johnson et al., 2019 ), we experienced great willingness among informants to share their experiences. All interviews were recorded with the permission of informants and transcribed verbatim (quotes were translated to English for the purposes of this article). A draft manuscript was sent to the informants for approval of quotations and ‘member checking’ of the emergent analysis (cf. Birt et al., 2016 ). Due to Danish law, it was not possible to obtain ethics approval for this study as the Danish research ethics committees only assess biomedical research .
When analyzing the interview transcripts and documentary material, we refined the analytical themes in an iterative process in which we moved between empirical data and theoretical constructs ( Meyer and Ward, 2014 ). Based on a systematic reading and open coding of the entire material ( Meyer and Ward, 2014 ), we made initial descriptions of the regulative ideals and practical experiences of PP in the DMC. Noting that patient participants reacted differently to the challenges of participation they described, we made a tentative categorization of participants based on whether they embraced or rejected their proclaimed role as ‘experts’. Our analysis continued with a cross-sectional and categorical indexing in line with Attride-Stirling (2001) thematic network analysis. We refined the descriptions of PP ideals and practices through readings of studies on democratic ideals of PP (e.g. Weale, 2016 ) and patients' knowledge contributions in HTA processes (e.g. Moes et al., 2020 ; Moreira, 2015 ). The conceptualization of participant roles was further developed through comparisons with the categorizations made by Nielsen and Langstrup (2018) and Rabeharisoa (2003) . The combined attention to patient ‘tactics’ and ‘lay-expert divides’ eventually informed our conceptualization of the four participant roles (summarized in Table 2 ).

Section: 4. Ideals and practices of patient participation in Danish HTA

Three interrelated regulative ideals guided the organization of PP in the DMC. These were ideals of 1) deliberative consensus, 2) expert-driven decision-making, and 3) equal participation.
First, the DMC subscribed to an ideal of deliberative consensus. According to a scientific officer: The processes of the DMC are largely driven by ideas of consensus. Both in the Council and the expert committees in fact (…). This is what you strive for instead of minority statements (ID15-16).
In line with basic tenets of Habermasian deliberative democracy , the DMC strived for decisions to be made in unity following open discussion, and sought to ensure that patient participants were engaged in decision-making on par with other stakeholder groups (Danish Regions, 2017 ). Hence, patient participants were constituted as an interested and consensus-seeking party. While consensus was a goal in both the expert committees and the Council, the organizational prerequisites for achieving this goal differed. In the case of the Council, the Terms of Reference provided some guidance about voting rules and minority statements. In the expert committees, it was up to the scientific officers and individual committee members to find out how to ensure shared decision-making that would provide for ‘agreement about medical, pharmaceutical and patient-oriented assessments’ ( Danish Medicines Council, 2018 :3).
The second regulative ideal concerned expert-driven decision-making. According to the regional authorities who established the DMC, priority setting should build on ‘independent’ evaluations detached from the political governance of the healthcare system (Danish Regions, 2016 ). The former chair of the regions expressed a need for ‘a procedure where decisions about the adoption of a new therapy rest on professional evaluations – not political voting’ ( Nielsen, 2016 ). In line with what Martin (2008b) has termed the ‘technocratic rationale’ for public participation, patient participants were enrolled as ‘patient experts’. When the DMC was established, a stated goal was to include patients with direct disease experience in the expert committees ( Danish Medicines Council, 2017a :45). Over time, representatives from patient organizations were also included. Upon enrolment, patient participants were informed that they were expected to ‘contribute with experience-based knowledge from their own course of disease’ ( Danish Medicines Council, 2017b :45). An inspiration catalogue encouraged patient participants to prepare input related to disease experience, perceived treatment needs and acceptance of adverse effects ( Danish Medicines Council, 2017b :47). Hence, patient participants were constituted as experts on embodied, experiential knowledge. However, contrasting ideas of valid knowledge also guided the DMC. Notably, the evaluation processes were structured by a methods handbook that reflected scientific virtues of objectivity and disinterestedness. The methods handbook defined detailed principles for the retrieval and statistical analysis of clinical data, but left the role of patients' experiential knowledge largely unexamined, except for a broad statement that encouraged patient participants to provide input about trade-offs between treatment benefits and adverse effects ( Danish Medicines Council, 2017c :5).
The third regulative ideal concerned equal participation. The website of the DMC stated that patient participants were ‘part of the expert committees on an equal footing with other members’ ( Danish Medicines Council, 2020 ). This regulative ideal implied that patient participants were to be respected and acknowledged as ‘full members’. Two scientific officers explained: The cornerstone is that they [patient participants] are part of the expert committee as full members. They participate in everything; they are part of all mail correspondence. (…) They have full membership (ID15-16).
While patient participants were to be given the same formal opportunities, measures were also taken to ensure that participation would not become a ‘burden’ for patient participants ( Danish Medicines Council, 2020 ). The website of the DMC suggested that in some types of evaluations, patient participants could skip meetings that were ‘of a scientific nature’ or focused on the ‘review and discussion of medical literature’ ( Danish Medicines Council, 2020 ). Hence, patient participants were constituted as equally valued but also potentially vulnerable members in need of special protection.
Generally, patient participants valued the opportunity to be included in the DMC and expressed appreciation of the efforts made by the scientific officers to support their participation. Still, they encountered challenges.
Patient participants recognized the regulative ideal of consensus but found that it also carried a risk of concealing diverging viewpoints. A patient member of an expert committee explained that much effort was invested in reaching agreement: We put a lot of effort into agreeing on everything. They [the scientific officers] prefer that the expert committee agrees. They don't want to hand over anything to the Council that is not fully agreed upon (ID5).
According to the patient participants, consensus was often reached. However, what appeared as unanimous consensus decisions in the reports of the expert committees did not always reflect full agreement about the specific contents of the report. Sometimes, patient participants would accept a decision they did not fully agree with in order to ‘maintain a good relationship’ with other committee members (ID5). At other times, they refrained from pursuing viewpoints further because of a sense that the other committee members had closed the debate. A patient member of an expert committee explained: I can just feel when it [the debate] is closed. So, I don't carry on or get hysterical or anything. I'm able to see when I'm the minority, right? (ID8).
In such cases, the patient participants recognized a need for the process to go forward but expressed a wish that minority opinions could be accounted for in the committee reports. Finally, some of the patient participants dismissed the idea that they would ever disagree with a conclusion reached by other committee members because of difficulties understanding the discussions: Disagreeing is really difficult for me because I don't have the professional insight. (…) So, I have never felt that ‘I do not agree with this’ or ‘this is all wrong’. Because this would be wrong of me. At least, I feel it would be because these assessments are at a very high scientific and professional level (ID3).
Based on a feeling of incompetence, these patient participants questioned their authority to disagree.
When asked to exemplify how their input could make a difference for the evaluation of new medicines, patient participants suggested four main types of contributions. First, knowledge about disease manifestations . Patient participants explained that they could stimulate awareness about the variety and gradient of symptoms. For instance, they could provide insights about less severe variations of a disease that hospital-based clinicians would rarely encounter. Second, they could provide insights about the perceived acceptability of therapies . Patient participants explained that their input was important when weighing adverse effects against expected treatment benefits, when considering the implications of adverse effects for patients’ quality of life or when judging the value of new forms of medicine administration (e.g. pill vs. injection). Third, patient participants could contribute towards considerations about the evaluation of treatment effects . Some patient participants explained that clinicians and patients can have different ideas about what constitutes relevant treatment outcomes. For instance, a patient participant explained that the ability to communicate independently with friends and family meant a lot to patients but was not necessarily recognized as a valid treatment outcome by clinicians. Fourth, patient participants could contribute with insights about time perspectives . Patient participants noted that they were aware of how symptoms or side effects would vary over time, while clinicians often only see patients when they are affected severely. One patient participant suggested that patient participants who represented people with a rare disease might experience more opportunities to provide knowledge input due to limited experience among medical professionals with rare diseases (ID6).
While the topics of possible contributions mentioned by patient participants were well-aligned with the areas of patient input suggested by the DMC, there was a clash between knowledge types. The experiential knowledge, which patients were encouraged to contribute with, did not fit the prevailing ideas of robust ‘evidence’ in the DMC: You're taught to pose some questions and to tell about your own story and your experiences (…) but when patients enter the expert committees, they learn that this cannot be used for anything because it's anecdotes and narratives . Then, what's the use?” (ID11).
In the scientific committees, patient participants were invited as representatives of a particular kind of expertise (embodied experience). However, this idea of representation was challenged by the emphasis on statistically representative knowledge in the scientific committees, which made some patient participants doubt their ability to legitimately represent patient views. For example, when asked how patients could contribute in the HTA process, one patient member of a scientific committee pondered: ‘Of course they could ask me about my preferences [concerning the risk of adverse effects]. But this would be an individual judgment; not a broad assessment’ (ID9). The scientific officers also recognized the knowledge schism: Patients experience this schism that the DMC weighs RCT's [randomized controlled trials] highly and then, there may be some patient-reported data that we think don't have the same validity as an RCT (ID15-16).
While the scientific officers were aware of this tension, they had limited possibilities for addressing it because the methods handbook did not provide for the inclusion of experiential forms of knowledge.
Generally, patient participants felt respectfully treated in the DMC. A patient member of an expert committee expressed a commonly experienced sense of equal human worth: I think it's really nice that we're being heard. I don't feel that we're looked down on as patient representatives, not at all (ID10).
Still, several of the patient participants felt ill-equipped to participate as full members. A patient participant pondered: Involvement is the right word, I think. I feel involved because I receive all the meeting material and can attend the whole meeting etc. But I wouldn't say I've been given decision-making power [in Danish medbestemmelse ], I guess (ID4).
Literally translated, the Danish notion of ‘medbestemmelse’ means ‘co-deciding’. Hence, for this patient participant, involvement did not equal participation in the sense of having a say in shared decision-making. While all the interviewed patient participants appreciated the formal means of inclusion as a symbol of interpersonal respect, this did not necessarily translate into shared decision-making because it was difficult for patients to comprehend the meeting material and follow the discussions. ‘There is really a lot of reading material and it's very difficult to read’, as a patient member of an expert committee noted (ID10).
The scientific officers were aware of these challenges too. Two of them expressed uncertainty about how to address this issue: Sometimes, we try to ask: ‘What do you think about this?’ Or: ‘Would this be acceptable?’ But I feel a bit uneasy putting them in the spotlight like this … Ideally, patients are to influence the choice of outcome measures and the definition of clinically important effect differences. But it requires that they actually understand what these terms mean. What is an absolute risk reduction or a PFS (progression free survival), for instance? (ID13-14).
Using the metaphor of putting patients ‘in the spotlight’, these two scientific officers expressed uneasiness about possibly exposing a patient's inability to understand the highly technical language used in the expert committees. These two scientific officers explained that they devised individual solutions to increase the scientific literacy of patient participants (e.g. offering individual teaching sessions) (ID13-14). According to patient participants, other scientific officers sought to make patient participants feel comfortable by emphasizing that they were not required to read and understand everything (e.g. ID4, ID9). However, such attempts by the officers of the DMC to lift the burden of participation were interpreted by other patient participants as misguided considerations. A patient member of an expert committee commented: I would've liked them (the DMC) to be more ambitious on behalf of patient representatives. I definitely think we can bring more to the table (ID2).
Likewise, another patient participant expressed surprise that no one asked about their viewpoints regarding the meeting material: ‘We are not required to read it. (…) No one is asking, have you read it, or what do you think about it?’ (ID4). Hence, the well-intended efforts of the scientific officers were interpreted by some patient participants as a lack of interest or neglect of their role.
Apparently, small gestures made a big difference for patients’ experience of equal participation. Comparing experiences from two expert committees, a patient participant emphasized how direct questions and eye contact from the scientific officers in one of the committees made an important difference: In one of the committees, the scientific officers were good at asking: ‘Do you have anything to add?’ before they closed the discussion. Then they looked at us directly, the patient representatives. That enabled us to open up and add anything we hadn't had the opportunity to say yet (ID5).
Rather than feeling exposed, the direct address and nonverbal signals of the scientific officers made the patient participants feel seen.
The frictions between the regulative ideals and the practical experiences of participation prompted the patient participants to employ various tactics that shaped their role as participants. In the following, we outline four participant roles emerging in the interplay of patient tactics and organizational constraints. The participant roles are ‘ideal types’ in Weber's sense of the term; i.e. they are analytical heuristics that foreground certain characteristics of the expressed goals and practices of patient participants ( Weber, 2019 ). The various roles require more or less resources of patients and their organizations, are oriented towards various goals, can be expected to provide different opportunities for patients to influence decision-making, and carry various risks (see Table 2 ). Table 2 . Overview of participant roles. Participant role Compliant keepers of experiential knowledge Lay experts engaged in evidence production Alliance-building knowledge translators Demonstrators promoting public contestation Patient tactics Compliance Evidence production Alliance building Protest Goals of participation Interpersonal respect Direct influence on decision outcomes Long-term influence on evaluation frameworks Direct influence on decision outcomes Lay-expert divide Reproduced Reproduced Transgressed Reproduced Arena of participation Formal forum of deliberation Formal forum of deliberation Formal forum of deliberation and informal encounters Public debate Risks for patient participants Patient concerns may be overlooked Resources may be wasted Allegations of lobbyism Deliberative processes may be undermined
Some patient participants settled with what they denoted a ‘minimal’ role in the expert committees. Realizing the scientific character of the meetings, these patient participants expressed an inability to contribute. For instance, one of them commented that the meeting material ‘is not made for me’ and concluded that he was not in a position to contribute because he was ‘not at the same level’ as the other committee members (ID3). These patient participants reacted by delegating authority and decision-making power to medical committee members, based on the understanding that these were the ‘real experts’: ‘I don't think you should dispute with the physicians because it's still the physician who has the expertise’, as one patient participant stated (ID10). Another commented: They sum up some data and do some statistics (…) and in the end I just need to believe that it’s true. (…) I just got to believe that everyone has an interest in getting some better medicine (ID4).
For these patient participants, the knowledge schism did not cause frustration because they did not accept their proclaimed role as patient ‘experts’. Rather, they relied on their trust in the skills and motives of the professionals. One expert committee member noted: ‘When the discussion gets really nerdy, I just go and grab a coffee’ (ID1). When asked about their own role in the committees, they tended to define it as active listening: As patients we cannot really contribute with anything but quality of life . And this isn't discussed that often at the meetings. (…) But it's also interesting just to listen – even if it appears like code-language now and then (ID10).
Another patient participant commented that she had ‘no responsibility but to show up and note if anyone says something odd’ (ID4). Akin to what Nielsen and Langstrup (2018) call the ‘compliance’ tactic, these patient participants invested limited resources in PP. For instance, they spent limited time on meeting preparation to prioritize other activities like patient counselling (ID1). During meetings, they would ask clarifying questions and tell about their experiences if asked directly for input. Reproducing a classical divide between lay and expert knowledge, patient participants were constituted as compliant keepers of experiential knowledge alongside the professionals who were cast as the ‘real experts’ akin to what Rabeharisoa (2003) calls the ‘auxiliary model’ of patient-professional relationships.
Recognizing that their experiential knowledge had limited bearing on the evaluation of new therapies, some patient participants sought to adapt their knowledge contributions in line with prevailing ideals of scientific expertise. A member of an expert committee explained: We do what we can to bring documentation because it has become very clear that this is what they (the DMC) care about. Of course, it's frustrating to learn that it’s not enough that we explain how it matters for our quality of life to get this medication. (…) They cannot really take note of this because there's no quality of life measurements to back this up. (…) So, the more they insisted that there was no evidence, the more we've done to supply as much documentation as we possibly could (ID5).
In acceptance of the fact that their personal experiences was not regarded as statistically representative knowledge, some patient participants put a lot of effort into using their personal networks to gather ‘a hell of a lot of patient experiences’, as one patient participant expressed it (ID8). Most drew on existing local networks while a few entered international patient networks to accumulate insights about patient preferences or patient-reported outcomes. Some received help from their organizations to search for research publications or commission research. These tactics of evidence production served to enable patient participants to discuss medical issues on the medical specialists' terms and contributed to constituting patient participants as ‘lay experts’ (cf. Epstein, 1998 ). Like the tactic of compliance, the tactic of evidence production also reproduced a divide between lay experience and scientific expertise – but with the key difference that patient participants focused on acquiring scientific expertise.
Some patient participants used the formal set-up of the DMC to establish relationships and shape the viewpoints of other parties to obtain long-term change. They engaged a tactic of alliance building. For instance, a patient participant explained that the two patient representatives on their expert committee would formulate a joint plan and reach out to specific medical experts before committee meetings: We read the material and lay out a strategy. (…) Sometimes I also talk to other members of the committee. I think these talks may prepare them a little to say: I agree with that (ID5).
Through such informal encounters, the patient participants hoped to influence overarching conceptions of treatment outcomes or evaluation procedures. According to patient participants, this was a continuous process that extended far beyond the assessment of specific therapies: Our input might not change the bigger picture at present, but it can have an impact in the long run. It will appear somehow in a protocol someday (ID2).
Patient participants explained that they worked continually to raise awareness and shape conceptions about outcome measurements. For instance, they would pinpoint shortcomings of particular measurement instruments, make suggestions about which dimensions to include when measuring the functional capabilities of patients and seek to influence the definition of thresholds on measurement scales. One patient participant explained that alliance building within the expert committee was used to levy pressure on pharmaceutical companies to include additional outcome measures in clinical trials (ID4). Another indicated how patient participants and professional committee members collaborated to find ways of convincing the Council of the DMC about the value of new therapies: In the beginning, I wondered whether it might become a sort of struggle between the professionals and us as patient representatives. But I definitely think it's a collaboration (…) The disagreements have rather been between the committee and the Council (ID2).
Based on regulative ideals of deliberative democracy, the networking activities of patient participants might be dismissed as ‘lobbying’. For patient participants, however, alliance building rendered participation meaningful even when they experienced little ability to influence the evaluation of single therapies because it helped them to focus on longer-term goals. As patient participants actively sought to translate their experiential knowledge into categories that would lend themselves to scientific investigation, this role of patient participants transgressed the classical divide between lay and expert knowledge. Akin to what Rabeharisoa (2003) has called the ‘partnership model’ of patient-professional relationships, the patient participants took on a role as specialist partners in their own right and used their experiential knowledge to shape scientific developments. Hence, patient participants were constituted as knowledge translators in pursuit of long-term change.
Finally, patient participants reacted by engaging a tactic of public contestation. Seizing the possibility of making minority statements, the patient participants in the Council used this option a few times to signal publicly that they did not endorse the consensus obtained among remaining members. According to patient members of the expert committees, they did not have similar options to express diverging viewpoints within the participatory framework. More often, public contestation occurred through social media, national news or the political system. For instance, patient participants encouraged journalists to cover ongoing evaluations, expressed their hopes and concerns during interviews, and occasionally arranged open protests when they found no way forward within the formal framework of the DMC. Hence, patient participants were constituted as demonstrators promoting public contestation. This role of participation also reproduced the lay-expert divide. However, as news media and political debate lend themselves easily to patient narratives, the experiential knowledge of patient participants tended to be foregrounded while the arguments of scientific experts appeared secondary.
Patient participants who delegated authority to medical committee members and engaged as ‘compliant keepers of experiential knowledge’ rarely employed other roles. These patient participants came from small organizations with limited staff resources and had not completed scientific training as part of education or work. The patient participants who conceived of themselves as ‘experts’ on par with other committee members concomitantly engaged the roles of ‘lay experts’, ‘knowledge translators’ and ‘demonstrators’. These patient participants all had some form of scientific training or had established research network through their organization.
Several of the patient participants who engaged multiple roles described a development from a focus on short-term to longer-term goals. As they became acquainted with the methods of the DMC, they would mobilize their network or draw on their own scientific training and engage as ‘lay experts’. However, the tactic of evidence production held no guarantee of direct influence on the evaluation of specific therapies because the kind of research that patients and their organizations were able to provide did not always align with the principles laid out in the methods handbook of the DMC. Over time, patient participants therefore tended to emphasize the role as ‘knowledge translators’ in pursuit of longer-term goals. For example, they would build alliances to foster the development and use of particular outcome measures. One of the patient participants explained that she initially focused much on gathering evidence about patients' treatment preferences but gradually put more emphasis on quality of life measurements as she realized that these data could make a real difference but were often missing from the data submitted to the DMC by the manufacturers. ‘It provides a basis for our future work’, she noted (ID2). Likewise, other patient participants became engaged in the translation of patient experiences into measurable dimensions of ‘functional ability’ as they found existing outcome measures to be too narrowly defined (ID7, ID5).
Alongside the efforts of fostering longer-term change, open protests were sometimes used to raise public awareness about the evaluation of specific therapies. Based on the ideal of deliberative consensus, patients’ tactics of public contestation might be dismissed as illegitimate forms of participation. Yet, patient participants experienced no apparent conflict. In the words of one expert committee member: We get a possibility to express when we feel the DMC is wrong. And we do think we're allowed to do so even though we are involved where the decisions are made (ID6).
According to these patient participants, public contestation enabled them to voice concern when their viewpoints did not fit within the framework of the DMC. Yet patient participants also stressed that contestation needed to be used with caution and sought to foster an understanding of this among their constituents. A patient representative in the Council of the DMC explained: We have a dialogue with the patient organizations when something is at stake. Sometimes, we need to explain afterwards why we didn't make a minority statement. Of course, it's difficult for some to accept this, but we cannot make minority statements every time (ID12).
According to this participant, they had to ‘follow the majority opinion from time to time’ and display their willingness to play by the rules to remain legitimate members of the deliberative forum while they also experienced a need to challenge majority decisions to remain legitimate representatives of patient interests (ID12). Similarly, a patient member of a scientific committee noted: ‘I make an effort to influence decisions but sometimes it's wiser to give in – because you also need to cooperate’ (ID5). Hence, public contestation occurred alongside the deliberative process in a complex balancing act.

Section: 5. Discussion

This analysis suggests that formal ideals of consensus-based deliberation are insufficient to foster equal participation in knowledge-intensive decision-making processes like HTA. Epistemic conflicts between scientific ideals and the experiential knowledge of patients limited the ability of some patient participants to engage in discussions; what Moes et al. (2020) call ‘epistemic injustice’. This challenge is not unique to the Danish setting as previous studies of PP in HTA processes in the Netherlands, England and Canada demonstrate ( Boothe, 2019 ; Hashem et al., 2018 ; Moes et al., 2020 ; van de Bovenkamp and Zuiderent-Jerak, 2015 ). Others have attributed unintended consequences of PP to attempts at manipulation or suppression (e.g. Harrison and McDonald, 2008 ; Williams et al., 2014 ). This study suggests that the challenges experienced by patient participants related to conflicting principles in the framework that guided PP activities; notably the schism between the requested knowledge input from patient participants and prevailing ideas of what counted as ‘evidence’. Both patient participants and the scientific officers sought to deal with this schism by developing their own tactics. Direct participation of patient participants in HTA is a relatively novel practice in Denmark. Research from settings with more extensive experience, such as Canada, suggest that stakeholders' ideas about whether and how to include patient participants in HTA processes may converge somewhat over time, though uncertainty about how to use the input of patient participants prevails ( Boothe, 2019 ).
This article contributes to the sociological literature on PP by conceptualizing four co-existing participant roles emerging in the interaction of organizational constraints and the tactics employed by patient participants to deal with these constraints: 1) compliant keepers of experiential knowledge, 2) lay experts investing in evidence production, 3) knowledge translators engaged in alliance building, and 4) demonstrators promoting public contestation. The identification of multiple, co-existing forms of participation raises questions about the goals and rationales of PP. Hierarchical classifications of PP (e.g. Arnstein, 1969 ; Gauvin et al., 2010 ) build on the premise that more patient and citizen control is always better (cf. van de Bovenkamp and Zuiderent-Jerak, 2015 ). This study shows that patient participants pursue different goals and have different abilities to engage. The small sample of this study does not allow for firm conclusions about how the characteristics of patient participants may influence participation. We encourage further research on how characteristics like the educational background of participants, the size and resources of the patient organization, the rarity of the disease, and the availability of active treatment for a given disease may influence the engagement of various participant roles. We do not judge the various participant roles based on an a priori ranking of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ participation (cf. Irwin et al., 2013 ). Rather, we suggest that our categorization of participant roles may foster consideration about how to take into account the variation in the resources and orientation of patient participants.
The challenges of PP are unlikely to be solved by confronting one principled critique with another. Rather than providing principal prescriptions, we have therefore sought to ‘re-describe’ the practices of PP to encourage reflection about practical challenges and possible solutions (cf. Pols, 2015 ). The study suggests a need to explicitly address the schism about valid forms of knowledge that challenges PP in Danish HTA and beyond. Internationally, there are a few examples of HTA agencies experimenting with co-construction approaches to PP, which show some direction for how the integration of patients' experiential knowledge and medical ‘evidence’ may be supported in more institutionalized ways rather than relying on the network and resources of individual patient participants and their organizations ( Pomey et al., 2020 ). If HTA agencies are not prepared to let the experiential knowledge of individual patient participants influence the evaluation of medical technologies , one strategy could be to collaborate with public authorities and patient organizations to set up infrastructures that will support the production of statistically representative knowledge of patient experiences in accordance with acknowledged scientific standards. Procedural amendments can also be considered. For example, active exploration and documentation of minority opinions could be included in deliberative processes to address the risk that the strive for consensus may conceal diverging viewpoints. Lastly, small and perhaps unrecognized gestures, such as body language, seemed to make a difference for experiences of inclusion in this study, which suggests a need for future studies to investigate not only what is said in deliberative settings, but also how it is said (see also Schonhardt-Bailey, 2017 ).
To conclude, the regulative ideal of deliberative consensus that guides Danish HTA processes and other PP initiatives is unlikely to provide for equal participation unless it is supported by mechanisms that explicitly explore and account for minority opinions, and that clarify the types of knowledge contributions that are expected from participants. We suggest that scholarly and policy debate on PP may move beyond binary oppositions by acknowledging the co-existing forms of participation outlined in this study. Further research could fruitfully explore the conditions that prompt patient participants to engage certain participant roles, and the implications for participants of adopting various roles.

Section: Sample Credit author statement

Mette B. Steffensen: Conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft. Christina L. Matzen: Conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft. Sarah Wadmann: Conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft, writing – revision.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

Sarah Wadmann conducts contract research for public and private institutions, including government agencies and pharmaceutical companies, as part of her employment at The Danish Center for Social Science Research – VIVE. After the completion of the current study, Mette B. Steffensen has been employed by the Danish Ministry of Industry, Business and Financial Affairs and Christina L. Matzen has been employed by AbbVie.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank all the informants who contributed to the study and also wish to thank Lea Larsen Skovgaard, Dixie Louise Strand, Henriette Langstrup, Mette Brehm Johansen and the reviewers for thoughtful comments on earlier versions of the manuscript. The study has been supported by an unrestricted research grant from the Novo Nordisk Foundation ( NNF17OC0026466 ). The foundation has not been involved in the preparation of this article or the underlying research.
