Title: ‘Poverty can break a home’: Exploring mechanisms linking cash plus programming and intimate partner violence in Ghana


Abstract: Abstract

A growing body of research in West Africa and globally shows that cash transfers can decrease intimate partner violence (IPV). The purpose of this study was to explore how the government of Ghana's Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) 1000 program, an unconditional cash transfer plus health insurance premium waiver targeted at pregnant women and women with young children , influenced IPV experiences. Existing program theory hypothesizes three pathways through which cash transfers influence IPV, including: 1) increased economic security and emotional wellbeing ; 2) reduced intra-household conflict; and 3) increased women's empowerment. Informed by this theory, we conducted qualitative in-depth interviews with women in northern Ghana (n = 30) who were or had been beneficiaries of LEAP 1000 and had reported declines in IPV in an earlier impact evaluation. We used narrative and thematic analytic techniques to examine these pathways in the context of gender norms and household dynamics, as well as a fourth potential pathway focused on interactions with healthcare providers. Overall, the most prominent narrative was that poverty is the main determinant of physical IPV and that by reducing poverty, LEAP 1000 reduced conflict and violence in households and communities and improved emotional wellbeing. Participant narratives also supported pathways of reduced intra-household conflict and increased empowerment, as well as interplay between these three pathways. However, participants also reflected that cash transfers did not fundamentally change gender norms or reduce gender-role strain in a context of ongoing economic insecurity, which could limit the gender transformative potential and sustainability of IPV reductions. Finally, while health insurance increased access to healthcare, local norms, shame , fear, and minimal provider screening deterred IPV disclosure to healthcare providers. Additional research is needed to explore interplay between pathways of impact across programs with different design features and implementation contexts to continue informing effective programming to maximize impact.

Section: 1. Introduction

A growing body of evidence shows that cash transfer programs - direct cash payments to groups often targeted based on eligibility criteria related to poverty and livelihood indicators - are promising structural interventions to reduce intimate partner violence (IPV) in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). In a mixed-method review of 22 studies of cash transfer programs (14 quantitative and 8 qualitative), nearly three-fourths (73%) reported decreases in IPV ( Buller et al., 2018 ). In addition, a meta-analysis of 14 quantitative studies showed average decreases ranging from 2 to 4 percentage points across measures of controlling behaviors, emotional and physical/sexual IPV ( Baranov et al., 2021 ). This is notable as cash transfer programs operate at-scale, primarily target the poorest and most vulnerable segments of the population, are cost-effective, and facilitate beneficial outcomes across a wide range of poverty and wellbeing outcomes ( Beegle et al., 2018 ). However, as the core objectives of cash transfer programs are typically poverty-related, there is limited research on the pathways of impact on secondary outcomes such as IPV. In addition, few rigorous qualitative studies have assessed how context, including gender norms and the conditions in which women and their families live, shape these pathways.
Buller et al. (2018) summarized the evidence on mechanisms underlying impacts of cash on IPV and developed a program theory elaborating three main pathways: 1) economic security and emotional wellbeing; 2) intra-household conflict; and 3) women's empowerment (see Fig. 1 ). The first pathway operates at the household level, whereby increased economic security resulting from the cash transfer translates into increased emotional wellbeing and reduced poverty-related stress for all members, reducing poverty-related triggers for IPV perpetration. The second pathway is a couple-level dynamic, whereby the influx of cash into the household can reduce daily conflict over scarce resources, resulting in decreased triggers for IPV. However, there may be a countervailing effect if there are disputes over how the cash is used, including for temptation goods (e.g. alcohol and tobacco), resulting in increased conflict. The third pathway operates at the individual level, where women recipients of cash and/or complementary services may have increased financial or social standing inside and outside the household, leading to shifts in agency and power in the household. The resulting impact on IPV depends on partners' reactions to these changes, either accepting shifts in power (leading to potential reductions in IPV) or taking actions to counteract the shifts via asserting his authority (leading to potential increases in IPV). While these mechanisms are typically tested individually, Buller et al. (2018) acknowledge that in practice, there could be interactions between mechanisms, or multiple mechanisms operating in the same setting which may offset or enhance each other. Download: Download high-res image (756KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Program theory linking cash transfers and intimate partner violence. Source: Buller et al., (2018) .
A small qualitative literature provides support for the economic security and emotional wellbeing pathway, with improvements in economic security benefiting the entire household ( Buller et al., 2016 , Lees et al., 2020 ; Litwin et al., 2019 ; Yildirim et al., 2014 ). However, in some cases, improvements in emotional wellbeing were specifically accrued to the individual targeted to receive cash, for example men in Mali ( Lees et al., 2020 ). The study in Mali also unpacked drivers of different types of IPV indicating cash transfers reduced physical IPV due to reductions in household tensions and disputes but had limited effects on sexual IPV or controlling behaviors, which were more likely to be driven by norms around male authority ( Lees et al., 2020 ). Some studies have generated insights into the intra-household conflict and empowerment pathways. For example, in Ecuador and Turkey, where women are the direct beneficiaries of cash transfer programs, there were beneficial effects of cash on household conflict ( Buller et al., 2016 ; Yildirim et al., 2014 ). These studies also generated narratives supporting multiple pathways of women's empowerment, including those related to increased financial independence, decision-making ability, freedom of movement, confidence, and knowledge—the latter in Ecuador due to complementary programming of nutrition training, which led to increases in respect and admiration from partners ( Buller et al., 2016 ). In contrast to these positive findings, Litwin et al. (2019) identified possible conflicts over use of cash and men feeling threatened when women received cash in Brazil's Bolsa Familia program. However, these findings were primarily reported by staff of women's resource centers and community members, rather than women reporting on their own lived experiences .
Few studies have expanded on the pathways laid out by Buller et al. (2018) , specifically in the context of complementary programming or longer-term pathways, including possible changes in partnerships if women are able to exit abusive relationships. One exception is a study examining a cash transfer targeting secondary-school aged girls in South Africa showed a 34% reduction in 12-month physical IPV ( Kilburn et al., 2018 ). The authors hypothesize this impact was at least partially due to girl's choosing not to engage in sexual partnerships, thus reducing the opportunity for IPV to occur. In addition, a mixed-methods study of Ethiopia's Productive Safety Net Programme found that livelihood programming and gender-transformative programming, such as engaging men in nutrition behavior change, were promising complementary activities for improving gender relations and decreasing IPV ( Ranganathan et al., 2021 ). However, qualitative findings highlight tensions related to women's labor availability to complete cash/food-for-work activities along with household domestic tasks.
We draw upon qualitative research to continue expanding understanding of the pathways from cash to IPV reduction in the context of the Ghana Livelihoods Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) 1000 program. LEAP 1000 is a government-run unconditional cash-transfer program paired with health insurance premium waivers, targeted at poor households with pregnant women and women with children under 12 months. The LEAP 1000 impact evaluation showed significant reductions in 12-month frequency of emotional, physical and combined IPV, but no impacts on frequency of sexual IPV alone ( Peterman et al., 2021 ). Additionally, for women in non-polygamous marriages, the program resulted in modest reductions of any experience of 12-month IPV ranging from 11% for emotional IPV to 15% for physical IPV. While the LEAP 1000 evaluation documented an important protective effect of the program on IPV, it was not able to fully explore pathways of impact or the role of program design and contextual factors. We also explored a fourth pathway focused on complementary services, specifically the role of the health insurance premium waiver as a mechanism to enhance women's opportunity to interface with the health sector, which could enhance support related to IPV, deter IPV perpetration, or mitigate negative consequences.
To this end, we addressed the following three research questions: 1) What are community norms around gender in LEAP 1000 communities and how do they moderate impacts on IPV? 2) What are the pathways through which LEAP 1000 reduced IPV? 3) What is the contribution of the health insurance premium fee waiver to IPV reduction? We conclude with consideration of implications for both theory and cash transfer programs.

Section: 2. Methods

Ghana is divided into sixteen administrative regions subdivided into 260 metropolitan, municipal and district assemblies. The current study took place in two districts in northern Ghana, Garu Tempane in the Upper East region and Yendi in the Northern region. While the service and industry sectors are the largest contributors to the national economy, agriculture remains the predominant sector in northern Ghana.
LEAP was launched in 2008 by the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (MoGCSP) as a large-scale social protection program to address extreme poverty. It provides bimonthly unconditional cash payments ranging from 64 to 106 GH₵ (USD $10-$18) to extremely poor households with orphans and vulnerable children, elderly with no productive capacity, and persons with severe disability. A proxy means test is used to determine poverty eligibility. In 2011, the MoGCSP and National Health Insurance Authority integrated an annual premium fee waiver, including fees related to card processing, premiums, and renewals. However, participants must still take the initiative to enroll in the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS). By December 2020, LEAP was in all districts of Ghana and reached more than 350,000 households.
LEAP 1000 was piloted in 10 districts in northern Ghana, adding a fourth eligibility criteria to include extremely poor families with pregnant women or infants under the age of one year to improve nutrition and development in the 1000 days from conception through 24 months, a key development window.. A longitudinal mixed methods impact evaluation was conducted between 2015 and 2017 to determine the effects of LEAP 1000 on household well-being, including economic security and health outcomes ( Ghana LEAP 1000 Evaluation Team, 2018 ). Participants in the current study were recruited from the intervention cohort of the LEAP 1000 program. Payments to LEAP 1000 households began in 2015 and continued through and beyond the qualitative interviews conducted for the current study in 2019.
Women were eligible for the current study if they were: at least 18 years old; a current or past beneficiary of LEAP 1000 who participated in the impact evaluation; and reported that they had experienced physical IPV at baseline (2015) but not at endline (2017) in the quantitative survey of the impact evaluation. We purposively sampled women who reported a decline in physical IPV to learn about women's perceptions of factors that contributed to this decline, including but not limited to their participation in LEAP 1000. We also purposively sampled on household structure , aiming to include approximately half women in monogamous households and half in polygamous within each district. To facilitate fieldwork, the study team identified communities within each district that had the most overall eligible polygamous and monogamous participants. In each district, study coordinators made initial visits to obtain permission from local authorities to conduct research and connect with LEAP focal points, who facilitated introductions to eligible participants.
A total of 30 interviews were conducted, 15 in each district, in November 2019. Two female interviewers, each with prior experience and fluency in local languages, conducted the interviews in a private location of the participant's choosing to maintain privacy and minimize interruption. Building on our past experience conducting qualitative interviews with LEAP 1000 participants, the study team collaboratively developed a semi-structured guide including open-ended questions on 7 domains: 1) Community context; 2) Household context and social networks; 3) Impact of LEAP 1000 on household; 4) Relationship dynamics and communication; 5) LEAP 1000 and household dynamics; 6) Impact of LEAP on individual wellbeing and 7) Community Dynamics and Social Capital. Questions also probed on the hypothesized pathways of influence from cash to IPV in the Buller et al. (2018) program theory. Discussion of LEAP included the ‘plus’ component of health insurance enrollment and renewal to explore a fourth potential pathway related to the role of increased access to and engagement with health services; enrollment and renewal were asked about as well as verified by looking at the participant's insurance card. The interview guide was the starting point for interviews; interviewers were trained to engage in active listening and to probe for examples and clarifications beyond the guide.
While all participants reported a change in physical IPV, from “yes” at baseline to “no” at endline in the LEAP 1000 impact evaluation, no reference was made to this during recruitment or data collection for the current study to avoid putting words in women's mouth or re-traumatization. Questions about personal experiences with IPV were asked first at the community level and then at the household and couple levels. Participants were reminded that they did not have to talk about anything that they did not want to discuss. All interviews were audio recorded and transcribed directly to English.
Analysis began during fieldwork with fieldnotes to document key themes from interviews and relevant contextual observations regarding the recruitment and interview processes documented in a template based on the interview guide. The field team debriefed at the end of each day to discuss emerging themes and address challenges that came up during interviews. These meetings were also used to monitor saturation of themes, or the point at which themes begin to be repeated in the data and data collection becomes redundant, with minimal new information emerging ( Hennink et al., 2017 ). The final sample was determined based on the determination that saturation had been reached around the key questions of pathways of influence from cash to IPV.
Upon completion of fieldwork, we engaged in a combination of narrative and thematic analysis ( Maxwell and Miller, 2008 ). We began by reviewing fieldnotes and transcripts to create a narrative summary of participants' experiences with IPV and LEAP 1000 ( Sandelowski, 1995 ). We then developed a codebook that included topical codes (e.g. gender roles, relationship background), deductive codes derived from the cash and IPV program theory pathways (e.g. empowerment, economic security), and inductive codes that were identified during the preparation of narrative summaries (e.g. stress, community participation). All transcripts were systematically coded using Atlas.ti. We reviewed narrative summaries and code outputs comparatively based on household structure (polygamous and monogamous) and district, but we did not identify any noticeable differences in pathways across these strata and present findings together for both groups. Quotes include participants’ ages, number of children and household structure to provide context.
This study was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Boards at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the Navrongo Health Research Centre. Data collection followed best practices for interviewing on sensitive topics, including recruitment of female interviewers, providing specialized training on IPV, monitoring for signs of distress during interviews, maintaining privacy and offering de-identified referral cards to local services for all women and direct referrals to services in the case of adverse events or acute situations. Informed consent was obtained before all interviews and each participant received 2 bars of soap in appreciation of their participation.

Section: 3. Results

We recruited a sample of 30 participants, 15 in Yendi and 15 in Garu Tempane ( Table 1 ). Average age was 37 years in Yendi and 36 in Garu Tempane. In each district, 5 women were in polygamous households and 10 were in monogamous households. Average number of children per woman was 6 in Yendi and 5 in Garu Tempane. Households were larger on average (15 members) in Yendi than Garu Tempane (8 members). None of the participants in Yendi had ever gone to school while 4 women in Garu Tempane had received some schooling. Most women in Garu Tempane were farmers (n = 13) while the majority in Yendi reported being traders as well as doing farming (n = 9). All participants in this sample reported having enrolled in NHIS , though a few had expired cards at the time of the interview. Table 1 . Description of study participants (n = 30) a . Empty Cell District Garu Tempane (n = 15) Yendi (n = 15) Average age (years) 36 37 Household structure Polygamous 5 5 Monogamous 10 10 Average number of children 5 6 Average number of household members 8 15 Average number of co-wives (among polygamous sample) 1 1 Education Ever went to school 4 0 Occupation Farmer 13 6 Trader 1 9 a Eligibility criteria: being a current of past beneficiary of the LEAP 1000 cash transfer program and reported “yes” to physical IPV at baseline but “no” at endline in the quantitative survey of the LEAP 1000 impact evaluation.
We first describe participants’ perceptions of gender norms and roles and IPV in their communities to provide context to our assessment of the role of LEAP 1000 on IPV reduction. Next, we review key findings about the pathways through which LEAP 1000 reduced IPV, including economic security and wellbeing, intra-household conflict, and empowerment, and interplays between the three. Lastly, we consider a fourth pathway related to the health insurance premium waiver component.
When asked about gender roles in their communities, participants consistently described men as having ultimate power and control in marital relationships. Women rely on marriage to meet their gender roles, including being a mother, and are expected to be obedient and subservient to men. Participants in both monogamous and polygamous households explained that their ability to leave a marriage was limited by pressure to adhere to these roles, When you get married and you do whatever your husband asks you to do and you don't refuse him, then you will have a successful marriage. But when you refuse what he tells you then you cannot sit or be with him … it leads to separation and if you are not careful you won't get a better man to marry. (30, 6 children, polygamous)
The reference to the challenges of finding a “better man” in this quote highlights the value placed on marriage for women in this setting. While there was some reference to separation and divorce, overall participants reflected that they felt limited options or desire to leave their partners.
Norms around provider roles were also salient and offer context to our analysis. Participants described the paradox that men are expected to be the main economic provider of the household, but that many men cannot fulfill this role due to limited economic opportunities. Men who had multiple wives were viewed as being especially limited as providers, though this critique was sometimes made by women in monogamous households speaking from opinion rather than lived experience . In addition to men's limited economic opportunities, a repeated phrase used across interviews was that “ men only give maize ”, which refers to the normative expectation across ethnic groups that men are responsible for providing staple foods, specifically cereals, and women are responsible for legumes and other ingredients, as reflected below All is about poverty in that the day you are to prepare a meal without having money, you will find it difficult to get money. In a village, the man doesn't give additional money for cooking aside from the maize he provides. Sending it to mill, getting vegetables and other ingredients for the soup is all the wife's responsibility, so if you don't have [money] you have to go out and borrow. Your husband doesn't understand that today I have to support my wife because she is not having [money]. (55, 6 children, polygamous)
As reflected in this quote, men and women had clear roles with regard to household food consumption, which create challenges in this context of extreme poverty. Women experienced stress and tensions with their partners when they didn't have resources to meet their responsibilities. Participants also emphasized the need for “patience” to negotiate managing poverty with their husbands, or “ there will be a fight every day ”, reflecting the added burden on women to prevent conflict related to the limited economic opportunities and normative expectations around provider roles.
When asked about norms around IPV, participants described IPV as both normalized but also shameful and increasingly less acceptable. Physical and sexual IPV were not viewed equally, with one woman saying “ they will bring you back ” if you seek help from your family related to sexual IPV. Non-consensual sex was viewed as part of being a wife and sustaining a marriage. Another expression of this was the distinction made between daytime and nighttime violence, with daytime violence usually referring to physical IPV and nighttime referring to sexual IPV. Several women explained that men wait to beat their wives at night to avoid shame and scrutiny If it's in the morning people will come to stop the fight and ask of the cause, but if it's in the night, no one will intervene. They say at night it's not usually good to intervene when a man and the wife are quarrelling. (55, 6 children, polygamous)
This quote highlights how attitudes towards IPV and acceptability of bystander intervention are highly contextualized, dynamic, and nuanced.
The primary driver of IPV identified by participants was poverty and the consequent stress and household conflict. Many women mentioned that asking their husbands for money was one of the main triggers of conflict and IPV in their household. They also directly linked the relationship between poverty and IPV to the strain men feel related to their inability to fill their provider role, as explained below, Poverty can break a home … If the man could afford to do all his responsibilities, there would not be any fight between him and his wife. (36, 5 children, polygamous)
Another participant echoed how men's inability to regularly provide economically impacted household dynamics, I think it's poverty that's causing us to live the way we live. We see how the government workers handle their wives, but poverty won't permit us to live like that. I'm sure if my husband had money, he would take better care of me than he is doing now.’ (39, 7 children, monogamous)
The comparison to “government workers”, referring to salaried workers who are perceived to have more economic stability, reflects women's perception that their own unstable economies drove tensions in their households and men to engage in violence. Other drivers of IPV included women denying men sex, fatigue causing impatience, disagreement about use of violence towards children, and jealousy and disagreements with co-wives.
Consistent with both quantitative and qualitative findings from the LEAP 1000 impact evaluation ( Ghana LEAP 1000 Evaluation Team, 2018 ), nearly all participants attributed improved economic conditions in their households to the cash, in particular food security , starting a small business or investing in farming, taking care of children's health and education expenses, and coping with shocks. As a result, women felt less stress, worry, and more “ peace of mind ”. Summarizing LEAP 1000 impact, one participant said, “ Now I sleep well, I eat well, I have put on weight and I don't think much ”. In addition to the impact on their own wellbeing, women also described that LEAP 1000 impacted men's wellbeing since women were able to take care of some of the household expenses, in particular those related to the children, as reflected below He is happy I'm with LEAP. At first it was hard for him to get money to buy children's sandals. It was such a pity. But now I can just take the money to buy those sandals so that the child will not walk bare foot. It has covered his shame and we are happy. (35, 4 children, monogamous)
It was noted by some women, however, that the impact on wellbeing was temporary, “ your mind is stable until it (the money) finishes ”, and that while things were better, “ you still have problems ”. Despite these limitations, there was a recurring narrative across most participants that since joining LEAP 1000, their economic conditions had improved leading to improved overall wellbeing.
Echoing the perception that poverty was a key driver of conflict and IPV described earlier, the most commonly mentioned mechanism of influence of LEAP 1000 on IPV was by reducing poverty, Truly speaking, at first the relationship between women and their husbands wasn't good, but now it is better because of the LEAP support. I can say it is … poverty that caused all problems. (36, 5 children, polygamous)
She went on to say, “ When he knows I have my own money he will not get angry with me ”, reflecting that poverty reduction reduced conflict, as well as the potential for women's economic empowerment to deter IPV. Other participants echoed the link between economic security, in particular having food to eat, and less conflict and physical violence, as reflected in this exchange, Participant: We are living in peace. No fights, there's love, and thanks to LEAP there's food to eat. Interviewer: How's the love? Participant: It's just as a man would love his wife (laughing). I can't remember the last time he beat me or even insulted me. There's unity between us. (32, 5 children, monogamous)
Another way in which women described how the improved economic conditions of the household reduced conflict in the household was that women did not have to travel to find work. This was only mentioned in Garu Tempane, where women were more likely to migrate for work. Work migration was identified as a source of tension with husbands, It is only now that LEAP has come and we don't travel. At first, we used to travel somewhere to make money. The man may not agree because of the children. (30, 3 children, monogamous)
Leaving home to work reflected women's pressure to contribute to household expenses, but was also a direct challenge to women's caretaker roles as well as a threat to men's provider roles.
Of note, while women appreciated that they did not have to ask their husbands for money as often after joining LEAP 1000, they did sometimes lend money to their husbands. However, this was rarely described as coercive or forced. You know it is the man who is supposed to support a woman with money but not a woman supporting a man with money. I can only lend him money and take it back later, but not for free … When my husband needs money from me, he only begs that I should lend him and he will pay back later. He doesn't force to get money from me. As for a woman, she doesn't always want quarrels so once she has the money and the husband wants to borrow, she will lend him. (36, 5 children, polygamous)
As reflected in this quote, men were expected to pay back any money they borrowed from their wives, and according to one participant, with interest. A few women described that their husbands questioned or critiqued how they used the LEAP 1000 money, but most described their husbands appreciating the additional economic resources and deferring to women to decide how to use them.
Along with the nearly universal support for the economic impact of LEAP 1000 and resulting reduction in IPV, there was also some discussion of the limits of LEAP 1000's impact on poverty and, subsequently IPV, within the limited economic opportunities in study communities. While LEAP 1000 was connected to improving men's happiness, several participants mentioned that the program did not impact men's ability to be more economically productive. It is good because the beatings are over. The only problem is that there is no support from the men. This community too there is no market to do trading. ( 27, 4 children, monogamous )
This observation raises concerns around sustainability of program impacts, given that men's economic opportunities were still considered severely limited.
While we purposively sampled women who reported a decline in physical IPV during the impact evaluation period, a few women alluded to ongoing IPV. Reflecting the theme of husbands and wives borrowing money, a 32-year-old mother of 5 in a monogamous relationship described that in her household they shared their financial resources and loaned each other money to avoid conflict and shame “ so that people outside will not hear about us”. However, they had recently argued when the participant needed money to mill maize, which was viewed as her responsibility I needed money to mill maize for food in the house, my husband got angry and started shouting at me that I should also look for money to do it. He did not beat me, he only shouted and insulted me.
The participant went on to explain that her husband had hit her “about five months ago”, He came from the farm and I fetched water down for him to bathe, but the water got cold and he got angry and started talking. I also got angry and told him if he wanted to bath early, he should have returned from the farm early. He just turned and started hitting me. I believe he was hungry too because the whole of that day he didn't eat when he went to the farm. (Laughs …).
The participant also reflected how the aforementioned gender norms limited her ability to leave her husband and invoked the ongoing tensions related to poverty, even in the context of LEAP, I don't have anywhere to go because of the children I have given birth for him. As for that, life is not easy with us due to poverty. … No, there is no perfect life anywhere.
This example highlights limitations of the impact of LEAP 1000 on reducing household conflict, including IPV, especially in a context where men's aggression is justified in terms of their patience and hunger, and women have limited mobility once they have formed a union with children.
In addition to improving their economic security and wellbeing, participants also described many ways in which their participation in LEAP was empowering to them as individuals. Women felt more confident and important, saying, “I feel like a human being now and the luckiest one as well” “I am confident because it (LEAP money) helps me to never be disgraced” “I am counted as an important person too in the community”
These quotes reflect how having more financial autonomy and control improved women's overall sense of self as well as their perceptions of how others in the community viewed them. This extended into the social sphere as well, with women attributing greater social participation to the cash, which helped them to acquire new clothes, wash their clothes more frequently, earn invitation to social events, and contribute to family and community collections.
Another example of empowerment was in the financial sphere. Women appreciated having control of how the cash was spent. One woman said that it was hard to get money from her husband in the past but after being in LEAP 1000, “ if he is not giving me the money, I can get it on my own now ”. In addition to this control of resources, women were able to join savings groups, locally referred to as susu I am part of a susu group. I was even made one of the leaders of the group so I represent the group in external meetings … I like the group because it helps us, especially in hard times. When you need money direly to solve a problem, you can run to the group for a loan. Because you have contributions there, they cannot deny you. That's how helpful the group is. (32, 5 children, monogamous)
Beyond the ability to borrow, this participant also described how the group provided advice and support We are united as a group. The group doesn't limit our borrowing to how much we have contributed. We can borrow an amount more than how much we have contributed and no group member will have a problem with that. We support and also advise one another.
Women were also more able to receive loans as lenders believed they would be able to pay the money back, which facilitated being able to engage in entrepreneurial endeavors and cope with shocks.
People now respect and like me more than before the money. I am able to buy my yam with cash or pay back on time when I buy the yam on credit. I am able to even make advance payment to the farmers before they harvest the yam from farm. (39, 8 children, monogamous).
This participant mentioned she had put on weight since she was worrying less about money, reflecting the interplay between economic security, empowerment and wellbeing.
Women connected their financial autonomy to reduced household conflict, in particular arguments with their husbands. The most salient mechanism was that by having more financial autonomy, women did not have to ask their husbands for money, which was identified as a major trigger of conflict When I wasn't on the program, I used to have quarrels with him anytime I ask of money and he says he doesn't have. But now that I'm on the program, I can even borrow from someone and solve my problem and pay when I collect the money. (55, 6 children, polygamous)
Another participant highlighted the role of empowerment together with other pathways. She explained, I used the money to farm, take care of children's school fees, and quarrels with my husband have reduced. I buy food ingredients with the money. The LEAP money has been helpful to me and my household. I can say the LEAP money has saved a lot of marriages in this community. My relationship with him has improved because he now knows I am also somebody and (I) don't rely on him totally for my needs and my children's needs. He now respects me and we don't quarrel often like first. It was because of poverty we used to quarrel. (36, 5 children, polygamous)
The participant reflects a three-way interplay of pathways suggesting that her empowerment in the household came as a result of the improved economic security afforded by the LEAP funds, which then led to an improved relationship and less conflict with her husband.
None of the participants mentioned that their participation in LEAP and economic autonomy led them to consider leaving their marriages, which is one of the hypothesized pathways to reduced IPV. Some framed this as a result of the positive effect of LEAP on their household and their desire to stay with their husband and keep their family together. Others reflected that they did not feel they had the option to leave since they had children with their husband due to local norms around women's roles .
Another potential pathway of impact is related to the health insurance premium waiver, the “plus” component of LEAP 1000. As noted earlier, all participants had enrolled in NHIS , though a few had expired cards at the time of the interview. Participants overwhelmingly emphasized that having insurance increased their access to and use of healthcare by reducing cost barriers. Even though several noted that not all costs were covered, most participants felt that they were able to use healthcare services more for themselves and their children with the insurance.
However, we did not find that this increased access led to increased IPV screening, disclosure , or support for IPV. Only six women had been asked by nurses or physicians about physical violence or forced sex when they sought care for non-violence related health issues, especially during pregnancy. While we did not aim to assess prevalence of IPV screening, it is notable that such a small number of women had been asked. Even when asked, shame and fear of more violence, including towards children, were mentioned as deterrents to disclosure, as described in this exchange, Interviewer: Why have you never reported to the hospital or anyone after it occurs, but keep it to yourself? Participant: It's all because of the children I'm having. Interviewer: How? Participant: I've said that because it gets to a stage in marriage that you can't act in a certain way all because you have children with the man. You might act unreasonably, and your children might end up being the victims. So, going to report to the hospital or authorities isn't good . (55, 6 children, polygamous)
This quote invokes the norm around staying with a man once you have children and extends this to include tolerating IPV for the sake of children's safety.
Four women had sought medical care due to injuries caused by violence perpetrated by their husbands. None explicitly disclosed to their providers that their injuries had been caused by their partners. One participant was comfortable speaking with “anyone older than me” in the family, including her co-wife, about her husband's violence and forced sex. However, when she sought medical care due to an injury to her hand, she did not disclose to healthcare providers, due to shame and fear of the impact on her husband.
Participant: He hurt my hand and I had to go for treatment. When he beat me, I felt pains in my head and chest and I went to the hospital and got treated. People asked me to forgive him so I did.
Interviewer: Has a nurse or doctor ever asked you whether you were beaten by your husband?
Participant: If I should tell them, my husband will be arrested and that will be shameful. (32, 6 children, polygamous).
Another participant was pregnant when her husband slapped her, and she sought care for a resulting injury to her eye. She spoke about the incident with her elder brother who determined that the husband was not at fault and did nothing. At the hospital, she did not disclose the incident to any providers, I was keeping it secret, why would I tell them at the hospital? (Laughing) … When I married my husband, I told him to not scold me in public when I'm at fault but wait till we are in the bedroom. I didn't want people to know what was happening between my husband and I. (age 32, 5 children, monogamous)
Her laughter when discussing whether she disclosed in the hospital reflects the strength of the norm around keeping conflict within the couple or family. Another example of this was a participant who sought medical care after being beaten by her husband shortly after she had given birth. After the incident, which was loud and heard by neighbors, her husband's parents convinced her not to speak to her own family. At the hospital, she suggested that the visibility of her injuries precluded the need for disclosure and that “ the doctors and nurses didn't spare him ” They told him it was very wrong for him to beat a nursing mother, no matter what she might have done, especially knowing how bad my health condition was. They said he wasn't even supposed to let me do any hard work like harvesting of maize. (39, 7 children, monogamous)
Ultimately, when asked if she had ever thought of leaving her partner, the participant responded Oh not at all. I've never thought of that. I can't leave my marriage. Where will I go. If I leave here, I've lost everything. My children are my all and I can't lose them. I can't leave my children to suffer.
This exchange reflects how the potential for doctors and nurses to provide social support and anti-violence normative influence to perpetrators simultaneously with medical care to survivors of violence is limited by the strength of the norms around gender roles and children.

Section: 4. Discussion

We explored pathways through which a national cash transfer program in Ghana, LEAP 1000, led to reductions in IPV among mothers of young children . The most prominent narrative was that poverty is the main determinant of physical IPV and that by reducing poverty, LEAP 1000 reduced conflict and violence in households and improved overall wellbeing. These findings were consistent across polygamous and monogamous households, though the economic strain of supporting large polygamous families was identified as a source of additional stress. Sexual violence was not emphasized in women's narratives of LEAP 1000 impact, which is consistent with descriptions of the context in which physical IPV is considered less acceptable and open to public scrutiny while sexual IPV is considered a private matter between husband and wife ( Lees et al., 2020 ). Findings resonate with the overall results from the LEAP 1000 impact evaluation and support the potential for cash transfer programs to contribute to reducing physical IPV ( Peterman et al., 2021 ).
The main narrative of poverty reduction contributing to declines in IPV reflects the economic security/emotional wellbeing pathway hypothesized by Buller et al. (2018) , as well as the interplay between this pathway and the intra-household conflict and empowerment pathways. The economic security/emotional wellbeing pathway is supported by a large literature showing cash transfers increase food security , savings, and productive assets, as well as mental health and emotional wellbeing in LMICs ( Hidrobo et al., 2018 ; McGuire et al., 2020 ). For women in the current study, emotional wellbeing included stress reduction and improved happiness. Participants also described that their husbands' felt relief that their wives were able to use the cash to contribute to households needs. This is consistent with findings from Mali's national cash transfer program, where men were the recipients of the cash and also experienced stress reduction, as well as less anxiety and household conflict ( Heath et al., 2020 ). Additionally, economic security, emotional wellbeing and empowerment were all described as leading to less household conflict, which is an important outcome on its own in terms of household wellbeing as well as being a direct determinant of IPV. Our findings suggest that conflict reduction may operate as a key mediator in the economic security/wellbeing and empowerment pathways. There is also some suggestion of empowerment leading to improved emotional wellbeing among women, in the form of reduced stress and increased social support, which could reflect that emotional wellbeing is a mediator in the empowerment pathway. Future research is needed to explore these potential mediators and the interplay between pathways to continue informing effective programming to maximize impact.
Despite these positive findings, participants emphasized ongoing poverty and vulnerability to economic shocks. LEAP 1000 was demonstrated to improve consumption, food security, investments in economic activities and savings between 2015 and 2017 ( Ghana LEAP 1000 Evaluation Team, 2018 ). Nevertheless, due to high rates of inflation , the purchasing power of the bi-monthly cash transfer eroded 20% over the period studied. Participants in the current study underscored the prevailing economic conditions and lack of economic opportunities, which make sustainable poverty reduction a challenge. Hence, poverty-related drivers of IPV still exist, as reflected in participant narratives.
In addition to overall poverty reduction, women in our study talked extensively about empowerment in terms of how they were viewed within the community and increased self-confidence, social participation, and dignity because of participating in LEAP 1000. They also noted their autonomy in deciding how to use the LEAP 1000 cash. The most salient mechanism through which empowerment was described as having an influence on IPV was reduced reliance on men for money, which was identified as one of the main triggers of IPV ( Buller et al., 2016 ). While women's control of resources appears to be empowering, Manji et al. argue that shifts in gender norms and roles are only transformative if they “ transcend the internalized oppression that restricts their perceived options ” ( Manji et al., 2020 ). Our findings reflect important processes related to autonomy and social participation among women, but it is not clear whether these processes are transcending the oppressive context nor is there clear evidence of transformation occurring among men that would lead to sustained reductions in conflict and IPV. Additional research with both men and women and with extended follow-up is needed to fully explore whether the processes of empowerment that are achieved by providing cash to women can achieve sustainable gender norms transformation in households and communities.
Another key contextual insight is related to gender role stress or strain, a documented determinant of IPV ( Cardoso et al., 2016 ; Gottert et al., 2018 ; Closson et al., 2020 ). Participants in our study highlighted that their husbands were not able to provide for all household economic needs, due to limited economic opportunities. Women had to creatively make up for shortages in a manner that aligned with social and gender norms and demonstrated respect and subservience to men, a phenomenon also documented in the public health literature ( Aborigo et al., 2018 ). The cash appeared to relieve economic stress and reduce adverse interactions about lack of resources, in a way that did not threaten the existing hierarchies within the household or increase tensions with husbands or enhance gender role strain. One reason for this may be that in this setting, women were already expected to contribute to the household economy, in the form of legumes and ingredients to accompany the main staple maize, and the cash transfers helped fulfill economic needs within the structures of these existing norms. In this way, cash transfers may reduce IPV by reducing triggers related to asking husbands for money and providing women with money to manage on their own. However, as noted above, these changes may not be gender transformative as they did not appear to fundamentally change gender norms or reduce gender role strain.
We explored whether and how the health insurance premium waiver could improve access to healthcare services and, subsequently, enhance support related to IPV, deter IPV, or mitigate negative consequences. All participants in the current study had enrolled in NHIS, which they directly connected to improved healthcare access. In the impact evaluation, only 46.6% of the eligible LEAP 1000 treatment group was enrolled two years after the start of LEAP 1000 enrolment ( Palermo et al., 2019 ). Barriers to NHIS enrolment included high costs related to travel to enroll/renew enrolment, not understanding annual renewal processes, and lack of understanding of eligibility ( Palermo et al., 2019 ). Participants in the current study noted LEAP program efforts to support enrolment and renewal, which may have contributed to higher level or enrolment in our sample. However, participants did not make a direct link between this complementary programming and IPV. Women were reluctant to speak about IPV with anyone outside of their families due to shame and cultural norms and there was limited screening and disclosure of IPV in healthcare settings. These findings add to a relatively scarce literature examining how complementary programming may have synergistic or additional impacts on IPV, over and above cash alone ( Roy et al., 2019 ; Ranganathan et al., 2021 ). Efforts to maximize plus programming impact on IPV must address both the normative context around gender and IPV as well as capacity in complementary services to effectively support women who are at risk of or experiencing IPV.
While this study enhances understanding of the pathways through which cash transfers affect IPV, many questions remain. Future research is needed to investigate the moderating influence of household structure (including monogamy versus polygamy) on these impacts, influences of cash transfers on divorce, separation, and relationship formation, and the effects of cash transfers on gender norms ( Kilburn et al., 2018 ). Such studies will be enhanced by using mixed methods approaches to both deductively assess hypothesized pathways and inductively identify and unpack additional mechanisms. Other important questions to be investigated include those related to program design, including frequency and amount of transfers, gender of the recipient, and the synergistic effects of complementary programming and linkages to services ( Heath et al., 2020 ; Haushofer et al., 2019 ).
This study had several limitations. While we sampled women who reported past experience with IPV, there had been a time gap of nearly two years and some participants did not discuss those past experiences. Given stigma and shame, women may have also been reluctant to discuss past and current experiences with IPV, despite having reported IPV in the past. This limited our ability to contextualize reductions in IPV more fully. However, this was the most appropriate, respectful, and safe way to engage with participants. Additionally, we also faced some challenges with language. Despite being told by local counterparts that all participants we aimed to recruit in the Yendi region spoke Dagbani, some participants were not fluent, which limited direct communication and created challenges with probing and comprehension.

Section: 5. Conclusion

We contribute to the growing body of research in West Africa on government cash transfer programs, showing how cash can decrease IPV in at-scale programs ( Briaux et al., 2020 ; Heath et al., 2020 ; Peterman et al., 2021 ) and adding more nuance to understanding of the pathways. We found that women perceive improved economic security and wellbeing as the key pathway from cash to IPV reduction. We also found support for the intra-household conflict and empowerment pathways outlined by Buller et al. (2018) , and interplay between those pathways. We found minimal disclosure of IPV due to strong cultural norms that discourage disclosure and fear of the consequences for male perpetrators. These factors led to limited evidence for the fourth pathway we explored focused on whether improved healthcare access could enhance prevention and support for IPV. Additional research is needed to explore interplay between pathways of impact across programs with different design features and implementation contexts to continue informing effective programming to maximize impact.

Section: Credit author statement

Clare Barrington: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, writing-original data, supervision, funding acquisition Amber Peterman: conceptualization, writing-original, funding acquisition Akalpa J Akaligaung: investigation, writing-review and editing, supervision Tia Palermo: conceptualization, writing-review and editing, funding acquisition Marlous de Milliano: formal analysis, writing-review and editing Raymond Aborigo: investigation, writing-review and editing, supervision, project administration.

Section: Acknowledgements

We are grateful for the support of the Government of Ghana for the implementation of the LEAP 1000 programme, in particular William Niyuni, Mawutor Ablo and Richard Adjetey from the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection. In addition, the Transfer Project and the UNICEF Ghana team were instrumental to the success of this study and in particular: Jennifer Yablonski; Christiana Gbedemah; and Vincent Van Halsema. We are also grateful to the We would like to acknowledge the field team of the Navrongo Health Research Center (NHRC) who conducted the data collection for this study to the highest standards. We thank all the woman who took part in the study for sharing their stories and lives with the research team.
Funding for the original LEAP 1000 impact evaluation (2015-2017) was provided to UNICEF Ghana by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID Grant # G45602 ) and the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA Grant # G07201 ). Funding for the current study, which followed up this impact evaluation cohort, was generously provided an Anonymous donor, received via the International Food Policy Research Institute. Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institutes of Health , specifically NICHD under award number P2C HD050924 and NIA under award number P30 AG066615 of the National Institutes of Health .
We are grateful to members of the Cash Transfer and IPV Research Collaborative for input to the study design and results at various stages and participants at the Cash Transfer and IPV workshop in October 2020 organized by the collaborative and Innovations for Poverty Action for helpful comments. We thank Elsa Valli for input into the sampling strategy. The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of affiliated institutions.
