Title: Invisible and unequal: Unincorporated community status as a structural determinant of health


Abstract: Abstract

Despite increasing awareness of the importance of political determinants of health, place-based research has not interrogated one of the most common political statuses: the impact of living in a community without municipal incorporation. In 2010 an estimated 37% of the U.S. population lived in an unincorporated area; despite their ubiquity, unincorporated communities are largely absent from the public health literature. Residents of unincorporated areas typically do not have their own local (e.g., city or municipal) government. This lack of representation leads to political exclusion and diminished access to resources, especially for low-income communities of color, Furthermore, by not disaggregating health data to unincorporated communities, residents are subsumed into county or census tract data that may not be reflective of their community's composition or context. Without jurisdictional distinction in research, there is no accountability for the manufacturing of health inequities in unincorporated communities . In the absence of empirical research on unincorporated communities, this paper uses the Commission on Social Determinants of Health (CSDH) Framework of the World Health Organization to argue that lack of municipal status is a structural determinant of health responsible for social conditions which generate cumulative health risks for residents. This includes using existing evidence on social conditions typical of unincorporated communities to describe patterns of residential segregation , neighborhood disadvantage, and environmental hazards that may increase residents' exposure to unhealthy environments in unincorporated communities. Finally, we provide an agenda for future public health research that can begin to address this health and racial equity gap for low-income unincorporated communities of color who have, until now, been absent in health equity discourse.

Section: 1. Introduction

Place-focused research can expose governmental systems and policies that render communities structurally vulnerable to health inequities ( Bambra et al., 2019 ). Braveman (2014) defines health inequities as “avoidable, unnecessary, and unjust” health differences (p.7). Subsequently, policymakers, practitioners, and the public can disrupt and intervene on identified mechanisms of health inequities ( Bambra et al., 2019 ). As a field, public health can highlight under-resourced communities that face a disproportionate burden of health risks associated with political geographic factors ( King, 2010 ). Unfortunately, many studies rely on geographical units of analysis such as census tracts, zip codes, or urban/rural status, while omitting meaningful political difference, such as lack of incorporation as a municipality (i.e., city or town; Cummins et al., 2007 ; Lichter et al., 2015 ). For residents of many unincorporated communities, lack of incorporation elevates their risk of exposure to unhealthy community conditions ( Anderson, 2008 , 2012 , ; Rowles et al., 2020 ). This is especially pronounced for low-income communities of color. During the COVID-19 pandemic counties in California and Texas that disaggregated data by incorporation status found hotspots in unincorporated communities with high proportion of low-income, uninsured, and immigrant populations ( Samuels, 2020 ; Tavares, 2020 ). Unfortunately, limited awareness of the impact of municipal incorporation on a community's wellbeing has left these socially vulnerable communities relatively absent from public health research .
In 2010 an estimated 37% of the U.S. population lived in an unincorporated area, that is, outside of incorporated municipal boundaries ( Cohen et al., 2015 ). Within these areas are unincorporated communities , defined as settled, populated areas whose community identities are commonly known but do not exist as an incorporated entity like a city or town ( Flegal et al., 2013 ). Unincorporated communities lack local government and therefore must rely on county governments as their primary form of representation. Counties are not obligated to prioritize unincorporated communities in decision-making, leaving residents institutionally vulnerable to neglect because of diminished political representation ( Anderson, 2008 ). Limited extant research outlines evidence of neglect on unincorporated communities from the fields of geography, sociology , law, and environmental science, as well as government and news reports ( Aiken, 1987 ; Anderson, 2008 ; London et al., 2018 ; Purifoy, 2021 ). Notably, in unincorporated communities with high proportions of socially marginalized residents (e.g., low-income, Black, Indigenous and people of color, and immigrant populations), a portrait emerges of localities characterized by adverse social conditions that demonstrate accumulated risk for poor health outcomes ( Bullard, 2008 ; Fernández and Langhout, 2018 ).
In this paper, we seek to raise the significance of unincorporated communities as potential sites of health inequities and call for comprehensive research to investigate social determinants of health, health outcomes, and political arrangements within these communities. First, we provide a summary of unincorporated communities as political units, also locating them within the U.S.’s history of racial and economic segregation . Next, we summarize key components of the Commission on Social Determinants of Health (CSDH) Framework of the World Health Organization ( Solar and Irwin, 2010 ), which we use to argue that municipal incorporation operates as a structural determinant of health. We then outline downstream impacts of lack of incorporation status, such as environmental hazards, poor built environments, and inadequate housing, water, and sanitation. Our analysis focuses on low-income communities of color whose experience within unincorporated spaces is dissimilar yet historically linked to that of white, wealthier populations ( Purifoy and Seamster, 2021 ). Finally, we provide an agenda for future public health research that can begin to address this health equity gap for low-income unincorporated communities of color that have until now been rendered invisible by conventional approaches.

Section: 2. Unincorporated communities: outside the boundaries of municipalities

Unincorporated communities are ubiquitous yet overlooked ( Mattiuzzi and Weir, 2020 ). In this paper, we use the term unincorporated community to describe settled areas with a collective identity among residents but not legally incorporated as a municipality (i.e., a city or town). Unincorporated communities are located within unincorporated areas , defined as any territory that is not within a municipal boundary ( Flegal et al., 2013 ). Unincorporated communities include: “peri-urban” or “urban fringe” settlements adjacent to a municipality; unincorporated “islands” not annexed within a city; and hinterlands, hamlets, colonias, or villages that do not share a boundary with any nearby city and function as their own informal town ( Anderson, 2008 ; Flegal et al., 2013 ). Each type of community faces distinct opportunities and challenges based on rural/urban location, proximity to resources (e.g., employment, health care, parks, and food outlets) and municipal services (e.g., water, garbage, and sanitation), and potential impact of nearby municipal policies and actions (e.g., planning, annexation, and extraterritorial jurisdiction) ( Rubin et al., 2007 ). In the U.S., states confer counties or county-equivalents (e.g., boroughs in Alaska and parishes in Louisiana) with administration of unincorporated communities ( Anderson, 2008 ). Unincorporated communities generally do not have their own local elected officials and instead rely on a distal county governing body. Many remain as informal settlements with diminished legal power to address health compromising conditions.
Within broader public discourse, a few unincorporated communities have gained national attention vis-à-vis environmental justice. Most notably, the film Erin Brockovich ( Soderbergh et al., 2000 ) featured Hinkley, California and has influenced the social imagination of environmental justice ( Richter, 2018 ). Located in “Cancer Alley,” Reserve, Louisiana is often highlighted for having the highest rate of cancer in the U.S. ( Meaders, 2021 , Lartey and Laughland, 2019 ). Most recently, the public has raised concerns over SpaceX's near complete purchase of homes in the unincorporated village of Boca Chica, Texas, and the environmental harm the launch base poses to the area. Boca Chica residents have faced forced road closures, pressure to sell their homes, and possible erasure of their town's name and identity, as Elon Musk proposes changing the community's name to “Starbase” ( Hooks, 2021 ). Typically, when unincorporated communities are identified, they are describeas urban, suburbs, or rural towns—terms that obfuscate political status. Unfortunately, even with public attention, the communities' status as unincorporated is infrequently referenced or understood.
In the global health literature, unincorporated communities are often identified as peri-urban or informal settlements. Rural communities in countries like China face declining populations without adequate resources ( Wang et al., 2020 ), while in Canada, they are increasingly absorbed by urban expansion ( Meligrana, 2003 ). Meanwhile, displaced populations in urban fringes in India and Zambia struggle to get adequate access to potable water ( Mbiba and Huchzermeyer, 2002 ; Ranganathan and Balazs, 2015 ). These challenges mirror the experiences of impoverished unincorporated communities in the U.S. For example, lack of access to potable water is an ongoing crisis in California and Texas ( London et al., 2018 ; Rowles, III et al., 2020 ). In the U.S., however, representation in health research is hampered by inadequate recognition of unincorporated communities.
Inconsistent identification in the U.S. Census renders an unknown number of unincorporated communities invisible ( Durst, 2019 ; Flegal et al., 2013 ). According to the 2010 Census, 37% of U.S. residents lived in unincorporated areas , not all of which are unincorporated communities that have a collective identity. Additionally, the Census Bureau reported that in 2010, 12% of the U.S. population (38.7 million people) lived in Census Designated Places (CDPs) ( Cohen et al., 2015 ). CDPs are the closest federal equivalent of unincorporated communities ( Flegal et al., 2013 ). Thus, the estimated number of people living in unincorporated communities is somewhere between those residing in CDPs and unincorporated areas, that is, between 12% and 37% of the U.S. population. Precise population estimates are difficult in part due to the fluidity of urban boundaries, small population sizes , and the varied processes for documenting these communities across regions and time ( Flegal et al., 2013 ). Still, even with a legal designation, the estimated 38.7 million people in CDPs are seldom studied in social science and health research.
The construction, history, and trajectory of low-income unincorporated communities of color intertwines with that of municipalities, place-making, and processes of racial and social stratification ( Purifoy and Seamster, 2021 , Tyson, 2013 ). Leaning on principles of critical race theory (CRT), we highlight sociohistorical factors that have maintained some unincorporated communities of color as sites of disadvantage through municipal boundary laws and practices. CRT emerged as a critique to colorblind legal analysis that viewed the law as race-neutral and ignored the role of legal institutions in the social construction of race ( Ford and Airhihenbuwa, 2010 ). Within U.S. local government institutions, two durable local government tools maintaining structural racism are development policies and disinvestment ( Moore et al., 2019 , Purifoy and Seamster, 2021 , Tyson, 2013 )(). Consistently, Black and Brown spaces have suffered under years of neglect, while also being targeted for unwanted land uses that create generational harm ( Purifoy and Seamster, 2021 ). Despite being conferred municipal privileges, administrative discretion and alternate legal methods have been used to disadvantage people of color in cities ( Blessett and Littleton, 2017 ). However, while there has been an important focus on the role of planning and investment choices in reproducing disadvantaged segregated neighborhoods in cities and suburbs, less is known on how these tools operate outside of municipal boundaries ( Purifoy, 2021 ). A guiding principle of CRT is to examine how processes of stratification operate within specific contexts (e.g., time, geography, social hierarchy) for people living in the margins if we are to undo discriminatory practices that lead to harm ( Ford and Airhihenbuwa, 2010 ). The following section seeks to make visible how the ordinary planning and policy tools associated with place-making operate in the reproduction of social stratification in (un)incorporated communities.
Unincorporated communities reflect regional contexts, including distinctive histories, local economies, and state and county policies (e.g., annexation, incorporation laws, zoning) regulating these settlements ( Anderson, 2008 ; Rivera, 2014 ). Furthermore, many communities formed based on de jure (codified into law) and de facto (in practice, but not officially sanctioned ) segregation ( Anderson, 2008 ; Johnson et al., 2004 ). Until the mid-20th century, racialized municipal processes (racially restrictive covenants, red-lining, black codes, block busting, and racial steering) segregated people of color, many into unincorporated communities ( Aiken, 1987 , 1990 ). In the South, individuals freed from enslavement formed communities outside of cities, close enough to jobs but away from hostilities of white residents who denied them housing ( Aiken, 1987 , 1990 ). Rural Black hamlets grew around sharecropping . Still, other Black-founded communities formed as a strategy to escape violence and for greater autonomy ( Hunter and Robinson, 2018 ). Racially restrictive covenants and redlining limited housing further fueling growth of unincorporated communities of color as far west as California ( Bender, 2009 ; Eissinger, 2017 ).
In the Southwest region, unincorporated communities referred to as colonias emerged to support the need for agricultural and manufacturing labor across the U.S.-Mexico border ( Rivera, 2014 ). Notably, between 1942 and 1964, colonias multiplied during the implementation of the Bracero Program ( Donelson and Esparza, 2016 ; Durst, 2019 ). Developers built homes where costs were low, regulations were lax, and water and sewer lines were optional. Some homes were sold without land rights . ( Henneberger et al., 2010 ). The plight of colonias elicited federal attention in 1989, when a reporter for The New York Times referred to the communities as “one of the nation's most wrenching public health problems” ( Applebome, 1989 , Section A, p.12). In Texas alone, there are more than 2000 colonias, almost exclusively unincorporated and low-income with inadequate housing and infrastructure ( Rivera, 2020 ).
In the mid to late 20th century, unincorporated communities became contested spaces. In the 1940s, as school desegregated and cities diversified, white populations fled to the suburbs (then unincorporated). The "white flight" narrative emerged as the dominant frame for communities “outside the city,” obscuring stories of those living in unincorporated communities of color ( Anderson, 2008 ; Kye, 2018 ). For example, in Ohio and Illinois, new white communities displaced older Black homeowners through “race-neutral” building codes and ordinances applied selectively to Black spaces ( Hunter and Robinson, 2018 ). In the 1960s substandard federally sponsored affordable housing developments were built outside of cities in the South to avoid angering white city officials ( Aiken, 1987 ). Still, other communities grew as families of color sought homeownership ( Hunter and Robinson, 2018 ; Rivera, 2014 ). Physical conditions in low-income unincorporated communities of color even now are substandard relative to adjacent cities, sometimes lacking rudimentary services, including clean drinking water and sanitation ( Purifoy, 2021 ; London et al., 2018 ). A 2020 investigation of spatial patterns of poverty found growing poverty and racial minority populations in unincorporated communities wedged between large metro and newer smaller cities in the South ( Mattuizi and Weir, 2020 ). While these communities are often temporary byproducts of city growth until they are annexed or incorporated, low-income unincorporated communities of color are more apt to remain in a permanent state of legal exclusion ( Kye, 2018 ; Pulido, 2015 ). Residents outside of municipal boundaries face diminished institutional power and avenues to address their community's health risks and needs ( Purifoy, 2021 ). Both low political influences compounded by near invisibility in public health research further leaves health inequities uninterrogated and unincorporated communities structurally vulnerable.

Section: 3. The social determinants of health approach to identifying health inequities

The well-established World Health Organization's (WHO) Commission on Social Determinants of Health (CSDH) framework depicts known pathways through which health outcomes are socially manufactured ( Solar and Irwin, 2010 ). The CSDH framework enables researchers to identify mechanisms that contribute to population health risks through contextually meaningful structural and intermediary determinants ( Solar and Irwin, 2010 ). As a tool, the framework is helpful for conceptualizing how different government regimes (e.g., lack of incorporation and its corresponding government arrangements) impact a community's health chances through the distribution of power , resources, risks, benefits, and access they enable ( Bharmal et al., 2015 ). We deploy the CDSH framework as the backdrop to examine the literature on socially vulnerable unincorporated communities and argue that these settlements are potential sites for health inequities.
The CDSH framework highlights empirically identified determinants of health and differentiates between two critical elements of social determinants of health inequities along the causal pathway: structural determinants (upstream factors) and intermediary determinants (downstream factors). Structural determinants are the drivers within the political, societal, and economic context that reinforce one's socioeconomic position and the distribution of "power, prestige, and access to resources" shaping populations' social conditions and health inequities ( Solar and Irwin, 2010 , p.30). Downey and Gomez (2018) define structural determinants through an institutional lens as factors “that codify, in systems like medicine, law, or welfare, differential access to social, political, and economic opportunities” (p. 212). The causal effects of structural determinants result in disparities in downstream social conditions (intermediary determinants , which produce group-differentiated health burdens and benefits ( Downey and Gómez, 2018 ). I ntermediary determinants broadly refers to the constructed social conditions (e.g., material circumstances, psychosocial circumstances, behavioral and/or biological factors, and the health system) that permeate exposure to compromising health risks ( Solar and Irwin, 2010 ). Intermediate outcomes are considered antecedent to health outcomes as they shape, moderate, and mediate health status ( Bharmal et al., 2015 ).
Using the existing literature from urban planning, geography, environmental science, and sociology , and government reports and news articles, we apply the CSDH framework to situate unincorporated communities as sites of neglect and harm. The adapted CSDH framework in Fig. 1 illuminates places of investigation into health inequities for unincorporated communities ( Solar and Irwin, 2010 ). Specifically, we elaborate on the structural mechanism of lack of incorporation status and its related pathways. This includes highlighting those institutional actors who may be accountable for and have agency to address the production of health inequities in these communities ( Krieger, 2012 ). We then identify its downstream effects by describing intermediary outcomes found in these communities that demonstrate elevated risk for adverse health outcomes. Vitally, when understood through an intersectional analysis, the CDSH framework reveals how structural determinants manifest differently, often based on a community's social location (e.g., racialization , political status, socioeconomic status; Ford and Airhihenbuwa, 2010 ). By employing the CSDH framework through a CRT lens in our analysis of the literature, we seek to demonstrate how low-income unincorporated communities of color are particularly made structurally vulnerable to illness and death through the mechanism of living in a community without municipal status because of their social location. Download: Download high-res image (326KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Structural Determinants of Health in Unincorporated Communities, adapted from the WHO Commission on Social Determinants of Health Framework ( Solar and Irwin, 2010 ).

Section: 4. Application of the CDSH framework to unincorporated communities

This section uses the key anchors of the CSDH framework, structural determinants and intermediate determinants, to articulate the multiple pathways through which unincorporated communities are made vulnerable to health inequities. We examine the scant literature on unincorporated communities through the lens of the framework to identify existing social determinants of health mechanisms operating within these communities. Additionally, there are case studies included from news articles and government reports that provide additional detail to identified case studies in the academic literature. The examples chosen feature low-income, unincorporated communities of color to demonstrate the unique intersectional experience within these marginalized spaces. Although from disparate fields and regions, the data in this section expose a recurrent pattern across regions of risks for adverse health outcomes that deserve further attention by scholars and policymakers.
Local government is an established structural determinant of health. Municipal governments' institutional power shapes key factors contributing to the wellbeing of residents: rights, benefits, and participation of citizens, employment, distribution of revenues and services, regulation, and policies impacting neighborhood conditions ( Solar and Irwin, 2010 , Trounstine, 2018 )—key factors contributing to the wellbeing of residents. For most of the U.S. population, local government is a city or town's governing body, which determines the meaningful political regime (i.e., institutional structures and arrangements, policies, and practices) impacting residents within jurisdictional boundaries ( Rudolph et al., 2013 , Trounstine, 2018 ). The political regime of an unincorporated community is distinct from a city or town. This regime often includes: 1) county government as the most proximal decision-making body; 2) lack of local political representation, which can restrict political agency over policies governing community environment; and 3) policies and practices that determine incorporation, planning, and city extraterritorial jurisdiction in unincorporated areas ( Anderson, 2008 , Anderson, 2009 , Anderson, 2012 ). Each component can act as a pathway to health inequities. Communities with high concentrations of low-income residents of color are often sites of neglect and political marginalization; however, for unincorporated communities, it is the unique status of being without municipal status that codifies, facilitates, and exacerbates inequality, including residential segregation .
Governance by a county board or executive in the absence of local municipal representation is the primary political regime for most unincorporated communities ( Anderson, 2008 ; Fernández and Langhout, 2018 ; Flegal et al., 2013 ). County governments are administrative units of the state and operate within parameters delineated by federal and state legislatures ( Benton, 2003 ). Generally, states grant cities/towns more authority than counties ( Tyson, 2013 ). Counties are regional providers of a variety of government services (e.g., public records management, court functions, county jails, cash benefits), and primary local providers of municipal services (e.g., water, planning, fire, police/sheriff) to unincorporated communities ( Lobao and Kraybill, 2005 ). Tasked with large responsibilities outlined by the state, county responsiveness to residents’ needs is constrained.
Anderson (2008) was the first legal scholar to question whether county governments are sufficient as the sole local representation for urban unincorporated areas and/or equal to municipal governments in their capacity to govern for unincorporated communities. Anderson (2008) found that counties fell short on their ability to provide (1) choice and mobility in the housing market for residents; (2) adequate air, soil, and water quality services; and (3) political access and representation. Based on all three criteria, county government did not afford equivalence to urban unincorporated community residents in housing mobility, service delivery, and adequacy, protection from undesirable land uses, and civic participation—all critical social determinants of health.
Furthermore, the vast responsibilities of counties require large sums of money to operate well and meet underfunded state mandates; however, counties have limited revenue-generating options allowed by state legislatures ( Benton, 2003 ; Farmer, 2011 ). Tax revenue generation is further delimited by the socioeconomic status of residents in unincorporated areas. With few revenue-generating options and competition from cities for business investments, counties use or curb local policy tools (e.g., zoning, tax subsidies, and environmental regulations) to attract new, taxable developments ( Anderson, 2012 ; Feiock et al., 2008 ). This can result in unsustainable land-use practices in unincorporated communities beneficial to corporations, private investors, state, and county revenues but harmful to residents ( Feiock et al., 2008 ). For example, county governments across Alabama sold hundreds of acres of land to developers, who built large landfills on the unincorporated fringes of poor Black rural towns, entrenching risks for hazardous environmental exposures for decades ( Bullard, 2008 ). Similarly, Kings County, California approved an expansion permit for the largest hazardous waste site west of the Mississippi, despite opposition from the nearby Latino unincorporated community, which was simultaneously facing a birth defect cluster. Two case studies of the land use decision found consistent evidence for racialized structural neglect, denied protection, and limited recourse from environmental hazards at the hands of state actors and retreat by county officials ( Arata, 2016 ; Richter, 2018 ). Typically, local policymakers would be directly accountable to their communities. However, for residents of an unincorporated community, there are no “local” policymakers, only county policymakers who serve many constituencies ( Richter, 2018 ). The political power of residents to create healthy futures and mitigate harm is eroded when avenues for government accountability are missing.
Participation in municipal government decisions gives residents the power to shape social and economic opportunities and risks in their communities. Welch (2012) identifies political participation as the “quantity, quality, and diversity of stakeholders' input into government decision-making” (p. 93). Rights associated with incorporation confer legal privileges, protections, and responsibilities to residents within their jurisdictional boundaries, providing residents a form of “exclusive citizenship” ( Purifoy, 2021 , p. 4). However, absent this local tier of governance, current political arrangements (e.g., county voting regulations, elected representation, planning processes) for unincorporated community residents are barriers to adequate political participation and hinder self-rule.
Notably, voting procedures typically allow all county voters, including municipal residents who will be exempt from the decision, to participate in land use and tax decisions that occur only within unincorporated areas and communities; special districts are exceptions ( Fernández and Langhout, 2018 ). For example, in 2020, Alameda County, California, sought to renew a utility user tax (Measure V) in unincorporated areas, which is voted on county-wide but is only applied to non-municipal areas ( Spur, 2020 ). It is, therefore, common that city residents who cannot be taxed by counties can vote on whether to tax unincorporated communities. Although all county residents (inside or outside of cities) have equal voting privileges in the county, only residents in unincorporated areas are solely dependent on county decision-making. This means there is an underrepresentation of unincorporated community residents in votes on issues that differentially impact their communities ( Fernández and Langhout, 2018 ), possibly exposing them to higher risks for adverse health outcomes.
Incorporation and annexation policies can be targeted levers of exclusion and neglect for unincorporated communities ( Aiken, 1987 ; Tyson, 2013 ). Incorporation, proffered as a civil rights tool for communities of color, provides political agency over governance, land use, and provision of services needed for healthy communities ( Smith and Waldner, 2018 ). However, residents of low-income unincorporated communities seeking greater protection and autonomy under a municipal charter face strict incorporation laws in many states. For example, the Local Agency Formation Commission, California's municipal charter authorizing body, has three times denied incorporation to East Los Angeles, an unincorporated community of 126,496 residents (96.2% are Latinx), determining it could not be financially sustainable ( Ihn, 2010 , Sprague, 2016 ). Even when states have lenient incorporation laws, few communities can become municipalities because of high costs associated with service provision ( Smith and Waldner, 2018 ; Tyson, 2013 ). Most often, new and largely majority white municipalities have formed outside of diversifying cities, enabling greater self-rule, preventing forced annexation, and allowing communities to maintain control over tax revenues.
Furthermore, annexation laws accomplish contemporary de facto segregation through municipal underbounding ( Aiken, 1987 ). Cities use economic justification to refuse annexation of lower-income unincorporated communities while simultaneously leapfrogging over them to annex wealthier white communities. For decades, Modesto, California has bypassed annexation of four predominantly Latino unincorporated communities entirely within city limits—Bret Harte, Garden/Rouse-Colorado, No Man's Land/Hatch-Midway, and Robertson Road—while also excluding them from wastewater treatment services that operate beneath their ground ( Molina, 2014 ). Still other unincorportaed communities avoid annexation, concerned that higher costs and greater regulation could negatively impact residents ( Mukhija and Mason, 2013 ). The extent to which municipal underbounding is systemic is unknown ( Johnson et al., 2004 ; Lichter et al., 2007 ; Purifoy, 2021 ). Lichter et al. (2007) posited that white-controlled municipalities that perceived a “Black threat” (political or economic) would be less likely to annex (p. 67). Under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, federal courts previously determined that states and jurisdictions with a history of violating civil rights and suppressing minority votes needed “preclearance” from the Attorney General for any annexation. This practice ended in 2013, as the U.S. Supreme Court deemed the preclearance requirement unnecessary in Shelby County v. Holder . Although incorporation and annexation are not the only or best solution to problems with being unincorporated ( Purifoy, 2021 ), few unincorporated communities of color are afforded the agency to exercise these options.
In sum residents in unincorporated communities experience institutionalized political exclusion through reliance on distal and constrained county government, diluted voting power, and reduced legal control over their home territory . Political exclusion reduces one's influence over resources, power, and government investment to decrease health risks and increase health benefits in one's community ( Bambra, 2019 ). This has salience for low-income communities of color, systematically targeted for disenfranchisement through evolving policies and practices at the state and local levels associated with lack of incorporation.
Intermediary material social determinants are characteristically observable signposts of a community's potential health vulnerability ( Marmot et al., 2008 ). Critical material conditions associated with healthy communities include clean air and water, adequate sanitation, safe places to play, sidewalks to walk on, access to nearby grocery stores with nutritious food, and access to health care ( Diez-Roux and Mair, 2010 ). Healthy communities require funding, policies, and a responsive government that supports favorable land uses and amenities, such as parks, recreational facilities, libraries, fire stations, and land buffers that protect residential areas from potential environmental harms. Unfortunately, the existing research describing material conditions in unincorporated communities demonstrates patterns of neglect and risk that create an unfair health burden on residents.
A community's physical environment is a social determinant of health largely constructed by what government bodies allow ( Anguelovski, 2016 ). The literature on unincorporated communities reveals that multiple environmental exposures to LULUs (locally unwanted land uses) are located within proximity to low-income communities of color ( Lowman et al., 2013 ; Richter, 2018 ). This includes polluting industries and farms, biosolids , chemical treatment plants, landfills, prisons, and high voltage utilities ( Anderson, 2009 ; Richter, 2018 ). Furthermore, freeways and industrial buildings are zoned near single-family dwellings as zoning policies are often haphazard and unsustainable ( Pulido et al., 2000 ). “Fenceline communities” adjacent to polluting industries such as the predominantly Black unincorporated communities Mossville and Reserve populate Louisiana's chemical corridor because of state incentives and parishes that can approve hazardous sitings without citizen input ( Meader, 2021 ). Lerner (2010) equates “fenceline communities'' as “sacrifice zones” where residents live and go to school adjacent to “hot spots'' of pollution that border residential areas (p. 3). Additionally, many unincorporated communities are also home to landfills and sewage treatment plants for nearby cities ( Lowman et al., 2013 ). These communities may face a form of double jeopardy with regards to vulnerability to health risks: these landfills, recycling plants, and water and sewage treatment plants are physically adjacent, while many of the services they provide are not available to their residents ( Anderson, 2008 ).
Residents of impoverished unincorporated communities often cannot evade environmental health risks by seeking shelter inside their homes. Substandard housing and inadequate services are endemic and pose multiple health risks ( Ranganathan and Balazs, 2015 ; Rivera, 2014 ). Low-grade housing materials, low standards for building permits, and lax code-enforcement enable substandard housing ( Durst, 2019 ), Furthermore, residents in these communities grapple with living conditions common in developing countries due to inadequate services. Providing municipal services such as water and wastewater to unincorporated communities can be costly for the county, city, and residents, forcing these communities to rely on unsafe water systems, local water wells, and household septic tanks ( Johnson et al., 2004 ). The inadequate water systems can create severe water shortages and quality concerns for unincorporated communities ( London et al., 2018 ). Furthermore, in some U.S. unincorporated communities, old septic tank systems are failing, and sanitation is inadequate ( Lowman et al., 2013 , Rios and Meyer, 2009 )(). Residents are forced to buy bottled water or risk contamination, showers and sinks spew sewage, and children play in yards with leaking sewage.
Built environments may also threaten unincorporated community health by limiting access to nutritious food and spaces for physical activity . Unincorporated communities lack access to nearby well-stocked grocery stores, sidewalks, and streetlights and are identifiable by deteriorating road construction and lack of public transportation ( Anderson, 2008 ; King et al., 2009 ). The lack of safe streets, sidewalks, and green spaces make it difficult for outdoor activities as simple as walking, playing, or running and increases the chances of accidental injuries ( Shenassa et al., 2004 ). Similarly, the absence of healthy foods limits access to nutritious eating, while the absence of amenities limits opportunities for healthy behaviors.
Given the widespread presence of inhospitable social conditions in unincorporated communities, the dearth of literature on health outcomes is surprising. However, there are studies demonstrating substantial health risks for communities with similar characteristics to unincorporated communities, particularly as they relate to environmental exposures and inadequate infrastructure.
Environmental exposures associated with proximity to industrial and hazardous waste sites, air pollution, and contaminated water have been associated with adverse infant health outcomes, childhood cancers, and asthma ( Brender et al., 2011 ). Neighborhoods with underdeveloped pedestrian infrastructure and disconnected streets, contributing to unhealthy landscapes that dampen physical activity and increase car dependency and pollution exposures have impacted obesity ( Xu and Wang, 2015 ) and asthma ( Corburn et al., 2006 ). Furthermore, inadequate sewage and water systems, like those found in disadvantaged unincorporated communities, threaten public health and increase the chances of intestinal parasite exposure ( Adams and Perkin, 1985 , McKenna et al., 2018 ) and the spread of infectious diseases ( Rowles III et al., 2020 ). Importantly, constructed social environment health risks are avoidable and once identified can be modified.
When knit together, the fragmented scholarship on socially vulnerable unincorporated communities suggests that residents are at risk for adverse health outcomes as evidenced by community conditions that are toxic, hazardous, or inadequate to sustain healthy living ( Anderson, 2008 , 2010 ; Eissinger, 2017 ; Richter, 2018 ; London et al., 2018 ). Unincorporated communities are not just physically on the fringe of cities but also spatially on the fringe of modern progress ( Aiken, 1987 ; Anderson, 2008 ). Years behind their municipal counterparts, unincorporated communities struggle to secure adequate water, sewer, and garbage systems that will not pose health risks for their communities ( Durst, 2019 , McGurty, 2009 )(). Conceptually, these social conditions make unincorporated communities vulnerable to health risks, including infectious diseases, diabetes, asthma, heart disease, infant mortality, and shortened life expectancy (Borchardt et al., 2003; Diez Roux, 2001 ; Frank et al., 2006 ; Macintyre and Ellaway, 2003 ; Marmot et al., 2008 ). Moreover, lack of municipal status limits unincorporated community residents’ ability to effect change, as they must operate without the benefit of a local governmental structure that represents them. The presence of inhospitable living conditions and structural vulnerability identified within the limited research on unincorporated communities suggests a critical need for further scholarly investigation, with particularly attention to racialized health inequities.

Section: 5. Future health research on socially vulnerable unincorporated communities

We believe the current health risk landscape in socially vulnerable unincorporated communities merits the attention of scholars investigating racial and spatial health inequities. Evidence of harmful social conditions within these disadvantaged places suggests lack of incorporation status is an overlooked social determinant of health linked to adverse social conditions known to be associated with health disparities . Fortunately, public health can significantly impact unincorporated communities by directing research efforts at identifying and understanding the scope of health inequities within these neglected communities. We offer the following priorities for future public health research: 1) Establish a baseline of descriptive data for unincorporated communities by disaggregating existing data sets on health factors and outcomes. Population-based datasets, such as birth and death records, can be linked to information about incorporation status that are subsumed in non-specific geopolitical categories. Furthermore, identifying unincorporated communities in studies will assist with understanding the scope of health challenges that are currently unknown ( Richter, 2018 ). 2) Construct improved measures and data collection to describe unincorporated communities. A Policy Link report published in 2013 found that official counts in the 2000 Census reported approximately 3.6 million people living in CDPs across California. However, by using census block data, aerial photography , agricultural mapping, county public documents, and regional forums, researchers were able to document an additional 2.8 million people who lived in unincorporated communities not defined as a CDP ( Flegal et al., 2013 ). Promising approaches to studying unincorporated communities using Census Bureau and spatial data include those used by Durst (2019) , London et al. (2018) , Mattiuzzi and Weir (2020) , and Purifoy (2021) . Improved identification of these communities will require cross-sector partnerships including working with local and state government agencies and community organizations that can locate communities currently unidentified in the Census and state maps. 3) Conduct exploratory research on socially vulnerable unincorporated communities that elucidates existing social processes and conditions that contribute to health inequities. Place-based approaches can expose harmful conditions and the social, political, and economic mechanisms that generate them ( Diez Roux and Mair, 2010 , Duncan and Kawachi, 2018 )( Diez Roux and Mair, 2010 ). Furthermore, given the variety and often small size of the populations in unincorporated communities, both robust qualitative ( Hamilton, 2020 ) and quantitative methods (National Academies of Sciences Engineering, 2018) are needed to build the evidence base for health inequities in socially vulnerable unincorporated communities. 4) Investigate (lack of) municipal incorporation and its corresponding policies as political determinants of health. There is little research that captures the unique policies and practices impacting unincorporated community residents' health ( Todic and Scott, 2021 ). Studies on environmental justice and climate change can help elucidate the role of lack of governance with the production of future health risks. Additionally, health research using spatial analysis of urban areas may overestimate who lives in cities by including adjacent unincorporated communities in their statistics ( Hall et al., 2006 ). Similarly, many studies that focus on rural health disparities do not differentiate communities by political determinants such as municipal status ( Miller and Vasan, 2020 ). By re-examining data on communities with high risks for adverse health outcomes through the lens of incorporation status, the political roots of some health inequities may be exposed. 5) Utilize the Public Health Critical Race (PHCR) praxis framework and community-based participatory research methods to conduct health equity research and practice. The PHCR praxis framework provides guidelines for integrating CRT into empirical research that would be generative for working with unincorporated communities ( Ford and Airhihenbuwa, 2010 ). A key feature of PHCR praxis and participatory research is the integration of community participation across the distinct stages of empirical research. The situated knowledge ( Haraway, 1988 ) of residents lived experience will produce a textured thick description of the fullness of the experience that can help researchers also identify the assets, the strengths, the beauty, and value of the lives that are now opaque to the greater population. 6) Examine protective factors that may be present in unincorporated communities, such as social cohesion , multi-generational families, and mutual support, that can lead to positive health outcomes. Notably, low-income communities of color generally face greater surveillance than do white communities overall ( Soss and Weaver, 2017 ). For Black residents that are racially profiled ( Alang et al., 2017 ) and immigrant families who fear identification of their lack of documentation, the diminished opportunities for interacting with law enforcement may reduce the costs associated with those encounters ( Rivera, 2020 ). Less government oversight in unincorporated communities may result in less stress and fear and greater autonomy. Research investigating the benefits of unincorporated communities could offer valuable information that can inform efforts to advance health equity. 7) Leverage variation in country, state, and county policies on incorporation to understand the impact of different political arrangements on health. Policy differences offer vital information for discerning health-promoting political arrangements that may provide protective benefits or risks for residents ( Michener, 2017 ). For example, some states have low thresholds for becoming incorporated ( Smith and Debbage, 2011 ). Comparing small towns with government representation that would not be incorporated in another state could demonstrate if incorporation correlates with better health outcomes. Additionally, some counties in states like California have created municipal action committees that give advisory roles to unincorporated communities ( London et al., 2018 ). Researchers may consider investigating whether such participatory governance structure may promote health equity in unincorporated communities. 8) Identify policy and practice interventions that can increase the political power of unincorporated communities to participate in local government and ensure equitable distribution of power , money, and resources ( Walters et al., 2016 ). Low-income unincorporated communities of color lack adequate infrastructure, funding, and services ( Anderson, 2008 , Anderson, 2009 ). By identifying policies and practices that can direct additional resources and power communities can start to construct health-promoting social and material environments.

Section: 6. Conclusion

This paper furthers public health's commitment to achieving health equity and centering racial justice by making visible the socially vulnerable unincorporated communities neglected in public health research and practice. We argue that low-income populations of color living in unincorporated communities are structurally vulnerable to policies and governance structures that diminish political participation and local representation that could potentially address health risks associated with social determinants of health. Furthermore, we anchor the history and practices associated with living in unincorporated communities for low-income communities of color as imbued with racial inequities, including the practice of municipal underbounding that continues to serve as de facto segregation. Thus, we demonstrate that municipal status and its corresponding processes serve to reinforce racial health inequities. Finally, we use the existing research on unincorporated communities and social determinants of health to show patterns of neglected landscapes, detrimental exposure, and proximity to environmental hazards, and inadequate living conditions, including water and sanitation, linked to adverse health risks.
Questions remain about the scope and variability of health inequities across the country in unincorporated communities. Significantly, how does the governance of unincorporated communities differentially impact low-income communities of color and their health? For unincorporated communities, this requires interrogating social injustices that can arise from a lack of local governance by demonstrating through research how current governance impacts communities of color. Addressing political determinants is critical to public health efforts to dismantle structural racism ( Kuehn, 2021 ). However, to progress on racial health inequities, public health practitioners and scholars must not only include communities ignored and disregarded in conventional data aggregation and research methods, but also find ways to partner with them, ensuring that research agendas center their experiences ( Ford and Airhihenbuwa, 2010 ). By unmasking health inequities and their mechanisms in socially vulnerable unincorporated communities, we can identify actionable insights to redress racial and social injustice that has entrenched itself within neglected pockets of U.S. society.

Section: Declaration of interest and acknowledgements

Cristina Gomez-Vidal received fellowship support during development of this publication through the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Health Policy Research Scholars Program. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The authors extend their thanks to Ariana Bennet, Mayra Cazares-Minero, Monica De La Cruz, Martin Diaz, Jr., Margaret Mary Downey, Shannon Frattaroli, Walter Gomez, Julia Hernandez, Allen Ratliff, and Katie Savin for providing feedback on this manuscript.

Section: Credit author statement

Cristina Gomez-Vidal: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Anu Manchikanti Gómez: Writing – review & editing.
