Title: Bodies-in-waiting as infrastructure: Assembling the Philippine Government's disciplinary quarantine response to COVID-19


Abstract: Abstract

The purpose of this article is to advance the concept of bodies-in-waiting as an everyday infrastructure to explain the shifting nature of ‘pandemic cities’ in response to the changing dynamics of infection control in urban spaces. While previous literatures have been ‘sanitized’ to emphasize the importance of managing optimal physiological health and safety, we would like to argue that keener attention is needed to rethink the constitutive role of bodies in co-producing a city's sociopolitical ecologies at this time of crisis. The main body is divided into three sections. The first section introduces the political dimensions of pandemic response by various governments with an emphasis to experiences of middle to low income countries. Our intention is to show how these studies bring into light the role of local politics of pandemic response within countries, and that actual governance mechanisms in cities are shaped and contested by shifting power blocs and emergent affinities. The second section forwards an embodied urban political approach that conceptualizes bodies-in-waiting as infrastructure. In this view, bodies-in-waiting is produced and reproduced by complex social-material flows and transformation rooted in variegated matrices of power through which urban spaces are (re)assembled. The last section demonstrates a sample case that shows how bodies-in-waiting as infrastructure are understood using Twitter-sourced data associated with the Philippine government's disciplinary quarantine measures which started March 12, 2020 in the NCR. At its core, bodies-in-waiting as infrastructures populate a politically affirmative urban imaginary of bodies living on despite the existence of an accelerated and mutating virus in slower moving cities.

Section: 1. Politics of pandemic cities and moral urbanisms

The socio-political landscape of pandemic cities show a hybrid infrastructural and morally fragmented urban space. Ever since the World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 pandemic outbreak in March 2020, countries worldwide continue struggling to keep their economies afloat by establishing international and local alliances in order to curb the rates of local infection. However, far from the recommendation of an adaptive and centralized pandemic governance led by the WHO, most countries are observed to secure their own ‘national interest’ over the call for global solidarity to end the pandemic ( Gostin et al., 2020 ). In what has been described as a fractured global health ecosystem, low to middle income countries suffer the most, as their leaders are embattled to sustain cities and its various communities in light of highly fragile health systems and infrastructures, neoliberal policies to health care , and existing social inequities such as race, gender, or social class ( Bambra et al., 2020 ; Roder-DeWan, 2020 ; Williams et al., 2021 ; Zhou, 2021 ).
Notwithstanding the changing relations of interstate politics and border control, pandemic cities are shaped by the intensifying local politics of urban governance amongst existing state and non-state actors as well as emergent collectives. In such a volatile and divisive context, the consolidation of hybrid forms of governance structures – a mixture of vertical and horizontal relations of power – permeate and restructure the production of urban spaces. Typically to augment health and economic provisions provided by the national government, strengthening partnerships with the private sector , faith-based organizations, and other local and international non-government groups are seen as beneficial to expand and sustain care in hard-hit cities ( Lim and Sziarto, 2020 ; Park and Chung, 2021 ; Seddighi et al., 2021 ; Vilakati et al., 2020 ). These collaborative efforts are envisioned to buffer the immediate and chronic impacts of the pandemic as well as to foster a stronger sense of solidarity by enabling mutual and agile aid across affected communities. As case in point, the different modes of networking (e.g., state-private, local governments and non-government institutions) greatly contribute in addressing the everyday needs of local communities in Southern regions like India , Indonesia, Bangladesh, or Pakistan, that are continuously beset by compounding health and financial challenges ( Ahmed et al., 2020 ; Balsari et al., 2020 ; Djalante et al., 2020 ).
Due to the instability and rupture of conventional communal norms and practices amid the pandemic, these collective endeavors toward unified action are mired with differentiated lines of moral fragmentation. In this context, a moral splitting of body classification exists which constructs bodies as primarily un/safe, non/dangerous, un/clean, or un/disciplined ( Kusaka, 2020 ; Lasco, 2020 ; Reny and Barreto, 2020 ; Todd-Gher and Shah, 2020 ). Specifically, a morally dichotomous ordering of bodies can be understood as a specific form of moral urbanism or the symbolic-affective construction of cities ( Darling, 2013 ). In other words, we posit that bodies are produced in a complex amalgam of socio-material meanings and processes that is integral to city-making ( Gandy, 2004 , 2005 ). And while previous literatures on pandemic response have been ‘sanitized’ to reify the biomedical construction of the body in the discourse of managing optimal physiological and psychological health (e.g., Fullana et al., 2020 ; Robertson et al., 2021 ), we further argue that keener attention is needed to rethink the constitutive role of bodies in co-producing a city's sociopolitical ecologies in crisis mode.
In this article, we use the Philippines as a sample case of generating contested urban imaginaries that are shaped by fragmented and uneven ‘covidscapes’ in the country ( Aguilar, 2020 ). According to the Department of Health, the total recorded COVID-19 cases in the country is around 1,765,675 (as of August 17, 2021), wherein the largest concentration of cases (599, 964) is found in the National Capital Region (NCR), while cases in regions outside the metropolis, such as in the Central and Western Visayas, are on the rise ( Department of Health Philippines COVID-19 Tracker, 2021 ). Compared to other countries in Southeast Asia like Indonesia or Malaysia, the total cases during the earlier phase of the COVID-19 outbreak in the Philippines was relatively lower ( Bueza, 2020 ). However, as of mid-August 2021, the average number of deaths reported each day in the country increased by 44% from its previous peak three weeks ago ( Reuters COVID-19 Tracker, 2021 ). As of August 15, 2021, only around 13–14% of the country's population had received the first of two doses of the vaccine since the vaccination program started last February 2021 ( Rappler, 2021 ). With more severe cases of viral mutations are reported in the country (e.g., Delta variant), Philippine hospitals continue to struggle in coping with the threat of rapid and large-scale surges ( Morales and Lema, 2021 ).
The Philippines has also experienced one of the world's longest and strictest community quarantine lockdowns ( See, 2021 ). President Rodrigo Duterte, despite allegations of human rights violations directed to his government's ‘war-on-drugs’ national policy, continues to extend a war storyline in addressing the threat of COVID-19 in the country. In a televised announcement at the wake of the initial outbreak last March 2020, Duterte was quoted stating that “ we [Filipinos] are at war against a vicious and invisible enemy. One that cannot be seen by the naked eye. In this extraordinary war, we are all soldiers ” ( Petty and Morales, 2020 ). In view of the Duterte administration's implementation of top-down disciplinary quarantine measures, local bodies are morally demarcated between those embodying ‘good citizenship’ and the ‘pasaway’, a ‘perpetual enemy of health and order’ ( Hapal, 2021 ; Kusaka, 2020 ). Whilst the idea of a morally charged social construction of the body is nothing new (e.g., Canoy and Ofreneo, 2017 ; Miller et al., 2017 ; Rich and Evans, 2005 ), its bio-necropolitical loadings in the context of existing regimes of health governance need to be further fleshed out as these can fuel moral panic, deep seated prejudice, and violence directed toward certain groups, especially amid the pandemic ( Chakraborty, 2021 ; Rose, 2021 ; Sandset, 2021 ). For example, in another televised address, Duterte was quoted saying, “ my orders to the police and military … if there is trouble and there's an occasion that they fight back and your lives are in danger, shoot them dead” ( Reuters, 2020 ).
Working through this polarizing moral field, we further observed that these complex urban realities surrounding the local pandemic response seldom reflect a more nuanced theoretical work that challenges an often rigid vertical/structural approach to power/resistance. For example, most studies that analyzed the nexus of power/resistance in understanding societal relations in the production of urban spaces (e.g., Legg, 2008 ; Garmany, 2010 ; Certomá, 2015 ; Füller, 2016 ; Oakes, 2019 ) had strong influences from Foucault's work on biopolitical power and governmentality ( Foucault and Burchell, 2008 , 1991 ). And while contemporary social analysis has moved ‘beyond Foucault’, such as the politically engaged work by Rose (2007) , Puar (2017) or Mbembe (2019) , potential insights from these bodies of work have yet to be fully taken up in studies on urban health governance, in particular, on the ways that ‘messy’ everyday realities amid the pandemic are understood and reflected upon. Conversely, examining these realities may contribute to generating more robust and innovative theories or models of governing urban spaces post-pandemic. As such, we view our main intellectual contribution as situated within the dynamic relations between the social theory and practice of body politics in light of the contested and shifting urban political ecologies of COVID-19.

Section: 2. Bodies-in-waiting and the shifting ecology of the body-city

Our choice to focus on non-mobile bodies stems from our own observations and personal experiences of waiting since the first community quarantine lockdown last March. In this context, an episode of waiting – having made to wait for something (e.g., vaccination schedule, next Presidential elections in May 2022) or to wait with others (e.g., falling in line in the vaccination facility; getting our lives back to ‘normal’) – is an emotionally intense and perplexing embodied experience. It also does not help that some countries, at this point, have already started conversations on COVID-19 booster shots, while our country's vaccination program leaves its unvaccinated citizens to wait indefinitely or that some people still choose not to get vaccinated at all. Although not all cities are on the same boat pre- and peri-pandemic, citizens of some Southern countries like India or South Africa (including the Philippines) have had to experience chronic waiting due to the politicized bureaucratic system of the state ( Carswell et al., 2019 ; Oldfield and Greyling, 2015 ). However, most especially during the pandemic, for most people in our country and perhaps elsewhere in the world, cities have indeed transformed into complex political spaces of waiting.
Previous literatures on the politics of waiting are discussed in relation to contexts of extended precarity, social conflict, and political instability of the state. Some bodies that experienced waiting or have had no choice but to wait for a long time belong to marginalized groups such as immigrants ( Bélanger and Candiz, 2020 ), the unemployed ( Ozoliņa-Fitzgerald, 2016 ), asylum-seekers ( Mountz, 2011 ), or women ( Wick, 2011 ). Similar to disciplining the pasaway , the embodied experience of waiting by these groups is marked with prolonged agony or ‘slow death’, including punctured episodes of violence. In this context, the body's urgency (e.g., to move, to connect, to survive etc.) ‘is cast as subjective and impulsive, while larger scales, such as the region, state or society, emerge as the scale of a rational ethics’ ( Olson, 2015 , p. 520). Insofar as the foregoing literatures which we identified above are concerned, bodies-in-waiting are typically contained in a ‘micro’ and/or individual scale by strong political forces imbricated in more ‘macro’ and socio-structural scales like the city.
Recent literatures on urban political ecology (UPE) have moved beyond its initial thesis on the urbanization of nature (see recent review of Tzaninis et al., 2021 ). One key assertion of contemporary UPE scholarship is viewing the category of the ‘urban’ as a set of socio-material metabolic processes and flows, networks, or assemblage. From this perspective, the city's vibrant social infrastructures and its symbolic registers produce and reproduce how human and non-human spaces are understood, experienced, and transformed. The relationalities that the urban enable, for instance, provide deeper insights to the ethico-political encounters amongst stakeholders with competing interests involving communal issues such as everyday environmentalism ( Loftus, 2012 ), green spaces ( Chung et al., 2018 ), housing ( Perkins et al., 2004 ), or resource production ( Saguin, 2018 ), to name a few.
This article draws from a growing strand of UPE scholarship that problematizes body relations in the city ( Andueza et al., 2020 ; Canoy, 2021 ; Doshi, 2017 ). In this specific body of work, bodies are agential and vibrant socio-materialities that co-constitute and populate urban forms and spaces. Moving away from notions of the body as either a passive vessel of macro political forces or a humanist trope of personal control and volition, an embodied UPE recognizes the ‘multiple, interconnected relations of difference and power’ ( Doshi, 2017 , p. 126) that shape how bodies are made to appear and be recognizable, disgruntled and bemoaned, punished and pleasured, or even violated and erased. Thus, the body's materiality and the space it inhabits are kept in place, not only by the city's mega-infrastructures, but by ‘the social codes and relations that keep the body connected to infrastructure, or demand particular types and/or certain divisions of labour, often reinforcing or remaking gendered, classed and/or racialized lines’ ( Ramakrishnan et al., 2020 , p. 2).
Within the frame of an embodied UPE, the entangled relations between the city and the body – a body-city – are key to understanding urban health governance and space reproduction. Building from the earlier work of Matthew Gandy on rethinking urban metabolic flows in a neo-organismic model of the cyborgian city (2005), the body-city, by contrast to the hygienic or ‘sanitized’ regime of the bacteriological city ( Gandy, 2006b ) or a Foucauldian model of a city as analogous to a collective homogenous body ( Füller, 2016 ), accommodates blurred and intersecting fields of power, like how pandemic cities reforge their existing affinities, recalibrate limited resources, and reinstitute bordering mechanisms to manage viral transmission. However, unlike ‘ordinary’ time pre-pandemic, pandemic cities are highly reactive networks of hypervigilant bodies. Rearticulating Gandy's (2006a) description of neoliberal and politically unstable cities, pandemic cities ‘are increasingly characterized by ‘marked bodies’ rather than citizens in a reprise of twentieth-century fascism so that landscapes of paranoia become interwoven with longstanding structural inequalities to produce volatile topographies of hatred and mistrust’ (p. 507).
In reading the foregoing passage taken from Gandy's discussion of complex bio-political contestations in urban spaces, bodies are not subservient to human will nor inferior to the urban body itself. Rather, bodies themselves are vital infrastructures in the city ( Andueza et al., 2020 ). Specifically, we extend this assertion in view of non-mobile or sedentary bodies structured by complex social formations, and that these seemingly inert bodies are themselves course in and through power ( Bissell, 2007 , 2010 ). In relation, bodies-in-waiting are everyday infrastructures ‘defined by the (non) movement or patterning of social form. It is the living mediation of what organizes life’ ( Berlant, 2016 , p. 393; emphasis added).
As a social infrastructure in the body-city, bodies-in-waiting are produced and reproduced by uneven social-material flows and transformation rooted in variegated matrices of power through which urban spaces are (re)assembled. In other words, bodies are not mirrors nor passive conduits of social processes. Rather, as constitutional to the relations of the becoming urban, bodies always exceed their ‘exchange value’ ( Andueza et al., 2020 ). Thus, bodies-in-waiting as everyday infrastructures cannot be fully abstracted by the capitalist machine because these bodies don't just occupy or are commodified in space, but rather are rightfully viewed as fundamental to the differentiated worlding of urban life . As such, this concept may provide a grammar to appreciate and enliven bodies in pandemic cities as populated by and inhabiting the precarity and unevenness of the urban, along with the moral urbanisms that constellate its socio-spatial temporalities. In the next section, we present a sample case to demonstrate bodies-in-waiting as infrastructures in the context of assembling the Philippine government's disciplinary quarantine response to the pandemic.

Section: 3. Case: bodies-in-waiting as infrastructure in the context of disciplinary quarantine

The disciplinary quarantine measures implemented by the Duterte administration are consistent to an overarching war storyline enshrined in the current national government's drug war campaign. Even pre-pandemic, the drug war has tremendously shaped the nature of urban spaces in the country, with the large concentration of deaths reported in the NCR ( Atun et al., 2019 ; Warburg and Jensen, 2020a ). Urban poor communities, often tagged as drug ‘hotspots’, struggled the most, as deaths linked to police crackdowns generated an atmosphere of ambiguous fear and mistrust which fundamentally destabilized and reconfigured social relations between the state and members of the community ( Ofreneo et al., 2020 ; Warburg and Jensen, 2020b ). Specifically, the bio-necropolitical governance of these urban spaces reinforced a morally crystallized construction of a dangerous other that justifies the use of violence towards certain groups (e.g., drug user/addict) as legitimate ( Lasco and Curato, 2019 ).
Here, we need to consider the urban realities that the Philippine drug war enabled to better situate the implementation of disciplinary quarantine measures as a distinct feature of local pandemic response. For the purpose of this article, we argue that it is not only about the continuity of a spectacular display of military force to eradicate the ‘enemies’ of the state, nor to say whether the government's pandemic response is indeed effective or not, which takes the ‘central’ rationale of presenting such a case. Rather, it is to point to the specific constructions of everyday bodies that should be problematized in relation to the (re)production of urban spaces in pandemic cities which may be related, yet remain distinct to the bodies constructed in a drug war context. Definitely, we are not generalizing that all bodies in every city around the world experienced and are experiencing the same set of conditions. Nevertheless, we still contend that there are critical similarities across cities. For example, we see that the responsibility (even perhaps in terms of accountability to a certain degree) of sustaining various communities in these cities is often diffused and volatile, enacted by multi-actor networks – whether coordinated or not, regardless if a city has adequate resources or not. In other words, the power to sustain life in pandemic cities is not solely reliant on the stability and performance of formal national and/or local urban health governance structures, but rather the exercise of governmental power in these cities is more distributed (not flat) and shared (not always mutual) with other non-state actors through strategic partnerships and alliances.
We build on this premise of a more distributed urban health governance to rethink the nature of ‘disciplining’ in disciplinary quarantine. Fig. 1 shows the extensive and modified disciplinary spaces (e.g., streets, borders, basketball courts) that regulate bodies (e.g., stop/restrict/contain movement), especially those that violate community lockdown protocols (e.g., strict curfew, mobility of essential goods, services, and workers etc.). In contrast to the policing agents of the state, bodies-in-waiting as everyday infrastructures are always in excess of the state's power to smoothen and flatten such bodies' capacities to disentangle moral codes and transgress legal protocols with the least ‘resistance’. As a vibrant infrastructure of pandemic cities, bodies-in-waiting live on and not just ‘resist’ state surveillance through acts of deviance or acts of human resilience. What seems contradictory to these photos of bodies-in-detention or impassable bodies in Fig. 1 is the more-than representational quality of these bodies to skid through lines of differentiation and spaces of containment. In pandemic cities, the number of bodies ‘contained’ in institutionalized spaces and passages like quarantine facilities, hospitals, inter-city checkpoints, airports, or funerals do not clearly indicate the ‘success’ or ‘failure’ of a pandemic response measure as indexed by the capacity to hold/release something or to facilitate/impede movement. Rather, it is more important to examine in how momentary, provisional or chronic clustering of the infrastructural body assembles and animates relations, meanings, affects, and other material processes in a particular space/passage. For example, quarantined bodies in a facility are not only construed as being subdued by its walls and rules, but rather as infrastructures coursing in and through a surplus of meanings/memories/powers. These bodies can indeed sustain, amplify, or resuscitate a facility's limits, capacities, and affective registers. Download: Download high-res image (837KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Figure 1. Everyday Spaces and Borders of Disciplinary Quarantine Policing. Note. Copyright 2020 by Punong Barangay Lourdes A. Fortaleza of Barangay Poblacion- Valenzuela City, AFP / Alex Badayos and Philippine Star News, Grig C. Montegrande and Philippine Daily Inquirer
The everyday animation of bodies-in-waiting is clearly demonstrated in public marketplaces in the city (see Fig. 2 ). Similar to groceries found in commercial malls, partitioning of bodies through physical distancing measures (i.e., left panel) in public marketplaces suggests the assumption of clear cut and divisible spaces that allow bodies to ‘fall-in-line’ and take turns to purchase food and other everyday needs. However, we posit that the reproduction of space in public marketplaces, at least in the Philippines, is actually enlivened by the ‘non-thematisation’ of lived bodies that constitute the mundane chronopolitics – nexus of mobilities and non-mobilities – and democratic entanglements of assembling public marketplaces for most Filipinos. As seen in the right panel of Fig. 2 , Divisoria , a locally popular public marketplace in Metro Manila, is observed to be populated by shoppers from diverse walks of life and a multitude of sellers (i.e., formal/informal vendors), even at the earlier phase of the pandemic outbreak in April 2020. Again, we are not saying that this depiction of bodies-in-cramped spaces is acceptable or not – certainly the risk of COVID-19 transmission is very high in these kinds of places. Rather, we are saying that the prosaic nature of the complex labyrinth of Divisoria disrupts any ordered partitioning of bodies (especially early morning or at night) because policing conditions on the ground are more ‘loose’ and open (even pre-pandemic) to negotiated networks of disjunctive urban governance (see also article by Recio (2020) on street vending in Baclaran district, Metro Manila). Download: Download high-res image (1000KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . (Un)Restrained Movement in Public Marketplaces. Note. Copyright 2020 by Philippine Star News, Philippine Daily Inquirer, Manila PIO, and Carlo Molina
Divisoria as an embodied infrastructural ecology also shows complex relations of bodies-in-waiting that trouble the capacity of the body to wait in relation to intersecting everyday temporalities (i.e., bodies while waiting to get vaccinated, also cannot wait to move and feed its thirst and hunger). As such, the disciplining of bodies-in-waiting via strict quarantine measures is like ‘the tussle between the demands of abstraction and concrete processes of social reproduction plays out’ ( Andueza et al., 2020 , p. 12). In other words, bodies-in-waiting as (im)mortal infrastructures can be viewed as both complicit and resistant in their constitutive role of reproducing differentiated and liminal urban realities, wherein simple binary classifications are always already blurred or transgressed. The shifting duality of bodies-in-waiting also invokes and energizes urban spaces contrary to the despondent and muted imaginary of urban ‘death worlds’ (e.g., Chakraborty, 2021 ) because it challenges any full enclosure, over-determination, and extremization of deploying particular social categories (e.g., poor, women, etc.) that may deny the ontological condition changing bodily existence, mutations, and agential entanglements of human and non-human bodies. And while the pandemic disproportionately impacted certain bodies over others (e.g., some bodies indeed die because of state negligence), it has also made instabilities, fluidities, ruptures, and alternate futures more normative rather than the exception to governing everyday urban life .
Bodies-in-waiting are politically engaged infrastructures. As Andueza et al. (2020) posited, ‘it is not only the rule of capital that needs to be articulated on the permanently shifting cultural grounds that give social reproduction its multiple meanings, but it is also from these grounds that any possible political composition of resistance must emerge’ (p. 13). The left panel in Fig. 3 demonstrates a collective protest of bodies gathered in the auspices of a local public university against the state's endorsement of an anti-terrorism act (the Republic Act no. 11479 was passed on July 18, 2020). Moreover, it is also around this time that the country's largest media and broadcasting firm was shut down due to the state's non-renewal of its operating franchise. Despite the threat of viral transmission, the mobilization of these public protests signified the continuity of efforts to protect and fight for the people's right to free speech and due process. Here, we can observe an iconic representation of human non-mobility invoking the strong refusal to move (on) and be removed from an accelerated political storyline of state censorship. Download: Download high-res image (831KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Re-assembling Bodies-in-Protests. Note. Copyright 2020 by Philippine Star News and Boy Santos, Philippine Star News and Michael Varcas, MovePH and Russel Loreto
Furthermore, the apparent continuity of protest activities also encompasses political discontinuities of ‘broken’ infrastructural bodies. The bodies-in-waiting in the middle and right panel of Fig. 3 show the ‘new’ and ‘old’ bodies embodying relations of repair and decay which demand redemption and justice stretching beyond the pandemic storyline. The middle panel shows bodies of jeepney drivers that are pushed to ask for alms in the streets. This is one example of a hard-hit group during the pandemic in light of the limited public transportation in Metro Manila. Despite overwhelmingly difficult circumstances, some jeepney drivers have been denied or was asked to modify their franchise for being non-compliant with the Public Utility Vehicle (PUV) Modernization Program ( De Torres, 2021 ). The PUV modernization program, which started around 2017, is part of the government's flagship program ‘which envisions a restructured, modern, well-managed and environmentally sustainable transport sector where drivers and operators have stable, sufficient and dignified livelihoods while commuters get to their destinations quickly, safely and comfortably’ ( Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board, 2021 ). Ironically, Duterte's promise of ‘dignified’ livelihood for transport workers in the country was short-lived when he was quoted in one press conference saying, “ Mahirap kayo? Putang ina, magtiis kayo sa hirap at gutom, wala akong pakialam (You're poor? Son of a b***h, suffer hardship and hunger, I don't care). It's the majority of the Filipino people. Huwag ninyo ipasubo ang tao (Don't endanger the public)” ( Ranada, 2017 ).
The phasing-out of traditional jeepneys in 2017 and its eventual non-essential use during the pandemic meant that some jeepney drivers have to continue the painful laboring of their bodies on the streets just to survive another day. In this context, the pandemic has accelerated and further exposed (Metro) Manila's necroburbian spaces – deceptive and violent urban spaces – wherein the bodies of jeepney drivers, together with bodies of the homeless (right panel of Fig. 3 ), constitute a neglected and severely disenfranchised urban imaginary deserving of everyday brutalities ( Ortega, 2020 ). For instance, the homeless or informal settlers are easily to blame for the city's disaster-related problems like flooding ( Alvarez and Cardenas, 2019 ) or the production of empty socialized housing programs by the government ( Arcilla, 2018 ). While the pandemic's more chronic impact is still unknown, the issue of homelessness is (once again) further pushed back to the urban fringe through prioritization of other ‘essential’ bodies. In Berlant's (2016) words, ‘we can see the glitch of the present [pandemic] as a revelation of what had been the lived ordinary, the common infrastructure’ of the city's hauntingly unmappable bodies-in-dispose (p. 403; emphasis added).
Bodies-in-waiting as infrastructure always belong elsewhere, but also nowhere. To buffer economies from complete melt-down, the ‘embodied circulation [of ‘essential’ bodies] is necessary to produce capitalist value and facilitate local exchange’ ( Andueza et al., 2020 , p. 6; emphasis added). However, like in the case of jeepney drivers, the permission, denial, or urgency of bodies to move back to their places of work are shaped by existing inequalities ( Dobusch and Kreissl, 2020 ), and anchored to a country's specific amalgam of urban imaginaries. The left and right panels in Fig. 4 show a cluster of bodies-in-waiting constituting the stream of local migrations in cities (i.e., inter-city/city-province movements). Aside from the need to satisfy the economic reproduction of bodies, the experience of waiting, which includes being made to wait indefinitely (i.e., waiting in daily commute, stranded and waiting to return home), is primarily a question of belongingness to a city's shifting urban imaginary. In this context, the classification of bodies as either ‘essential’ or ‘non-essential’ produces a different set of moral qualities in defining who is (not) deserving of the city, who are able and worthy to provide (continuous) financial, health, and social care to others, and who are given the privilege and responsibility to reimagine the city for oneself and for/with others. Download: Download high-res image (965KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Congestion and Absence of (Non)Mobile bodies in streets. Note. Copyright 2020 by The Philippine Star, Philippine Daily Inquirer and Richard A. Reyes, Rappler and Ben Nabong
On the flip side, the ‘depopulating’ of capitalist infrastructures (e.g., commercial buildings, business districts) are re-casted as hollow, empty or ‘ghostly’ grounds (see Fig. 4 's middle panel). This means that bodies which previously occupied and animated these spaces are elsewhere doing work-from-home arrangements. In relation, the technological affordances of bodies working remotely (at least those who have the access to do so) also meant the invasion and transformation of care spaces at home. While work-from-home arrangements are also disproportionately experienced, for instance, by the intensification of unpaid work of women (e.g., Chauhan, 2020 ), the political infrastructural ecology of the home itself is transformed by the further partitioning of domestic space in order to maintain ‘healthy’ psychological boundaries between ‘work’ and ‘non-work’. Furthermore, these bodies-in-waiting are also stretched temporally as the notion of time is also ‘essentialized’ and redistributed in light of a reconstituted home assemblage and the changing wider home-city relations.

Section: 4. Conclusions

The pandemic city as a space of waiting is a political space characterized by the intense ebbs and flows of human and non-human bodies across national and local borders in light of the continuing suppression of viral transmission. While the dominant discourse of infection control has been to classify bodies as either COVID-19 positive/active or not (i.e., infectious or not), the article's main intellectual intervention is aimed to distinctly reconceptualize bodies-in-waiting as everyday infrastructures which are always already in excess of the state's rendering of bodily health, security, and shared fate. Drawing on insights from scholarship on critical urbanism and embodied urban political ecology, we have advanced ways to rethink the constitutive role of bodies in co-producing cities' sociopolitical ecologies at this time of the pandemic. Working through a city's contested and hybrid moral field, we have demonstrated salient examples of interrogating how ‘stuck’ or inert bodies can be understood differently beyond a simplistic binary framing of activity/passivity or mobility/non-mobility. Furthermore, we have also highlighted the relative porosity, existing negotiated networks, and disjunctive reanimation of everyday urban life that challenge the flattening of how bodies are categorized in discourses of urban health governance. What is at stake in this kind of intellectual work is it offers a generous critique to the pervading urban imaginaries and its moral discontents under the conditions of an evolving crisis. It seeks to provide a revitalizing discourse on the ethico-political possibilities of encountering and reimagining the city, and to expand the ways bodies become more-than representational, more-than material, and more-than human.
Our focus on bodies-in-waiting, however, is not meant to romanticize suffering or presuppose a different kind of distant ‘gaze’ – very far from it . As you might have personally observed or experienced, the everyday discourse of bodies are almost completely ‘codified’ through powerful framings of urgency, vulnerability, and passivity in light of the much-needed integrated public health and social care interventions. We don't disagree with this reality. As an unintended effect, however, there is also a danger of nominalizing bodies as either COVID positive or negative, living or dead, winning or losing, vaccinated or not, stuck or mobile, and so on. As Olson (2015) notes: “insisting that a suffering body, now, is that which cannot wait, has the ethical effect of drawing it into consideration alongside the political, public and exceptional scope of large-scale futures. It may help us insist on the body, both as a single unit and a plurality, as a legitimate scale of normative priority and social care” (p. 523). Theorizing bodies-in-waiting as ‘infrastructural’ does not imply reducing the value of bodies into a material substrate. Rather, we are that careful attention is needed to unpack the bodies' transforming socio-material relations in (re)producing (post)pandemic cities, which can further strengthen the call towards securing 'life-making' infrastructures, instead of bolstering a purely technocratic and ‘profit-making’ infrastructural (post)pandemic response ( Leach et al., 2021 ; Jaffe, 2020 ).
Bodies-in-waiting as infrastructures are bodies enacting moral agencies via strategic collective action while also maintaining strong ‘rootedness’ to a sense of personhood . By contrast to viewing bodies as mere technologies of circulation, (in)visible bodies in the photos are real entities that ‘exist within broader social formations in which meanings are constructed, in which love, care, anger and repair are all felt, experienced and acted upon’ ( Andueza et al., 2020 , p. 8). That is why bodies-in-waiting do not lie ‘outside’ representational and structural power, but rather these bodies' socio-material relations are situated in ‘practical, embodied consciousness in the world – that is, an ‘interworld’ where meaning and materiality are inseparable’ ( Simonsen, 2013 , p. 6). In this context, bodies-in-waiting are realised in in-between spaces of perpetually reproducing themselves while at same time transgressing the abstract machinery that designates its use value.
To conclude, we would like to recognize the efforts of scholars who continue contributing to the ‘thickening’ critical scholarship of understanding the contextually complex and multifaceted pandemic response of cities from their own conceptual and locational vantage points. We hope that our intellectual intervention can modestly contribute to these ongoing discussions. Asserting that the discourse of the COVID-19 pandemic is not solely about the virus or vaccines, we assert that potential insights gleaned from our distinct conceptualization of bodies and urban space are applicable and transferable to cities which are governed by hybrid logics and competing everyday practices of caring for and with local communities. At its core, bodies-in-waiting as infrastructures populate a politically affirmative urban imaginary of bodies living on despite the existence of an accelerated and mutating virus in slower moving cities.

Section: Notes

1. We used this term similar to Fuller's (2016) discussion of the biopolitical effects of changing infection control in post-SARS Hong Kong , but also encompass modes of living beyond a Foucauldian gaze of the city. 2. Sample photos used in this article are sourced from online local news platforms.

Section: Credit author statement

Nico A. Canoy: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration. Augil Marie Q. Robles: Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization. Gilana Kim T. Roxas: Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Section: Acknowledgements

We would like to recognize the contributions of Mr. Tristan Gamalinda in co-writing the earlier drafts of the sample case presented in this paper.
