Title: Brains exposed: How new imaging technology reconfigures expertise coordination in neurosurgery


Abstract: Abstract

This study explores the consequences of the uptake of novel medical technology for expertise coordination among specialists. Building on a 40-month field study , we show how the introduction of iMRI triggered a significant change in temporal, interactional and role dimensions of coordination. We trace the origin of those changes to the novel role the images started to play in surgery: iMRI generated new forms of visibility of the brain (offering real-time, more precise imaging) and new forms of ambiguity for clinical action (representing the brain undergoing manipulation). In response to this dual nature of images, specialists reconfigured how they engage with each other: aligning temporal rhythms of their corresponding work practices, shifting their interactions to focus more on dialog and synchronous mutual exploration of images, and delegating increased weight to radiological judgement for guiding immediate surgical action. We discuss the implications of our findings for research on expertise coordination and on the consequences of novel medical technologies for situated practice.

Section: 1. Introduction

Effective coordination of specialized medical expertise is a crucial condition and a significant challenge for successful care delivery ( Martin et al., 2009 ; Powell and Davies, 2012 ). Research often shows that when experts face the need to coordinate their hyper-specialized knowledge, deep epistemic boundaries surface ( Carlile, 2004 ), contestation may emerge over whose knowledge takes primacy ( Oborn and Dawson, 2010a ), and rigid professional roles may stand in the way of exploring common ground ( Liberati et al., 2016 ; Valentine and Edmondson, 2015 ). Novel medical technologies can add to the complexity of such coordination, especially when they have the potential to produce new kinds of information that may affect professionals’ expert work ( Bourret et al., 2011 ; Bourret and Cambrosio, 2019 ; Timmermans and Buchbinder, 2010 ) that, by extension, unsettle existing ways of coordinating knowledge across different professional groups.
In this paper we offer an analysis of the consequences of the introduction of novel medical technology through the lens of expertise coordination, which is valuable because of its particular focus on the use and exchange of expertise in practice. This perspective, drawing on practice theories , traces the situated ways in which experts combine their specialized inputs to achieve the collective aims of the organizations in which they are active ( Bechky and Okhuysen, 2011 ; Ben-Menahem et al., 2016 ; Faraj and Xiao, 2006 , Oborn and Barrett, 2021 ). The practice-centric view of coordination argues that in addition to focusing on formal, managerial, or organizational control arrangements, it is also important to examine in detail the emergent activities and interactions that experts use in their everyday work to integrate their disparate expertise and enact their role relations to achieve a collective goal. This approach has produced insightful accounts about what mechanisms enable successful expertise coordination. Yet, recognizing the significant influence that the introduction of new technologies has been shown to exert over how situated work is performed ( Orlikowski and Scott, 2016 ; Sergeeva et al., 2020 ), researchers have recently called to augment this perspective through more explicit attention to the role of technology in constituting and shaping such coordination arrangements, and more accounts of “material enactment” of coordination ( Bailey et al., 2019 ; Beane and Orlikowski, 2015 ).
We address this call in our 40-month field study of the introduction of Intraoperative Magnetic Resonance Imaging (iMRI) in the work of radiologists and neurosurgeons, for the purpose of improving brain tumor resection procedures. Previously, neurosurgeons relied on radiologists’ interpretations of preoperative images taken a few days before surgery, and postoperative images taken within 48 h afterwards, to establish how successfully the tumor had been resected. iMRI technology gave neurosurgeons high-quality images taken during the surgical procedure itself, inside the operating room, without having to transport patients to the MRI unit. Radiologists interpreted the images during surgery, providing surgeons with real-time guidance to improve their control over tumor resection during the procedure, offering an improved way of navigating the brain.
We found that iMRI was influential in reconfiguring expertise coordination between surgeons and radiologists in that it triggered change in temporal, interactional and role dimensions of coordination. In terms of temporality, the rhythms of the specialists’ work had to align; on the one hand, the low-pace, deliberative work of radiologists adapted to the urgent demands of surgical practice, while on the other hand, surgeons had to allocate the time radiologists took to interpret images during the acute procedure. Interactionally, previously brief and fragmented practices of expertise exchange between radiologists and surgeons shifted to focus more on dialog and mutual exploration of brain images. Role relations changed in that surgeons ceded a substantial part of the core judgement to radiology and iMRI images, representing a significant departure from their traditional authoritative role in the operating room. We trace how such emerging changes were enacted in response to the ways in which iMRI both offered new ways of visibility of the brain and brought to the fore new forms of ambiguities of clinical action, that together gave rise to novel dependencies in exchanging radiological and surgical expertise. Our findings therefore underscore the consequential role of materiality in affecting coordination, responding to recent calls for more in-depth accounts of “material enactment” of collaborative work ( Beane and Orlikowski, 2015 ; Sergeeva et al., 2020 ).

Section: 2. Theoretical background

In spite of the expectations that various emerging medical technologies – such as imaging devices or genetic testing – are supposed to offer experts novel and more accurate information, objective, evidence-based action, and unequivocal judgments ( Ginat et al., 2014 ; Nimsky et al., 2001 ; Racine et al., 2005 ), social scientists have shown that the introduction of such novel technologies is often accompanied by changes in situated practices, where newly emerging questions, and unanticipated struggles arise ( Alač, 2011 ; Armstrong and Hilton, 2014 ; Joyce, 2005 ; Reed et al., 2016 ; Timmermans and Berg, 2003 ; Timmermans and Buchbinder, 2013 ). Previous studies have focused primarily on practices of and interactions between patients and physicians, but to a lesser extent on those practices involving coordination across specialist groups. In what follows, we briefly review what kind of consequences for practices have been considered and then offer the expertise coordination lens as a useful one for exploring the consequences for practices involving collective work.
The use of novel medical technologies often reconfigures the situated ways in which physicians interact with patients, with complex consequences for their relationship. For instance, studies on the introduction of the stethoscope are one example. The fact that stethoscope rendered important symptoms knowable, in faster and presumably more objective ways, diminished the importance of patient narratives and thereby shifted how consultations were performed, moving them away from “narrative” practices towards more instrumental and tool-mediated ones ( Schubert, 2011 ). Far from ensuring objective and accurate knowledge about the fetus, the introduction of the prenatal ultrasound screening led patients to call into question doctors’ knowledge, and prompted them to develop new sensemaking practices, triggering fraught relationships between actors ( Williams, 2006 ). In a study of genetic newborn screening technologies, Timmermans and Buchbinder (2010) show that rather than contributing to the development of more accurate and reliable knowledge, the screening facilitated the emergence of new types of doubt about the likelihood of a newborn developing several metabolic disorders . Coping with such doubt in action required the reconfiguration of the relationship between physicians and patients, as they came together to develop new ways to interpret borderline results.
Emerging medical technologies have also been shown, despite what is implicit in the rhetoric (e.g. Racine et al., 2005 ), to not unequivocally produce knowledge for action but to be inseparable from physicians' practices on the ground, creating new reconfigurations and demands on those practices. Electronic monitoring in anesthesia, for example, may be seen to offer an automatic way to keep track of patient vitals, but in practice actually puts a lot of demand on the anesthesiologists’ work. Specialists need to be continuously attuned and skilled at ongoing interpretation and alert to possible malfunctions and abnormal readings, all of which illustrates how making technology work is contingent on a set of expert practices ( Goodwin, 2009 ). Similarly, imaging technologies, such as MRI or CT, have been heralded by practitioners and the media with the rhetoric and assumptions of producing superior and objective knowledge about human anatomy and its functions ( Joyce, 2005 ; Saunders, 2008 ). The practice of using those technologies shows, though, that every new generation of MRI and CT images requires a new array of “reading” practices and intense engagement and interpretation by radiologists, where their judgments become even more crucial ( Burri, 2008 , 2012 ; Saunders, 2008 ). A recent development of functional MRI (fMRI) may be seen as a similar example in the sense of how the promises and expectations of unprecedented new knowledge (such as the exact location of cognitive processes like memory, language, and spatial cognition) are controversial and make invisible a set of new skilled practices emerging among scientists to make sense of technologically generated images ( Alač, 2011 ).
In sum, emerging medical technology often gives rise to unanticipated consequences for situated practices, including novel patterns of performing physician-patient consultations ( Timmermans and Buchbinder, 2010 ), new types of coping strategies by patients ( Reed et al., 2016 ), and the emergence of new skills and work practices to deal and make sense of the new information ( Alač, 2011 ; Goodwin, 2009 ; Saunders, 2008 ; Timmermans and Angell, 2001 ). While prior studies have deeply explored consequences for patients and physicians, we suggest that it is also revelatory to continue tracing what kind of implications emerging medical technology may have for coordination across medical specialist groups . Given that existing interactions across specialist groups are known to be influenced by how existing medical technology is used ( Saunders, 2008 ), we may also expect new ways of working and novel coordination arrangements across specialists to emerge in response to new technology. For example, traditional interaction scripts in medical practices may be disrupted ( Barley, 1986 ), and experts may start negotiating their role arrangements and defend their jurisdiction, all to protect their autonomy and position ( Barley, 1990 ). Following studies of medical technologies that have started to investigate the emergence of new configurations among experts (e.g. Bourret and Cambrosio, 2019 ), we continue to explore this by utilizing the expertise coordination lens, which we outline below.
Expertise coordination is defined as a “temporally unfolding and contextualized process of input regulation and interaction articulation to realize a collective performance” ( Faraj and Xiao, 2006 , p. 1157). This perspective emerged from the growing ethnographic investigation of professional settings, where reality often did not fit textbook descriptions of organizational coordination. The mainstream view of coordination focused on formal mechanisms, such as hierarchy, divisions of labor, or contingency fit between environment and organizational structure ( Galbraith, 1973 ; Thompson, 2003 ). In practice, however, many professional settings reliant on complex collaborations, such as trauma teams ( Faraj and Xiao, 2006 ) or new product development ( Bechky, 2003 ), seemed to draw only partly on such mechanisms, while simultaneously requiring informally emerging patterns of interactions, which have not been accounted for in formal descriptions of how coordination is achieved. Several recent studies have, thus, focused more on these “emergent” or situated practices, rather than formal organizational arrangements, to understand what experts actually do in practice to integrate their knowledge in order to accomplish their goals (see e.g. Ben-Menahem et al., 2016 ; Kellogg et al., 2006 ; Lindberg et al., 2019 ; and Okhuysen and Bechky, 2009 for a review of the historical development of coordination research). In what follows, we briefly outline three dimensions of coordination that have been found influential for coordinating expertise in practice and have emerged as useful for interpreting our case.
An expertise coordination perspective is valuable for tracing the consequences of new technologies for collaborative work because it puts the focus on specific and idiosyncratic work practices and ways of knowing that each specialist group enacts in the course of their work and explores how differences in those may stand in the way of transferring meaning to another group ( Faraj and Xiao, 2006 ). The focus on deep differences in ways of knowing allows us to recognize that to coordinate expertise, a lot of effort and specific practices are required to overcome or transcend knowledge boundaries ( Majchrzak et al., 2012 ; Oborn and Dawson, 2010a ), and that deep dialog, translation, and non-straightforward alignment of perspectives is often necessary ( Carlile, 2004 ; Oborn and Dawson, 2010b ). Practices in collaborative work are also shown to rely on distinct temporal orientations – i.e. taken for granted assumptions about e.g. the pace, urgency, trajectories and scheduling of occupational activity – which influence how specialists align the performance of their work vis-à-vis each other ( Oborn and Barrett, 2021 ; Reddy et al., 2006 ).
An expertise coordination lens, with its emphasis on situated action, also suggests tracing how specialists enact situated interactions practices or scripts – routinized patterns of sayings and doings through which experts are accustomed to exchanging their judgments ( Faraj and Xiao, 2006 ). These interaction patterns have proved particularly important in contexts where the interdependencies between experts are complex and uncertainty is high, which often requires formal coordination mechanisms to be complemented by situated informal interactions. For example, Kellogg et al. (2006) illustrated how cross-disciplinary teams in a highly dynamic setting had to engage in constant and intense practices of display, representation, and assembly to ensure that their specialized knowledge was at least partly understandable by members of another specialist group. Patterns of interactions have also recently been shown to be influenced by differences in temporal orientations of expert groups, which can dictate whose perspective will dominate the interaction, as for example in the case of multi-disciplinary meetings, where surgeons’ temporal priorities to move on with surgeries clashed with the slow-paced temporal orientations of oncologists, producing strain in overall coordination of care ( Oborn and Barrett, 2021 ).
Finally, an expertise coordination lens allows accounting for existing role relations, i.e. shared expectations that exist in the workplace with regards to what tasks and activities each group is expected to perform, whose knowledge informs what activity, and how those are allocated and performed across specialist groups ( Bechky, 2006 ; Faraj and Xiao, 2006 ; Okhuysen and Bechky, 2009 ; Valentine and Edmondson, 2015 ). Focusing on how role relations enable coordination also helps to realize that coordination arrangements are not neutral but intertwined with the status and relative importance of each groups’ expertise vis-à-vis each other. For example, studies exploring how knowledge is shared across oncology , surgery, and nursing show that in deciding on treatment plans, role relations exhibit a clear privileging of certain types of knowledge where the expertise of groups, such as nurses, is regularly sidelined ( Oborn and Dawson, 2010a ). In the famous study of CT scanning technologies, role relations similarly exhibited status differences, where technicians felt that despite feeling competent to read the scans, their role vis-a-vis radiologists was clearly preventing them from offering their opinions ( Barley, 1990 ).
While an expertise coordination lens has proven valuable in getting closer to how coordination is actually performed on the ground ( Faraj and Xiao, 2006 ; Okhuysen and Bechky, 2009 ), a growing number of studies call for more research on the consequences of new technologies for coordination arrangements ( Bailey et al., 2019 ; Beane and Orlikowski, 2015 ; Orlikowski and Scott, 2016 ; Schakel et al., 2016 ). Recent studies have offered some insights in such consequences, e.g. tracing how electronic patient records ( Pine and Mazmanian, 2017 ), robotics ( Sergeeva et al., 2020 ) and telepresence ( Beane and Orlikowski, 2015 ), reconfigure in various ways how practices are performed and thus illustrate the significance of new technology for affecting coordination. In this paper, we continue and join this line of research, focusing specifically on an aspect that is relatively less explored in existing studies of technology and coordination – i.e. how the potential for new knowing and action offered by new technologies triggers coordination arrangements to be reconfigured.

Section: 3. Research setting and method

These findings are part of a larger study conducted at a university hospital in Sweden. We focused on the introduction of Magnetic Resonance Imaging performed intra-operatively using a movable, ceiling-mounted scanner in the operating room. In our setting, Intraoperative MRI (iMRI) was mainly used for neurosurgery , particularly for brain tumor resection.
The key difference between traditional brain surgery and iMRI-assisted surgery is in how and when the images are taken. In the traditional procedure, to check whether the entire tumor has been resected, the surgeon needs to close up the patient and transport them to the MRI unit for imaging. The MRI images are then interpreted by a radiologist and communicated via a written radiology report. In contrast, with iMRI, imaging can be performed during surgery itself, without having to close up and move the patient. When neurosurgeons feel they have sufficiently resected the entire tumor, they can stop and request an MRI right there to see if they have succeeded and can update their navigation system with real-time images should additional resection be needed. Neurosurgery is inherently delicate, highly uncertain, and centered around surgeons' clinical judgment ( Litofsky et al., 2006 ). Due to the phenomenon of “brain shift” – the movement of brain structures after intervention – MRI images produced prior to surgery may be inaccurate by up to 10 mm ( Nimsky et al., 2001 ). As a result, neurosurgeons face high levels of uncertainty with respect to their orientation within the surgical cavity and the sufficiency of tumor resection. iMRI makes it possible to navigate with more precision and check the extent of resection via immediate imaging – an immense improvement that has increased surgeons’ confidence in their judgments.
The fieldwork, conducted between December 2015 and March 2019, combined observational ethnographic methods, interviews, and document analysis. The Swedish Regional Ethics Committee approved the study, and participants provided their informed consent . As part of the larger study, the first author has performed extensive fieldwork, including more than 80 interviews and 200 h of observation. The data used in this specific study included 20 interviews with surgeons (10) and radiologists (10), observations of 16 medical procedures (eight before the introduction of the new technology, and eight afterwards), and observations of nine training sessions with the new technology. Extensive field notes taken during these observations describe the physical configuration of settings, interactions, exchanges, and individual and collective actions. Observations provided rich material on how the work was performed before and after the new technology was introduced, which – in addition to focusing on narratives and provider accounts – offers insight into how expertise was coordinated in clinical settings. We interviewed specialists who were directly involved with or had knowledge of the new technology. This selection reflects the small number of experts at Swedish hospitals and in Sweden with experience of iMRI. Open-ended interviews allowed interviewees to talk freely about their views and experiences ( Silverman, 2011 ). Questions sought to capture the work situation before and after the introduction of iMRI, as we asked respondents to describe how they worked with the technology, what it implied for their traditional work responsibilities, and how they would describe changes in their work compared to the traditional situation. We also collected documents such as PowerPoint presentations, equipment lists, policy documents, and checklists.
We analyzed the field material using an iterative comparative method inspired by grounded theory ( Strauss and Corbin, 1998 ). We first used a line-by-line open coding process on the transcribed interviews and field notes, generating a description of the traditional work processes of neurosurgeons and radiologists, and how these altered after the new iMRI technology was introduced. To identify what changes were most consequential for surgeons and radiologists, we constructed comparative tables for each occupational group in which we coded data for how work and coordination was performed before and after iMRI was introduced. When examining these examples in detail, we noticed that they concerned ways of knowing and acting on the brain, which are aspects often discussed in the sociological literature on emerging medical technology and its potential for knowledge about the patient and disease. For example, prior to the new technology, surgeons were not dependent on images or radiological expertise to guide surgical action but largely engaged in a solo situated balancing act while in the wound. With the new technology, they often praised the promise of iMRI images for providing them superior information about the brain and tumor location, largely guiding their surgical action. However, for this technological possibility to be materialized, surgeons found themselves crucially dependent on bringing radiological expertise into the operating room (OR). We therefore focused on how the surgeons' collaborative work with radiologists started to be performed as a particularly revelatory change following the introduction of the new technology. Thus, we turned to the expertise coordination literature and literature on consequences of emerging medical technology to help us make sense of our material and compare it with existing insights. As we iterated between our data and the existing literature, we noticed that many of the informants’ descriptions concerned novel ways of working together, pointing to changes in practices of expertise coordination, something less often described in existing research. We then zeroed in only on those segments of our data where surgeons and radiologists explained changes in their interactions and role relations before and after iMRI. We structure the presentation of our findings in the following sections according to how each group works and how they coordinate with each other, before and after the introduction of iMRI.

Section: 4. Findings

The peripheral role of images in situated surgical action. While neurosurgeons traditionally utilized MRI images to guide their surgical judgments and actions, these images played only a peripheral role. Deciding on how to proceed was largely based on the situated tacit judgment of neurosurgeons and a combination of input from other instruments used during the immediate surgery. This was because the images were not accurate enough to fully inform neurosurgeons to orient themselves in the brain, which was recognized as one of the greatest challenges of their work: A brain tumor is very difficult to see because it also looks very similar to normal brain tissue . Sometimes we may think we have removed it all, but later we find out we haven't. That's the challenge with brain tumor surgery – to really remove the maximum but leave everything that is healthy. That's an ongoing balancing act. We are trying to push it as far as we can until we think it [the tumor resection] is finished.
Preoperative MRIs that visualize the location of the tumor and orient surgeons during surgery were not completely accurate because they did not reflect changes in brain anatomy during surgery. Surgeons also relied on image-guided neuro-navigation systems that combine MRI, CT, and PET images to navigate the brain structure and find the optimal access path. Neuro-navigation faces similar limitations: the moment a surgeon opens a patient, brain structures move around. One surgeon commented, “It's like driving a car with a bad or outdated GPS; you will risk going wrong”. Finally, surgeons also used microscopes to magnify structures so they could see the details of tissue not distinguishable to the human eye. Microscopes helped surgeons differentiate tumors from normal brain tissue as they performed the difficult task of visualizing and resecting infiltrating parts of the tumor, but they offer only a narrow field of view and a straight line of sight that together prevent accurate assessment of tissue position relative to other brain structures. Thus, although neurosurgeons used imaging technologies, they were never sufficient to provide unequivocally accurate, fully actionable knowledge, and surgeons engaged in a continuous balancing act, relying mostly on their situated judgment, as commented by surgeons: “there is a lot of feeling to it, how we actually see and feel in the wound”, and “I have learned over the years that it always comes down to my judgment in the wound”.
The non-central role of surgical input in radiological practice. Radiological interpretation of images was traditionally performed separately and drew only marginally on the input from surgical action. In the pre-iMRI situation, radiologists’ main focus in interpreting images was on inferring the most certain diagnosis from ambiguous cues on images ( Joyce, 2010 ; Prasad, 2005 ). Surgeons typically provided limited input, including only basic clinical information about the patient, which radiologists dealt with by increasing the length of their reports and including more hypotheses in the diagnostic judgment: The clinicians who send a referral to us write important information about the patient, but often there is very little information, and then our answer becomes more uncertain. So, then I might mention more differential diagnoses and write that maybe if the patient has such-and-such symptoms, it could be this, but otherwise it could be something else.
The brevity of engagement with surgical expertise or practices was not perceived as too problematic nor as impeding interpretation activities for radiologists because they saw their main goal less in contributing to immediate surgical action in the present (given that MRI images were not central for surgery), but instead valued the luxury of time to engage in low-paced pondering, detective, “back-stage” work. For example, they valued the ability to run a “standard tumor protocol”, producing a couple of hundred images. One radiologist explained that this protocol sometimes produced “a few more images than was necessary” but was still employed to make sure the radiologist had “all the images to feel convinced, and that [they had] captured everything”. Radiologists also routinely integrated other types of information and compared them across time to make their interpretations more certain. This included: clinical data such as symptoms and lab reports; relevant normal anatomical correlated images from body atlases; input from colleagues; and old and current images. Radiologists placed great value on deliberating thoroughly and with no time-constraints on their interpretations, taking the approach of what one described as “pondering and being thoughtful” in their work. They identified their job as a “thinking and pondering profession” and their role as performing a type of “detective work”. This included allocating significant time “to read [ing] a lot about patient cases” and engaging in lengthy discussions with colleagues to highlight interesting cases or collectively solve puzzles.
Traditional interactions between surgeons and radiologists. Pre-iMRI, neurosurgeons and radiologists coordinated their expertise in a sequential manner through formally organized exchanges of diagnostic input. They performed this through two main interaction practices: brief document exchanges and routine in-person reporting meetings. Surgeons communicated their requests for patients who had not undergone surgery via short referral notes listing clinical symptoms, past medical history and potential diagnoses. For patients who had undergone surgery the request would just be for specific images. Radiologists, in turn, communicated their image assessments and the most probable diagnosis through written MRI reports. Because surgeons often requested answers to specific questions concerning how to act, radiologists’ responses provided only limited representation of the amount of interpretation work, including patient history details and comparisons across time, that they had engaged in behind the scenes. As a result, written communication concerning interpretation of MRI images was brief and did not include much detail about the associated expert practices.
In the second interaction practice, radiologists and surgeons met in person twice weekly for “radiology rounds” and participated in multidisciplinary conferences that brought together multiple specialists to discuss specific patient cases. This practice allowed more room to exchange expertise than was possible in the reports. However, rounds and conferences were still largely organized as a means to support surgeons in how to move on with surgical action. During these meetings, surgeons typically first articulated their requests, and radiologists served as advisors, giving formal presentations, projecting images, and explaining their clinical interpretation as it related to the surgical plan. Although within their practice radiologists were keen on investigating cases in-depth as “detectives”, rounds or conferences afforded little room for displaying this work. Surgeons generally did not give feedback to radiologists, and little collective exploration of images occurred.
Traditional role relations between surgeons and radiologists. Traditionally, expertise coordination between surgeons and radiologists was reliant on a relationship in which radiologists were treated as advisors, providing a broad assessment but not directly informing step-by-step surgical planning or participating meaningfully in surgical work. There was also little feedback from surgical expertise back to radiology. The relationships were also quite distant, with their own distinct temporal rhythms whereby each group emphasized its own priorities, interests and temporal orientations; there was little opportunity to understand the details of each other's practices in order to better align their inputs or inform their own practices. The surgeons' role bestowed on them a key status as decision makers on surgical matters in the OR, and radiology was for the most part out of the spotlight. Thus, the role relations on which coordination was reliant featured surgeons as focal actors, with the expertise of others being oriented to their priorities, privileging one expert group over others in the multidisciplinary team ( Oborn and Dawson, 2010a ). However, as we explain below, introducing iMRI triggered a fundamental change in how expertise was coordinated, changing how each group engaged in their work, how they interacted, and what role relations they subsequently performed vis-a-vis each other. Our case narrative traces the origin of those changes to the materiality of technology, focusing specifically on what aspects of the iMRI images became consequential for reconfiguring coordination practices.
Images acquire a central role in surgical practice . The introduction of iMRI offered the surgeons a promise to draw on novel and more precise real-time information, during surgery, about the brain that allowed them to accurately visualize the extent of tumor resection . As one surgeon commented, “It happens often that I don't know exactly how to proceed; if I should resect additional tumor or not. Then we need a decision-making basis and that is where iMRI comes in”. Thus, the reliance on new types of real-time images gave a potential to stop largely relying on “feeling” and situated judgment, and instead immediately check their conjectures by running an MRI during the surgical procedure. In this way, iMRI offered a novel form of visibility – a real time, precise view of the effects of their manipulations – making the brain knowable differently for them in practice. In the words of one surgeon, “Instead of pushing the tumor resection to its ultimate limit we can now make an MRI examination and see”. One surgeon explained what this meant: We can find out how [the surgical wound] looks and find one part that perhaps needs to be left there, but in another place find a small something that is still there, and that we can actually remove.
The iMRI examination also promised surgeons the possibility of navigating the surgical field with more certainty by using real-time representations of the brain. As one surgeon explained, “We load the new images to update the map [of the brain] and use these images and the updated map to continue the surgery if there is tumor left”. In contrast to navigation using the “outdated GPS”, real-time images could solve the problem of insufficient knowledge associated with “brain shift”, enabling direct visibility into the current structure of the brain and the effects of surgeons’ actions on the surrounding brain structures: We can see clearly whether we have influenced any other important structure, which can sometimes be very difficult to see [with a microscope], as abnormal tissue can often look very similar to a normal brain. You can see how close you are to important structures and if you dare to go a little further and dare to be a little braver.
Surgeons become more dependent on radiological expertise to use iMRI. The possibility of more accurate navigation and knowing the extent of tumor resection did not automatically occur through installing iMRI in the operating room. To achieve its promise, surgeons found themselves crucially dependent on bringing radiological expertise into the OR. This was because surgeons were not used to viewing and interpreting iMRI types of images and felt that their expertise was insufficient. What they typically knew how to interpret were CT images acquired in the axial plane (top to bottom), which were thus interpreted from this specific direction. However, iMRI images are acquired in multiple planes, including side to side and front to back, which were less familiar to surgeons. Thus, they did not feel confident in reading or interpreting these types of images, especially in the context of a high-stake and acute procedures. Most surgeons emphasized that they couldn't work without the presence of someone with specialized expertise to interpret such images on the spot. In the words of one surgeon: It's important that the radiologist looks at the images and that we're not the ones doing it. I think it's better if someone who is an expert, trained at looking at these images, actually does that. Although we see lots of images and are good at looking at them, there is a certain difference. Having someone who is a professional at it. It can be things they [radiologists] say: for example, if we see something strange there, then they can say, “No, no, that's blood, you can tell by the signals”. “Okay, so there's no tumor?” “No, it's blood.”
Radiologists become more dependent on surgical input. For radiologists, in turn, interpreting new types of images was also not simply a replication of their old practice in a new environment of the operating room, but in fact exposed the novel requirement to rely on surgical input, where they discovered they needed to know much more about the surgical manipulation than before. With iMRI, radiologists now scanned and interpreted images from patients with open brains lying on the operating table. Because, according to radiologists, open-brain imaging entails “a mix of more air and liquid compared to a normal skull”, radiologists struggled to make sense of images produced with fresh bleeding and wounds that looked different to pre- or post-operative images. Moreover, the time it took to run the actual MRI scans had to be compressed, from up to an hour down to 30 min, and the time radiologists had to interpret these images was also reduced, effectively imposing a different temporal orientation on radiological work. While traditionally radiologists valued the opportunity to have “peace and quiet” and few explicit time constraints, with the new technology they were positioned as part of an acute procedure where they were pressed to, as one of them put it, “decide right there and then”. A critically ill patient lying open on the operating table did not allow the luxury of the calm deliberation traditionally characteristic of radiological work; rather, it required radiologists to come up with an interpretation “as soon as possible so that surgeons [could] continue operating if any tumor [was] left”.
Given these changes, radiologists became more dependent on understanding exactly what kind of manipulation the surgeon had performed on the brain just a few minutes before the image was made, to understand what the image represented. This situation stood in stark contrast to traditional MRIs, where patients were scanned several days after surgery and thus the image did not necessarily contain any reflection of the surgical manipulation. Radiologists did not need an explanation of surgical action to interpret the images, so this was rarely provided. With iMRI, however, the real-time images represented a different kind of reality – a brain that was undergoing surgical manipulation – and radiologists could not interpret such images without immediate input from surgeons. One surgeon recalled such an example: We had a case in December where the radiologists thought there were two places with tumor remaining. After we discussed it, we said the first place is in the middle of the tumor cavity; there we have inserted blood-clotting material, so there is no chance there could be something tumorous left there. But in the other place that was out in a corner, there it could be tumor, and based on their judgment we went back in. And, as we thought, in the first location it was only blood-clotting material, but in the other place we could actually remove more tumor. And this kind of discussion is so valuable … We have our normal MRI rounds, but not with this kind of intensity. Radiologists normally just get our referral and write up an answer.
It now became important for radiologists to discuss and more deeply understand the specifics of surgeons’ practices as well: what surgeons saw directly in the brain, and what they did while operating, since without that information radiologists were unable to interpret certain cues in the images they would not traditionally see in normal MRIs. To decipher these new images, radiologists started to engage in novel discussions with surgeons to learn more about how wounds looked during an operation. One radiologist described such a situation: There was some signal I was looking at [on the image] and I wondered, what can that be? It looked really strange. Only after a while the surgeon then said, yes, but in this location, I had to leave some blood-clotting material. Then I started to learn what that looks like in the images. So, when the surgeon needs to stop the bleeding during the surgery, it can appear in the images as a signal, and we may wonder what it is. It was not there before. Is it a small part of the tumor there, or what is it?
New interaction practices between surgeons and radiologists. Being confronted with a new kind of brain image produced directly at the site of surgery exposed surgeons and radiologists to differences in how they saw and worked on the brain. This led to their interactions becoming deeper and reciprocally attuned to each other compared to the brief, superficial, and sequential encounters held previously in rounds or exchanged via reports. Both groups now engaged in much deeper dialog and reflected on their corresponding ways of knowing the brain. Radiologists commented that they now understood why sometimes they saw a lot of tumor left behind in post-operative images; they now understood that surgeons were unable to see the tumor hiding behind certain structures. Radiologists also reflected that while they were used to “seeing in grayscale” and two dimensions, surgeons were used to seeing the tumor in three dimensions and in color, even “very blood-red sometimes”. Once the two groups could explore and compare these differences in-situ, they both explicitly started to tailor their exchange of inputs to each other, rendering their perspective legible in light of the other group's limitations in visual perception. Surgeons, for example, could now more easily explain to radiologists what they were missing when visualizing anatomical structures . One surgeon explained: A tumor can have two components, and then we remove one of them and think we have removed the entire tumor. In the wound, we only see that the tumor ends, but from the MRI we can see that it actually continues a bit in a curve that is further on, deeper into the brain. And so we would have missed it. We have had this in some cases, and then the tumor may hide under an edge that you can't see, and it is therefore missed.
Similarly, radiologists could now more easily orient themselves to surgeons' perceptions by indicating what exactly surgeons would have missed had they relied on traditional visualization. In the words of one radiologist, “It's difficult [for surgeons] to see into the actual wound, so they can benefit from us explaining that the tumor was hiding a bit up there in the corner”.
New role relations between surgeons and radiologists. With the iMRI images becoming the central source for guiding the progression of surgery, expertise coordination also changed in terms of roles, around which expertise informed surgical action. Because surgeons highly valued iMRI's promise of the novel visibility of the brain, but needed to cope with the ambiguity that came along with it, by extension they also came to emphasize the importance of the role of radiology vis-à-vis surgeons. One surgeon concluded, “It is clear that the words of the radiologist weigh most heavily in these situations”. Another surgeon similarly shared: “If [radiologists] say that there's probably tumor left, then we will go back and have a look there.” Several surgeons reflected on the increasing weight that radiology should assume in this practice, and how, compared to the traditional setting, their role had evolved to become central rather than advisory. For example, two surgeons commented, “In the end, [radiologists] are the ones who should tell me if there is any tumor left, not us”; and “The role of radiologists has a more direct impact than before. Now they have the opportunity to directly impact the surgical outcome, an opportunity they did not have before”. In the words of another surgeon: With this intraoperative MRI situation, the radiologist's decision or diagnosis has a more direct impact on whether or not we should go back. For example, if a radiologist says it's totally clear that there is nothing left, then we won't go back and look unless there's something exceptional. If they say there is a lump left, then we'll go back and take it out if we can. [The new role of the radiologists] makes it special.
Radiologists also experienced this increase in the influence they had in guiding surgical judgment. As one radiologist explained, “My role is actually to judge the outcome of the surgery and how much tumor is left. Is there anything left, or should they be satisfied?” Another radiologist commented, “[Surgeons] rarely question us. They find it difficult to question us if we say something is still there”. One radiologist further pointed out, “My role has a greater impact and meaning. It's obvious they are guided by us with the decisions they are making in the OR”.
In this way, there was a change in the division of responsibilities with respect to whose expertise informed surgical action, and how. Surgeons began to delegate parts of their clinical judgments to the expertise of radiologists in interpreting the iMRI. This role reconfiguration in the OR became evident during one observation, when the researcher witnessed how a neurosurgeon came across a mass in the brain and urgently needed to rule out whether it was an aneurysm. The surgeon called up the radiologist in the adjacent room, who immediately came into the OR so they could discuss what the mass might represent. The surgeon invited the radiologist to examine the image on the monitor and explained his apprehensions, pointing to how the mass was bulging. The radiologist explained that he was quite confident it was not an aneurism; he had seen older 2D images of this patient, which gave him a perspective on how this mass had been situated around surrounding structures. The radiologist concluded that it was likely a remnant from a previous biopsy. Having heard this explanation, and after a real-time MRI scan was performed, the surgeon was reassured that it did not represent an immediate risk and proceeded to resect the mass. After a few minutes of operating, their hunch was confirmed: the mass was not an aneurism. The surgeon exclaimed with relief, “It must have been old blood in the wound that looked very much like an aneurysm!”
This observation demonstrates the newly emerging role relations in which surgeons ceded significant authority and reliance on radiological judgment in deciding how to proceed with crucial surgical judgments and actions around tumor resection. The new role relations that we observed in practice in the OR represented a dramatic and significant departure from traditional patterns on which expertise coordination used to be based.

Section: 5. Discussion

This study found that the introduction of iMRI was influential in reconfiguring expertise coordination between surgeons and radiologists. Previously fragmented and temporally separate practices were now exposed to each other, with each discipline aligning their temporal rhythms to the demands of the corresponding practice. Interactions between specialists shifted from brief and sequential formalized exchanges to focus more on deep dialog and mutual exploration of brain images. In terms of role relations, surgeons ceded a substantial part of the role of core surgical judgement to radiologists and the iMRI images, representing a significant departure from their traditional authoritative role in the OR. We explain that these changes were enacted in response to the distinct materiality of images produced by iMRI: offering new forms of visibility on the one hand and producing novel forms of ambiguity for clinical action on the other. In showing this, our study may be seen as interdisciplinary, as it informs different streams of literature, namely the literature on expertise coordination, and research on consequences of novel medical technologies once taken up in practice.
First, this study offers implications for research exploring the consequences of novel medical technologies for situated practices. Previous work has shown how the potential of new technologies to generate more precise information and knowledge may paradoxically increase ambiguity of action, gives rise to new struggles and sensemaking for patients and physicians, may require new skills from practitioners, and may necessitate changes in the work practices of physicians interpreting the information produced by the technology ( Alač, 2011 ; Goodwin, 2009 ; Reed et al., 2016 ; Saunders, 2008 ; Timmermans and Angell, 2001 ). We extend this literature further by focusing in-depth on another type of situated practice - expertise coordination. We specifically illustrate that enacting new ways of knowing, promised by new technologies, involves changes to collaborative work, including drastic redistribution of temporal orientations of work, interactions and roles. Such focus allows us to bring to the fore how the collaborative action of two different specialists groups is also crucially implicated in the work with the novel technology.
Second, we offer contributions to the literature focused on the interplay between technology and coordination. Our ethnographic study traces reconfiguration in three dimensions of coordination - temporal orientations, interactions, and role relations – illustrating how they are influenced by technology. Regarding the temporal dimension, previous research shows that coordinative action across specialties may be hindered by the differences each specialty has in terms of temporal orientations, including the rhythms of performing work, prioritizing tasks and the urgency they attribute to certain tasks ( Oborn and Barrett, 2021 ; Reddy et al., 2006 ; Venters et al., 2014 ). Our findings extend this point by showing how technology introduction can be a trigger for reconfiguring the temporal orientations. In our case, to be able to make use of iMRI images, both specialist groups had to significantly change temporal performances of their work, to align with each other. Radiologists had to change their rhythms of work from low pace to more urgent, in-the-moment diagnoses, synchronizing their activities with the temporal mandates of surgical practice. Surgeons had to include the practice of radiology not as a supportive input before surgery, but as a more consequential in-the-moment guidance of their immediate surgical action, therefore relinquishing part of their authority over the pace of surgical performance. This finding allows us to see that part of how the coordination activities are temporally performed – including whether they are synchronized and sequentially practiced, and whose temporal rhythms dominate – is influenced by what technologies are used by different specialist groups.
Our findings also have implications for extending a practice perspective on expertise coordination ( Faraj and Xiao, 2006 ; Okhuysen and Bechky, 2009 ). Previous research in this tradition highlights the value of focusing on patterns of interactions that are used by different specialists to exchange their input ( Ben-Menahem et al., 2016 ), make their expertise legible to another discipline ( Kellogg et al., 2006 ) and dialogically negotiate emergent action ( Faraj and Xiao, 2006 ). With the introduction of new technology, situated interactions have been shown to change and made to fit with the emergent new patterns of coordination ( Lindberg et al., 2019 ; Sergeeva et al., 2020 ). Our study similarly finds that interactions started to be performed differently with the use of iMRI, in that radiologists and surgeons moved from episodic, brief encounters to deep dialog and the mutual exploration of images. The case shows that this change in the interactional aspect of coordination was importantly shaped by the materiality of technology. The narrative zooms in on how iMRI images came to feature more centrally in guiding surgical action, as they produced a new visibility – real time visualization of areas of the brain, which at the same time generated new doubts on how to proceed with surgical performance. Eventually, these ambiguities were dealt with by bringing radiological expertise into the OR and collectively exploring, reading and making sense of images, where both radiologists and surgeons shared their input. These findings thus underscore those interactional elements of coordination are not solely social or discursive in nature, but are materially mediated, as deep dialog and exchange practices seem to emerge in response to what images make available for specialist work in practice. In ethnographically tracing the role of images in triggering new interactions, we respond to recent calls for more studies on “material enactment” of coordination and for more scholarly attention to how technology is inseparable from the way coordination is practiced on the ground ( Bailey et al., 2019 ; Beane and Orlikowski, 2015 ; Sergeeva et al., 2020 ).
This research also has implications for studies exploring flexibility and malleability of coordinative action. Previous studies have shown that roles and work practices may be disrupted after new technology introduction and require creative efforts of specialists to keep performing medical work in the newly, sometimes constrained, conditions ( Pine and Mazmanian, 2017 ) and learn how to adapt their working together to make sure the performance is still safe and effective ( Sergeeva et al., 2020 ). Our case similarly shows such flexibility of expertise coordination, where radiologists and surgeons were open to engage with each other more deeply than in a traditional set-up. In addition, this study also finds a more profound shift of radiologists acquiring significant influence in a procedure that was traditionally the exclusive responsibility of surgeons. One possible explanation for such extreme malleability of coordination may lie in the significance of the new ways of knowing the brain offered by iMRI: being able to know how much tumor to resect and how to more accurately navigate inside the brain gave crucial hope for managing the critical challenge of neurosurgical practice. Thus, the case may be indicative of a possibility that novel technologies might contribute to changes in otherwise rigid patterns of coordination when they provide a solution to a central challenge facing the focal expert group. We encourage future research to focus on this aspect in more detail, through examining other specialist groups and other novel technologies.
Our findings also have implications for the literature on role reconfiguration following new technology. The case reports a significant change in role relations between radiologists and surgeons, where radiology ultimately evolved from a subordinate support function to performing a more equal partner role in surgical practice. The change in role relations that we observed have some parallels with previous research, which (although not directly focusing on coordination) showed, for example, how engaging with novel technologies triggers renegotiation of scripts and status relationships between groups ( Barley, 1986 ), produces tension between different specialists ( Barrett et al., 2012 ), and can result in an update of social structure in the workplace ( Barley, 1990 ). In addition to also documenting role reconfiguration, our study traces how changes in roles followed from the situated attempts of specialists to, on the one hand, act upon the visibility offered by technology and on the other, cope with the emerging ambiguities of that came along with it. While iMRI was offering an attractive promise of a precise navigation and real-time visibility of the extent of tumor resection for surgeons, this potential only became actionable when both groups discovered their newly emerging dependence on each other's expert input to make sense of new images and adjusted their roles accordingly. We thus contribute to the growing body of studies on role relations by zooming in how the nature and types of visibility and ambiguity generated by technology may matter for status and role reconfiguration.
Finally, while some emerging studies have begun to show how interactions across specialist groups are influenced by the manner in which novel medical technology is used in practice (e.g. Bourret and Cambrosio, 2019 ; Saunders, 2008 ), we add to these insights by providing an in-depth exploration of the practices and use of new technology during the moment of change. Adopting a longitudinal study design and zooming into practices before and after the introduction of technology is particularly useful when the aim is to understand the consequences of change, such as when new technology is introduced ( Barley, 1990 ). Such a design has given our study the benefit of comparing in generative detail the activities that occurred prior to and during the introduction of new technology, including the ways surgeons and radiologists knew and acted on the brain, as well as how they interacted and enacted their role relations prior to and post-iMRI. Such detailed comparisons add to existing studies an understanding of what kind of information and visibility was unavailable before the introduction and use of the new technology, as well as capturing the significance it may have for shaping new patterns of interactions and role relations. Had we not made our comparisons in the moment of change, the dramatic increase in the radiological impact on surgery may well have faded from the memories of the specialists.
This study may also inform practitioners involved in the introduction of emerging medical technologies. More and more technologies are being introduced into medical practice, accompanied by visions of more accurate, objective and novel knowledge about disease, more precise diagnosis and more certainty for physicians. While these promises may be rhetorically appealing, our study continues to illustrate the importance of being aware of unintended consequences for situated practice ( Timmermans and Berg, 2003 ). Practitioners therefore may need to be attuned for how realizing the knowledge potential of new technologies is inextricably linked to reconfigurations of collaborative action and reflect on what kind of flexibility in coordination practices it may require.

Section: Credit author statement

Daniel Tyskbo: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Anastasia Sergeeva: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing

Section: Funding

No funding has been received for the preparation of this manuscript.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

We have no conflict of interest to declare.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors thank Editor Stefan Timmermans and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions throughout the review process. The authors also gratefully acknowledge Claudia Egher, Lauren Waardenburg, Elmira van den Broek, Tomislav Karacic, Kajsa Lindberg, Linda Douw, and the participants at the KINcubator of 2019 and KIN Summer School 2018 for their helpful and encouraging comments on earlier drafts of this article.
