Title: Influence of human–surface water interactions on the transmission of urinary schistosomiasis in the Lower Densu River basin, Ghana


Section: Credit author statement

J. Ntajal, T. Falkenberg, and M. Evers: Conceptualization and methodology. J. Ntajal: Data curation. J. Ntajal and T. Falkenberg: writing—original draft preparation. T. Falkenberg and M. Evers, and T. Kistemann: writing – review, and editing. T. Falkenberg, M. Evers, and T. Kistemann: Supervision. T. Falkenberg, M. Evers, and T. Kistemann: Funding acquisition.

Section: 1. Introduction

Human interactions with surface water systems are reflections of humanities' dependence (directly or indirectly) on water resources for survival ( Massuel et al., 2018 ; Tanaka et al., 2016 ). These interactions influence surface water systems’ pollution pathways and the exposure of humans to water-related infectious diseases (e.g. schistosomiasis) ( Ciddio et al., 2017 ; Kulinkina et al., 2019 ). Schistosomiasis is one of the Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs) that pose a huge economic burden and health challenges in tropical and subtropical regions ( Kulinkina et al., 2019 ; Rostron et al., 2019 ). Schistosomiasis, a water-based infectious disease, is a parasitic disease of considerable medical and veterinary significance, which is caused by flatworms of the genus Schistosoma ( Gower et al., 2017 ; Webster et al., 2013 ).
Schistosomiasis has a complex lifecycle (see Fig. 1 ) that requires freshwater snails ( Bulinus ), which serve as the intermediate host in which the parasite undergoes development, and the definitive hosts (humans and animals) in which the parasite matures ( French et al., 2018 ; Tchuem-Tchuenté et al., 2017 ). Schistosomiasis transmission depends on water-contact patterns as well as the presence and distribution of infected intermediate snail hosts within watercourses ( Chadeka et al., 2017 ; Grosse, 1993 ; Hunter, 2003 ). The cercariae, a parasitic fluke released from the snails, penetrate the skin of humans and animals, transform into schistosomula and enter the bloodstream or the urinary system , mature, pair up and begin to produce eggs after about two weeks ( Ciddio et al., 2017 ; Grimes et al., 2016 ; Tchuem-Tchuenté et al., 2017 ). Download: Download high-res image (557KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Schistosoma transmission lifecycle. Source: adapted from Ciddio et al. (2017) and McManus et al. (2010) .
Ecological and human factors play major roles in the epidemiology of the disease ( Hunter, 2003 ; Hunter et al., 1983 ). Ecological changes resulting from the construction of dams, ponds, or irrigation canals, along with the hydrological dynamics of a given environment, influence the survival, dispersal, distribution, and abundance of the cercariae and the snail hosts, due to changes or modifications to the habitat conditions ( Ciddio et al., 2017 ; Hunter, 1981 ).
Further, the risk of human infection depends on the degree of exposure (water-contacts), host immunity, and hygiene and sanitation conditions, particularly open defecation ( Angelo et al., 2018 ; Schmidlin et al., 2013 ). The pollution of surface water with human excreta containing schistosoma eggs is the key driver of schistosomiasis transmission in most endemic areas across the world, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa ( Kulinkina et al., 2019 ; Webster et al., 2016 ). Given the underlying risk and exposure factors, schistosomiasis infected persons can experience some general symptoms, including blood in urine, pains (in the abdomen and joints), and whole-body sicknesses, such as itching, skin rashes, fatigue, fever, and weight loss. The occurrence and severity of these symptoms depend on the immune systems of the definitive host ( Tchuem-Tchuenté et al., 2017 ).
As of 2018, the number of people suffering from schistosomiasis worldwide was approximately 252 million, and it was estimated that between 4400 and 200,000 people die annually from the disease ( Niu et al., 2018 ). Over the past decades, it has been reported that about 90% of global schistosomiasis cases are reported in Sub-Saharan Africa ( Anyan et al., 2019 ; Hughes and Hunter, 1970 ; WHO, 2020 ). Among the numerous species of schistosoma discovered in the tropics and sub-tropical regions, S . haematobium and S. mansoni are most commonly reported for human infections in Sub-Saharan Africa ( Stadley et al., 2012 ). In many West African countries, including Senegal, Mali, Ghana, Burkina Faso, Niger, and Nigeria, schistosomiasis is considered endemic ( Kulinkina et al., 2019 ; Martel et al., 2019 ; Walz et al., 2015 ; Woodall and Kramer, 2018 ).
In Ghana, schistosomiasis is not a new disease, instead, it has become a permanent health challenge, since the construction of dams and ponds for hydropower , irrigation, and community water supply in the early 1950s ( Grosse, 1993 ; Hughes and Hunter, 1970 ; Hunter, 2003 ). It has been reported as the most neglected among the Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs), and is widespread in the peri-urban and rural communities of Ghana, where access to clean water, improved hygiene, and sanitation is limited ( Kulinkina et al., 2019 ; Martel et al., 2019 ; Nyarko et al., 2018 ). S . haematobium is the most commonly reported schistosome species in Ghana, which causes urinary schistosomiasis ( Anyan et al., 2019 ; Kulinkina et al., 2019 ; Martel et al., 2019 ). In 2018, the proportion of schistosomiasis among all reported cases of water-related infectious diseases in Ghana was approximately 52%, while the prevalence rate was 27.5% ( Anyan et al., 2019 ; Martel et al., 2019 ; Nyarko et al., 2018 ). The underlying exposure and risk factors associated with such cases were not explicitly highlighted, although control measures such as mass drug (praziquantel) administration (MDA) were implemented ( Martel et al., 2019 ; Nyarko et al., 2018 ). Praziquantel is described as an anti-worm drug used to prevent the newly hatched schistosoma worms from multiplying in the human body ( Vale et al., 2017 ).
Despite the interventions, including the mass drug administration and schistosomiasis sensitization programs by the Government of Ghana and the World Health Organization (WHO), schistosomiasis continues to be a stern health challenge in the country ( Kulinkina et al., 2018 , 2019 ; Tetteh-Quarcoo et al., 2013 ). Reports of research studies in the southern part of the country revealed that the prevalence and impacts of the disease have often been underestimated ( Anyan et al., 2019 ; Kulinkina et al., 2019 ; Martel et al., 2019 ). Research studies on schistosomiasis in the Densu River basin focused mainly on the prevalence, parasitic egg counts, intensity, environmental factors , and control measures ( Anyan et al., 2019 ; Martel et al., 2019 ; Nyarko et al., 2018 ). There is a need for comprehensive investigations, from a transdisciplinary perspective, to understand the human-water contact patterns and exposure factors that reinforce the schistosoma lifecycle and its transmission. This study explored and examined the influence of the availability and accessibility to safe drinking water and improved sanitation, the places of open defecation, and the type and pattern of human-water-interactions on the transmission pathways of urinary schistosomiasis in the Lower Densu River catchment in Ghana.

Section: 2. Study area

The study was conducted in the Ga South and Ga West Municipal Assemblies in the Lower Densu River catchment in Ghana, a coastal country located in West Africa ( Fig. 2 ). The Densu catchment occupies an area of about 2490 km 2 with a total population of over 600,000 people spread over 200 settlements, equating to a population density of 240 persons per km 2 ( Ghana Statistical Service, 2014 ). The catchment is located in the southeastern part of Ghana, which stretches between longitudes 0°10′ W - 0°40′ W and latitudes 5°30′ N - 6°15′ N ( Fig. 1 ). Download: Download high-res image (1MB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Map of the study area.
This area experiences a bimodal rainfall pattern. The average annual rainfall is about 800 mm, with higher monthly rainfall in June and July ( Nkrumah et al., 2014 ). The annual temperature ranges between 23 °C and 33 °C with the hottest periods between February and April ( Codjoe and Larbi, 2016 ). The source of the river lies in the Atewa mountain ranges and flows for about 116 km southwards into the Weija reservoir before entering the sea at the Gulf of Guinea ( Attua et al., 2014 ). The Densu reservoir serves as a drinking water source for most parts of the city of Accra and its peri-urban areas ( Karikari and Ansa-Asare, 2006 ; Yorke and Margai, 2007 ).
The communities along the Densu river depend directly on the river and its tributaries as a source of livelihood and domestic water supply , which exposes them to water-related pathogens and parasites ( Tetteh-Quarcoo et al., 2013 ; Nyarko et al., 2018 ). The major occupation and livelihood activities in the communities are subsistence farming , fishing, and petty trading.

Section: 3. Materials and methods

The minimum sample size determination approach of Pourhoseingholi et al. (2013) as stated in E q u a t i o n 1 was used to determine the sample size of 306 for the cross-sectional survey (see Appendix I ). (1) n = Z 2 P ( 1 − p ) d 2
Applying a buffer of 10% to account for potential non-response, 337 schoolchildren were randomly sampled from six schools. The selection of sampling sites was based on the proximity of the respective communities to surface water bodies (river, streams, and ponds), the communities’ interactions with surface water , and the prevalence of schistosomiasis ( Attua et al., 2014 ; Codjoe and Larbi, 2016 ; Kulinkina et al., 2019 ; Nyarko et al., 2018 ). The public schools with the largest number of schoolchildren were selected as they were all part of the “free and compulsory” basic schooling program of Ghana, which gives equal opportunity to all residents to acquire basic education. The six selected schools were found to be homogeneous and the targeted sample frame was made up of children with similar demographic characteristics, including the same age groups; hence, the total sample size of 336 was equally distributed among the selected schools (see Zimmerman, 1996 ). The names of the schools were coded with letters (i.e. A, B, C, etc.) to protect their privacy.
Through consultation with the Schistosomiasis Control Program at the Center for NTDs in Accra, Ghana, schoolchildren aged between nine and fifteen years, who have spent at least five years within their respective communities, were considered eligible to take part in the survey. These eligibility criteria are based on the experiences of the Center for NTDs, indicating that a minimum of five years of residency is required to ensure that recorded prevalence rates can be attributed to community-level exposure factors. To ensure the data collected in this study is compatible with the existing schistosomiasis database in Ghana, the eligibility criteria of the Center for NTDs were followed. A systematic random sampling approach, using the school attendance record book with the names of the pupils, was used to select the participants. The list of schoolchildren was segregated by gender (to obtain a gender-balanced sample) and the names of the children were numbered from one to the n th person. The first participant was randomly selected and subsequently, every fifth student on the list was selected until the required sample size was obtained. The consent to participate in the study was granted by 336 schoolchildren, hence, 56 schoolchildren (28 males and 28 females) were sampled from each of the six basic schools.
Prior to conducting the surveys, gatekeepers (assembly members, school staff, and chiefs of the communities) were consulted to gain full entry and access to the communities and the basic schools. In addition, research practice partners (i.e. key stakeholders and institutions who supported the fieldwork and data collection process) including experts in water and sanitation research, disease control officers of the various health centers in the communities, school staff, and experts of schistosomiasis research were identified and consulted to support the design and data collection activities.
A cross-sectional survey was conducted to obtain primary data on the pattern of human-water interactions, access to clean water, sanitation and hygiene facilities, self-reported experiences of schistosomiasis (blood in urine), and perceptions on exposure and risk factors . An expert interview was conducted to obtain data on disease control and preventive measures. The collection of blood, stool, or urine samples was not included in this study due to logistics and financial constraints. The different types of water-contact activities in the communities were classified according to the reasons for engaging in such activities. Therefore, all water-contact activities were classified into four major categories: domestic, occupational, recreational, and cultural/religious.
In order to complement the self-reported water-contact patterns, on-site observation of water-contact activities was conducted at the major water-contact points in each community twice per week over three months (February to April). The water-contact activities, the people (i.e. age group and gender) involved, and the duration of water-contacts were the key items of the observation.
This study utilized descriptive statistics and bivariate odds ratios for data analysis. In order to identify the predictors of S . haematobium infection, an analysis of the Spearman rank correlation test was performed. The output of the test allowed for selection of the most potent factors that can likely explain infection. In addition, a bivariate logistic regression was performed, calculating odds ratios. The results were considered statistically significant at a P-value of 0.05 or less.
Ethical approval was obtained from the Ethical Committee at the Center for Development Research (ZEF), University of Bonn, Germany. In addition, ethical approval was obtained from the Ethical Clearance Committee at the University of Ghana, and the Ghana Education Service. A letter of approval to conduct the study was obtained from the education offices in the Ga South (Weija) and the Ga West (Amasaman) Municipal Assemblies. The ethical clearance letter, together with a copy of the consent form and a sample of the questionnaire, was presented to the school staff to also seek their approval. One week before the commencement of the survey, copies of the consent forms were given to the participants (schoolchildren) and their parents or guardians to obtain their informed consent . The researcher received the endorsed copies of the consent forms before the commencement of the study. The participants were informed that they are free to withdraw their consent or discontinue their participation in the study at any point and for any reason. An identification number (ID) was assigned to each respondent to ensure their anonymity.

Section: 4. Results

In each of the six schools, 28 males and 28 females took part in the survey, resulting in a response rate of nearly 100% with a total sample size of 168 males and 168 females. Further, the age of the study participants ranged from 9 to 15. The highest number of children were found within the age group of 11 and 12 years (144), while the lowest number of children were within the age group of 15 years and above (14) (see Table 1 ). Table 1 . Age distribution of the sampled children in the surveyed schools. Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019. Availability and accessibility of sanitation facilities. Age group A B C D E F Total 09–10 years 10 12 26 13 15 23 99 11–12 years 18 22 22 33 32 17 144 13–14 years 21 18 7 8 9 16 79 15 and above 7 4 1 2 0 0 14 Total 56 56 56 56 56 56 336
The availability and accessibility of sanitation facilities were found to be a challenge in the selected schools and their respective communities. In all the selected schools in the Ga West and Ga South municipal assemblies, public toilet facilities, commonly known as “Ventilated Improved Pit latrines” (VIP) were available and accessible to all schoolchildren, however, these facilities were poorly maintained. At home, 53% of the schoolchildren depended on public toilet facilities, which were also found in poor condition. This compelled 33% of the schoolchildren and other members of their households to practice open defecation (see Table 2 ). One of the reasons for engaging in open defecation was the usage fees of the VIP. In addition, the distance between the home and the nearest toilet facility, on average between a two to 4-min walk, was noted as a common reason for not utilizing these facilities. Lack of improved sanitation facilities compelled 61% of the schoolchildren to practice open defecation at Kojo Ashong. Similarly, limited access to improved sanitation and hygiene was identified as the motivating factor for open defecation among 55% of the schoolchildren in Obom. Communities such as Weija, Adjen Kotoku, and Galilea are peri-urban areas with relatively high access to sanitation facilities compared to the rural communities: Obom, Kojo Ashong, and Dome Fase. Table 2 . Access to sanitation facilities in the communities. Community Public (VIP) Private pit latrine Private flush toilet Open defecation Obom 16 (29%) 8 (14%) 1 (2%) 31 (55%) Kojo Ashong 18 (32%) 4 (7%) 0 (0%) 34 (61%) Weija 34 (61%) 5 (9%) 3 (5%) 14 (25%) Adjen Kotoku 46 (82%) 6 (11%) 3 (5%) 1 (2%) Galilea 41 (73%) 11 (20%) 2 (4%) 2 (4%) Dome Fase 24 (43%) 4 (7%) 0 (0%) 28 (50%) Total 179 (53%) 38 (11%) 9 (3%) 110 (33%) Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019.
Despite global and national efforts to end open defecation (OD), rural communities in Ghana, including those in the lower Densu River catchment, still practice OD. It was found that 33% of the children were compelled to practice OD due to limited access to improved sanitation at home. The crucial aspect of OD in this study was the places it is practiced (see Fig. 3 ). Importantly, 48% of OD was practiced in and around the Densu River (and its tributaries). The uncleared bushes and grasses around the buildings were the next suitable OD sites for 32% of the children. Other places such as public dumping sites and uncompleted buildings were also identified as places for OD, particularly at night, when the surrounding environment becomes dark. Download: Download high-res image (220KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Places of open defecation in the communities. Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019.
In schools of the peri-urban communities, the main source of drinking water was bottled (or sachet) water. However, in rural communities, the main source of drinking water at school was piped water, which is tapped from the main Municipal Water Supply System (from the Weija Dam). For example, 43 out of 56 schoolchildren at Weija depended on bottled (or sachet) water. The bottled (or sachet) water is sold on the schools’ premises. Hence, the schoolchildren who could not afford it, as was the case at Dome Fase, had to rely on river water at school. At home, the schoolchildren in communities such as Dome Fase, Kojo Ashong, and Obom depended on unimproved water sources (directly from Densu River and its tributaries) as their main source of drinking water (see Fig. 4 ). Although the municipal water supply (piped water) is available in all selected communities, it is not affordable to all households. In communities such as Obom, where the Densu River is relatively difficult to access, 28 out of 56 of the schoolchildren revealed that their households depended on the Ponpon stream, a tributary of the Densu River. Download: Download high-res image (423KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Sources of drinking water at school, and at home. Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019.
Human contacts with polluted surface water systems that contain the infected intermediate snail host are crucial in the transmission cycle of S. haematobium . Water-contact activities at the community level give a holistic view of human interactions with surface water. For example, the major water-contact activity in all the communities was recreational (53%), primarily swimming (see Table 3 ). 28% and 18% of the schoolchildren were engaged in domestic and occupational water-contact activities, respectively. Only one percent of the entire sample population had water-contact for cultural/religious reasons, e.g. during the “holy baptism”. Water-contact activities, such as assisting parents in fishing, crossing the river to reach school, or irrigating crops, were the common occupational activities among the children. Further, a gender difference was found, with 34% of males engaging in recreational water-contact activities compared to only 19% of females. On the other hand, 20% of females were involved in domestic water activities, whereas only 8% of males indicated such water-contact activities. Table 3 . The outcome of the self-reported water-contact activities in the communities. Water-contact activities Recreational Domestic Occupational Cultural Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell Empty Cell Gender Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Water type Obom 22 10 4 13 2 4 0 1 River & stream Kojo Ashong 20 15 3 11 5 2 0 0 River Weija 17 12 4 8 7 6 0 2 River Adjen Kotoku 16 8 4 11 8 9 0 0 Ponds Galilea 18 9 7 13 2 6 1 0 River Dome Fase 21 11 4 12 3 5 0 0 River Sub total 114 (34%) 65 (19%) 26 (8%) 68 (20%) 27 (8%) 32 (10%) 1 (0.3%) 3 (0.9%) Grand total 179 (53%) 94 (28%) 59 (18%) 4 (1%) Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019
The segregation of water-contact activities by age group (see Table 4 ) shows that recreational activities are the most common water-contact activity practiced by children of all age groups, with an increasing proportion in older age groups. Whilst 45% of 9-to-10-year-old children engage in recreational water activities, 62% and 71% of children aged 13 to 14 and above 15 years engage in the behavior, respectively. Interestingly, it was found that younger children , i.e. age groups 9–10 years and 11 and 12 years, are more frequently engaged in occupational and domestic water-contact activities compared to the older children. In fact, 23% of the 9-to-10-year-old children indicated being involved in occupational water-contact activities, whilst only 10% of the older children (13 years and above) indicated such behavior. It is thus indicated that with increasing age, children are less engaged in domestic and occupational water-contact activities and more engaged in recreational water activities. Table 4 . Cross-tabulation of age groups and water-contact activities. Age group Water-contact activities Recreational Domestic Occupational Cultural 09–10 (n = 99) 45 30 23 1 11 – 12 (n= 144) 75 41 26 2 13 – 14 (n=79) 49 20 9 1 15 & above (n=14) 10 3 1 0 Total (n=336) 179 94 59 4 Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019
Comparing the outcomes of self-reported with observed water-contacts at the community level (see Fig. 5 A), both methods revealed that children were most commonly engaged in recreational activities in all communities except at Galilea , where observed domestic water-contact activities were similarly common to recreational activities. Download: Download high-res image (621KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 5 . A : self-reported versus observed water-contact activities; B : gender distribution of water-contact activities. Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019.
Segregating water-contact activities by gender (see Fig. 5 B) confirms that males are more frequently engaged in recreational activities compared to females. The observational data further confirm that females are more frequently engaged in domestic water activities compared to males, however, the observations revealed a slightly higher proportion of males than the self-reported results (28% and 34%). The gender distribution of the occupational water contact category differed between the observational and self-reported data. While the self-reported results indicated that more females were engaged in occupational water interactions, observation showed a higher proportion of males engaging in such activities. Similarly, more males were observed engaging in cultural water interactions, whilst the results of the self-reports indicated that more females were engaged in such activity. As the number of both reported and observed cultural water activities was very low, the gender distribution in this category is not robust and should therefore be ignored. Additionally, it should be noted that the surveyed children were asked to indicate their primary water contact activity, which may have led some males to omit their engagement in occupational water contact activities. Further, it cannot be excluded that some reporting bias was evident during the survey.
Thirty-two percent of the children indicated in the survey to have water-contacts more than twice per week (see Table 5 ). For example, children who were involved in fetching drinking water to be used at school and/or at home in Dome Fase and Galilea . In addition, it was found that recreational activities occurred once per week (only on weekends) at Adjen Kotoku, Weija, and Obom, and more than twice a week at Kojo Ashong and Galilea. Table 5 . Frequency and average duration of water-contacts. Empty Cell Frequency of water-contacts Number of children Percentage Self-reported Less than twice in a week 205 61% Empty Cell More than twice per week 131 39% Empty Cell Total 336 100% Self-reported Less than 30 min 194 58% Empty Cell More than 30 min 142 42% Empty Cell Total 336 100% Observed Less than 30 min 1162 69% Empty Cell More than 30 min 519 31% Empty Cell Total 1681 100% Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019 .
The water contact duration was categorized as either more than or less than 30 min. Both the self-reported and observational data indicate a higher proportion of children engaging in water contact activities for less than 30 min. The self-reported results showed a higher percentage of children engaging in longer water-contacts (42%) compared to the results of the observed data (31%). This difference may be attributed to the aggregation of water contact durations. While the observation recorded the duration of a single water-contact event (e.g. duration of a single swimming event), the respondents of the survey may have aggregated the total water-contact duration (i.e. duration of multiple swimming events).
The results of the self-reported occurrence of blood in urine among the schoolchildren revealed that 98 children (76 males and 22 females) reported blood in their urine, representing 45% and 13% of the total male and female sample populations, respectively. Overall, a strong gender effect is evident, with more males reporting blood in urine compared to females. At the community level, Kojo Ashong recorded the highest case count of 19 male children and 7 female children (see Fig. 6 A), followed by Obom with 21 cases. Weija and Dome Fase had relatively moderate case counts among the male children. Adjen Kotoku had the lowest number of cases, which was partly due to the type of water body (pond) in the area and the corresponding water-contact patterns. Download: Download high-res image (364KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 6 . A : self-reported cases of blood in urine in the communities by gender; and B : self-reported cases of blood in urine in each age group.
Further, when we compute the percentage of children with reported cases of blood in urine for each age group, the results show that 57% of the older children within the age group of 15 years and above reported blood in urine (see Fig. 6 B). Similarly, 47% of the children aged 13–14 years reported blood in urine, compared to 23% of the children of 10 years and below. This result shows that older children (13 years and above) experienced more cases of blood in urine.
The blood in urine segregated by age group was calculated using the total number of self-reported cases of blood in urine in each age group divided by the total number of children in that age group.
Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019 .
Knowledge about places of exposure to cercariae is imperative for the control and prevention of schistosomiasis. This study found that 55% of the schoolchildren perceived that frequent swimming in polluted water is the cause of blood in urine, while 10% of the children did not know any exposure factors, and 2% perceived schistosomiasis as a spiritual issue or punishment from the gods (see Fig. 7 ). It could be observed that the majority of the schoolchildren were aware of some exposure factors, such as fetching water and fishing in the Bulinus dominated water. Download: Download high-res image (197KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 7 . Perceived exposure factors. Source: based on primary data collection in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019 .
The output of the correlation analysis (see Appendix II ) revealed that blood in urine is correlated with recreational, domestic, and occupational water-contact activities, as well as frequency and duration of water-contacts, whilst these also correlate with each other, leading to issues of collinearity. Therefore, a bivariate analysis (calculation of odds ratios) was performed between blood in urine and each of the exposure variables (see Table 6 ). Table 6 . Bivariate regression analysis showing odds ratios of self-reported blood in urine. Variable Odd ratio Significance 95% CI Gender 5.482 0.000 3.190–9.422 Improved water supply 0.733 0.202 0.455–1.181 Open defecation 1.287 0.317 0.786–2.109 Domestic 2.749 0.001 1.490–5.073 Recreational 4.202 0.000 2.466–7.158 Occupational 3.634 0.002 1.588–8.318 Cultural 1.238 0.854 0.127–12.052 Water-contact more than twice/week 1.857 0.014 1.131–3.051 Water-contact more than 30 min/week 2.898 0.000 1.785–4.705 Mass drug administration 0.439 0.001 0.272–0.710 09–11 years 1.530 0.123 0.891–2.627 11–12 years 1.347 0.226 0.832–2.180 13–14 years 1.702 0.050 0.999–2.897 15 years and above 3.437 0.026 1.160–10.183 The variables were considered statistically significant at a P-value of 0.05 or less. Source: all the variables were self-reported in the survey conducted in Ghana between February 2019 and April 2019.
A strong gender effect is evident with males having 5.5 times the odds of blood in urine compared to female children. Additionally, an age effect was found with significantly elevated odds of blood in urine among the 15 years and above (OR = 3.4) and 13–14 years (OR = 1.7) age group. The three dominant water-contact activities, domestic, recreational, and occupational, all show significantly elevated odds of blood in urine. The highest odds ratios were found for recreational water-contact activities followed by occupational and domestic activities. More frequent and longer water-contacts also led to elevated odds of blood in urine. Considering the interactions between these variables, it was found that children involved in domestic activities are more likely to have more frequent water-contacts, i.e. more than twice per week, while recreational and occupational water-contacts are linked to longer water-contact durations, i.e. more than 30 min. Additionally, the results indicate a preventive effect of mass drug administration (MDA), where children receiving the treatment show 0.4 times lower odds of blood in urine compared to children not receiving treatment.
Key informant interviews with disease control officers in the various health centers of the communities revealed that the common schistosomiasis control measure was MDA with praziquantel. In addition, an interview with the school staff at Obom and Galilea revealed that sensitization programs were organized occasionally for awareness-building, and to discourage swimming in the polluted water; however, such programs did not yield significant positive results.

Section: 5. Discussion

The interactions between humans and surface water systems influence urinary schistosomiasis, particularly regarding the type of water-contact behavior, availability of safe drinking water supply , and sanitation. The direct dependence on unimproved water sources, i.e. surface water, increases the chances of exposure to contaminated water and thus, the risk of S. haematobium infection. This study found that peri-urban and rural communities (e.g. Dome Fase and Weija) directly depend on surface water from the Densu River and the Weija Lake to supplement their domestic water supply. Consequently, these surface water sources are extensively used for washing, cooking, personal hygiene, and drinking. This is of particular concern as open defecation (OD) is widespread in these communities. Although sanitation facilities generally exist, the poor conditions of these, required usage fees, and relatively long distances between homes and public sanitation facilities were key factors driving community members to engage in open defecation. In this study, it was identified that OD is commonly practiced along the watercourse, leading to fecal contamination of surface water systems and thus contributing to the transmission of fecal-oral diseases, including schistosomiasis. While OD was not statistically significant in this study, Schmidlin et al. (2013) found it to be a statistically significant risk factor of S. haematobium in the Taabo area of south-central Côte d’Ivoire. Poor hygiene and sanitation linked to the practice of OD play crucial roles in the transmission cycle of S. haematobium , as the schistosome eggs are released into water systems via feces and urine ( Schmidlin et al., 2013 ). The eggs released from infected humans hatch and infect the snails (intermediate hosts), which in turn release the parasites to infect humans ( Kulinkina et al., 2019 ; Martel et al., 2019 ). OD forms a precondition for infecting Bulinus snails with S. haematobium . A related study on schistosomiasis in other peri-urban communities of the Ga West and Ga East Municipal assemblies highlighted that the schistosomiasis risk of children was linked to limited access to safe drinking water, swimming activities, and low investment in improved hygiene and sanitation infrastructure ( Nyarko et al., 2018 ). Therefore, eradicating OD can contribute greatly to breaking the S. haematobium transmission cycle.
It was found that all children engage in some kind of water-contact activity. The most common were recreational water-contacts (53%), followed by domestic (28%) and occupational water-contacts (18%). Direct water contact exposes the children to the cercariae and thus places them at risk of infection. Ajakaye et al. (2017) reported that individuals who directly depended on freshwater as a source of livelihood had higher exposure to the cercariae in Nigeria. Similarly, Codjoe and Larbi (2016) highlighted that children with relatively high levels of exposure to cercariae in the Densu Basin in Ghana were those engaged in frequent water-contacts, such as fetching water for household use. Occupational water-contacts, such as fishing or crossing water, were reported as exposure factors in the Eastern region of Ghana and the Migori county in Kenya, where schoolchildren cross water bodies with bare feet to and from school ( Martel et al., 2019 ; Ng'ang'a et al., 2016 ). It is therefore evident that water contact is common and, in many cases, unavoidable. Additionally, it was identified that the type of water-contact activity is related to the frequency and duration of the water-contact, which in turn correlates with the level exposure. Whilst, domestic water-contact activities are linked to more frequent (but rather short) water-contact activities, recreational water-contact activities occur less frequently but usually for longer durations. Similar patterns were observed in a study in the Shinyanga District of Tanzania, where swimming activities were positively correlated with longer water-contact durations, thereby increasing the exposure to schistosomiasis ( Angelo et al., 2018 ). In addition, studies in Senegal revealed that exposure of women and children to cercariae was influenced by the frequency and duration of water-contacts, and the proportion of the human body exposed to the cercariae ( Ciddio et al., 2017 ; Webster et al., 2013 ). This indicates that the type of water interaction is an important factor mediating exposure to cercariae and the risk of schistosomiasis. As swimming activities usually involve longer water-contact durations as well as full submersion of the body, it is not surprising that our data indicates these recreational water-contact activities as having the highest odds of experiencing blood in urine. Similarly, more frequent water-contacts (more than twice per week) and longer water-contact durations (more than 30 min) also showed significant increases in the odds of blood in urine.
The identified control measure in the communities was mass drug administration (MDA), which does produce some degree of protection against blood in urine. However, the degree of protection appears to be low. While studies have demonstrated the vital role of praziquantel in the control of human schistosomiasis, other reports have highlighted its weaknesses regarding the development of resistance ( Chai, 2013 ; Vale et al., 2017 ). For example, studies in Ghana show a wide coverage of MDA in schistosomiasis prone communities, however, health centers in these communities continue to record new and recurrent cases of schistosomiasis ( Martel et al., 2019 ; Nyarko et al., 2018 ). Additionally, It was discovered that the drug has side effects , including increasing allergic and hypersensitivity reactions ( Chai, 2013 ). This is an illustration that MDA may be insufficient to eliminate the disease. Therefore, measures to tackle the underlying causal factors, including open defecation and limited access to safe drinking water, are required alongside awareness-building campaigns.
Our study found that 88% of children were aware of the risk and exposure factors of schistosomiasis. Nonetheless, these children still engage in risky behaviors. Interestingly, reports on schistosomiasis in the northern part of Ghana and southern Burkina Faso from the 1950s and 1960s already indicated that these water-contact behaviors were the drivers of schistosomiasis transmission ( Hunter, 1981 , 2003 ; Hunter et al., 1983 ). The findings of these reports and the results of our study show that there has not been a significant change in the water-contact behavior of children over the past decades, despite successful awareness-raising campaigns (as indicated by the relatively high level of awareness of key risk behaviors among the children). This is an important finding with a significant policy implication, highlighting that awareness-raising is insufficient to sustainably change behavior or reduce schistosomiasis transmission. There is a pressing need for the development and implementation of more efficient and sustainable strategies that target the root causes of schistosomiasis transmission, such as the provision of functioning primary barriers (i.e. sanitation facilities). In the hot Ghanaian summers, it will be unavoidable that children engage in recreational water activities and the occupational utilization of water resources form important components of local livelihood strategies. Avoiding water contacts is therefore not be a solution to schistosomiasis transmission, but what is required is the establishment of effective primary barriers. Additionally, the provision of a safe and sufficient drinking water supply can significantly reduce exposure, particularly among populations that rely on these surface water systems for drinking water or domestic water uses.
The study relies on self-reported cases of blood in urine, hence, some degree of reporting bias must be expected. Particularly, the gender and age effects should be viewed with great caution. Although all children engage in multiple water-contact activities, only the dominant water-contact activity was reported. This may affect the respective effects of the individual water-contact activities. The study design is based on the assumption that all children have some degree of exposure, therefore there was no control group, thus not allowing robust case-control analysis.

Section: 6. Conclusion

This study assessed human water interactions and their influences on schistosomiasis prevalence. There is limited access to improved sanitation and safe water supply, which compels the communities to rely on open defecation and untreated river water , reinforcing the schistosomiasis transmission cycle. Particularly, open defecation along the waterways forms a precondition for schistosomiasis transmission. Water-contact activities, including domestic, recreational, and occupational activities, are practiced by all children, therefore creating a widespread exposure pattern. The type of water-contact activity influences the frequency and duration of water-contact, which in turn determines the level of exposure. Higher frequencies and longer durations are linked to a higher prevalence of blood in urine.
The majority of children are aware of the underlying exposure factors, yet still engage in these risk behaviors. It is therefore indicated that awareness-raising campaigns are insufficient to break the schistosomiasis transmission cycle. Next to such campaigns, the common schistosomiasis control measure is mass drug administration. Although significant preventive effects were noted, the effect size was found to be rather low. Current control strategies target the human definitive host by promoting behavior change and preventive treatment. However, these strategies failed to sustainability break the transmission cycle, as these do not tackle the underlying causal factors. Ensuring a sufficient and safe drinking water supply is needed to reduce the requirement to utilize surface water for domestic purposes, which thus reduces the frequency of exposure. Additionally, sensitization campaigns are required for occupational users to ensure that adequate protective gear is being utilized during prolonged water contact, also contributing to exposure reduction. However, the transmission cycle cannot be broken by exposure reduction, but rather, requires the development of effective primary barriers. The provision of improved sanitation facilities can form an effective strategy by halting infection of the intermediate snail host. In order to sustainably tackle schistosomiasis, the transmission cycle must be broken by preventing open defecation through the provision of improved sanitation facilities.

Section: Funding

This study was funded by the Ministry of Culture and Science , North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany, through the Forschungskolleg “One Health and Urban Transformation”.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Section: Acknowledgment

We are grateful to Ghana Education Service and Ghana Health Service for their approval of the study. We also wish to acknowledge the Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research (ISSER), and the Center for Neglected Tropical Diseases in Accra, Ghana for their support in the fieldwork activities. We are thankful to the traditional leaders of the selected communities as well as the school staff for their support. Many thanks to Mr. Christoph Höser and Mr. Merveille Koissi Savi for their support in statistical data analysis.
