Title: Hopeful adaptation after acquired brain injury: The case of late referrals in the Netherlands


Abstract: Abstract

A substantial number of people with ‘mild’ acquired brain injury (ABI) suffer from cognitive impairments that are not immediately acknowledged as such. Some are eventually referred to multidisciplinary rehabilitation care after months or years of suffering, which is why we have labelled them ‘late referrals’. The aim of this paper is to add to the discussion on hopeful adaptation by focussing on the diverse adaptive strategies of late referrals. Hope is typically discussed as a positive emotion that can contribute to transformative processes, but that is also mirrored by despair . We conducted in-depth interviews with ten late referrals in the Netherlands. Our findings demonstrate that the trajectories of late referrals are characterised by wandering and navigating. Wandering is predominantly associated with feeling lost, and not knowing where one is going. While navigating is more purposeful, we found that our participants sometimes navigated in directions that turned out to be dead-end streets. We conclude that hopeful adaptation encompasses a circuitous way of trying and adapting and trying again. As a key recommendation for practice, we suggest that people with cognitive problems due to mild ABI should be supported in reducing the complexities of their everyday lives by taking up challenges one place at a time.

Section: 1. Introduction: About acquired brain injury and late referrals

Acquired brain injury (ABI) is an umbrella term used to describe an injury of the brain that has occurred after birth, and is not hereditary, congenital or degenerative. The injury can be of traumatic origin – when something happens to the brain by an external force, such as an impact on the head from a fall, traffic accident or bullet; or of non-traumatic origin – when the injury is the result of things going on inside the brain, such as a stroke, transient ischaemic attack (TIA) or tumour. After traumatic brain injury (TBI), all grades of injury can occur, ranging from no visible abnormality of the brain in cases of mild TBI to superficial bruising (contusion), and in severe cases, dramatic swelling (oedema) as well as large collections of blood (haematomas). Around 90% of TBIs are classified as ‘mild’, implying that the patient is awake upon admission but may have experienced a loss of consciousness and/or short amnesia . Only 3–5% of TBIs are labelled as ‘severe’, meaning that the patient is unconscious upon admission ( WHO, 2006 ). When looking at non-traumatic brain injury (NTBI), the most common severe type is a stroke. In developed countries, up to 75–80% of strokes are attributed to focal occlusion of the cerebral blood vessel (ischaemic stroke), while 10–15% are the result of a ruptured blood vessel (haemorrhagic stroke) ( WHO, 2006 ). A TIA, or ‘mini-stroke’, is a temporary lack of blood flow in a part of the brain, causing stroke-like symptoms that may resolve within a few minutes or at most within 24 h. A TIA is seen as an important risk factor for stroke. Therefore, preventive medical treatment is foregrounded at the expense of the ‘transient’ complaints ( Ramírez-Moreno et al., 2019 ). Whether the cause is traumatic or non-traumatic, the physical, cognitive, behavioural, social and emotional problems after ABI can be severe and life altering for victims and their families ( Atienza, 2019 ; Ramírez-Moreno et al., 2019 ; Turner et al., 2019 ).
After acute medical diagnosis and treatment in hospital, ABI patients with severe disability are treated in a multidisciplinary rehabilitation setting before being discharged home. However, there are also numerous ABI patients with complaints that are less visible at first sight or that seem to recover soon after injury. Therefore, they are discharged home immediately after acute medical diagnostics and treatment. Sooner or later, a substantial share of them go on to experience secondary problems, such as oversensitivity to stimuli, forgetfulness, loss of concentration and fatigue ( Hoffer and Balaban, 2019 ; de Koning et al., 2017 , de Koning et al., 2018 ; Ramírez-Moreno et al., 2019 ; Turner et al., 2019 ). These mostly invisible problems adversely affect their lives and those of their families ( Atienza, 2019 ). Yet, neuroimaging techniques often fail to detect structural brain damage in these patients. Consequently, the health complaints they experience are frequently not acknowledged to be the result of the earlier brain injury, which has been closed medically as ‘minor trauma’ or a ‘mini-stroke’ without residual problems. As a result, many people who have experienced such a ‘mild’ brain injury suffer from its effects for prolonged periods of time, without knowing the cause of their health problems. In some cases, professionals with knowledge of the far-reaching consequences of brain injury are able to put the pieces of the jigsaw puzzle together, and through neuropsychological assessment they diagnose the victims with ABI after all. Often these patients then belatedly receive multidisciplinary rehabilitation treatment to help them regain control of their lives. The embodied lived experiences of these ‘late referrals’, as we have called them, are the object of our study on hopeful adaptation in the case of illness.
By cross-examining the life trajectories of late referrals before and after diagnosis and rehabilitation treatment, we will gain a better understanding of the transformative nature of people's efforts in responding to adversity, a process that Power et al. (2019) have coined ‘hopeful adaptation’. The aim of this paper is to add to the discussion on hopeful adaptation by focussing on the diverse adaptive strategies of late referrals. Using the concepts of hope and hopeful adaptation as the theoretical lens may also contribute to early recognition, acknowledgement and support in dealing with the problems that late referrals face. In the longer term, this will help them to make sense of lost places and experiences; to find new routines, occupations and places to interact in and shape their everyday activities; and to find hope and direction in their lives.
The concept of hope is generally defined as a feeling of expectation and desire for a certain thing to happen. Hope is a positive sentiment that can provide a sense of resilience in difficult times, such as when encountering impairments or illness. It has mainly been used as a positive emotion linked to temporality, which “has prompted criticism of hope as projecting promises, which may never be fulfilled, into an indefinite future” ( Raffaetà, 2015 , p. 116). In health geography, the concept of hope is relatively new. An informal survey conducted by Andrews (2018) has shown that scholars in the field use hope in different ways. Relevant for this article are the hopes of researchers for their participants who are dealing with incapacity or illness, as well as the hopes of individuals dealing with incapacity or illness for a better future. These hopes illuminate the importance of giving voice to population groups that are often not heard, which also forms a motivation for this article.
When looking into the hope of individuals dealing with illness or incapacity, the concept of ‘hopeful adaptation’ is useful ( Andrews, 2018 ; Power et al., 2019 ). Hopeful adaptation “emphasises the transformative nature of people's efforts to respond to adversity” ( Power et al., 2019 , p. 2) without reverting to dichotomies of how people engage with health and well-being practices in their lives, such as harmful versus health-enabling behaviours, or how the sense of self is defined before and after illness. With that, it focuses attention on a person's capability to design a new life path; “to encounter and weave together different relational, affective and material assemblages to deal with and/or transform adversity”, rather than accepting change ( Power et al., 2019 , p. 2). Hope is thus not seen as an end point but as a process that can be filled with possibility and potential. This understanding aligns with non-representational theory (NRT), developed by Nigel Thrift (2008) , and aspects of the theory can help us to make sense of the process of hope when dealing with illness. It is particularly relevant that NRT foregrounds embodied practices, and is interested in the ‘on-flow’ of everyday life , and in the relations between humans, things and objects (see Thorpe and Rinehart, 2010 ). For instance, Gombay and Andrews (2021) use a non-representational perspective to explore the embodied experiences of living with TBI, drawing out the changing and complex sensory experiences around vision, hearing , sleep, and vibration, thus discussing the reconfigured relations between the individual and the things and objects in the world. Through the concept of hopeful adaptation, then, what is underneath the surface can be made visible, and what has remained out of sight can be explained. Furthermore, and again following Power et al. (2019) , hope can alert us to the decisive moments that enable people to change course and find new ways to adapt to adversity. Conversely, despair and hopelessness can show moments that catalyse the loss of hope and more negative ways to respond to adversity.
Bays (2001) has conducted one of the rare studies on hope in the field of ABI. This qualitative research found a wealth of themes related to hope after a stroke, which can be summarised into four positive aspects: 1) looking forward to and making concrete plans for the future; 2) drawing on inner strength and previous capabilities; 3) engaging in rewarding activities and movement; and 4) connecting with other people. Her analysis resulted in the following description of hope: "[h]ope is a life-sustaining, positive, inner strength actively moving the stroke survivor forward toward anticipated future possibilities” (p. 23). Contextual factors found to facilitate a feeling of hope were family connectedness, spiritual connectedness and the achievement of goals that people had set for themselves.
The role of hope has also been studied in people with other illnesses, for instance, when living with a terminal illness such as cancer ( Baczewska et al., 2019 ; Clayton et al., 2005 ; Downman, 2008 ; Kennedy and Lloyd-Williams, 2006 ) and in the case of suicide ideation ( Huen et al., 2015 ). Overall, these investigations show that having hope in times of adversity can contribute to well-being, while losing hope or feeling despair can lead to reduced well-being, anxiety, depression and suicidal thoughts. Huen et al. (2015) have even argued that inspiring a sense of hope in people may be a useful intervention in suicide prevention.
Some studies have examined the transformations that may occur as a result of hopeful adaptation. For instance, in their study on biographical disruption and family life transitions when living with Ménière's disease , Bell et al. (2017) found that participants as well as their family members elaborated on hope for their future life paths, to live well themselves, with each other, and with the illness. In a paper on walking groups for women with breast cancer, Ireland et al. (2019) found that the decision to participate in a walking group was enveloped with a sense of hope, as it marked a new activity, an act of moving beyond the illness. Besides, participants in the study found comfort in walking together, sharing both mundane and illness-related experiences.
While having hope can be conducive to well-being in people with (chronic) illness, it is important to acknowledge that hope may seem out of reach to those who feel they are in a dead-end street; for example if they have a terminal illness, or if they feel ill but have not received a (correct) diagnosis. In his study on the life spaces of individuals living with Type 1 Chiari Malformation , Andrews (2019) discusses the struggle that these individuals face in getting the right diagnosis, alluding to the patterns of hope and despair induced by their intensifying complaints. He highlights how the invisibility of the illness tends to stand in the way of the social aspect of hope, since other people find it difficult to understand what is going on and how the lives of the individuals suffering from the illness are impacted. This invisibility of illness is also characteristic of our target group: people living with the invisible adverse consequences of ‘mild’ ABI, and who received a diagnosis after a prolonged period of time. Indeed, a diagnosis can give a renewed sense of direction and expectation to one's life ( Committee on Diagnostic Error in Health Care et al., 2015 ). With the knowledge of a chronic illness that typically comes with a diagnosis, it is possible to reframe one's identity, adapt to a future with the illness, and to find hope in that. This is not to say that a diagnosis automatically leads to a brighter future; in some cases, it can have the opposite effect. In their work on women with ME, Moss and Dyck (1999) conceptualised a diagnosis as a “bodily inscription” (p. 377) that can lead to a person being framed as ‘ill’ or ‘disabled’. However, that may not be how people who suffer from an illness view their own identity.
Living with and adapting to adversity is not a purely individual task and struggle. Rather, it is embedded in the social and spatial structures that define our societies. Take the study on Ecuadorian migrants in Italy by Raffaetà (2015) , which found that hope emerges through the interaction between the resources one has, and the places one is in. For instance, having an understanding and supportive social network may be conducive to dealing with adversity ( Meijering et al., 2019 ). By the same token, a general failure to recognise the agency of people living with impairments in a society may have a detrimental effect on managing adversity. A study on biographical flow and disruption among rural stroke survivors ( Meijering et al., 2017 ) revealed that the rural holds the potential to function as a therapeutic landscape, especially through its enabling natural and social characteristics, but that it also needs to be understood in relation to individualised experiences and contexts over time. Furthermore, our spatial living environments, such as neighbourhoods and villages, also have an impact on processes of hopeful adaptation, whether positive or negative ( Power et al., 2019 ). Spatiality can be broken down even further into meaningful places, ranging from the workplace and the home, to consultation rooms in the hospital. This was the approach adopted by Meijering et al. (2019) in their study on how stroke survivors negotiate engagements with everyday places, which are characterised by loss and disruption as well as gain and flow between and within places that were meaningful to them. In this article, we examine the embodied and emplaced experiences of adversity for late referrals with ABI, as well as the catalysing moments that marked the process of hopeful adaptation for them.

Section: 2. Methodology

In this study, we worked with participants who had not received timely diagnosis and treatment for the consequences of ABI . These consequences were only signalled later, often after a prolonged period of struggle with invisible cognitive problems. Hope is a relevant concept for this study population, which typically goes through cycles of hope and despair , as the people concerned try to make sense of the impairments they are experiencing.
In this paper, we use an interpretive framework, which is appropriate when trying to develop a comprehensive understanding of a topic. In line with this approach, we adopted a qualitative methodology using in-depth interviews ( Hennink et al., 2020 ). Participants were recruited through a network of people who were sharing their experiences of ABI in a closed Facebook group. The most important inclusion criteria were 1) being a late referral; 2) having had a mild brain injury at least 2 years prior to the interview; 3) having residual complaints due mainly to cognitive problems; and 4) living independently at home in the Northern Netherlands. The local Medical Ethical Committee exempted the study from being reviewed, as it was an observational study (2018/136).
Participants were contacted via email and/or telephone after being asked by a peer expert participating in the project team. The research assistant explained the purpose of the study to them and gave information on what participation would entail via email or post. With the information, a consent form was also included. Once they had agreed to take part, participants were contacted to arrange a suitable date, time and location for the in-depth interview. At the start of the interview, the interviewer explained the purpose of the study once again, described the topics to be addressed during the interview, and clarified how the research team would manage the data. Furthermore, the interviewer confirmed that participation was voluntary and that participants did not have to provide a response for any questions they did not want to answer. She explained that we were interested in the participants' experiences, and that there were no ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ answers. All participants gave written informed consent before the interviews began.
The research assistant who conducted the interviews was a trained qualitative researcher, with previous experience in doing in-depth interviews with people with ABI. To guide the research assistant, both authors participated as co-interviewers in one interview. When participants became overwhelmed or tired, the interviewer proposed a short break, and discussed with the participant how they wanted to proceed. Before the interview began, some participants had already indicated how long the interview could last, to enable them to balance their energy. The interviewer respected these boundaries and took care to round off the interview on time. In terms of topics, the interview centred on the timeline and different phases that the participants had gone through, with regards to not knowing and knowing about their brain injury. For each of these phases, important activities and places were discussed, along with the emotions experienced (see Supplement 1). The interviews were audio-recorded and then transcribed verbatim by a professional transcriber. The research assistant pseudonymised the data, which were stored on a secure server, in compliance with GDPR requirements. The first author took the lead in analysing the data, and was supported by the second author. Data were analysed in Atlas.ti 8.4. In the process, we followed the reflexive approach to thematic analysis of Braun et al. (2019) , and the six steps they identified: 1) familiarise oneself with the data; 2) generate initial codes; 3) search for themes; 4) review the themes; 5) define and name the themes; and 6) produce the report.
After reading through the data several times (step 1), we developed a code tree that consisted of both inductive and deductive codes, centring around different emotions experienced in relation to place and time (step 2). Examples include sadness, feeling insecure, enjoyment, illness experience and routines. The data were coded iteratively until all data were fully coded, with new inductive codes arising throughout the process. Subsequently, co-occurrence tables were created to identify (lack of) overlap between the different codes around emotions in space and time and to search for emerging themes (step 3). The data connected to each code combination were further reviewed and merged into more general categories: direction in life, shaping everyday life , and daily activities (step 4). Finally, the data were organised according to the two phases outlined in the Findings section: wandering and navigating (step 5) and written up (step 6).

Section: 3. Findings

Ten participants were interviewed: six women and four men, aged from their 20s to their 60s. Seven had experienced a mild NTBI , two a mild TBI. One participant had experienced both an NTBI (at birth) and multiple TBIs (two car accidents and a fall from the stairs). The participant characteristics are recorded in Table 1 . Table 1 . Participant characteristics. Name (pseudonym) Gender identity Age range Years since brain injury Years without diagnosis Type of injury Living situation Employment status Lars Male 30s 6 4 Traumatic (fall) With parents Voluntary work Dan Male 60s 9 1 Non-traumatic (illness of nervous system), brain injury as side effect) With partner Voluntary work; sold own company after brain injury Miranda Female 50s 5 2 Non-traumatic (TIA) With partner and daughter Disability allowance; cannot work in own re-integration company Erica Female 50s 2 1 Non-traumatic (TIA) With partner and son Part-time work from home as secretary; part-time disability allowance Mark Male 20s 8 5 Non-traumatic (lack of oxygen at birth); Traumatic (fall and car accidents) Alone Voluntary work Violet Female 50s 15 10 Non-traumatic (brain tumour) With partner Voluntary work Rosalie Female 30s 5 3 Non-traumatic (meningitis) With three children (divorced) Disability allowance Sara Female 50s 10 1 Non-traumatic (TIA) With partner Part-time work as a carer; part-time disability allowance Patrick Male 20s 10 5 Traumatic (traffic accident) Alone Art student Evelyn Female 50s 8 0.5 Non-traumatic (TIA) With partner Self-employed as a coach
Overall, we found that our participants engaged in and moved through the process of hopeful adaptation in different ways at different times. The first central theme relates to how our participants wandered as they suffered from the consequences of brain injury, but without being fully aware of the cause. The second theme centres on how the participants navigated after the ABI diagnosis, sometimes with feelings of despondency and hopelessness about the time, space and experiences they had lost, but in other cases also moving purposefully forward, to live a meaningful life with ABI. 1. Wandering in the unknown: feeling lost and estranged
What was particularly challenging for our participants was that they had lived with the adverse consequences of brain injury for extended amounts of time without knowing the cause. Some had even been explicitly told by medical professionals that the problems they were experiencing could not be attributed to the accident, TIA or whatever other event that had caused their injury, since no abnormalities had been detected by the available neuroimaging tools: All well and good, they put me in such a noise-making thing, it's a horrible device, that MRI scanner. But nothing comes up. Yes, well, how is that possible, that nothing is visible [on the scan]? That's another moment when I thought, have I lost my mind or what? (Lars)
Lars's story shows how a medical tool – the MRI scanner – meant to produce detailed images of the inside of the brain actually reinforced his feelings of losing his sense of self, and with that his hope.
Not knowing what was wrong, and therefore not knowing what they should do, many of our participants continued their daily activities in meaningful places as they had done before their injury. They were filled with the desire and promise of going back to how things used to be, but continuously experienced intense uncertainty and increasing distrust in their own capabilities: I had no idea, I just continued working as usual. I sat at my desk, and my office door remained open and everyone kept coming in. My activities remained the same […], and I just wasn't able to say, ‘Guys, I'm sorry but I can't do it.’ […] The weird thing is, you can't really ask for help if you don't know what's wrong. How can I ask for help? What should I ask? (Evelyn)
Evelyn's example shows how she was unable to ask for help, since she did not know what was the matter with her. As a result, work changed from a place where she felt happy and in her element to a place where she felt deeply insecure and hopeless. This sense of deep despair manifested itself in different areas of participants' everyday lives: at home, at work, in social relations and leisure activities. Participants felt they had wandered into a dead-end street, without knowing how to get out again. As a result, their worlds often became increasingly small and restricted, without any sense of direction for the future.
In the context of this feeling of being lost and not seeing a way out, Violet told us how she had longed for someone to take the lead, to have a general overview of the whole situation, and to take a joined-up approach to the complex problems she was experiencing, especially when it was unclear what was ‘wrong’ with her: All these years, I've kept asking for someone to take charge, to coordinate. I've been trying to find all the pieces of the puzzle and hoped to put them together. […] I still struggle with that. [Care professionals] find it difficult to think through: to what extent can they burden me? If you're emotionally unstable, is that because you're actually exhausted? I've had to figure that out all by myself. (Violet)
Violet's story illustrates how she felt as if she was wandering in the unknown, with professionals who were unable to fully understand and support her because they did not know the cause of her health problems. Her experience underlines the lack of awareness among some professionals about the psychological vulnerability that accompanies extreme tiredness and lack of energy, manifested in the emotional instability that weighed Violet down. She felt profoundly lost, yet in her view was left to her own devices as to how to deal with her illness. Her health problems remained out of sight or just underneath the surface, as they did with many other participants.
In many cases, other explanations were found for the participants’ health problems. For instance, Violet was thought to be suffering from burnout, depression, anxiety disorder, epilepsy, dementia or meningitis; Lars from chronic hyperventilation , burnout, depression or being extremely homesick. These labels sometimes offered a glimmer of hope, for with a label comes some form of treatment, and that could be helpful in overcoming the health problems our participants were experiencing. However, this initial optimism was typically quickly followed by a renewed sense of despair, as the health complaints did not ease. Treatment sometimes even made the symptoms worse, and as a result, participants felt even more misunderstood. This shows how moments of finding an explanation for experienced health problems can be decisive, both in terms of finding and losing hope.
Overall, what we observed was that during this ‘not knowing’ phase, participants wandered in different no-man's lands: in the care landscape, from one health professional to another, none of them able to help; and between the different places of their everyday lives, where they felt estranged from their own activities and loved ones. Sara's words summarise how many participants felt: It's cost me blood, sweat and tears. […] The insecurity, of what's happening to me. The despair. (Sara)
Feeling and getting lost characterised this period during which our participants did not know how their health complaints could be explained or eased. 2. Navigating while knowing: mourning, vigour and resignation
After a prolonged period of not knowing, ranging from six months to ten years, our participants finally found out what was ‘wrong’ with them, and got an explanation for their health problems. Mostly, this discovery was made through neuropsychological assessment in which cognitive disabilities were detected and attributed to the previous brain injury. At first, many participants were angry or sad about the time they had lost wandering in the unknown. Take Evelyn, for example: The problem also is what it’s done to me. I used to be a rock in the sea, and then all of a sudden, I was drowning. Everyone kept looking at me as if I still was the rock, but I felt like a sponge, like anything but a rock. That's so confrontational, and I tried to translate that, what would those six months have been like if I'd been aware of this? (Evelyn)
Evelyn looked back with sadness on the time she had spent feeling utterly lost at work, and wondered how things would have been if she had been aware of the cause of the problems she was experiencing. Besides mourning the time that they had lost, participants resented losing the ability to do certain things that would have been ‘normal’ for them before the ABI. Miranda reminisced about how she loved to cook and eat with family and friends: Cooking is my hobby, we used to have a dinner table with people all around, that's fun, and people would just drop by and there was always enough food, stay over for dinner. It was like that in our home when I grew up, so I took that over. It's fun. If my daughter's friends wanted to come over, great. But none of that is possible anymore. If people just drop by, I can lose my temper and get really angry, because I can't cope with that anymore. (Miranda)
Despite finally getting an explanation for her illness, Miranda still had to learn to deal with loss in her life, such as the cooking and related social activities she used to enjoy so much. With the help of the ABI diagnosis, she became more aware of the boundaries that the identified cognitive disabilities imposed on her. These boundaries provide direction for the meandering pathways that lie ahead. More generally, through rehabilitation treatment, participants learnt to recognise those boundaries, and got advice on how to deal with them. Despite feelings of loss, anger and sadness, they could fill their lives with hopeful expectations and promises again.
However, learning to deal with boundaries in a clinical setting did not mean that our participants were able to transfer the lessons learnt to their own living environments. They tried out adaptations to their everyday routines, hoping these would make their lives better. Often a process of trial and error, these adaptations once again triggered cycles of hope and despair. Some participants tried to do too much after rehabilitation, and as a result were unable to achieve what they really wanted. An example is Lars, who attempted to get back on track by taking on different smaller unpaid jobs, seeing his friends, going to soccer matches and seeking reimbursement for personal injury, while living with his parents. Yet in the process, he found neither the space nor the time to obtain what he really wanted: his own house and paid work. Thus, while he felt some hope through reconnecting with people, making plans and engaging in rewarding activities, he also felt despair as his potential and possibilities were not being fulfilled. In other words, he feared his glimmer of hope would remain a distant and impossible promise.
Others had gradually become more successful at navigating towards paths that led to greater personal fulfilment. By engaging in pursuits that matched their capabilities, they drew a sense of hope. Rosalie, who had gone through a difficult rehabilitation process and a divorce, explained how she felt more confident about choosing fun activities to participate in, and about managing the inevitable fatigue afterwards: I feel I'm doing a bit better. Just the fact that there's a better balance that you know what you can and can't do. And sometimes I choose to do things that I can't do really. Like ice-skating last Friday, but it was so much fun. […] And on Saturday, we were still in our pyjamas at 10:30. Well, alright, we did ice-skate yesterday and had fun. The kids don't mind that really anyway, it's more in my head. (Rosalie)
While she knew skating would be tiring, Rosalie did it anyway and was able to enjoy the time together with her children. She felt good, both about having done the activity and about having planned it properly. This approach gave her the confidence to try out new things, opening up new possibilities and directions. Other participants also managed to overcome barriers, and eventually were able to resume or discover a whole range of activities, such as finding new employment, moving house, taking up painting, playing the piano, going ice-skating or going to see a musical. Successful engagement in new activities typically constituted a pivotal moment that catalysed a sense of hope.
What is important to remember in this context is that it is not always simply a matter of getting some help and then adapting an activity to make it more suitable. There are also environmental and temporal factors that play a role. Miranda's experiences of car driving are a case in point. She had bought a car with reduced lights and noise, to enable her to drive her daughter around and to travel more independently. Even so, this was not always possible: Miranda: I've bought a different car. A Citroën C4 with few stimuli. It's a great drive, one button on the dashboard can switch everything off, all the lights, except for the speedometer. Partner: And what's really important, like the temperature. But you don't see the radio, nothing. Miranda: Yes, so no distractions. Because especially if it gets dark, and it's raining, and you have the headlights and the regular lighting in the car, I can't manage. I can't [drive] that way.
With the option to switch off all the distracting stimuli in her new car, Miranda was able to drive again. Still, in specific circumstances – when she was tired, when it was dark or raining or when the sun was low – she was uncomfortable driving, even in the new car. She had to find creative solutions to manage this challenge, for example by asking her partner to drive in front of her in order to get home. There were, however, situations when she still had to drive in spite of her own discomfort and fears. She cited the example of taking her daughter to school on a dark and rainy winter morning. After such occasions she would be exhausted. Thus, the car allowed her to drive more, but still the circumstances limited her.
Through the navigation process, most participants managed to achieve a new sense of direction by learning, experimenting and fostering innovative solutions at meaningful places in their everyday lives, knowing that this delicate balance was always at risk of being temporarily disrupted by unpredictable circumstances or new places. Dan even explained how, after a period of struggling with the impairments resulting from his brain injury, he had come to feel he was functioning better than before, within the context of his current limitations: I feel that I'm thriving, within the limitations I experience. And that I'm thriving even more so than I used to, within the limitations that I used to have. Because we all have our limitations. […] If you get new limitations, for instance because of brain injury, then those are the new constraints you have to deal with. And that's what I've kept on doing: every time a new constraint arises, I've re-established my manoeuvring space. (Dan)
Dan became more aware of the limitations arising from the brain injury, and translated them into a positive adaptation process. His story is a powerful example of the transformative nature of hopeful adaptation. Although most participants were not as vocal as to how their lives had been enriched, they did talk about how they finally found a renewed sense of self after their brain injury had been diagnosed and treated. Late referrals with lasting cognitive disabilities due to a past brain injury have to learn to navigate each place where they wish to (inter)act again. This makes hopeful adaptation an everyday enterprise that is challenging and tiring, but also rewarding.

Section: 4. Discussion and conclusion

This article aimed to add to the discussion on hopeful adaptation by focussing on the diverse adaptive strategies of late referrals. For our participants, hopeful adaptation emerged as the capacity to combine vigour, resignation and resilience. The key contribution of our study is that it has deepened existing understandings of hopeful adaptation ( Power et al., 2019 ), by illuminating the transformative interplay between the dark and the bright sides of hope. Our findings demonstrate that hopeful adaptation is difficult to achieve when a direction for hope, in our case a proper diagnosis, is missing. They also show how, even when a direction is navigated, in our case after the ABI diagnosis, it is still a matter of searching, learning and finding alternative trajectories, with many ups and downs. In this respect, the lived experiences of our participants are not dissimilar to those expressed by people with Chiari I Malformation in a previous study ( Andrews, 2019 ) and in an auto-ethnographic account of living with ‘mild’ TBI ( Gombay and Andrews, 2021 ). In both cases, individuals had to renegotiate relationships with a range of places, including homes, neighbourhoods, workplaces and clinics, especially because of the invisible nature of their health problems.
During the period of ‘wandering’, our participants did not know what was causing their complaints, which resulted in deep feelings of despair and loss. They struggled to live with their invisible but also unexplained health problems: fatigue, limited concentration and sensitivity to stimuli permeated their lives at work, at home, their leisure activities and social interactions. Through this not knowing and lack of direction, they began to lose hope. Desperately trying to regain some control over their lives, participants turned to professionals in the hope of getting some sort of a diagnosis, but were often sent from pillar to post. Thus, purposeful efforts to find medical support ended up reinforcing their feelings of despondency and despair. As a result, several participants lost their sense of self and felt truly hopeless and aimless. The sad thing is that many ABI sufferers, who are not so lucky to get a proper diagnosis and treatment, may still feel like this and thus wander aimlessly around a chaotic world with no apparent way out.
The more purposeful process of navigation began after participants had received the ABI diagnosis, and had been treated to manage its consequences. As the course they had learnt to embark on was plotted in the clinic, they then navigated in different directions to achieve a balance in their lives again. The long-awaited accurate diagnosis and treatment brought the hope and promise of a prompt return to normality, an opportunity to make up for lost time, and the chance to start enjoying life as before. This indeed turned out to be a distant promise, expectation and desire that remained unfulfilled, which confirms other research ( Baczewska et al., 2019 ; Bays, 2001 ; Downman, 2008 ; Huen et al., 2015 ). Rather, in the navigation process, hope and despair fluctuated, not just over time but also at different places and under different circumstances. Some participants navigated into a dead-end street, resulting in a temporary sense of hopelessness. However, at other times, they were able to find rewarding activities. These navigating experiences mirror those of stroke survivors with severe disability that we have studied previously ( Nanninga et al., 2015 ; Meijering et al., 2016 ). We conclude that it often takes years of trial and error to incorporate a changed body and self into a different way of life. With that, we echo Moss and Dyck (1999) , who have shown that the identity of people who are diagnosed with an illness goes beyond being ‘ill’ or ‘disabled’: rather, it is about integrating that aspect into one's broader identity.
The complexity of the process of re-shaping one's identity post-ABI can be illuminated through the concept of tinkering as developed by Annemarie Mol (2002 , 2008) . Drawing on actor network theory, she notes that good care is always a collective achievement, and involves persistent ‘tinkering’ to keep together the multiple versions, values and materialities of care. Tinkering in a practical sense suggests a way of doing or working that is not linear: it is a circuitous way of trying and adapting, and trying again; making small changes, trying them out, and then taking the necessary steps in order to continually improve something. This tinkering can be illustrated by the example, discussed in our findings, of the driver with an oversensitivity to light and noise. Driving a car with a dashboard that can be switched on and off may work if the weather is good. But then, in bad weather, the raindrops and wipers on the windshield, or in darkness, the lights of other cars on the road, may be too overwhelming to bear. As a result, the driver has the option of covering her head with a jacket and asking someone else to drive her home; or choosing to drive home regardless, but accept the fact that she will be exhausted and may have to forgo the activities planned for the days that follow. This micro case exemplifies the ambivalences and tensions people with brain injury have to cope with every day anew. Not just in the car, but at every place they wish to (inter)act, be it the kitchen, office, supermarket or anywhere else. Although not explicitly described as tinkering, the ambivalences and tensions that people with brain injury have to deal with have also been discussed by Gombay and Andrews (2021) . Their study complements ours since they foreground and flesh out the impact of changing sensory experiences upon TBI in more depth and detail than we did, while we focused on the process of hopeful adaptation, of which sensory experiences form part.
In conclusion, we have shown that the process of dealing with adversity, specifically with the consequences of late-signalled cognitive impairments , is not linear: hope and hopelessness fluctuate, but they cannot be seen as alternating tides of ebb and flow (see also Power et al., 2019 ). The hopeful adaptation processes of our participants are not recurrent patterns of coming and going, of decline and regrowth . Our study shows that the problems our participants wrestle with are not just located in their body or mind, but also in a collective of human and non-human actors: neurologists, rehabilitation therapists, partners and children; as well as neuroimaging tools, neuropsychological assessment forms, car dashboards, skating rinks and so on. This collective is full of complex ambivalences and shifting tensions, demonstrating that dealing with adversity is not the sole responsibility of the person who is asking for help ( Mol, 2008 ). In that sense it transcends neoliberal dichotomies, which oppose active self-managing patients and passive recipients of care. Indeed, our study underlines the argument made in Power et al. (2019) that ‘relations of adversity are manifest, “made”, and come into being through the shifting places that people (maybe forced to) use, occupy, abandon and shape, for example via social, affective and material relations at home, in the community, and at a cultural/political level’ (p. 2).
In addition to contributing to the concept of hope, we have also made visible a group of people that has, until now, been largely invisible, in both health geography and research on ABI. In part, that is because our late referrals were indeed largely invisible in the clinical practices of neurologists and other professionals. As a result, they were unable to organise the appropriate support and care. This is an important barrier, as care is not first and foremost about decisions, but about getting things organised, something that is illustrated by the concept of tinkering ( Mol, 2008 ; Mol et al., 2010 ).
The invisibility of impairments in people affected by mild ABI brings us to the limitations of our study. The most important limitation is that we used in-depth interviews to gain insight into the lived experiences of late referrals, since these had not been documented before. However, this method is less suited to delving into embodied practices. Therefore, future research should look into their embodied practices, to make the practicalities of their impairments more visible, to create insight into how their bodies struggle and succeed in different places, and in interactions with other people. Observational methods applied in different places, such as the living room, the kitchen, the garden, the supermarket, the GP's surgery, the neurologist's office, and the rehabilitation clinic, should give more in-depth insight into such embodied practices. In this research, there would be conceptual links with NRT and geographies of affect (see O'Grady, 2018 ), and with praxiographies of disease ( Mol, 2002 ). A second limitation of our study is that the experiences that we encountered were diverse, since we included a range of participants who had experienced different ABIs, and different time periods of not knowing. Also, our sample was varied in terms of gender, age and socioeconomic status. This can also be seen as a strength, since it may enhance the transferability of the observed patterns to late-referral ABI populations in other locations.
As regards implications for practice, our findings stress the need for the early detection and treatment of residual impairments after mild TBI, TIA or minor stroke, even when neuroimaging techniques have not detected brain damage. The huge impact that cognitive problems can have on people's lives, and the difference we articulated between wandering pre-ABI diagnosis and navigating post-ABI diagnosis, challenge both the ‘transient’ characterisation of TIA ( Turner et al., 2019 ) and the ‘mild’ categorisation of TBI (de de Koning et al., 2017 ; de Koning et al., 2018 ). Appropriate follow-up assessment and treatment is needed for these brain injury patients (de de Koning et al., 2017 ; de Koning et al., 2018 ; Turner et al., 2016 , 2019 ), as well as novel life-story approaches that capture personal narratives. Our discussion on tinkering enables us to make these suggestions more concrete: professionals should learn to support brain injured individuals in their tinkering process by helping them reduce the complexities of everyday life one step at a time or, even better, one place at a time? Doing so would facilitate the transformative hopeful adaptation process of brain injured individuals, and decrease the impact on family life and the burden on society. With this study, we have made the experiences of late referrals more visible. Specifically, we have given insight into their sources of strength and hope as they cope with adversity. Both vigour and resignation are key for individuals who feel they have lost significant parts of their lives.

Section: Credit author statement

Louise Meijering: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Formal analysis, writing, reviewing & editing, Funding acquisition. Ant Lettinga: Methodology, Validation, writing, reviewing & editing, Project administration, Funding acquisition

Section: Funding statement

This research has been funded by the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMw) as part of the Action Research for Innovative Care programme ( 516006004 ). Louise Meijering would also like to acknowledge the support received from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme (Grant Agreement No. 802202 ).

Section: Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Linda Sierkstra for collecting the data and the participants for sharing their stories.
