Title: “We're people of the snow:” Weather, climate change, and Inuit mental wellness


Abstract: Abstract

Rapid environmental change due to climate change impacts Inuit mental wellness by altering the relationships between people, place, livelihoods, and culture. Little is known, however, about how fluctuations in weather contribute to the experience of place and the connection to mental wellness in Inuit communities. This study aimed to characterize the importance of changes in weather among Inuit, and how these changes influence mental health and wellness in the context of climate change. Data were drawn from a community-driven and Inuit-led study in the Nunatsiavut region of Labrador, Canada. In-depth interviews (n = 116 people) were conducted between November 2012 to May 2013 in the five Nunatsiavut communities. Qualitative data were thematically analyzed using a constant comparative method. Results indicated that weather impacted mental wellness through three key pathways: 1) shaping daily lived experiences including connection to place and other determinants of wellbeing; 2) altering mood and emotion on a transient basis; and 3) seasonally influencing individual and community health and wellbeing. These results demonstrate the immediate role weather has in shaping mental wellness in Nunatsiavut. In turn, this understanding of the climate-mental wellness relationship points to multiple pathways for action on climate adaptation policy and programming, and underscores the need for more culturally-specific and place-based investigations to appropriately respond to the mental health impacts of climate change.

Section: 1. Introduction

Climate change is altering ecological systems at unprecedented rates, resulting in direct and indirect impacts on human health ( Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018 ; Watts et al., 2017 ). While the links between climatic changes and physical health outcomes, such as vector-, water- and food-borne illnesses and heat-related morbidity, are well-established ( Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018 ; Watts et al., 2017 ), only within the last decade has mental health and wellbeing been included in climate change discussions (e.g. Berry et al., 2010 ; Bourque and Cunsolo Willox, 2014 ; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a ; Hayes et al., 2018 ; Middleton et al., 2020 ). Research suggests there are many causal pathways through which climate change influences mental health, including: acute psychological trauma resulting from exposure to severe weather events and their consequences ( Berry et al., 2010 ); disruptions to underlying determinants of mental health, such as physical health, social networks, and infrastructure ( Clayton et al., 2017 ); shifting connections to place, which impacts knowledge systems and cultural practices ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012 ; Tschakert et al., 2017 ); and experiences of loss, ecological grief ( Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018 ), and solastalgia ( Ellis and Albrecht, 2017 ).
The mental health impacts of climate change are inequitably distributed across places, geographies , demographics, and cultures ( Bourque and Cunsolo Willox, 2014 ; Clayton et al., 2017 ). Many populations who face differential mental health risks include: those living in environmentally-sensitive areas; populations that rely on the environment for subsistence such as farmers, fishers, and hunters; those living with chronic physical or mental conditions or disabilities; and those with limited physical and human resources to respond to changes ( Hayes and Poland, 2018 ; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018 ; Middleton et al., 2020 ). For example, the Arctic and Subarctic already experience profound climatic changes, including temperature warming at more than twice the rate of the global average, resulting in less predictable weather patterns, sea ice loss, disruptions to local vegetation and wildlife ( AMAP, 2015 ; Ford et al., 2018 ). Consequently, many communities in these regions experience a dramatically altered sense of place ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2014 ).
Inuit in Inuit Nunangat (Inuit homelands) have a close relationship with and reliance on the land for sustenance, livelihoods, and culture. Indeed, central to Inuit mental wellness is connection to the environment via access to and knowledge of the land, supportive relationships, cultural continuity, and regular consumption of country food ( Kirmayer and Valaskakis, 2009 ; Kral et al., 2011 ). For Inuit, mental wellness is a holistic concept that incorporates “self-esteem and personal dignity flowing from harmonious physical, emotional, mental and spiritual wellness and cultural identity” ( Alianait Inuit-specific Mental Wellness Task Group, 2007 ; Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2016 ).
Increasing research has identified strong links between climatic changes and mental wellness among Inuit ( AMAP, 2015 ; Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018 ; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a , 2013b , 2012 ). During periods of environmental and weather conditions that limit opportunities to safely spend time harvesting, traveling to cabins, and accessing culturally important sites ( Clark et al., 2016 ), Inuit have reported increases in: feelings of despair and hopelessness ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a , 2012 ; Durkalec et al., 2015 ); family stress ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b ; Petrasek MacDonald et al., 2015 ); drug and alcohol use ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b ; Harper et al., 2015 ; Ostapchuk et al., 2015 ); magnification of past psychological trauma ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b ; Harper et al., 2015 ); and suicidal thoughts ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b ).
Previous research has focused on how climate change impacts Inuit mental wellness through disrupting relationships to the environment and a sense of place ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a , 2013b ; 2012 ; Durkalec et al., 2015 ; Ostapchuk et al., 2015 ). Yet, little is known about how weather and seasons impact local concepts of climate ( Hulme, 2017 ), contribute to experiences of place, and effect the mental and emotional wellbeing of individuals and communities. Weather is understood not only as short-lived, isolated experiences of atmospheric conditions such as temperature, precipitation, and wind, but also holistically ( Hulme, 2017 ) to include how these conditions manifest in, and mediate the surrounding environment (e.g. colours, snow cover, ice quality; Palang et al., 2005 ) within shorter timescales (i.e. moment to moment, day to day). Seasonal weather includes these phenomena that are rhythmical and regularly recurring ( Palang et al., 2005 ). Climate refers to these conditions averaged over time and space, and adds a sense of stability to what would otherwise be interpreted as chaotic interactions ( Hulme, 2017 ). In this study, we therefore sought to further understand the climate-mental health and wellness relationship among Inuit in Nunatsiavut, Canada. Our objectives were to characterize: 1) the personal and collective significance of climate, including changing weather and seasonal patterns, among Nunatsiavut Inuit; and 2) how weather, season, and climate influence mental wellness in the context of climate change. By examining Inuit understandings of climate and climate change through lived experiences, this research explored the relationship between changes in weather and mental wellness.

Section: 2. Methods

Nunatsiavut is the ancestral homeland of Nunatsiavut Inuit. Nunatsiavut Inuit and their ancestors have been living along the Northern coast in the Subarctic region in Atlantic Canada ( Fig. 1 ) for thousands of years. In 2005, Nunatsiavut achieved self-governance through the Labrador Inuit Land Claims Agreement, which established the Nunatsiavut Government. The region is home to over 2200 Inuit ( Statistics Canada, 2017 ) in five communities: Rigolet, Makkovik, Postville, Hopedale, and Nain. There are no roads connecting the communities, and year-round access is possible only by plane. Nunatsiavut Inuit depend on land-based activities such as hunting, fishing, and foraging for subsistence and livelihoods, and to support culture and wellbeing ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a , 2012 ; Durkalec, 2013 ; Harper et al., 2015 ). Nunatsiavut Inuit depend on the region's polar climate including the annual freeze and thaw cycles of sea ice and snow cover where transportation is very limited ( Crate, 2012 ). Winter is the season of greatest mobility, when sea ice formation and snow cover allow people to access land farther from the communities on snowmobiles. Snow cover and ice remain into early spring where warming weather and longer days mean increased time outdoors. As the late spring thaw of sea ice and snow occurs, transportation becomes challenging as there is too little snow for snowmobiles, yet still too much snow for other vehicles. Summer brings warmer temperatures, longer days, and is when people tend to travel by boat to summer homes or nearby islands for fishing and berry picking. During the fall, before ice-freeze up, people continue to travel by boat, but increasing winds often create stormier waters making boat travel riskier. Download: Download high-res image (629KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Map and population sizes of Nunatsiavut communities; source: * Statistics Canada (2016) Census of Population.
As a region, Nunatsiavut continues to experience substantial climate and environmental changes, including but not limited to: less predictable and more extreme weather; diminished sea ice quality and extent ( Screen, 2017 ); disruptions to wildlife and vegetation distributions ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012 ; Harper et al., 2015 ); and regional winter warming of over 2 ᵒ C within the last century, and even greater warming projected within the next century ( Way and Viau, 2015 ). Nunatsiavut Inuit of all ages have reported that climate and environmental changes are felt intensely and acutely, and have been linked to a variety of health outcomes ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b , 2012 ; Durkalec et al., 2015 ; Harper et al., 2015 ; Ostapchuk et al., 2015 ). Rapid climatic and environmental changes have been coupled with intense socio-cultural changes within the last century, including imposed social and economic structures associated with globalization and the ongoing impacts of colonialization ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2014 ; Petrasek MacDonald et al., 2015 ). Nunatsiavut Inuit have taken a proactive role in mitigating the health impacts of climate change through community-led policy, programming, and research that promotes meaningful pathways to achieve wellness and build adaptive capacity such as land-based health programming, environment-health monitoring, and food sharing programs ( Harper et al., 2015 ; Hirsch et al., 2016 ; Kipp et al., 2019 ; Organ et al., 2014 ; Sawatzky et al., 2017 ).
Data were drawn from the Inuit Mental Health and Adaptation to Climate Change (IMHACC) project (e.g. Petrasek MacDonald et al., 2015 ). IMHACC was a multi-year community-based study examining environmental change and mental health and wellbeing, led by the Rigolet Inuit Community Government in partnership with community governments from Nain, Hopedale, Postville, and Makkovik, and the Nunatsiavut Government's Department of Health and Social Development. Community and regional government and health professionals, community research coordinators, and academic researchers (including co-authors of the present study) were part of the original research team, involved in all phases of this project, and worked together iteratively on its conceptualization, design, and data collection, as well as the present analyses and write-up.
Qualitative data were gathered from November 2012 to May 2013 by local Inuit research coordinators in each community. Community research coordinators and community governments used purposive sampling to identify and recruit interviewees that reflected the diverse land-based experiences and knowledges across the region, as well a diversity of health professionals in each community ( Suri, 2011 , Fig. 2 , Fig. 3 ). By design, this included comparable ratios of male and female participants across communities and age categories. In addition to these purposefully selected individuals, an inclusive and open sampling approach was used: any community member 15 years and older who was interested in participating was eligible to be interviewed. Research coordinators used various recruitment strategies, including direct contact, local radio announcements, and flyer distribution (in both English and Inuttitut). A total of 116 participants were interviewed across all five communities in Nunatsiavut, including 96 community members and 20 health professionals. Download: Download high-res image (768KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Age (top) and gender-stratified (bottom) ratios of Inuit community member interviewees across all five communities (n = 96*; *does not include 20 community health professional interviewees). Download: Download high-res image (353KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Demographic and profession information of Nunatsiavut-based health professional interviewees (n = 20 participants).
Semi-structured interview guides were developed for both community members and health professionals, which included similar questions for both groups, with additional questions about effects on healthcare for the health professionals. These guides were developed by and pre-tested for content and context with investigators, community research coordinators, health professionals, community members, and members of all five Inuit Community Governments in the region. Four main topics were considered: 1) land activities, including purpose and frequency of land use; 2) local and individual understandings of health and wellbeing; 3) observed changes in the community and environment; and 4) mental and emotional health responses to those changes. Interviews were carried out in a conversational style to encourage participant elaboration, contextualization, and rich data ( Knox and Burkard, 2009 ; Kvale and Brinkmann, 2009 ). While there was an option to have an Inuttitut translator, all participants chose to have their interviews conducted in English. Interviews were 60–90 minutes in length, and audio-recorded for transcription. Ethics and research approvals were obtained from the University of Guelph, Cape Breton University, McGill University, the Newfoundland and Labrador Health Research Ethics Board, and the Nunatsiavut Government Research Advisory Committee.
Data familiarization took place through repeated reading of transcripts while concurrently journaling initial thoughts and preliminary concept maps ( Birks et al., 2008 ; Braun and Clarke, 2006 ). All interviews were analyzed using a constant comparative method to examine patterns within and between individuals, communities, and different demographic groupings ( Boeije, 2002 ). Additionally, analyses employed a hybrid technique of both inductive and deductive thematic analysis ( Fereday and Muir-Cochrane, 2006 ). The inductive approach ensured that codes and themes were grounded in participants’ lived experiences and respected Inuit perspectives on place and wellbeing ( Kirmayer and Valaskakis, 2009 ; Kral et al., 2011 ). The deductive approach was guided by a structural coding framework based on our objectives ( Decuir-Gunby et al., 2011 ). The latter approach helped focus the analyses on content relevant to mental wellness, weather, and climate. Both inductive and deductive approaches were data-driven, requiring repeated investigation of the raw data ( Decuir-Gunby et al., 2011 ).
Early stages of the analysis employed open coding ( Decuir-Gunby et al., 2011 ). Codes were freely generated, expanded, and collapsed throughout the process, and solidified into a codebook that served to inform thematic analysis ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ). Working with the codes, themes, and evolving concept maps was an iterative and immersive process until a final list of themes and subthemes was produced from the data that represented participants’ experiences of weather, climate, and mental wellness ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ). To ensure trustworthiness of results, reflexive memoing was practiced throughout the research process, which acted as an audit trail for the analyses ( Birks et al., 2008 ). Additionally, debrief sessions were held with members of the research team throughout the analyses to ensure that evolving themes and concepts were representative of the context in which interviews took place. Qualitative data management software, NVivo©, version 11.4.1, was used to facilitate transcript organization and quotation retrieval. Figures were created using Microsoft Office 365® PowerPoint and the map in Figure 1 was generated with Tableau Software® (using data from ©OpenStreetMap contributors, under license CC BY-SA, https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright ).

Section: 3. Results

The majority of participants spoke in-depth about their mental wellness in relation to their experiences with weather. Weather and the climate in the region held personal and collective significance for participants, and were understood to impact mental wellness through three main pathways: 1) as a presence that influences broader health determinants, including physical activity , social connection, culture, and identity; 2) as a transient factor that impacts mood and emotions; and 3) as a longer term presence experienced over seasons, that influences behaviours and moods.
For Inuit across Nunatsiavut, weather factored into daily life, often determining what was safe and possible to do. As one community member shared, there's been times, like, when we've said, ‘okay, we're going to the cabin, we're doing this, we're doing that.’ And then all of a sudden, nothing, like you're just stuck in the house because the weather has come down [poor weather].
Participants often explained that “everything is weather permitting”, not just in terms of traveling on the land, but also within the community. Many participants recounted experiences of weather delays preventing people from leaving or returning home while traveling, or from accessing services in a timely manner: The weather kind of has power over us, because it depends on the weather if people get in, if stuff gets in for the store, if we get mail, all of that … if you go to the store and your vegetables aren't in, you go to the post office and there's no mail, I think all that affects how you feel.
Acknowledging the role of weather as a determinant of daily routines and available resources, many participants discussed how weather and local concepts of climate contributed to personal and collective identities. Participants spoke with deep pride of their cold climate and how it shaped them as a people. As one Elder shared, “we're winter people … we're people of the snow; we want the snow, we want the ice.”
Several participants described how having the knowledge and capacity to survive and thrive in a cold climate contributes to their sense of wellbeing, and strengthens a sense of identity: All of a sudden, you're like ‘I am such a Labrador man’! Just like, ‘yes, trust me with everything, I've got all this under control.‘ … It just makes you relax, you know.… Even something as simple as something after a storm goes and all of a sudden you get out there and you're like ‘yep, I must dig out the home’ because if I don't get the shovel out, nobody is getting in or out. It's just like ‘I have to do this’!
By altering environmental conditions, such as ice and snow cover, weather was also described as important for reinforcing and supporting social networks and connectedness, and mediating connections to, and time spent on the land. Weather was not only important in maintaining participants’ physical access to the land and social networks, but helped maintain social relationships and fostered cooperation. As one community member explained, they're helping each other out ‘cause you got no choice but to help each other out when you're out on the land, ‘cause you could be in a life and death situation ‘cause you never know, ‘cause the weather could be so unpredictable and it could be so cold.
The unpredictability of weather was often discussed in relation to recurring experiences of how people acted “differently” on the land and in the “elements.” Participants consistently reported that people appear happier when they are on the land, that food and knowledge sharing is more common, and that time on the land connected people in a way that was “therapeutic.”
Shared experiences with weather were also important for reinforcing Inuit values such as patience and adaptability, with participants valuing “the ability to be able to wait and see.” Since weather often causes delays and disruptions: “You have to contend with all sorts of other things like the weather.… and you learn patience.” As a result, “people around here are pretty easy going with the weather, and just takes it as it comes.” Practicing patience was not only valued, but a source of pride for Inuit, as exemplified in the following exchange between a participant (P) and the interviewer (I), both lifelong residents of Nunatsiavut: P: About storms, you can't help [them], we just go through it … wait ‘till the storm's finished, and then go ahead with life again.… We [Inuit] do have a lot of patience. I: Yeah, that's probably why Inuit have been alive so long – because they know how to have patience and not get into dangerous situations.
Not only was patience valued, but participants emphasized being prepared and adaptable. One Elder shared the importance of being prepared: “with the bad weather, if you're not watching the weather, you could get caught out. If you don't prepare right, you could starve or freeze.” Some participants described how this vulnerability to weather required careful attention their surroundings: You have to be more attentive to what the land is doing. Like when was the frost and how much water did you get … it's not just oh, you're sitting here and you're like you can feel the spirit and whatever. You actually have to be attentive to a lot of things.
Given the role of weather and climate in shaping daily life, identity, social bonds, and culture in Nunatsiavut, almost all participants indicated that current and forecasted weather conditions had “a strong hold” on them, both physically and mentally. For example, one community member shared: It kind of depresses me sometimes.… There's times when you want to go off [on the land]. The forecast [is] calling for a really nice weekend, you actually get there and then there's a blizzard warning when you get up that morning. And when you're working like me, and you have to put in a leave request and it's approved, like you have no choice … [but] to take that day.
As one Nunatsiavut health professional echoed, even forecasted weather was identified as having influence on community mental wellness: “We as a people, that's our life: what's the weather going to be? … If you see a storm, it's one miserable week already.” Direct experiences with weather conditions, such as high winds, fluctuating temperatures, and unseasonal weather, were known to impact environmental conditions and time spent on the land, causing participants to report feeling “scared,” “intimidated”, “surprised”, “angry”, “mad”, “frustrated”, or filled with “sadness.” Conversely, participants also described how weather such as a snowfall or clear skies could elicit “excitement” and “joy,” and could make them feel “relaxed,” “calm,” and enhance their mental wellbeing: You're so at the mercy of the elements that you appreciate those elements … so when the first snowfall comes … and the snowflakes are falling on your face … you'll stop and enjoy that … you really feel like you're so attuned like you feel closer to the land.… they are really small moments, but they add to your mental health.
What constituted “good” versus “bad” weather was defined by the impact on peoples' ability to engage in various land-based activities in and around communities. As such, weather's emotional impact varied substantially within and across participants. For example, a storm in the community was often described as “frustrating”; however, one participant described enjoying storms once at the cabin because “you could be sitting in your cabin looking out the window at a big old storm, and it's just so good.” Similarly, an avid hunter discussed how, during an abnormally mild winter that was “scary” and “intolerable” for many people in his community, he accepted the risks related to the unusual weather conditions. He explained, “I used to get to my cabin, and that's simply for the fact that you're willing to take a chance and you've got that experience, you know …. a lot of people were scared and intimidated by it [poor snow and ice conditions].” When asked how bad weather conditions impacted her mental wellness, one woman commented, “it don't really bother me. But my husband, he likes to go out on land, so it affects him more so.” As further explained by one health professional, weather may be more of an important predictor of the emotional health for individuals whose role and identities are more closely connected to the land: “for some … that's what makes them feel that they are contributing to their families; when they're not doing that it makes them feel bad.”
While weather influenced daily emotions and mental wellbeing, many participants from across the region emphasized the importance of seasons and predictable, cyclical trends in weather. Participants explained that “we really need those seasons,” and that “up here … you live by every season.” As one Elder described, up here, every season is something different. You can do so much different in every season. Like, in the fall you pick all your berries and things like that. And, in the winter you can just go partridge hunting.… and in the spring you can go ice fishing.… and just being out is so nice, like, so good. And, the geese come in the spring, and that's a big old thing too – that's fun. Just to be able to hear ‘em even. It don't even matter if you get any. Sometimes, just being out there and hearing them … it's so nice.
Related to the arrival of each season, transition periods (‘shoulder seasons’) such as sea ice freeze-up and breakup periods, were described as particularly challenging times for mental wellness, because people are unable to travel safely and are “land bound” since the “ice is your highway.” As one participant described, during the fall freeze-up, community members eagerly await the turnover to winter: They're so excited to get on Skidoo [snowmobile] that as soon as it’s white enough to say there's snow, they'll go at the detriment of their Skidoo, because people just want to do that, hey? I think winter is one of the more preferred times of year here too.
While discussing the impact of these periods of limited mobility, one community member shared: “It can be hard on your mental capabilities. It can be hard to keep your sanity when you can't get out.” Not only did participants link these transitional periods to psychological distress related to limited access to resources such as firewood and food, and consistently reported feelings of “isolation,” “boredom,” and “anxiousness,” and used “cabin fever” to describe such moods. Several participants also expressed concern regarding the impact periods of “isolation” may have: Where people can't get out to do what they want, they just fall back on addictions.… They don't mean to get addicted to the drugs and the booze and stuff like that, you know, but before they know it they are addicted. A lot of that has to do with because they can't get out in the country like they wants.
Regional health professionals corroborated the seasonality of distress, and suggested that they were reflected in the use of health services in community nursing clinics. As one healthcare provider explained, “up North, yes, everybody talks about freeze-up and break-up, that those are the bad times if you talk to the nurses.” Similarly, a mental health professional from the regional government shared: We see a difference even, like, spring and fall, …. when people can't get out, they know there's a certain time of the year when you're almost land bound. And, we see a difference in the counselling part: people are more agitated … because they're just not getting off on the land.
With the shortening of daylight, several participants identified the fall freeze-up as a particularly vulnerable period. In conversation with the local research coordinator, one couple (P1 and P2; Interviewer – I) revealed, P1: “I think anybody with mental health issues would find the fall the worst.” P2: “Even when you don't have mental health issues, just being isolated and nothing to do and there's no sunlight” I: “That gets to you?” P2: “That gets to everybody.”
Many participants discussed seasonal affective disorder-like symptoms: “when we don't see the sun for a while, like, everyone is kinda in a funk.” Similarly, when asked what challenged or improved mental wellness, one community member shared: I think the weather … I mean, I wouldn't say I've got season[al] affective disorder … but … I certainly notice that I generally tend to be happier when it's a sunny day … even if it's the middle of winter – as long as it’s sunshine, I'm generally a happier person.
Regardless of the length of days, improved moods linked with sunshine were in part due to feelings of productivity. As “good weather” was often defined by its relation to feelings of productivity and mobility, a few participants identified the arrival of winter, snow, and stable ice, as a protective factor against “feeling down.” Participants noted an improvement in mood as it means community members can access the benefits of that season: “when the ice freezes up, then we can go, then we're free.” Similarly, one health professional described: “The snow is here; it's winter and people are happy – that's how I think. People seem a little bit more happier.”
Given the importance of seasonal cycles in weather across the region, almost all participants reported climatic observations related to seasonality, noting “shorter” winters, “spring thaws coming faster,” and “in the fall it seems like it takes so long to freeze up now, it seems like the fall drags on forever.” Anticipated changes in seasonality were linked to concerns about mental wellness. For example, one participant reflected on the potential impact of climate changes on community members: “it'll put stress on them for how they're used to living on the land, and where it's getting shorter and shorter, like there's not much time for doing stuff now in the winter.”

Section: 4. Discussion

Through the voices and lived experiences shared by Nunatsiavut Inuit, this study revealed the dynamic nature of the climate-mental wellness relationship. Experiences with weather and season shape and reinforce sociocultural environments emergent within climates ( Hulme, 2017 ), while also directly impacting emotional and mental states among individuals and communities ( Fig. 4 ). While the existing literature has identified direct and indirect pathways through which climate change impacts mental health ( Berry et al., 2010 ; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b ; Harper et al., 2015 ; Hayes and Poland, 2018 ; Middleton et al., 2020 ), participants in our study provided nuanced and contextualized insight into how climate is felt, sensed, and understood through daily life and in relation to place. Download: Download high-res image (521KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Thematic map representing main pathways through which climate was described to impact mental health and wellbeing among Nunatsiavut Inuit.
Participants discussed a diversity of weather and environmental conditions that have been linked to wellbeing in previous research from Nunatsiavut, and other Inuit regions of Inuit Nunangat (e.g. Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a ; Durkalec et al., 2015 ; Gearheard et al., 2010 ). People described how climate indirectly modified mental wellness through weather by shaping social determinants of health such as identity, social relationships, and culture ( Fig. 4 ; Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2014 ; Kirmayer and Valaskakis, 2009 ; Richmond and Ross, 2009 ). In particular, weather modified physical relationships to the environment: cold and clear weather makes it easier for Inuit to “go off” on the land, whereas unexpectedly warm conditions or storms force people to remain in the community or face increased risk when traveling on sea ice or water. In turn, weather has a role in both fostering and interrupting connections to place; this has consequences for identity, culture, social relationship, and mental wellness ( Ellis and Albrecht, 2017 ; Knez, 2005 ).
Participants explained how their ability to react to the weather improved their sense of wellbeing, not only by allowing them to access the land and participate in meaningful cultural activities, but also because these experiences were a source of pride and competency ( Deci and Ryan, 2000 ; Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2014 ). Conversely, unseasonal weather, or conditions incongruent with local and historical concepts of climate can result in experiences of identity disruptions ( Milligan, 2003 ). For example, an anomalously warm winter might be unsettling or painful for a person or community whose sense of self is connected to their relationships with snow and ice.
The threats to identity from changing weather aligns with cases from rural residents, fishers, and farmers ( Tschakert et al., 2013 ). Research from the Australian context, for example, found that being a ‘good farmer’ was contingent on the condition of land ( Ellis and Albrecht, 2017 ). During times of drought, land-based identity and emotional connection manifested as distress, compared to joy with seasonal rainfall. In this context, the relationships between people and weather is foundational to place-based identities and attachments, knowledge, culture, and wellbeing. The importance of day-to-day interactions with weather offers new insight into the local, incremental implications of climate change to mental wellness whose long-term impacts are not well understood yet ( Berry et al., 2018 ; Tschakert et al., 2017 ).
Given the cultural and practical significance of weather, season, and climate, these results establish why transient changes in weather could elicit immediate emotional and mental responses ( Fig. 4 ). While previous research highlighted the negative impacts of a changing climate on mental health and wellbeing ( Hayes et al., 2018 ), examining Inuit lived experiences of climate and weather revealed a spectrum of emotional and mental reactions, including conditions that enhanced and improved wellbeing. This aligns with literature on the health-sustaining value of nature ( Finlay et al., 2015 ), and the role of natural environments for healing ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a ; Robertson and Ljubicic, 2019 ).
Emotional and mental reactions to weather were highly variable and context dependent. The extent to which weather influences Inuit mental wellness may be contingent on individual attributes, such as land-based skills ( Clark et al., 2016 ; Durkalec et al., 2015 ), and how much place contributes to identity ( Hogg et al., 1995 ). For example, years of land-based travel experience may influence individuals perception of risk, including whether they are habituated to certain environmental exposures, and the emotional attachment these hold based on past experiences ( Durkalec, 2013 ).
Emotional impacts of weather may also be gendered. Previous climate-mental health studies in Indigenous contexts found that people who identified as women were more likely to share negative emotions related to weather and environmental changes ( Bunce et al., 2016 ; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012 ; Durkalec, 2013 ; McNamara and Westoby, 2011 ), and report fear for loved ones traveling out on the land during poor weather ( Dowsley et al., 2010 ). While in some cases, people who identified as men may be less likely to share emotive experiences, in some cultures they are more likely to engage in subsistence-based harvesting that contributes to identity; changes in weather and environmental conditions can disrupt these concepts of identity resulting in ontological and emotional distress ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b ). Research in other remote or rural contexts suggest that these emotional impacts may manifest differentially for men and women, such as drought contributing to suicidal struggles and maladaptive coping strategies involving substance use among men ( Ellis and Albrecht, 2017 ; Hart et al., 2011 ), while women may struggle with depression and anxiety during transition seasons and when they experience food insecurity ( Beaumer and Ford, 2010 , Durkalec, 2013 , Hadley and Patil, 2008 ). Together, this work points to the need for demographic-specific mental health adaptations in the context of a changing climate ( Hart et al., 2011 ).
Individual susceptibility to transient emotional experiences of weather may be mediated by social constructs and material conditions ( Clark et al., 2016 ). As such, the pathways outlined in Fig. 4 are not mutually exclusive, as socioenvironmental contexts may determine the extent of one's emotional response. The shift away from cultural subsistence towards wage economy, for example, has disrupted many Inuit lifestyles, and has contributed to social marginalization, stress, and suicide ( Clark et al., 2016 ; Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2014 ). Top-down labour structures, harvesting seasons, and government-implemented policies have heightened the emotional and mental impact of “bad” weather and environmental stressors ( Sakakibara, 2009 ). As climate change and increasingly unpredictable weather makes time spent on the land difficult to plan for, there is concern by Inuit about the extent to which policies and programs developed outside of the North may cause distress and diminish adaptive capacities in Nunatsiavut and elsewhere in Inuit Nunangat.
Seasonal weather patterns were also used to describe fluctuations in individual and community mental wellness ( Fig. 4 ). Dependence on the cycling of seasons for mobility, food, firewood, and cultural activities meant that transitional periods were particularly difficult for participants and their communities. This finding is consistent with previous case studies from the region, where sea ice freeze-up and breakup periods have been associated with boredom, distress, and mental health concerns reported by both community members and local healthcare staff ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a , 2012 ; Petrasek MacDonald et al., 2015 ). Additionally, unseasonal weather conditions may be particularly distressing for seasonally-dependent cultural and social activities including berry-picking and seal hunting. Seasonality , then, may be a culturally- and locally-relevant exposure for mental wellness in the region. In similar contexts, seasonality has been linked to suicidal thoughts and behaviours ( Silveira et al., 2016 ; Sparring Björkstén et al., 2005 ). While the underlying mechanisms are often debated ( Woo et al., 2012 ), findings here support the importance of considering the climatic and atmospheric contributions to seasonal mental health problems ( Burke et al., 2018 ).
A novel contribution from this study was identifying the positive role winter had on mental health and wellbeing despite shortening daylight hours. Winter weather and landscapes were a source of cultural pride and strength as they support individual and collective autonomy via land access and improved mobility. This finding is consistent with research among other Northern Indigenous Peoples that have linked environmental features with wellness such as sea ice with freedom ( Durkalec et al., 2015 ), trail access and traveling with cultural identity ( Aporta, 2009 ; Riedlsperger, 2014 ), and access to local food and time spent on the land with lower psychological distress ( Skogli et al., 2017 ; Tam et al., 2013 ). Additionally, these findings suggest that mental health outcomes (e.g. seasonal affective disorder) may be culturally mediated. Strong mental and emotional reactions could also be viewed as a sign of an individual who is “attuned” and connected to the land, and engaged with their community's and culture's values attached to climate, rather than a pathological response ( Harrison, 2004 ). In similar place-based cultures, Western ideas about mental health may be insufficient to illustrate and capture the full spectrum of impacts on mental health resulting from an altered climate.
The community-led and conversational nature in which interviews were conducted, and data-driven analytical approach, prioritized findings of local and cultural relevance to participants. A limitation of the present study is that participants were interviewed at one time point, therefore, the time/season at which the interview occurred may have influenced the nature of responses. However, interviews occurred across multiple seasons, adding strength to the consensus in themes that were drawn from these discussions.
These findings highlight the need for more culturally appropriate investigations of mental health and wellbeing. Medical definitions of mental health may not align with holistic definitions that are common among Indigenous Peoples that face the most acute health consequences of climate change ( Cunsolo Willox et al., 2014 ). Ongoing investigations of the climate-mental health relationship should use a broader framework for defining mental health, such as the Inuit mental wellness framework ( Alianait Inuit-specific Mental Wellness Task Group, 2007 ), grounded in local understandings of place and climate.
The present study described how changes in weather, even subtle ones, have the ability to impact Inuit mental wellness. Future research investigating the ways in which meteorological data map onto self-reported mental health and clinical outcomes, including if and how those relationships manifest in different subpopulations (e.g. gender, age, socioeconomic status, health history), would be valuable. While some participants expressed concern regarding repeated and extended exposure to seasonal transition periods, it is unclear how this may impact mental wellness for individuals and communities. As extreme weather events become increasingly frequent and intense, it will be important to anticipate the limits to individual and community resilience as changing weather impacts accumulate ( Ellis and Albrecht, 2017 ).
The relationship between weather, climate change, and mental wellness should be considered in public health policy and programming across Inuit Nunangat and throughout the Circumpolar North. Participants identified cyclical periods of distress and boredom linked to other mental health issues, thus marking important opportunities to support individuals and communities through both formal and informal mental health services ( Clayton et al., 2017 ). Within an Inuit mental wellness framework ( Alianait Inuit-specific Mental Wellness Task Group, 2007 ), additional supports could include: addressing healthcare provider staffing needs during these periods; promoting climate literacy such as identifying and communicating climate-specific exposures; programming and policy that facilitates social connection, connection to culture, and that provides opportunities for self-determination. As such, many mental health adaptations do not necessarily need to be framed within the context of either climate change or mental health ( Clayton et al., 2017 ); rather, they will need to be multi-faceted and multi-leveled.
The present findings demonstrate that climatic changes not only burden individual mental wellness but also lead to intangible, or non-economic, losses ( Preston, 2017 ), such as social networks, knowledge systems, and identities that are premised on stable constructs of place and climate ( Werkheiser, 2017 ). In order to appropriately support communities who face climate-induced loss and damage, there is a need to better provide meaningful opportunities for affected peoples to discuss and define these intangible losses and damages, and incorporate these concepts into monitoring, evaluation, and adaptation strategies ( Tschakert et al., 2017 ).

Section: 5. Conclusion

This research advances understandings of the temporal influence of climate on experiences place and mental wellness, offering new insights to the immediacy through which climate change is being felt among Nunatsiavut Inuit. Experiences with weather can reinforce local concepts of climate, strengthening social determinants of mental wellness, in addition to altering daily and seasonal emotive and mental experiences. Investigating the lived experiences of weather has helped identify new opportunities for climate-mental health adaptation. Not only will adaptation require policy and programming that supports both formal and informal types of mental health care, but importantly, strategies that help Inuit rearticulate and reclaim place-based identities and ways of knowing within a changing climate. As weather and seasonality were demonstrated to be important predictors of mental wellness in this research, there is a need for further engagement with lived experiences of climate in order to effectively and meaningful adapt in a time of rapid environmental change.

Section: Credit author statement

Jacqueline Middleton: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Investigation, Visualization; Ashlee Cunsolo: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Resources, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Validation, Supervision, writing – reviewing and editing; Andria Jones-Bitton: Supervision, writing – reviewing and editing; Inez Shiwak: Conceptualization, Methodology, Project administration, Investigation, Validation, writing-reviewing and editing; Michele Wood: Conceptualization, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Validation, writing-reviewing and editing; Nathaniel Pollock: writing-reviewing and editing; Charlie Flowers: writing-reviewing and editing; Sherilee L. Harper: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Resources, Project administration, Validation, Supervision, writing – reviewing and editing.

Section: Acknowledgements

Funding for this project was provided through Health Canada's First Nations and Inuit Health Branch, the Nasivvik Centre for Inuit Health and Changing Environments, Polar Knowledge Canada, and CIHR (to A.C.; the Rigolet Inuit Community Government; and S.L.H.), as well as scholarships and travel awards (to J.M.: CIHR, Ontario Graduate Scholarship Program; the Arthur D. Latornell Graduate and Travel Scholarships; and the Northern Scientific Training Program). Our deepest thanks to all of the participants for sharing their stories, wisdom, and expertise, as well as to the Inuit Mental Health Adaptation to Climate Change Team: Jack Shiwak and Charlotte Wolfrey (Rigolet Inuit Community Government); Marilyn Baikie (‘My Word’: Storytelling &amp; Media Lab); Herb Jacque and Myrtle Groves, (Makkovik Inuit Community Government); Diane Gear and Greg Jacque (Postville Inuit Community Government); Wayne Piercy and Juliana Flowers (Hopedale Inuit Community Government); Anthony Andersen and Noah Nochasak (Nain Inuit Community Government).
