Title: Writing to template: Researchers’ negotiation of procedural research ethics


Abstract: Abstract

This qualitative study examines researchers' views of research ethics in everyday global mental health research practice. We present data from a multi-site study conducted in 2014-15 involving 35 individual in-depth interviews that explore researchers' perceptions of procedural ethics in research conducted in South Asia. We examine how researchers' negotiate ethical procedures, and consider the impact this has on ethical practice. This study foregrounds researchers' pivotal role in procedural research ethics: they produce ethical documents including research protocols and informed consent forms; engage in ethical review; and apply ethical documents to research practice. We apply the analytical framework of boundary objects to show the active work that ethical documents simultaneously enable and inhibit as researchers and ethical review boards apply these as templates for interaction. This analysis shows how the documents required by procedural ethics processes facilitate representations of research that are generalised, standardised, and abstracted from the situated context in which they are applied. Researchers' engagement with these standardised forms cannot prepare them for potential ethical issues in research practice. These templates therefore act as ideal constructions of what research ethics could be, documenting moral intent that researchers draw upon to translate into practice.

Section: 1. Introduction

It is widely accepted that research should be conducted ethically (see e.g. Council for International Organisations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS), 2016 ; The National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects in Biomedical and Behavioural Research, 1979 ). Drawing upon Guillemin and Gillam’s (2004) distinction between procedural ethics and ethics-in-practice, this paper explores research ethics in everyday global mental health research practice. Procedural ethics encompasses research ethics approval processes such as developing research protocols, participant information sheets, informed consent forms, and other procedural documentation supporting research. These procedural ethical processes are different from ethics-in-practice: the day-to-day ethical issues that arise during research conduct. This distinction does not imply that the normative framing of “ethics” shifts between procedures and practice, but rather, that the expression of ethics in procedural documentation does not (and could not) embody the range of situated ethical judgements researchers may face in practice. This study aims to contribute to understanding what leads to and sustains this distance between the expression of ethical principles in procedural ethics, and the enacting of ethics-in-practice ( Guillemin and Gillam, 2004 ).
Prior to conducting research with human participants, researchers must follow procedures intended to promote ethical research that we refer to as procedural ethics . Procedural ethical guidelines in biomedical and increasingly social sciences research can be broadly characterised as adopting a principalist approach ( Beauchamp and Childress, 1989 ). Principalism is founded upon a ‘common morality’ claimed to be universally applicable across philosophical, theological, and social epistemologies and cultures ( Beauchamp, 2003 , 2007 ; Emanuel et al., 2004 ; Lacey, 1998 ). It aims to offer: “a shared and serviceable group of general norms for analysing many types of moral problems” ( Beauchamp, 2007 , p.3) that can be easily understood and applied across disciplines. Therefore, principalism is packaged as a universal route to assessing and responding to ethical issues in research ( Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 ).
Claims of principalisms' universal applicability has aided the development of procedural research governance that seeks to offer accountability and auditable proof that ethics has been “done” by producing outputs such as the signed informed consent form ( Boulton and Parker, 2007 ; Jacob, 2007 ; Strathern, 2000 ). Governance includes compliance with research ethics guidelines to receive funding ( Boulton and Parker, 2007 ), and Ethical Review Boards’ (ERBs) professional accreditation schemes in low and middle income countries (LMICs) ( Douglas-Jones, 2015 ). Increasingly globally embedded, the formalisation, rationalisation and harmonisation of research ethics governance is driven by economic and structural factors ( Dixon-Woods et al., 2007 ; Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 ).
Despite perceived advantages, principalism is subject to critique. This includes the philosophical concern that it lacks a unifying moral theory ( Clouser and Gert, 1990 ). More importantly, it is argued that principalism is a poor guide to action ( Levi, 1996 ), recognising that ethical judgements require balancing context with abstract principles to inform morally justifiable actions in any particular instance ( Fletcher, 1967 ; Hammersley, 2015 ). Whilst specified principalism attempts to address this by tailoring broad principles to specific contexts ( Richardson, 2000 ), this challenges prinicipalism's general morality by integrating it with specific moral frameworks such as cultural traditions, religious beliefs, or individual attitudes ( Hammersley, 2015 ).
When applied to research governance, principalism is frequently translated into prescriptions and proscriptions ( Biehl and Petryna, 2013 ), potentially encouraging their rote application ( Green, 1990 ) which can limit what is identified and addressed as an ethical issue ( Kingori, 2013 ). The danger of rote application of prescriptions and proscriptions is compounded by a proceduralist demand for standardisation ( Strathern, 2000 ). This standardisation of ERB decision-making is challenged by Friesen et al. (2019) who argue that ERBs should have the discretion to respond to the inherent complexity of making normative decisions about research, highlighting that the contextual and ethical factors at play are inherently varied and interact in unpredictable ways. Importantly, the assumption that governance mechanisms can ensure ethical practice has been heavily critiqued ( Miller and Boulton, 2007 ). Here, tensions between procedural and in-practice ethics come to the fore ( Guillemin and Gillam, 2004 ; Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 ). This study takes this tension as its point of departure, exploring this through an analysis of researchers' experiences of procedural ethics when conducting mental health research in multiple contexts in South Asia. The framework of boundary objects is applied ( Star and Griesemer, 1989 ), illuminating how researchers’ interactions with procedural ethical documents, and their perceptions of ERBs expectations, foreground procedural ethical markers such as the informed consent process, whilst supressing attention to situated ethical research practice.
Our analysis draws on the analytic framework of boundary objects to illuminate researchers’ interactions with procedural research ethics ( Star and Griesemer, 1989 ), building on previous empirical ethics research where this framework has been applied to informed consent ( Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 ).
Star and Griesemers’ (1989) boundary objects framework aids understanding of how material objects such as documents and forms facilitate coordination across social worlds, whilst simultaneously retaining interpretative flexibility that meets the needs of each independently. Originating from an ethnographic study of a natural history museum , the boundary objects framework demonstrated how heterogeneous actors working towards the same goal cooperate despite divergent or competing concerns of the social worlds they inhabit ( Star and Griesemer, 1989 ). .
As defined by Star and Griesemer (1989) , boundary objects: “inhabit several intersecting worlds… and satisfy the informational requirements of each… They are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and the constraints of the several parties employing them, yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites. They are weakly structured in common use, and become strongly structured in individual-site use” (p.393, italics original).
Boundary objects key features include that they are simultaneously concrete and abstract; specific and general; conventional and customised, operating as bridges or anchors across social worlds ( Star, 2010 ; Star and Griesemer, 1989 ). Importantly, boundary objects are complex and inseparable from “social-negotiation processes within and between communities, and therefore, empathetically purposeful constructs [which]…do not …passively bridge but actively negotiate perceptual and practical differences” of diverse social worlds ( Huvila, 2011 , p.2530).
The standardised documents of procedural research ethics such as research protocols, information sheets, and informed consent forms embody boundary object features. They provide a shared referent between researchers, ERBs, funders, and research participants, which are then tailored for research practice. Researchers are central to this process, engaging with ERBs and funders to co-produce procedural representations of a study, and then specifying the procedural ethical documents to research practice. Problems of conflicting world-views are managed by adopting the lowest common denominator (i.e. an ethical standard acceptable to all), whilst ensuring that documents remain reconfigurable for local application by researchers ( Star, 2010 ; Star and Griesemer, 1989 ).
The boundary object analytical framework therefore privileges researchers' engagement with the multiple social worlds and research ethics material ‘objects’ (i.e. documents), foregrounding their actions towards and with procedural ethical documents to shape them into boundary objects that facilitate their work processes: conducting research. A further theoretical lens applied in this paper is the “backstage” work of research ethics as researchers develop procedural ethical documents and apply for ethical approval, considering the invisible work that surrounds the “front stage” when the documents are applied to practice with research participants ( Goffman, 1959 ; Star, 2010 ). Goffman’s (1959) frontstage/backstage typology aligns with the boundary objects framework's distinction between the cooperative actions of social worlds creating shared representations in documents developed through ethical review, and their specification by researchers engaging with participants in research practice. Consequently, this analytical approach emphasises the distance between procedural and in-practice ethics, demonstrating that despite cooperative efforts, these documents remain neither neutral nor consensual as their interpretive flexibility reflects the different perspectives of the diverse social worlds applying them ( Huvila, 2011 ).
By examining researchers' experiences through the lens of boundary objects and applying Goffman’s (1959) frontstage/backstage typology, attention is focussed on procedural research ethics as a social phenomenon ( Molyneux and Geissler, 2008 ). Notably, it foregrounds a proceduralist and abstracted ethics embodied in documents, highlighting their co-production as a form of social work that is required by ERBs and sustained by researchers. This framing aids understanding of how procedural research ethics operates to enhance or constrain researchers' responses to everyday ethical issues that arise in research practice, illuminating tensions along the continuum between procedural ethics and the situated in-practice ethical judgements of researchers.
This paper adds to the empirical research ethics literature by exploring researchers' views of procedural ethics ( Douglas-Jones, 2015 ; Hedgecoe, 2012 ; Kingori, 2013 , 2015 ; Molyneux and Geissler, 2008 ; Wahlberg et al., 2013 ), examining how these shape researchers' lived-through experiences of research ethics. It illustrates how procedural ethics becomes embodied within standardised forms, which act to both facilitate and constrain what is identified as an ethical issue. This study further illuminates researchers’ negotiation of the procedural and in-practice ethics relationship, demonstrating the strategies they employ to balance adherence to procedural ethics, whilst retaining their moral agency when responding to the contingencies of situated research contexts.

Section: 2. Methods

This study explores procedural research ethics from the perspective of researchers conducting mental health research in LMIC settings. The focus on mental health research arose due to AC being embedded in this field and engaged in a project that involved the three case-study organisations. The study employed a multi-site case study design ( Yin, 2009 ) in three South Asian countries. Anonymity procedures prevent identifying the countries, however an overview of the research settings, organisations, and systems of procedural ethical oversight are provided to situate the results.
All three countries have experienced conflict and natural disasters within the last two decades, currently host refugee and/or internally displaced populations, and have ongoing political instability. The countries are culturally diverse, with a multiplicity of ethnic, religious, and language groups. At the time of study, C2 and C3 were classified as lower middle income, and C1 as a low income country ( World Bank, 2017 ). Youth literacy rates in all three countries continue to improve, whilst in C2 and C3 around 40% of the older generations were literate ( United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 2015 ).
Three research organisations conducting community-based mental health research participated in this study: two local NGOs (C1 and C2), and a Government Hospital (C3). The organisations were engaged in community-based global mental health research involving the development and effectiveness testing of low-intensity psychosocial or psychological interventions, often involving mixed qualitative and quantitative research methods , with each project lasting between 2 and 5 years. This research typically involves conducting formative and process evaluation qualitative research including individual interviews and focus group discussions , and the administration of standardised questionnaires and checklists assessing for example participants’ mental health symptoms (e.g. depression or anxiety), functioning, history of exposure to potentially traumatic events , and levels of social support. These are administered either for epidemiological purposes, or within controlled trails testing the effectiveness of psychosocial/psychological interventions. The interventions typically involved participants meeting individually or in groups with a trained and supervised “lay helper” administering a manualised mental health intervention. None of the research involved testing new psychopharmaceuticals, or obtaining blood samples or genomic data.
These types of studies therefore throw-up specific kinds of ethical considerations including the appropriateness of consent, anonymity, and data protection procedures for potentially vulnerable populations; the sensitivity of questions in standardised questionnaires – for example asking about suicidal thoughts or intent which may be culturally stigmatised; the training and supervision of lay helpers administering mental health interventions, and of researchers leading interviews or focus groups or administering standardised questionnaires; and the adequacy of safety procedures and referral mechanisms for those identified to require specialised mental health support.
At the time of this study the organisations were each conducting a different mental health study . All organisations were collaborating with international partners based at UK or US Universities, and with global bodies such as the World Health Organisation. Thus, the research participants in this study drew upon their experience of working with a range of populations (e.g. adults, children – including former child soldiers and street children, refugees or internally displaced persons) in rural, urban, and refugee or internally displaced persons settings.
The organisations typically had senior staff in permanent positions, all of whom had higher degrees (e.g. PhDs), and were either internationally- or city-based, and oversaw projects in the city or at regional sites. Supervisors were a mix of permanent staff and project-specific hires with Batchelor or Masters Degrees, had experience of training and supervising research assistants (RAs), and were being mentored by senior staff. PIs and supervisors had knowledge and experience of procedural research ethics, including formal research ethics training and/or certification. RA's were short-term hires and had, at a minimum, high school education , with many holding Batchelor Degrees. RAs were employed on a project basis, although many continued from one project to the next. All organisations had mandatory RA on-the-job training and supervision which included knowledge and experience of the application of ethical principles and ethics procedures in their day-to-day research practice. The organisations in this study are therefore considered typical of global health research (see Molyneux et al., 2013 ).
The three countries had sufficient similarity in procedural ethics systems to draw comparisons. This included all countries requiring that biomedical (including qualitative) research follow international ethical guidelines and undergo ethical review. The three organisations in this study were in receipt of international funding (i.e. from US National Institute of Health; Grand Challenges Canada; or the UK-based Wellcome Trust). As a result of multi-country collaboration all organisations were required to obtain ethical approval both in-country and from a UK or US University ERB, all of which followed a standardised principalist approach to ethical review, as described above. In-country ethical review was centralised in C1 through an ERB specialising in health research; in C2 it was institutionally based with organisations applying to either University or Hospital ERBs; and in C3 was devolved to an accredited independent ERB at a research NGO. Typically approval processes commenced with in-country review, followed international University review who gave the final ethical approval. This hierarchy of approval demonstrates the potential for power imbalances inherent to the interaction of “local” and “international” approval structures ( Douglas-Jones, 2017 ). It is important to highlight that whilst procedural similarity is assumed, each country had its own approach to research ethics as local norms impacted on the prioritisation and operationalisation of ethical principles. As this paper seeks to explore researchers’ experiences of procedural ethics processes however, there is sufficient similarity between the three countries for a multi-site case study approach.
This study was conducted between September 2014 and February 2015, involving 35 individual in-depth interviews with researchers from the three countries. Interview topic guides sought to explore procedural and in-practice ethics, and interactions between the two. This included how researchers: understood and defined research ethics; engaged with ethical review; identified and responded to ethical issues arising in research practice; approached research ethics training; and how procedural and in-practice research ethics might be improved. This framing of the topic guide to explore the continuum between procedural and in-practice ethics builds on Guillemin and Gillam’s (2004) research which foregrounds the gap between how researchers approach the form-filling of procedural ethics, and their responses to “ethically important moments” (p.265) that arise in research practice and may not have been considered at the procedural ethics stage.
The researchers interviewed in this study had varying degrees of engagement with procedural ethics commensurate with their role. Typically this included the PI and supervisors developing research protocols and participating in ethical review; and RAs receiving role-related training in ethical principles and procedures from supervisors. Additionally some PIs and supervisors had experience as ERB members. As one study objective was to understand how procedural ethics was constructed organisationally, speaking to all levels of researchers was important for exploring understanding of, and engagement with, procedural research ethics; and the application of ethical procedures to research practice.
Table 1 summarises the interviews conducted by country, identifying categories of research participants (PIs, supervisors, and RAs). Six interviews were conducted online (via skype/adobe connect) in C3 due to the security situation preventing in-person interactions. Interpreters were hired at each research site, trained as co-interviewers with AC, and were involved in all interviews to facilitate the participants’ full engagement. For discussion of the methodological approaches to interviewing with interpreters and online interviewing please see ( Chiumento et al., 2017 , 2018 ). Table 1 . Interview overview. Country 1: {Florin} September 2014 Country 2: {Bialya} December 2014 Country 3: {Markovia} January-February 2015 Number of interviews 17 9 9 Interviewees gender Male Female Male Female Male Female 13 4 6 3 4 5 Interview location UK – 2 1 In-country (no. of sites visited) 17 (3) 7 (2) 8 (1) Conducted online in-country – – 6 Interpreter involvement Without interpreter With interpreter Without interpreter With interpreter Without interpreter With interpreter All interviews 4 13 5 4 2 7 Primary Investigator (PI) 2 - 2 - 1 - Supervisor 2 1 2 - 1 1 Research Assistant (RA) - 12 1 4 - 6
All interviews were digitally recorded and the English conversation transcribed and anonymised for analysis by using pseudonyms, and fictional place and research project names denoted by { } - e.g. {Florin}. Furthermore, quotes in italics represent talk conveyed by interpreters on behalf of participants, whilst normal text represents participants speaking in English. To enhance readability quotes have been tidied up, with (…) indicating removed speech.
When researching the topic of research ethics with researchers, questions of power, positionality, and reflexivity arose for the researcher (AC) ( Spencer and Richie, 2012 ). As a white British female PhD researcher conducting interviews in South-Asia, AC was associated with British colonial histories and contemporary global anti-terrorism narratives . Positionality vis-a-vis participants was of an educated and privileged female with professional relationships with senior staff at organisations participating in this study. Organisational narratives highlighted ACs “expert” status which could bring power dynamics to interviews where participants might have felt their knowledge and practice was being judged. Efforts to minimise this included underscoring the study objective: to understand the experiences of research ethics from the participant's perspective. Moreover, ACs prior relationships with some participants, and being embedded within the organisations during data collection, led to informal interview dynamics which required attention to potential taken-for-granted shared understandings. Further negotiation of power hierarchies arose through the involvement of an interpreter that acted both to reduce the power of AC as an interviewer, whilst reinforcing key areas of difference between AC, the local interpreter, and the participant. Additionally, role expectations in the interviews shifted as the “researcher” role was contested and sometimes reversed ( Goffman, 1959 ). For example, research participants scrutinising ACs performance as researcher by critiquing the study's informed consent forms or commenting on lines of questioning in interviews ( Chiumento et al., 2017 ).
Therefore, conducting research into research ethics brought a degree of pressure for AC to “do” ethics “right”. Consequently, this study had an internal feedback loop as interviews probed the ethical dimensions of “being a researcher”, while at the same time these were being actively experienced and negotiated by AC.
Ethical approval was obtained from the University of Liverpool and ERBs in all three countries. All participants provided written voluntary informed consent prior to interviews. Interpreters were hired for the duration of in-country data collection, signed confidentiality agreements , were paid at a local rate, and were provided with references attesting to their role in this study.
Thematic analysis was driven by an underlying phenomenological epistemology ( Schutz, 1944 , 1945 , 1967 ). The analysis process ( Fig. 1 ) involved open coding a sub-set of transcripts to inductively develop a coding framework that continued to be refined throughout analysis ( Boyatzis, 1998 ; Green and Thorogood, 2014 ). Following initial coding of all transcripts, the coded data was revisited to map participants’ narratives about procedural research ethics, tracing the development of procedural ethical documents such as the research protocol and informed consent forms; and views of ethical review. Throughout the analysis emerging findings were discussed between co-authors to confirm their grounding in the data. Download: Download high-res image (954KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Data analysis.
The analytic approach was to look at narratives describing experiences of developing and applying procedural ethical documents to reveal the functions and roles they occupied, using this as an entry point to examine the social practices surrounding procedural research ethics. This process led to the identification of boundary objects as a productive theoretical lens, complemented by Goffman’s (1959) frontstage/backstage typology. This analysis provides insight into how researchers' engagement with procedural ethics shapes research ethics in specific ways, with implications for ethics-in-practice.

Section: 3. Results

Researchers' descriptions of procedural ethics are reported in three stages: (1) the development of procedural ethical documents by researchers; (2) co-production of the documents by researchers and ERBs through ethical review; and (3) application of procedural documents to research practice by the researcher. The researchers' reflections on procedural ethics processes that identify inherent limitations and suggest improvements are then considered, and the results discussed through the analytic frame of boundary objects and Goffman’s (1959) frontstage/backstage typology to illuminate what is foregrounded and supressed in procedural ethical documents and processes. 1. Researcher development of procedural ethical documents
Procedural research ethics begins with researchers developing procedural ethical material objects: the study protocol, participant information sheet, informed consent form, and other documents required for ethical approval. PIs and supervisors responsible for developing these emphasised standardisation and a strategic approach to form filling ( Israel and Hay, 2006 ): “a lot of ethics forms are almost written to template now” (Kari, C2 PI) “ethical procedures (…) we generally always do, and that the {ERB} approves.” (Hubert, C1 PI)
The standardised templates were described to frustrate identification of ethical issues in favour of form-filling to facilitate approval: “ethical approval processes is to…pre-empt, or identify…ethical challenges [but] the process has become (…) provide the answer the examiner is looking for” (Orville, C2 Supervisor).
The examiner analogy suggests that researchers have to evidence ethical competencies in the written work of documents to gain approval ( Jacob, 2007 ).
Some researchers felt the standardisation of procedural ethical documents limited their contextual adaptability: “Do we tailor make our ethical processes enough to the population? Er, the short answer is probably not.” (Hubert, C1 PI). In contrast, other researchers described adapting procedures – notably informed consent – to respond to the social context in which they would be applied ( Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 ). For example, researchers in all three countries described a generalised fear of signing documents amongst potential research participants, particularly amongst the non-literate. To avoid associations with historical exploitation, researchers drew upon precedent for documenting informed consent without requiring signatures from other settings, such as witnessed consent, documented verbal consent, and the use of a thumb print or a line/mark in place of a signature. These approaches produce the ethical outputs required for audit trails ( Strathern, 2000 ), whilst addressing research participants’ fear of signing documents they cannot read: “Almost 95% or 100% who are illiterate, …are afraid even to provide er, …thumb print. …Because they can't read. They say sometimes why you need? I don't know whether you have written…about my house, my land. How can I, I do this? (…) [We] explore what other, …organisation are doing, and what is international practice (…) [They] just requested to them to mark. [Now] we are just requesting them to make, er, line…whatever you want to mark.” (Masood, C1 Supervisor)
Once completed, researchers described organisational systems to verify that the documents contained the necessary information expressed in ways to facilitate ERB approval, for example by using lay language and clearly identifying key ethical principles: “where there's an instrument that has been developed….the research design has been done…I shall (…) review…the documents…to check whether the, the basic [ethical] elements [are] …reflected.” (Brendon, C1 PI) “my job, is often around, getting [the information sheet and informed consent form] into as lay language as possible. …ethics committees definitely scrutinise for lay language and making sure it's not full of jargon.” (Kari, C2 PI)
For some researchers the process of developing research protocols prompted reflection on their own internal moral compass: “first ERB is you yourself [as a researcher] and then [as a] respondent…would you be willing to, you know, give this answer…self-reflection is needed [to] actually see the situation of the (…) respondent. …self-ethics” (Shahashi, C1 Supervisor).
This emphasises researchers assessing study protocols from the perspective of potential research participants, echoing research that found ERB members adopt a similar strategy ( Simpson et al., 2015 ). 2. Researcher and ERB co-production of procedural ethical documents
Once developed by researchers, the procedural ethical documents are submitted to the ERB for review. Through this process the documents are co-produced via researcher and ERB interactions. To situate this process researchers' views of ERBs are provided, identifying the role researchers' ascribe to ERBs in ethical review, followed by researchers’ perspectives on the co-production of documents through the ethical review process. 2a Researcher views of procedural ethical review:
Researchers described ERBs as a “guardian”, “protector”, and “gatekeeper” responsible for “safeguarding” rights and duties, conceptualising research ethics in line with principalism and highlighting the ERBs role as external anticipatory regulator to prevent unethical research: “fundamental purpose of an ethical committee is…to stop (…) exploiting. …without that…people would not…have (…) any regulations over what they do” (Orville, C2 Supervisor).
Researchers described instances of participant exploitation following conflict and disaster which may have shaped an emphasis on the ERB's role as preventing researcher excess and protecting participants.
Overall, ethical review was seen as important: “I think all projects do need ethical review and I would certainly defend that to the hilt. Someone independent needs to have seen what you're going to do and approved it” (Kari, C2 PI). This bureaucratic procedure is viewed as promoting an ethical culture: “a culture that…research has ethics…the research purposes should be reviewed by a group of people, and at least that…they agree. Even if they agree crap, but they agree, it went through the process (…) a...first important step actually, in ethical research” (Shahsahi, C1 Supervisor)
Procedurally LMICs ERB processes were recognised to increasingly mirror those of high income countries (HICs), highlighting the globalisation of ethical review procedures ( Douglas-Jones, 2015 ; Wahlberg et al., 2013 ).
Researchers identified multi-level in-country and sponsor country review of research conducted internationally as routine. Commenting on bioethical capacity, researchers questioned LMIC ERBs ability to provide ethical scrutiny: “they're doing it - to the best of their capacity” (Hubert, C1 PI). A critique echoed across all countries was the HIC ERBs physical and cultural distance from LMIC research settings meaning they were not considered knowledgeable about the research setting; whilst LMIC ERBs were felt to lack technical mental health and research methods expertise: “I've had some ridiculous questions coming from the {HIC} committee…because they simply didn't…understand the (…) cultural context of what I'm doing…who these [participants] are and who (…) my team is. (…) I've had input from the {LMIC} committee that…questioned the scientific rigor of my study which has (…) reviews, won grants ( ). It's just ridiculous (…) a mis-match.” (Orville, C2 Supervisor) “[HIC] ethics review…I'm not sure…how much (…) they know the local setting. I didn't think that all the (…) concerns they raised were very appropriate” (Pedro, C3 PI).
Therefore, with multiple levels of review researchers emphasised balancing the distance – geographical, cultural, and methodological - between different ERBs.
Researchers called for proportionality in ERB review: “It should be facilitatory...it should not be punitive (...)...it should be doing more good than harm” (Pedro, C3 PI). This researcher argued that ERBs must strike a balance between preventing researcher excess, protecting participants, and facilitating research conduct ( Hedgecoe, 2014 ). This is threatened by ethical review that is perceived to overstep the ERB's remit: “ethical approval can be...an exercise in applying control” (Orville, C2 Supervisor), which can diminish researchers' perception of the fairness of ethical review ( Friesen et al., 2019 ). Taking this further, researchers in C2 asked who protects researchers against the power of ERBs? Responses invoked vulnerability: “like the research participants become vulnerable in the face of a researcher, (…) people who go into ethics committees and submit proposals [are in] a way vulnerable to the {ERB}” (Spiro, C2 PI)
Appealing to vulnerability suggests risk of harm, with researchers identifying examples including perceived arbitrary denial of ethical approval, and removing questionnaires perceived as culturally sensitive. Therefore, researchers voiced sharp critiques regarding the perceived expertise of both HIC and LMIC ERBs to conduct a proportional ethical assessment of proposed research. 2b Researcher and ERB co-production of procedural ethical documents:
Researchers described the ethical review process as always moving towards the final goal of approval: “…we submitted. Then {the ERB} provide the feedback: please, er, revise this section. This is not clear. The consent form is not right. Please include these things. Then we incorporate their feedback and again submit and they provide the approval. (…) based on the {ERB} feedback, if er you are not agreed with this then you justify [your position].” (Milenko, C1 Supervisor)
This description suggests that researchers have to submit and be submissive in the ethical review process, where researchers demonstrate docility and deference to a higher authority ( Dixon-Woods et al., 2007 ). In this process ERBs retain the power over how “ethics” is defined, understood, and applied in the explict content of procedural ethical documents ( Huvila, 2011 ). However, by identifying scope for challenging ERBs, researchers affirm their agency in this process.
In the co-production process the ERB role was described by one researcher in quasi-legal terms: “guards against...possible, er malpractice (…) holding it against the light...like you check er, …money, for a water mark…is it real, is it good, is it solid? ...there's a neutral body that does that” (Hubert, C1 PI). This analogy suggests that ethical considerations are embedded within the fabric of a project and require specific actions to reveal them, raising tensions over the respective responsibilities of researchers to express the ethical issues inherent in a project in standardised procedural ethical documents, and the ERB to “see” these.
“ethics committees where...you have to reassure them that actually these mental health questions have been asked of tens of thousands of people in community studies all around the world, different cultures (…) And if there was a…general, sensitivity around those questions (…) I think we'd know about it.” (Kari, C2 PI)
The appeal to the collective lived experience of mental health researchers (“we'd know about it”) is drawn upon to invoke the researchers' moral authority to make decisions about what is or is not ethical in a given setting, echoing critiques about the distance between ERBs and the lived-through realities of conducting research. 3. Researcher application of procedures to practice:
Moral qualities of honesty, professionalism, and integrity were identified as underpinning the accountability of individual researchers and organisations, and prompting researchers to follow approved ethical documents and procedures: “Because (…) we are bound to what we agree. And we also have fear,...if I don't follow…what I have submitted to the ethics board…I would have consequences to myself and to my institution.” (Shahashi, C1 Supervisor)
Researchers also discussed when the ERB should be informed about specifying ethical documents for site application: “minor changes, for example the words, the language…it's not necessary to resubmit the consent form to the {ERB}. If we change the methodology (…) change the er… study districts, sample size...we inform the {ERB}.” (Milenko, C1 Supervisor)
This description demonstrates that researchers’ continue to tailor documents and procedures once they have been approved by ERBs for site-use.
Community embeddedness was highlighted as a mechanism for informing the specification of ethical procedures to research practice: “principles remain the same (…) [but] their application can only come from the deep understanding of the population. (…) Working with them, knowing their priorities…their culture...what is important to them. (…) You're part of the situation.” (Pedro, C3 PI)
Alongside emphasising the universality of ethical principles, contextual factors that enabled greater understanding of cultural attitudes towards mental health, the impact of conflict or disaster, and perceptions of research shaped the specification of ethical principles to research practice. These important considerations were not reflected in researchers’ descriptions of their approaches to standardised procedural ethical documents. This suggests that neither local or international ERBs were provided with this contextual information, which was viewed by researchers as arising when applying the documented procedures to practice, underlining the distance between procedural and in-practice ethics.
To bridge the gap between ethical procedures and practice researchers suggested a role for ethical reflection: “It's something to put on paper based on scientific principles,...one thing to go and you know get…information based on that. So how do you bridge these two things? Pfffff...I think it's a continuous sort of process of reflection and learning (…) you need...scientific rigor, and you also need the ethical rigor (…) Budisplayquotet then to a specific population, you need to adapt” (Orville, C2 Supervisor)
This description of continuous reflection and adapting research methods and procedures to the context reiterates the distance between written documents and the lived-through reality of research conduct.
Researchers identified the value of the physical documents generated through ethical approval – the approved research protocol and ethical approval letter - for offering proof that research follows ethical norms: “without making protocol, …it's really hard to function (…) going to any organisation or going to field, they ask (…) What protocol they have.” (Ranjit, C1 RA) “people's in the community who has some knowledge about the research, they say…, ‘Do you have some ethical approval from the {ERB}?’” (Milenko, C1 Supervisor).
These call attention to the material and social role ethical approval occupies in facilitating research practice, including how gatekeepers request evidence of ethical approval in order to grant access to research sites. Ethical approval was also identified as necessary for publication: “to publish, you have to have…ethics clearance.” (Shahashi, C1 Supervisor). Consequently, at the intersections with the social worlds of gatekeepers, research participants, and publishers, ethical approval documents act as material boundary objects that explicitly represent an organisation's adherence to ethical standards ( Huvila, 2011 ). 4. Researchers' reflections on procedural ethics: 4a Limitations of procedural ethics
Being restricted to reviewing written documents was identified as an inherent limitation of procedural ethics: “look at the materials and (…) approve the materials, and that's all” (Kari, C2 PI). The anticipatory nature of ethical review, and the strategic form-filling approach to ethical approval documents described by researchers, contribute to a disconnection between procedural and in-practice ethics: “sit in ah, table and discuss all these things, but the issues actually come when you go into the field (…) most of the things we experience…are not written in books, you don't find them in guidelines. So you just have to go with your gut feeling and stick to is this right or wrong?” (Mercurius, C2 Supervisor)
The challenges researchers face in pre-emptively developing procedural ethical documents was recognised: “impossible to anticipate every single way that a person would react” (Orville, C2 Supervisor), suggesting that researchers anticipate experiencing ethical issues in the field beyond those anticipated at the procedural ethical stage ( Guillemin and Gillam, 2004 ; Heimer, 2013 ).
Researchers acknowledged the limits to ERB auditing for extending the problems inherent to ethical review, namely that they involve only auditing what can be measured ( Power, 1997 ; Strathern, 2000 ) through pre-emptive self-reporting or announced site visits that permit reporting what ought to be rather than what is: “send...research update (…) present your er research findings. ...Because the {ERB} provide the ethical approval, in the powerpoint presentation, we just mentioned there that we provided…some refreshment. But in the real practice (…) instead of the food we provide the money. But er, in the report we mention that we provide some…refreshment.” (Milenko, C1 Supervisor)
Regardless of the ethical status of these actions, it is clear that researchers felt compelled to only report to the ERB what was in the approved written protocol rather than what had happened in practice, undermining the purpose of auditing and missing opportunities to assess the revised procedures.
For one researcher clearly conveying the ethical issues inherent to a study in ethical approval documents was paramount: “I strongly believe the person who takes the proposal into the ethics committee has the responsibility to try and tease out, in advance, the ethical issues” (Spiro, C2 PI). However, findings from this study suggests that the standardised forms of procedural ethics, coupled with researchers seeking to provide responses to secure approval, act to inhibit engagement with potential ethical issues that may arise in practice. Moreover, whilst researchers could seek to make more explicit the operationalisation of ethical principles in procedural ethical forms, one researcher questioned: “If that would translate in more ethical research, I wonder?” (Hubert, C1 PI). This underlines the gap between procedural and in-practice ethics, recognising the challenges to comprehensively anticipating the relevant ethical principles and how they might be applied in practice. 4b Enhancing procedural ethics
Researchers’ suggestions for enhancing procedural ethics focused upon adjustments to the process , for example incorporating in-person discussions: “interactive manner, rather than taking a very top down, closed decision (…) consensual decision, rather than…say (…) “we don't think this is appropriate so you have to change this in the form and resubmit.” (…) a representative, from the team (…) have a discussion. Try and understand what's going on before {the ERB} start [to] pass a judgment” (Orville, C2 Supervisor).
Suggesting in-person contact highlights ERB-researcher social interaction as a way to make informed judgements about how research will be managed in practice rather than doing this via documents as a proxy ( Hedgecoe, 2012 ).
A number of researchers suggested that ERBs should increase their lay representation and involve RAs responsible for applying ethical documents and procedures to research practice: “It looks ethical from our point of view, but what about the point of view of the participants?” (Mercurius, C2 Supervisor) “more locally led... How many people (…) on the ground, who are researchers, are involved?” (Pedro, C3 PI)
Furthermore, suggestions were made for repositioning ethical auditing as capacity building: “researchers to come, and share their ethical practices. And learn from each other..., there has to be no penalty for…mistake. Orientation (…) should be not as punitive but as a capacity building. (…) improving the research culture” (Shahashi, C1 Supervisor) “learn from different settings. How different studies are done (…) voice of the participant...the research assistants.” (Orville, C2 Supervisor) “[if the ERB] clearly suggested please mention (…) what types of ethical problem er, arise...during your study period, and how could you handle?” (Milenko, C1 Supervisor)
Therefore, ERB's were viewed as in a position to promote reflection upon the application of ethical procedures to practice ( Eckenwiler et al., 2015 ; Guillemin and Gillam, 2004 ), and encourage cross-learning between researchers.

Section: 4. Discussion

This study has explored the multi-dimensionality of ethical engagement that is being facilitated or suppressed through procedural ethics processes as described by researchers. This draws attention to the relationship between ethics, governance, and research practice mediated via procedural ethical documents, and social norms of interaction that act to discipline the scope of procedural and in-practice ethics in specific ways.
Procedural ethical documents embody features of boundary objects: they are simultaneously generalised and specific, concrete and abstract, standardised and customised ( Star and Griesemer, 1989 ). As described by researchers in this study, procedural ethical documents act as explicit shared representations of moral intent when co-constructed between researchers and ERBs, satisfying the informational and work needs of both ( Star, 2010 ). Researchers contend that the generalised and abstracted content of procedural ethical documents are demanded by standardised ethical review forms and processes, which in turn reflect the historical proceduralisation of principalism (see e.g. Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 ; Friesen et al., 2019 , & Wahlberg et al., 2013 for discussions of the emergence of procedural ethical review). When interacting with social worlds such as gatekeepers and publishers the physicality of these documents becomes important, providing a material information source that confirms the researchers’ ethical intent . Simultaneously, when applied to practice these same documents are tailored and customised by researchers to the local context, whilst adhering to the generalised normative principles they embody – epitomised in the invention of ways to comply with informed consent requirements. In this process researchers adhere to the moral intent embodied in approved procedural ethical documents, whilst negotiating the lived-through socio-economic and structural realities in which research is embedded ( Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 ; Molyneux and Geissler, 2008 ).
Adopting a strategic approach to developing documents that emphasise form-filling and “writing to template” demonstrates how researchers respond to ritualised and culturally normative standardised forms and ethical review procedures ( Guta et al., 2013 ; Jacob, 2007 ). Applying the analytical framework of boundary objects makes visible the role of procedural ethical documents in bridging tensions inherent to the researchers cooperative backstage role when co-producing these documents with ERBs; and the subsequent actions of research practice where their interpretive flexibility allows researchers to reshape the same documents away from the ERBs gaze as they navigate the moral demands of operationalising procedural ethics to practice ( Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 ; Huvila, 2011 ; Molyneux and Geissler, 2008 ). This process is recognised by Star (2010) as the “invisible work” (p.606-7) that surrounds the conduct of science, foregrounding the gap between formal representations in shared material objects, and the unreported tailoring of these through local practice.
Tensions inherent in the abstraction and standardisation of procedural ethical documents are notably that researchers’ write-out context and fail to tailor ethical procedures to the research setting. In this approach the moral intent of research ethics eclipses researchers engagement with the practice of enacting ethical procedures with moral actors embedded in diverse socio-cultural and structural contexts ( Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 ). It also deprives ERBs of contextual information that must be weighed alongside ethical principles during ethical review ( Fletcher, 1967 ; Friesen et al., 2019 ; Molyneux and Geissler, 2008 ). This abstraction and standardisation of procedural ethical documents may also increase tensions between researchers and ERBs as researchers perceive ERB decision-making as unjust, in turn creating researcher incentives to downplay morally relevant information or engage in “ERB shopping” to obtain approval ( Friesen et al., 2019 , p.3).
Researchers respond to the ERBs regulatory governance role by ensuring a frontstage reflection of ethics expressed in ways demanded by the forms, aiming to facilitate the ERBs work practices and avoid raising red flags that indicate an ethically problematic study ( Gillam et al., 2009 ). This is assisted by researcher and ERB socialisation to the norms of procedural ethical review ( Goffman, 1959 ), leading ERBs to trust in researcher adherence to ethical norms ( Hedgecoe, 2012 ). Nevertheless, Hedgecoe (2014) has identified that this socialisation can lead to ERB and researcher co-construction of deviance from ethical standards as workgroup cultures emerge founded upon presumed researcher trustworthiness that act to diminish ethical oversight. This study extends this finding to suggest that repeated researcher-ERB interactions mediated via procedural ethical documents may result in the co-construction of a frontstage impression that procedural ethical standards are being realised, with the normative framework embodied in these documents subsequently reshaped through engagement with the situated demands of research practice ( Goffman, 1959 ). Thus, the boundary object format encourages researchers to supress engagement with the situational context in which ethical principles will be operationalised. As such, the documents come to operate in the moral domain of what ought to be through instilling morally sanctioned intentions which “produces a form of active “unknowing” [and] shapes a remit of ignorance” ( Hoeyer and Hogle, 2014 , p.352). It is important to emphasise that this is not to say that the normative framing of ethics shifts between procedures and practice, or that ethics-in-practice is truer. Rather, what this analysis foregrounds is the limitations of the role that the material objects of procedural ethics play in researchers' lived-through situated ethical decision making . It is the “remit of ignorance” promoted by appeals to the lowest common denominator between ERBs and researchers in procedural ethical documents that provide researchers with the autonomy to reconfigure ethical procedures to practice in line with their own moral values ( Kingori, 2013 ) and the demands of a situated research context. This suggests that research ethics is emphasised through the interpersonal social interactions inherent in research conduct, as reflected in literature exploring the RA role (see e.g. Molyneux et al., 2013 ). Researchers highlight the importance of contextual knowledge such as local norms and participant expectations to inform site specification of procedures, as localised practices interact with standardised global imperatives to generate new knowledge and practice ( Hogle, 1995 ). Reshaping procedural ethical documents to research practice can be viewed as what Huvila (2011) describes as a “hegemonic intervention” (p.2536) that aims to establish unambiguity, whilst being infused with the power of the interpreting social world and the discourse and material practices they inhabit. However, researchers’ narratives emphasise the role of procedural ethics in promoting an internal moral compass and attention to continuous ethical reflection, suggesting that the frontstage social process of acting towards and with procedural ethical documents acts to establish an ethical framework that is carried forward into the field.
Consequently, researchers' narratives identify the multiple social worlds of researchers, ERBs, participants, and others such as gatekeepers and publishers that engage with the procedural ethical documents acting as boundary objects, as researchers' actively seek to accommodate the varying needs, norms and social context of each. This re-emphasises the continuum between ethical procedures and research practice as researchers seek to address the “misfit between complex and fluid social worlds and increasingly standardised and regulated ethics procedures” ( Miller and Boulton, 2007 , p.2208). Achieving this necessitates researchers' performative actions to maintain a frontstage facade of ethical universalism that assumes the ethical homogeneity that principalism and standardised procedural ethical processes are searching for; but that can be reinterpreted in the material actions of researchers’ situated ethical decision-making when applying these generalised and abstracted documents in research practice.
Empirically investigating researchers' experiences of procedural research ethics in three South Asian settings fills a gap in existing knowledge, adding to the empirical and bioethical research literature on how ERBs approach procedural ethics ( Dixon-Woods et al., 2007 ; Douglas-Jones, 2015 ; Gillam et al., 2009 ; Guta et al., 2013 ; Hedgecoe, 2012 , 2014 ; Miller and Boulton, 2007 ). Notably this study adds to the existing literature by exploring the views of researchers based in LMICs. A limitation to the study is the abstraction of researchers’ experiences from their everyday local moral grounding due to anonymity procedures. Efforts to address this limitation include providing illustrative descriptions of organisations, settings, and typical ethical considerations that arise when conducting global mental health research. Recognising that globally procedural research ethics follows a broadly principalist approach and adopts recognisable procedures suggests that the study findings have global relevance. Furthermore, many of the procedural ethical issues raised in this paper are reflected in the wider literature, suggesting general applicability of findings. Methodological limitations include the potential for social desirability in the participants interview responses to protect organisational or personal reputations ( Chiumento et al., 2017 ), although open discussion of challenges suggests this did not occur. It is also possible that the organisations in this study are a-typical of global mental health research organisations as the study did not include inter-governmental organisations, therefore further confirmation of findings with these organisations would be valuable.

Section: 5. Conclusion

Given that “ethics review determines what is possible in the production of knowledge: what can be done, what can be asked, by whom, and for what purpose” ( Guta et al., 2013 , p.307) effective procedural ethical processes are of critical importance. Through the application of the analytical framework of boundary objects, this study has examined researchers' negotiation of the standardised documents and processes required by procedural ethics. This has shown that researchers are searching for a procedural ethics system that delivers a process perceived as fair ( Friesen et al., 2019 ), coupled with the production of outputs such as ethical approval to facilitate the work of conducting research. Findings also show that researchers recognise the importance of procedural ethical documents interpretive flexibility to facilitate the application of ethical procedures to the situated research context. Procedural ethical documents acting as boundary objects, and the standardised governance process of research ethics have been shown to deliver these features. Goffman's typology yields further insight by drawing attention to the ways that researchers act with procedural ethical documents acting as boundary objects according to their understanding of the needs of each social world, and their perceived level of control over shaping the operationalisation of procedures to practice.
Therefore, an important finding that extends previous studies is the pivotal role played by procedural ethics documents acting as boundary objects that enable researchers to strike a balance between adherence to standardised procedural research ethics, and retention of their own moral agency when implementing procedures in research practice; and researchers’ positioning of procedural ethics according to the social world being acted towards. Consequently, this paper has drawn attention to what procedural ethics foregrounds, namely researcher and ERB co-construction of regulatory compliance that is mediated via docuemnts acting as boundary objects; and what it supresses, attention to the idiosyncrasies of the contextually embedded practice of research conduct. Findings from this study are relevant to research ethics more broadly, providing empirical evidence about the strategies employed by researchers, who are pivotal actors navigating the tensions between procedural and in-practice ethics.

Section: Author contributions

The data for this manuscript was collected by AC as part of her PhD research. The research design was conceptualised by AC, with supervision guidance from LF and AR. Data analysis was conducted by AC and shared regularly with LF and AR for review and feedback on emerging findings. The presentation of this manuscript to focus on researchers’ experiences of procedural ethics processes was conceived and written by AC. LF provided input into the theoretical underpinning of the qualitative data analysis, and repeated manuscript editing and revisions. AR reviewed the full manuscript for editing. All authors have reviewed and approved the final manuscript for submission.

Section: Funding statement

The data used in this article were collected as part of AC's doctoral research generously supported by the Economic and Social Research Council [ ES/J500094/1 ]. The funder had no role in the collection, analysis, interpretation, or reporting of data.

Section: Acknowledgements

We would like to thank all who participated in this study for generously giving up their time to share their experiences of research ethics with AC. We would also like to thank the two interpreters from each of the three countries for their valuable contributions to the study, notably supporting the full engagement of research participants, involvement in interview transcription, and for offering their valuable insights and reflections in early stages of data analysis. We would also like to thank Professor Jude Robinson and the anonymous peer reviewers for their comments on earlier drafts of this paper, your suggestions have helped enormously.
