Title: The ubiquity of uncertainty in low back pain care ☆


Abstract: Abstract

Despite clinicians being important actors in the context of uncertainty, their experiences navigating uncertainty remain largely unexplored. Drawing on a theory-driven post-qualitative approach, we used Mol's logic of choice/care as a lens through which we made sense of interviews with 22 clinicians who work with patients who experience low back pain (LBP). Our analysis suggests that uncertainty is ubiquitous in LBP care and not limited to particular domains. Clinicians navigated uncertainty when considering patients' personal and social contexts; making therapeutic decisions; navigating emotions and mental health ; communicating with, and educating, patients, among others. These uncertainties are intertwined with clinical aspects such as treatment choices and evidence-based education about LBP. At times, clinicians resolved these uncertainties by producing certainty at the cost of attending to human aspects of care. We argue that epistemic shifts, theorisation and practical engagement with theory in training, research and clinical practice may prompt clinicians to embrace uncertainty and enact the logic of care.

Section: 1. Introduction

Uncertainty is common in healthcare. As Annemarie Mol discusses in the epigraph above, clinicians and patients ‘try, adjust and try again’ within uncertain and changing contexts to arrive at what is possible and desirable. Uncertainty has been explored in several health research fields: cancer ( Engelhardt et al., 2017 ; Hillen et al., 2017a , Hillen et al., 2017b ), cardiovascular disease ( Cupit et al., 2020 ; Winters, 1999 ) and mental health ( Lane, 2020 ; Pickersgill, 2020 ). Such research has mostly focused on biomedical aspects: aetiology ( Kotsopoulos, 2000 ), diagnosis ( Doty et al., 2021 ; Poluch et al., 2022 ), prognosis ( Engelhardt et al., 2017 ; Harrison et al., 2019 ) and treatment ( Mishel et al., 2009 ). In musculoskeletal conditions such as low back pain (LBP), uncertainty remains underexplored.
LBP is a primary cause of disability worldwide ( Hartvigsen et al., 2018 ). Despite extensive research efforts to better understand LBP, the global impact of LBP-related disability has increased over the last 20 years and is expected to increase further ( Buchbinder et al., 2018 ). LBP has challenged reductionist biomedical approaches where ‘objective’ knowledge derived from research and clinical findings is assumed to be separable from subjective experience ( Lillrank, 2003 ). Those with structural abnormalities, for example, may not experience pain ( Brinjikji et al., 2015 ) and vice versa ( Henschke et al., 2009 ). Models of care that extend biomedical perspectives and recognise the role of psychological and social aspects have been advocated for ( Waddell, 1987 ), including some with relational aspects ( Stilwell and Harman, 2019 ). Yet, both clinicians working with patients with LBP ( Cowell et al., 2018 ; Driver et al., 2021 ), and LBP researchers ( Mescouto et al., 2020 ) often struggle to enact such approaches. These uncertainties may add significantly to the burden of LBP if not negotiated adeptly.
This paper explores uncertainty in LBP healthcare through in-depth interviews with clinicians working with patients experiencing the condition. We first position our study within growing scholarship on healthcare uncertainty, illustrating a paucity of research on clinicians' experiences of navigating uncertainty in LBP. Second, aligned with our theory-driven post-qualitative approach, we explicate the theoretical backdrop to our empirical analysis, Mol's ‘logic of care’ ( Mol, 2008 ), before introducing our methods and findings. Overall, our analysis contributes and understanding of uncertainty as ubiquitous to LBP and not limited to particular domains.

Section: 2. Background

The term ‘uncertainty’ has several meanings and there are many types and sources of uncertainty ( Han et al., 2011 ). While some advocate for the use of an explicit definition ( Han et al., 2011 ), others suggest restricting uncertainty's definition may lead to an incomplete understanding ( Hillen et al., 2017 ). In alignment with our post-qualitative theoretical stance, we prioritised an unconstrained approach. It is important to acknowledge that there have been considerable attempts by researchers to understand the parameters of uncertainty in healthcare. For example, Babrow et al. (1998) developed a framework that defines the main forms of healthcare uncertainty as complexity, information quality, probability, information structure and lay epistemology. Focusing on patient experiences of cancer, Kasper et al. (2008) described eight categories of uncertainties: social integration, diagnosis and prognosis, deciphering information, mastering of requirements, causal attribution , preferred degree of involvement in the physician-patient interaction, physicians' trustability and treatment. However, Han et al. (2011) argued that such taxonomies are not sufficient to capture the full range of uncertainties experienced by clinicians and patients, nor sufficient to specify meaningful and actionable distinctions. Therefore, the authors proposed a tridimensional approach and characterised healthcare uncertainty according to its sources (probability, ambiguity, complexity), issues (scientific, practical [system-centred], personal [patient-centred]) and locus (patients v. clinicians). Han's taxonomy thus expands the types of uncertainty identified in Babrow's and Kasper's models, but suggests that personal uncertainties such as psychosocial issues reside solely in the patient. We will argue for a broader understanding than the taxonomies above. Looking through Mol's work (explicated below), clinicians, patients, communities, X-rays, MRIs and other human and non-human aspects are all entangled in experiences of ‘personal’, scientific and practical uncertainties while navigating LBP.
There is little suitable theoretical or practical guidance on how uncertainties are to be navigated. Within the widely advocated evidence-based practice paradigm, clinicians are urged to integrate scientific knowledge with a wider narrative that acknowledges social and psychological aspects of patients' lives ( Wieringa et al., 2021 ). Such practices reflect, as ( Latour, 1993 ) argues, science's constant process of purifying reality to produce categories that can be manipulated and analysed on their own (e.g., mental states, orthopaedic tests, imaging findings), which clinicians connect back together when working with patients. Yet healthcare elements are not singular or binary ( Simpkin and Schwartzstein, 2016 ); linking probability-based science to the wider context that unfolds other than probabilistically is challenging for clinicians and researchers of LBP ( Cowell et al., 2018 ; Driver et al., 2021 ; Mescouto et al., 2020 ). Clinicians often defer to biomedical authority engrained in guidelines and encourage patients' therapeutic and behavioural compliance with them (e.g., lifestyle change), rather than embracing and articulating uncertainties relative to an individual's psychological and social situation ( Cupit et al., 2020 ). In short, existing scholarship suggests that applying empirical evidence to patients' real-world contexts can produce uncertainty.
Uncertainties affect both clinicians and patients ( Allison et al., 1998 ; Kassirer, 1989 ; Logan and Scott, 1996 ; Simpkin et al., 2018 ). High stress from uncertainty is strongly correlated with depression and burnout in medical residents ( Simpkin et al., 2018 ). Clinicians may manage uncertainty by withholding information from patients or ordering multiple tests that carry risks of false positive results, overdiagnosis or iatrogenic injury ( Ganguli et al., 2020 ; K. Pienaar, Petersen and Bowman, 2019 ; Pienaar et al., 2020 ). Notably, clinicians' discomfort with uncertainty and ‘obsession with finding the right answer’ ( Simpkin and Schwartzstein, 2016 ) may lead patients to receive a less humanistic and individualised care ( Innes et al., 2017 ; Simmonds et al., 2012 ; Simpkin and Schwartzstein, 2016 ). To address these issues, there have been repeated calls for change: towards professional cultures which embrace uncertainty and value a therapeutic ‘grey-scale’ ( Costa et al., 2022 ; Hatch, 2017 ; Simpkin and Schwartzstein, 2016 ).
Despite calls to understand and embrace uncertainty, few studies have investigated how clinicians manage uncertainty in practice ( Bhise et al., 2018 ), where there are multiple and layered epistemic elements with no or few absolutes. For example, Lian and colleagues' (2021) narrative analysis of consultations between patients and General Practitioners (GPs) argued that GPs conceptualise uncertainty indirectly and in a depersonalised manner. The authors assert that this approach is likely a reflection of a deep-rooted unwillingness to acknowledge uncertainty embedded in medicine's culture. Interestingly, the authors note that GPs seemed to focus on diagnostic and aetiological uncertainties while neglecting uncertainty relating to psychosocial, lifestyle and personal aspects. Yet, uncertainties, even if seemingly limited to the biomedical aspects, are interwoven with one's emotions.
In one of the few studies discussing uncertainty in the context of LBP, an ethnographic study exploring uncertainty in clinical encounters between people with LBP and clinicians, the authors identified several sources of uncertainty, such as causes of LBP, prognosis and mismatch between imaging findings and clinical presentation ( Costa et al., 2022 ). For instance, patients were often uncertain about the pathoanatomical causes of their symptoms or what triggered them ( Costa et al., 2022 ). Likewise, some clinicians raised the uncertainties surrounding the causal relationship between imaging findings and clinical presentations, which are reported in the literature: pathoanatomical causes have been argued to be identifiable in only 5–10% of individuals who experience LBP ( Deyo et al., 1992 ; Krismer and van Tulder, 2007 ; Koes et al., 2006 ) and conversely, structural changes can be found in the spine of asymptomatic populations ( Brinjikji et al., 2015 ). Regardless of the source, uncertainty was often accompanied by emotions such as frustration and anger. Taken together, research to date suggests that although personal and emotional uncertainties are likely to be significant concerns to patients, clinicians often fail to address these concerns in clinical practice. Despite clinicians being important actors in the context of uncertainty, their experiences navigating it are not well understood. A better understanding of uncertainty more broadly, and uncertainties surrounding LBP specifically, could offer important insight for clinicians.
We sought to contribute to the healthcare-related uncertainty literature by undertaking in-depth interviews with clinicians to explore their experiences of navigating uncertainty with individuals who present with LBP. We took a flexible approach to conceptualising uncertainty, and relied on Mol's theorisation of ‘the logic of care’ ( Mol, 2008 ) to drive our analysis.
Mol contrasts the logic of choice and the logic of care. The logic of choice describes a linear process where professionals limit themselves to using instruments and presenting facts, from which patients can assess and make decisions ( Mol, 2008 ). Here, scientific knowledge is conceptualised as a growing collection of facts that gradually increase certainty . Mol argues that when clinicians work in this way, they reason that they need to know these facts and pass them on to patients, framing them in a rationalist repertoire that does not necessarily fit into people's lives.
Within Mol's logic of care , clinicians do not treat facts as neutral information. Instead, clinicians attend to values and broader contextual factors by adopting care practices that are resilient and adaptable. In these contexts, a good treatment goal is one that may be achieved in practice. While the logic of choice tries to separate facts from clinicians' and patients' values, the logic of care attends to them jointly. This requires clinicians to ask patients about their experiences and carefully attend to what they are told, including emotions, even though this is often a neglected part of clinical training ( Luther and Crandall, 2011 ) and the research that most clinicians access. For instance, within the context of LBP, clinicians may need to attend to patients' frustration about not improving despite engaging in evidence-based treatments such as exercise. Mol argues that if clinicians want to learn about the unexpected and uncertain effects of interventions, they should be attentive to whatever it is that emerges during clinical interactions in addition to the evidence derived from clinical trials. The logic of care is first and foremost practical - it is concerned with actively improving life and it seeks to intervene in the lived reality of bodies. Here, we employ these concepts to explore clinicians' experiences navigating uncertainty when working with people who experience LBP.
In both logics, uncertainty is ‘chronic’ ( Mol, 2008 ). The responses to uncertainty, however, are distinct. In enacting the logic of choice, patients make well-argued choices when faced with uncertainty. Yet, people often experience difficulties assessing one uncertain future compared to another, particularly those lacking the resources required to choose well ( Mol, 2008 ). In contrast, the logic of care values collaborative and continued attempts to attune knowledge to complex lives and uncertain contexts. In other words, navigating uncertainty in the logic of care is about exploring ways of shaping a good life.

Section: 3. Methods

Drawing on a theory-driven post-qualitative approach, we used Mol's logic of choice/care as a lens to analyse interviews with 22 clinicians of patients with LBP. Post-qualitative inquiry assumes an ontology of immanence and is always becoming – the not-yet, the yet-to-come, often pointing to the limits of intelligibility within a discipline ( St. Pierre, 2018 ). The work of post-qualitative inquiry is not to find, but to bring into being that which does not yet exist ( St. Pierre, 2018 ). Post-qualitative inquiry involves using theory to think with the data, or vice versa ( Jackson and Mazzei, 2013 ), to produce a new perspective on a phenomenon. While some argue that interview data is humanist and does not make sense in post-qualitative research due to its post-humanist underpinnings ( St. Pierre, 2017 ), others suggest ‘mainstream’ qualitative methods such as interviews should be retained to enrich research practices through pluralism , pragmatism and multi-textured analysis ( Brendan, 2021 ). In alignment with the latter view, we attempt to wrest our work from rigid styles or positions. We use data produced through interviews to better understand clinicians' experiences navigating uncertainty within the context of LBP care, accepting interview data as partial, incomplete and always in a process of being retold and remembered ( Jackson and Mazzei, 2013 ).
We invited a range of clinicians who had experience working with people with LBP. In total, 22 clinicians from seven disciplines (6 physiotherapists , 3 chiropractors , 3 occupational therapists, 3 psychologists, 2 osteopaths , 1 exercise physiologist and 4 physicians) participated (see Table 1 for details). Recruitment strategies included advertisements on social media (e.g., Twitter, Arthritis Australia website and Facebook page, University Newsletter) and snowballing. Through covenience sampling, we sought to reach diversity in terms of disciplines, gender and number of years working with people with LBP. Ethical approval was provided by the institutional Human Research Ethics Committee (ID number 2021/HE001723). All participants provided written informed consent. Table 1 . Participants’ demographic characteristics. Characteristics Empty Cell Age (range), years 26–69 Gender, % (n) Male 64 (14) Female 36 (8) Number of years in occupation (range), years 4–35 Work setting, % (n) Private 41 (9) Public 36 (8) Public and private 23 (5) Education level, % (n) Bachelor 23 (5) Masters 64 (14) Fellowship 9 (2) PhD 4 (1) Occupation, % (n) Physiotherapist 27 (6) Psychologist 14 (3) Occupational therapist 14 (3) Chiropractor 14 (3) Pain specialist 9 (2) Osteopath 9 (2) General practitioner 4 (1) Exercise Physiologist 4 (1) Surgeon 4 (1)
We conducted interviews via teleconferencing or telephone, asking clinicians to discuss in detail scenarios when they experienced uncertainty working with people with LBP. Because we avoided a fixed definition of uncertainty, we asked clinicians to consider the concept of “uncertainty” broadly and discuss any experience they could think of. We used questions such as “Can you recall any particular encounters of uncertainty when working with someone who had LBP?” And “How did you feel when you were uncertain about X?“. All interviews were facilitated by NC, KM and MD: female physiotherapists, familiar with critical reflexivity, post-qualitative and post-positivist research. Interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim, then de-identified, ascribing pseudonyms to all clinicians.
The research team included the three researchers listed above, as well as researchers from sociology , psychology and physiotherapy (RO, PB, RF and JS) who brought their emergent understandings and embodied experiences with uncertainty, clinical care, being patients, being clinicians, and living with LBP into relation with the analysis and reporting. Five interview transcripts were read by this team and discussed in two group analysis meetings. These discussions were guided by questions such as “What key words did you use to describe your impressions on the transcript?“; “What stood out to you while reading the transcripts?” and “What have you learnt from clinicians' stories/uncertainty scenarios?“. Each meeting was recorded and analysis summarised. Overall, researchers' interaction with the data underpinned the creation of the concept ‘ubiquity of uncertainty’, which was further explored while reading all transcripts in light of Mol's theorisation on the logic of care ( Mol, 2008 ) - that is, reading through the data while keeping Mol's logic of care in mind.
The findings that follow are informed by our various positionings. We come from a range of academic disciplines – predominantly physiotherapy, sociology, public health and psychology. As a result, we bring a range of philosophical perspectives including positivism , relativism, postmodernism and posthumanism . We were also influenced by our clinical experiences working with people with low back pain. Six of the authors are musculoskeletal physiotherapists who have over 60 years of combined experience working with people with LBP. Four of these physiotherapists have received training in sociology. One of the authors is a sociologist who has experience leading translational health research. These combined positionalities produced multiple perspectives (and interesting discussions!) and allowed us to bring together insights from both clinical practice and sociology to expand the way uncertainty is understood and discussed in healthcare research . For instance, although we attempted to narrow down the definition of uncertainty at times, we intentionally refrained from defining it to produce new ways of thinking. We worked to be aware of these positionalities and frequently discussed them during our analysis to try to include differences in our results.

Section: 4. Results

Clinicians described a range of contexts where they experienced uncertainty, which entangled with, and often extended beyond, the more commonly discussed aetiological, diagnostic , prognostic and treatment uncertainties. Our analysis suggests that uncertainty is ubiquitous in clinical practice and that all clinicians could relate to it – both because they experienced it themselves and/or because they navigated patients' uncertainties with them, while entangled with other humans or non-human factors. We discuss these under the headings below, using examples from the data and elaborating on them in relation to our research aims. Specifically, we analyse these scenarios in which clinicians experience uncertainty: patients’ personal and social contexts, therapeutic decisions, emotions and mental health , communication and education. We will end the results section in alignment with our findings and the stance taken in this paper – acknowledging that uncertainty, as post-qualitative research argues of any phenomenon, is always expanding and becoming.
I feel like uncertainties are … like … everywhere, if that makes sense? There is more uncertainty than anything. So, it's more about how you manage that. (Oliver, osteopath) aligned with Mol's assessment of uncertainty as ‘chronic’, clinicians often described uncertainty as ubiquitous – ever present in LBP care. Here, Oliver discusses that uncertainties - plural - are everywhere, across multiple contexts. Josh (exercise physiologist) similarly discusses uncertainty as intrinsic to LBP clinical care: “I think complexity and uncertainty underpins everything that we do, and it's just … the environment that we have to work in”.
Some clinicians discussed an increasing awareness of uncertainty as they gained more clinical experience: “I guess the more you do it, the more you realise that all these uncertainties are in play” (Samir, pain specialist). Increased experience accompanied increased uncertainty and awareness of the complexities of patients’ lives intersecting their pain experiences:
The more you get to do that job, the more uncertain you are about it, because you see how much complexity a lot of patients have, when there are many other things other than the pain that they are presented with. (Victoria, physiotherapist)
Clinicians often discussed patients' personal and social contexts as sources of uncertainty. Aligned with Mol's (2008) logic of care, practices seemed to be circular in these discussions, leaving both patients and clinicians uncertain about courses of action. Notably, scientific ‘facts’ drawn from probability-based research did not appear to determine decisions and actions. For instance, early return to work helps with recovery ( Shaw et al., 2018 ), identifying psychosocial factors reduces risk of chronicity ( Nicholas et al., 2011 ), changing lifestyle behaviours reduces pain ( Robson et al., 2021 ), but these findings did not always apply when considered within patients' personal and social contexts. Some clinicians discussed “riding” uncertainty with the patient, rather than offering an illusion of control or certainty. For example, when discussing a patients' fear of re-engaging with life if he recovers (e.g., losing his disability pension, looking for work again, writing a resume), a clinician described:
I think I probably just sort of rode the uncertainty with him because it is, again, it is scary and is concerning, and I had no idea what was going to happen. … If you're willing to go, I'm willing to go with in the journey with you. (Ryan, occupational therapist)
Clinical guidelines and post-positivist research strongly recommend people with LBP return to work as early as possible. Yet, the scenario above emphasises that such tasks involve uncertainties. Here, Ryan does not resist uncertainties and the unpredictability inherent in returning to work. Instead, he seems to acknowledge the uncertainties around the social implications of changes to people's LBP. As Mol suggests, seemingly solid scientific ‘facts’ from natural sciences cannot be simply laid out in the logic of care – since the concern with LBP interferes with patients' lives, the ‘facts’ do not simply refer to a body but to something historical and dynamic: a life. The body and life cannot be brought together only at specific occasions and times; they are always entangled. Mol's logic of care shows how, in this uncertain scenario described by Ryan, knowledge from natural sciences is given a new assignment. When mobilised to the consultation room, it is asked to contextualise ‘evidence based’ clinical guidelines' recommendations such as ‘early return to work’ to complex social aspects – navigating fears, reskilling and financial pressures.
Clinicians often discussed feeling a lack of control when faced with uncertainty about patients' personal and social contexts. As Mol argues, care and associated uncertainties require clinicians to ‘tinker’ with bodies ( Mol, 2008 ), knowledge and people, which is not always a straightforward task: …. particularly with things like looking at a biopsychosocial model . Our ability to identify barriers is not necessarily the same as our ability to remove barriers or modify them. And that's probably part of that acceptance with regards to that. And there's probably always a little bit of introspection in terms of if I should approach this in a different way … (Daniel, physiotherapist)
Here, Daniel expresses uncertainty regarding his ‘acceptance’ approach to barriers identified through a biopsychosocial approach to care, such as personal and social factors. This suggests that dealing with uncertainty may involve a shift from being aware of personal and social contexts to working out what to do with them.
As Mol argues, in the logic of care, care itself is concerned with actively improving lives. Yet, complex stories of patients' personal and social lives are often cast as distracting disturbances within LBP healthcare. Josh's discussion bears resemblance to Daniel's (knowing is not enough), but, unlike Daniel, Josh links uncertainty to a particular treatment approach, ‘behaviour change’, which is often considered to be key to a ‘biopsychosocial’ approach and likely a large focus of his training:
“Knowledge is to behaviour change is what a wet noodle is to a brick”… knowing about a particular issue doesn't mean to say that you're going to be able to come up with a behaviour change to deal with it. Just telling people that, “Oh, okay. Your depression and your work situation and your marriage and your relationships, they can all affect your pain” - that doesn't really, in itself, deal with the problem, does it?… how do we deal with shitty life syndrome? When you're an exercise trained person like myself? (Josh, exercise physiologist)
Josh expresses frustration about how to help people with LBP to deal with life challenges with the tools he has, inferring a sense of powerlessness. Yet, when using Mol's theorisation about the logic of care, the gap between science (in this case, the science of ‘behaviour change’) and messy practices that happen in consulting rooms is not surprising or a failure: it should be expected and is inevitable. Mol suggests that we might revisit our theories about scientific knowledge and what the assumed tasks of health-care professionals are. These may be reworked in the logic of care.
The analysis of the excerpts above indicates that although clinicians understand the empirical evidence on the association between personal and social factors and a patient's experience, they feel uncertain about how to address them, underpinning a sense of incapacity. Notably, the science that clinicians tend to use to inform the care they provide to patients with LBP does not seem to help them to navigate social and personal uncertainties.
Clinicians expressed uncertainty in weighing up advantages and disadvantages of treatment options with/for patients. Mol's logics of choice and care provide insights. In the former, the focus is on the moment where choices are made about which advantage to follow or disadvantage to avoid, with facts and courses of action being given at the same moment. In the latter, advantages and disadvantages are considered more fluidly and cannot be easily separated. Samir's discussion is instructive. He discusses weighing up whether to do a surgical procedure (ablation) on a patient who is certain they want the procedure, despite little benefit from it: The patient definitely wants to have it, it's a costly procedure in terms of, you know, resources required, and, you know, health resources spent on it. And I guess the dangers of sedation and interventional strategies. So trying to deal with the uncertainty of what you should do. … So weighing up the ethical issues of justice in terms of appropriate resource allocation , maleficence in terms of potential harm to the patient and beneficence in terms of patient risk, and then weighing up paternalistic versus autonomy based strategies … (Samir, pain specialist)
Here, Samir expresses uncertainty: should he give the patient the treatment they want, given the risks and small perceived benefits involved? Samir's statements indicates that choices about therapeutic approaches are non-linear. The sequence of neutral facts → value-laden choice → technical (in)action does not neatly apply. As Mol suggests, in the logic of care, no variable is ever fixed; variables are variable. The parameters assessed in clinical trials and their measures of success do not necessarily map to what patients want to achieve. What needs to be considered is not only what treatment is more effective, but also which effects are more desirable. Likewise, consideration of what treatment has the greatest impact on a given parameter is not enough; it is important to also consider which parameter to measure ( Mol, 2008 ).
Clinicians also experienced uncertainty in identifying which patients should receive care and when:
I'm involved in our triaging process. So when people get referred into our services, we get a letter with a lot of information and we have to make a judgement … as to whether that person's urgent or whether they can wait three months or whether they can wait 12 months to be seen. … I will look at the information that I'm given sometimes and go “oh, I don't know”. (Ava, psychologist)
Although very experienced, Ava acknowledges uncertainty in judging how long someone can wait to be cared for based on referral letters. It might be particularly difficult for Ava to make such a decision without seeing the person who the information belongs to. Mol argues that in the logic of care, categorising (in this case, triaging) is not like collecting: grouping individuals according to their characteristics to determine pathways of care. Instead, categorising is a matter of differentiating between collectives by considering the person's identity and needs.
Clinicians often discussed feeling uncertain about how to navigate patients’ emotions. For example, Leanne mentioned feeling disappointed at not being able to reassure a patient: I think because she was crying and not really listening to any ways of trying to calm her down, like mobilising … she was just crying a lot and it was, we couldn't, there was not much more that we could really do because she wasn't really, you know, it was quite, yeah … nothing we could really say was helping … (Leanne, physiotherapist)
Here, Leanne takes a linear approach to care. Following the logic of choice, calming the patient is limited to familiar tools (e.g., mobilisations). Yet, the patient was highly distressed, crying and understandably unwilling to engage with movement or breathing exercises. Such a scenario prompted Leanne to feel that her approach had failed ― she was uncertain how to carry out her usual care. Yet Mol would argue that the objective of care should never remain fixed. Could the focus of care be to sit beside a patient while she cried?
Like Leanne, Connor discussed a scenario in which he navigated uncertainty with a patient who was distressed about the uncertainties of worsening LBP symptoms: … she was emailing me after the consultation, and, you know, her pain was so bad, she'd want to die. And like, you know, really emotive language, again, which didn't really correlate with how she was walking in, and how she was walking out, and you know, what I was actually doing to her, so … [I dealt with this by] trying [to] bring it back to mechanical [back pain factors] … I just went through what is going on in her spine, okay, what isn't going on? Okay, so you know, it's all safe and okay. And just try to calm her symptoms down. (Connor, chiropractor)
This scenario is another example of how uncertainty intertwines with emotions and potential mental health challenges. Yet, unlike Leanne, who was disappointed with the patient's emotional reaction and uncertain how to deal with it, Connor reported feeling ‘fine’ about navigating the patient's emotionally imbued uncertainty. Here, Connor responds to the patient's suicidal ideation by returning to her LBP through familiar (to him) mechanical aspects of the condition, reassuring her that her spine is ‘safe’ and ‘okay’. Although Connor was able to justify a biomedical approach to LBP care, he did not appear to reflect on the patient's emotions or navigate non-mechanical elements embedded in uncertainty and care. Using Mol's theorisation on the logic of care helps us reflect on the relevance of the parameters measured in clinical practice. In both Connor's and Leanne's examples, the parameters used seemed not to align with patients' needs: the clinicians proceeded with using familiar tools. Attending to patients' emotions was not a viable option (e.g., further inquiring about the patient's desire to die, sitting with the patient while they cry). Yet, in the logic of care, care itself is adaptable.
Some clinicians discussed how, for patients, the experience of uncertainty was associated with a feeling of hopelessness: [This patient works full time and has a family] but he's quite debilitated by his back pain . But his hopelessness and uncertainty [recently] pushed him to some pretty extreme levels in terms of alcoholism, and mixing medications. He hadn't disclosed to anyone until our time that those mixings of alcohol and medications were, not premeditated, but purposeful. So his level of hopelessness and fear and uncertainty had led him to some pretty dark places. If they're feeling comfortable enough to be able to open up about that in a session, then I think … they're in the right place. Now, my level of uncertainty then peaks, because that's not my … you know, but I'm, but I'm confident in what the service that we offer and in the people that I have within my team and, and competent to, to continue those conversations with that patient in that moment, to get them to the places that they need to be so. (Claire, occupational therapist)
Claire feels uncertain about how to respond to the patient's sense of hopelessness. Yet, she is confident that other team members can provide the services the patient may need. Here, the clinician is welcoming the patient's ‘difficult’ emotions (despite mental health not being her area of expertise) ― “they're in the right place” ― and sharing the care with the team. This approach aligns with the logic of care, where the action is more important than the actor. Action may be shared and shifted around. While healthcare professionals must act within their scope of practice , attending to patients' emotions is relevant for every discipline as they are intertwined with both uncertainty and professional care. Overall, clinicians often respond to patients' ‘difficult’ emotions with uncertainty. However, such uncertainty is not problematic or inherently negative when navigated adaptively and adeptly.
Communicating education about LBP was another common scenario where clinicians described navigating uncertainty. For example, Lisa said she considers providing evidence-based education when patients are experiencing uncertainty the biggest challenge of LBP care:
… and when that education might be different to the patient's understanding [the biggest challenge] is to how to support them to move and be on board with new information. I think patients come in with a lot of uncertainty. They'll say: “I've seen all the specialists” “I've had all the scans” [and then] either “My scans don't show anything” or “My scans show terrible things” or “Nobody knows what's the cause of my pain”. So, I think people come in with a lot of uncertainty themselves. (Lisa, occupational therapist)
Uncertainty permeates communication that may contrast with the patient's expectations, particularly when the information provided contradicts their own understandings or what other healthcare professionals and scans have indicated. Interestingly, Lisa positions patients as the ones who need to ‘be on board’ with new information, rather than clinicians incorporating patient understanding into the clinical scenario. Such an approach may be possible in the logic of choice, where choices are linear or structured, and the clinician might be able to choose between their perspective or the patient's perspective, allowing one of the two to prevail. In contrast, the logic of care demands more complexity – both perspectives (and potentially others) are part of the situation being navigated, incorporated, tinkered with, and held together. Uncertainty does not need to be resolved for decisions to be made and for LBP care to progress.
Similar to Lisa, George describes feeling uncertain when providing ‘evidence-based information’ in scenarios where it may clash with patients' values and beliefs. For instance, George discusses often feeling uncertain about what to tell someone about their scan findings and how a patient may respond to the information provided: So, am I going to invalidate the person if I explain [that a certain amount of pathology in their scan is normal when they had thought it showed the cause of their pain] … that's not uncertainty about, about whether I whether the information that I'm telling them is true, the uncertainty is how is that person going to respond … the difficult part is when you're really stuck with someone where they sort of have to be told what is factual information, what is not? Even when you know that that is going to clash … with their beliefs? When is that appropriate to do? And what level of rapport building? (George, physiotherapist)
Here, George acknowledges that familiarity with the patient/person is required prior to presenting the ‘facts’ to the person with LBP. Most importantly, George seems to believe that the rapport determines the appropriate time to do so. Mol's theorisation of care enables us to understand George's experience with uncertainty here - care and life with LBP does not begin once all the facts have been assembled. Instead, presenting facts is an intervention in a person's life.
Some clinicians also discussed experiencing uncertainty when adapting messages to the patient in front of them. For example, James (physiotherapist) emphasises that his experiences with uncertainty are mostly about tailoring language to a particular person and attending to their emotions simultaneously. “… it's less now about the diagnostic and the treatment plan and more ‘Did I use language that was appropriate to that person?’ and ‘Could I have played with that more?’” Similarly, Mol states that: “Good communication is a crucial precondition for good care. It also is care in and of itself. It improves people's daily lives” (p. 76). It is important to note that when referring to communication, Mol points out that it goes beyond picking the right words to accepting silence, looking at each other and using both body language and touch to communicate. A different participant seemed to not know how to communicate and educate patients who were from a lower socioeconomic demographic. Such uncertainty was resolved by giving up on the task altogether and creating certainty that nothing could be done for them:
There's people who just can't educate, they're in a lower socio economic demographic . It's just very hard to deliver a message to them that they can understand. And so that's just a complete waste of time. … They come in stinking of cigarettes, they have teeth missing, they're just, they're not intelligent at all. I'm just not able to dumb it down to a message. And even if I could, it wouldn't change their behaviour. They'll leave and not remember anything I said even if I've sort of been Donald Trump in terms of how simple I've tried to pitch the message. It's just a complete waste. … So there's only really one cohort that I enjoy, and that's the ones with back pain who are what I would consider normal people who care about themselves. … They're the ones I feel like I actually do quite a lot of good effort for … (Liam, spinal surgeon)
Here, Liam's discourse aligns with the logic of choice and presumes that individuals are free and make rational choices, failing to acknowledge that choice has limits. Within this context, the uncertainty surrounding communication takes a broader shape – navigating uncertainty becomes intrinsically linked to navigating behavioural, structural and social determinants of health. Clearly, Liam fails to address such tasks – as he said: “I am unable to dumb it down to a message”, implying that he does not know how to communicate with people from a low socioeconomic status. So, he addresses this uncertainty by creating certainty (that ‘dumbing down’ is the answer and that these people are not worth his effort), neglecting care of some people all together. Within the logic of care, doctoring depends not only on being knowledgeable, accurate and skilful, but also on being able to navigate uncertainty by being attentive, inventive, persistent and forgiving. Although Liam was explicit about his experiences and thoughts about communicating and educating people from low socioeconomic status, other clinicians may act in similar ways without acknowledging it. More …
In addition to the contexts discussed above, clinicians described other situations in which they experienced uncertainty in LBP care: patients' expectations of treatment; patients' understanding of clinicians' roles; patients’ (in)tolerance of uncertainty; LBP research unknowns; how to manage conflicting advice within and between professions ; and when to end care or refer to other clinicians – just to name a few. Like post-qualitative inquiry, which is underpinned by an ontology of immanence and is never settled, uncertainty is ubiquitous and seeming certainties are always in the process of becoming uncertain in the fabric of LBP care, pointing to the limits of intelligibility of healthcare practice – it is hard to disentangle or grasp.

Section: 5. Discussion

Our post-qualitative inquiry enabled us to ‘think with theory’ to explore how clinicians navigate uncertainty, without constraining such exploration to a particular meaning (i.e., we did not define uncertainty when discussing it with participant-clinicians). By using this emerging research tradition, we brought to the fore a new way of understanding uncertainty, extending scholarship on uncertainty and LBP by suggesting that uncertainty is ubiquitous in LBP care, woven into its very fabric, extending to, and beyond biomedical aspects. Clinicians considered patients' personal and social contexts as sources of uncertainty which led to uncertainty about courses of action, often accompanied by a sense of powerlessness and lack of control. Likewise, clinicians encountered uncertainty when trying to match clinical recommendations to patients' lives, as well as when choosing pathways for each patient. Patients' emotions and mental health also appeared to be contexts in which clinicians navigated uncertainty with patients with LBP. Uncertainty was also present when clinicians communicated with, and aimed to educate, patients. In these contexts, clinicians discussed that the uncertainty they experience is often underpinned by the relationship between clinicians' own values, beliefs and emotions, and patients' previous experiences with healthcare, their values, beliefs, emotions, behavioural, social, and structural determinants of health . Taken together, these findings emphasise the ubiquity of uncertainty in LBP care. Most importantly, our findings show that clinicians often have difficulty embracing and navigating these uncertainties. Where they do embrace such uncertainties, Mol's logic of care offers a way to conceptualise these more fruitful navigations – i.e., to provide care in a way in which clinicians can collaboratively and continually attempt to attune knowledge to complex lives and uncertain contexts, attending to emotions that emerge and exploring ways of shaping a good life in a non-linear manner.
In this discussion, we expand on how attending to what we call the ‘ubiquity of uncertainty’ demands that clinicians attend to human uncertainties when working with people who experience LBP and enact the logic of care as opposed to leaning on the more linear (and familiar) logic of choice. The term ‘human uncertainties’ refers to uncertainties related to personal, emotional, psychological, social, cultural, ethical and moral aspects. We use this term to distinguish these uncertainties from the more biological and biomedical uncertainties that are commonly considered in LBP literature (pathology, neurophysiology , neuroscience , medications), acknowledging that these factors are interrelated and overlapping. Overall, we argue that attending to human uncertainties abuts practical reality and has the potential to challenge biomedical thinking, ‘truth’, the essence of LBP care, and healthcare broadly. Our analyses add to the uncertainty literature by acknowledging i) the ubiquity of uncertainty, ii) human uncertainties as a concern to clinicians and iii) the intersections between mainstream scientific and human uncertainties. It is our hope that through better recognition and theorisation of uncertainties in LBP care, such uncertainties can be better navigated – and include human elements which generally receive less attention in healthcare ( Mescouto et al., 2020 ).
Our analyses suggested uncertainty is both ubiquitous and, at times, difficult to navigate in LBP care. When present, challenges navigating uncertainty were associated with a sense of powerlessness and lack of control. For instance, clinicians often assumed that they had to resolve uncertainty by getting patients ‘on board’ with the scientific information, or acknowledged they lacked skills to communicate effectively when navigating uncertainties well with a patient. These attempts to create certainty (e.g., manipulating patients' beliefs so they align with clinicians' views, or not communicating with people from low socio-economic backgrounds) are likely to create epistemic injustice, a common issue in pain management ( Buchman et al., 2017 ). Epistemic injustice refers to situations in which medical experts exert power to persuade individuals using their chosen scientific frameworks and reject patients' claims ( Buchman et al., 2017 ). Such scenarios may be particularly problematic when contextual factors such as the lived experience and determinants of health are not considered. Buchman et al. (2017) argue that clinicians should avoid epistemic injustice by striving toward epistemic humility. Being epistemically humble means correcting for prejudicial credibility judgements by recognising that medical decisions are almost always accompanied by uncertainty and that individuals' perspectives can enhance understandings of the clinical scenario. Notably, epistemic humility does not reject clinical expertise. Instead, it encourages clinicians to consider the limits of clinical expertise, especially where there is uncertainty or incomplete knowledge. Based on the epistemic injustice literature and our findings, we argue that clinicians, researchers and policy-makers alike should incorporate uncertainties into clinical practice, training, research and policy to enable enactment of the logic of care. This means acknowledging that scientific evidence is never complete and must be subject to new insights ( The Council for Public Health and Society, 2017 ), including human uncertainties. Equally important is embracing uncertainty about what good care is, which is context specific in the logic of care ( Mol, 2008 ). Notably, elements embedded in the logic of care, such as tinkering, are also ways through which clinicians and patients may infer, reason or make favourable outcomes and futures. Especially in individual cases, a logic of care seems to be a reasonable approach to deal with uncertainty, rather than always relying solely on evidence-based medicine's Bayesian reasoning, which at times suffers from its inability to attend to context.
As part of embracing uncertainty, it is important to consider integrating different sources of knowledge within contexts in which care is provided. As illustrated by our results and others', therapeutic processes are not simply clinical and technical processes – they are also social and political processes ( Buchman et al., 2017 ). Thus, although it has been argued that health professional education needs more room for social science and humanities ( Buchman et al., 2017 ), we add that this needs to be not only conceptual knowledge but woven into the fabric of healthcare practice and values . An epistemic shift towards constructivist and interpretivist approaches to learning have the potential to encourage clinicians to engage in reflexivity and prepare them to better integrate human uncertainties into evidence-based practice, rather than engaging in the logic of choice and simply presenting facts derived from clinical trials. Within this context, inclusion of practice-based learning that fosters both procedural and dispositional dimensions of knowledge is important ( Billett, 2015 ). Said another way, theorisation and re-conceptualisation is a necessary precursor to changing; seeing things differently allows us to do things differently ( Laliberte Rudman, 2014 ). For instance, application of social theory such as Mol's logic of care to observations of clinical appointments could be a useful tool for training both undergraduate students and clinicians in attending to uncertainties while enacting the logic of care. Mol's logic of care has been applied to children's neuromuscular care to make routine practice less familiar and thus open to examination. Thille et al. (2018) used Mol's work to denaturalise habitual ways of thinking and working and enable clinicians to co-analyse observations of their clinical work. Through dialogues, researcher-facilitators prompted clinicians to identify moments they interpreted as examples of the logics of care and choice in the written observations or their appointments with patients. The authors argued Mol's emphasis on the impacts of clinical actions on the lives of patients and families is a valuable tool in facilitating dialogical thinking and attending to the human dimensions of healthcare. Within this context, expanding attention from more biomedically focussed uncertainties (e.g., aetiology, diagnosis, prognosis, treatment) to considerations of human uncertainties (e.g., emotions, socio-economic factors) may also contribute to enactment of humanistic approaches in LBP care. To be clear, Mol does not argue that biomedical evidence should be ignored or dismissed, but rather that is included as an option alongside other human and contextual elements. She agues that scientific knowledge does not simply apply to a body but to a body within a life ( Mol, 2008 ). Considering our analyses, engaged with the lenses of Mol's theory, it is clear that both clinicians and researchers need to revisit our theories about scientific knowledge and its ties with human aspects. Likewise, we may need to re-examine the tasks of healthcare professionals, which are different in the logic of choice (detached from uncertainty and one's personal contexts) and the logic of care (attuned to uncertainty and one's personal contexts). Good care is context specific and requires clinicians to navigate uncertainty with curiosity, exploring their feelings, navigating uncertainties in themselves, broadening the range of places they learn from, disentangling practicalities patients may need to deal with in their lives, tinkering ( Dillon et al., forthcoming) and offering emotional support when needed.
It is also important to attend to the ubiquity of uncertainty within the context of shared decision-making. Patients have been increasingly encouraged to actively engage in decision-making and ‘choose wisely’ ( https://www.choosingwisely.org.au ) regarding tests, treatment or procedures because of concerns over potential overdiagnosis and overtreatment. Yet as Mol argues, in the logic of care making choices involves considering ‘situations of choice’ (e.g., mode of organising action and interaction; understanding people and their lives; dealing with knowledge) - it is more than adding and subtracting advantages and disadvantages. Notably, our findings emphasise that choices about therapeutic approaches are neither value-free nor linear - variables and parameters are variable as opposed to absolute. As a result, it is possible that open discussions about uncertainty might be safer than too much certainty or neglect of uncertainty, particularly if patients undergo unnecessary and risky treatments or procedures - risks always involve uncertainty, but uncertainty does not always involve risks ( Lian et al., 2021 ).

Section: 6. Conclusion

This paper contributes an understanding of uncertainty as ubiquitous in LBP care. This ubiquity deserves attention as clinicians often work to resolve uncertainties by producing certainty at the cost of attending to the human aspects of care. Drawing on clinicians’ experiences, we identified that uncertainties are woven into clinical aspects such as treatment choices and evidence-based education about LBP, with relevance for clinical practice. If we are to better navigate the inevitable uncertainties in LBP care and in healthcare more broadly, uncertainties should not be discussed as belonging only to patients. Rather, uncertainties reside in, and should be considered by, clinicians, researchers and policy makers, and in light of the logic of care. Epistemic shifts and practical engagement with theorisation in training, research and clinical guidelines may prompt clinicians to embrace uncertainty and enact the logic of care.

Section: Credit author statement

NC and JS conceptualised the study and developed the interview guide. NC, KM and MD conducted the interviews. NC cleaned the transcripts, led the research team analysis and wrote the analytical summaries. All authors contributed to the data analysis. NC wrote the first draft of the manuscript and all authors contributed to the final manuscript draft.

Section: Acknowledgments

NC is supported by The University of Queensland (University of Queensland Stimulus Fellowship). JS is supported by the National Health and Medical Research of Australia ( NHMRC: APP1157199 ).
