Title: ‘Known to be unhealthy’: Exploring how social epidemiological research constructs the category of low socioeconomic status


Abstract: Abstract

We examine how the category of low socioeconomic status (LSES) was constructed in European social epidemiological research and policy advice from 1977 to 2019. We analysed 22 empirical social epidemiological research publications on LSES and health, as well as six scientific advisory reports that offered government officials an overview of scientific evidence on health inequalities. We show the construction and reification of LSES as a problematic group in dominant thought, which consists of the following components: 1) the proliferation of SES concepts, indicators and groups labelled LSES; 2) generalisation through which LSES is constructed as a single population; 3) problematisation through which LSES is constructed as an inherently unhealthy population; and 4) individualisation by which a LSES personality is presented as an explanation of health differences. We also show how this knowledge is extrapolated into the policy domain in the form of scientific advisory reports. These findings provide evidence of the construction of LSES as an inherently unhealthy population through hyperproliferation and references to the objectivity of scientific research. With respect to the LSES category, the dynamics of research and policy resemble those regarding categories of ethnicity and gender. We conclude that if the construction of LSES remains unquestioned, social epidemiology might continue to (re)produce what it examines: LSES populations ‘known to be unhealthy’.

Section: 1. Introduction

Health inequalities in Europe have been considered an important policy problem. Since the 1980s, social epidemiological research has provided ample evidence of a correlation between socioeconomic disadvantage and health: in Western European societies, people with socioeconomic status live unhealthier, shorter lives than those who occupy a higher social position ( Berkman and Kawachi, 2014 ; Smith et al., 2015a ).
Since its emergence, social epidemiology has been characterised by its engagement with socially marginalized populations , and it has argued that health inequalities are unjust ( Porter, 2006 ; Mackenbach, 2009 ). This engagement was translated into the development of evidence-based policies aimed at tackling inequalities, which Marmot (2017, p. 545) made particularly clear in his statement that social epidemiology has an ideology: ‘Health inequalities that are avoidable and are not avoided are unjust. Putting them right is a matter of social justice. But the evidence really matters’.
Indeed, evidence is crucial in social epidemiology. It is understood as the basis of actions taken to reduce health inequalities ( Bambra et al., 2010a , Bambra et al., 2010b ; Siegrist and Marmot, 2006 ). Policymakers have increasingly used social epidemiological research as a basis for policy interventions aimed at reducing health inequalities ( Marmot and Allen, 2014 ). Hence, close interactions have developed between social epidemiological research and health policymaking. However, despite the amount of published research and the number of interventions, recent studies have suggested that health inequalities between high socioeconomic (HSES) and low socioeconomic (LSES) populations continue to persist ( Smith et al., 2015a ; Mackenbach, 2019 ).
This trend has stimulated reflection by social epidemiologists regarding health inequality research and interventions. Some experts have stated that further evidence should be generated regarding the relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and health (Smith, Bambra, and Hill, 2016). Some have argued that new research tools must be developed to measure how SES relates to health ( Smith et al., 2015b ). Others have suggested that neoliberal policies prevent the adequate translation of scientific evidence into policy measures (e.g., Collins et al., 2015 ). However, the possibility that social epidemiological research itself plays a role in constructing and sustaining health inequalities has not been discussed. In this paper, we address this gap in the research by exploring how socioeconomic health differences were constructed in European social epidemiological research and policies between 1977 and 2019. Because previous research on social epidemiology has focused only on the health of LSES populations ( Berkman and Kawachi, 2014 ), we focus on the construction of this category.
To study the construction of LSES, we draw from science and technology studies (STS). STS scholars have shown that scientists do not simply discover facts; they construct them in interactions with society, politics and cultural practices ( Jasanoff, 2017 ; Sanderson, 2002 ; Shapin and Schaffer, 2011 ), which also applies to categories constructed in interactions between science, politics and society ( Bowker and Star, 1999 ).
Bowker and Star (1999) used the example of racial classifications under South Africa's apartheid system to show that the categories people used were a product of political negotiations and scientific and social considerations. When they are made and interwoven in political-administrative and scientific infrastructures, categories become a way to explain and comprehend the world (p. 196) and shape it through their ‘knowledge creating role’ (pp. 115, 155). Bowker and Star underlined, to classify is human’, and that classifications are not inherently bad (p. 5). However, they asserted that the moral and political effects of specific classifications need to be critically studied because some classifications create better worlds than others.
The philosopher Ian Hacking (1986) coined the term ‘making up people’ to describe the categorisation of groups. In line with Bowker and Star, according to Hacking, ‘the kind and the knowledge’ grow together: categorising people in a certain way informs expectations about them and, hence, co-influences how they are studied and understood ( Hacking, 1995 , p. 31). Hence, it matters for the studied population how a study is performed ( Helberg-Proctor et al., 2015 ). Moreover, this constructivist orientation demands attention to the question of what and whose knowledge is considered in science and in policy-making purposes ( Moes et al., 2020 ; Fricker, 2007 ; Jasanoff, 2017 ; Potter, 1996 ).
Building on Bowker, Star and Hacking, various STS scholars have investigated the construction of categories of social difference, such as gender and ethnicity, in health research. They have studied how these categories emerged in scientific practices and found their way into society, and vice versa ( Helberg-Proctor et al., 2015 ; Epstein, 2007 ; Shim, 2002 ). This body of work has provided three important insights that are relevant to the present study. First, scholars working according to this tradition have empirically shown how the construction of categories of social difference takes place in interactions with political and societal processes ( Epstein, 2007 ; Jasanoff, 2004 ; Krebbekx et al., 2017 ). For instance, Helberg-Proctor et al., 2015 , Helberg-Proctor et al., 2017 showed that the categorisation practices of the state informed the design of ethnicity research by requiring publicly funded research to adhere to specific, predefined social categories. Second, various scholars have underlined that the social categories in health research reflect dominant societal norms and hierarchies. These categories have emerged from a series of choices that were not only methodological in nature but also based on cultural narratives about normality, difference and hierarchy ( Lupton, 1995 ; Shim, 2014 ; Sibley, 1995 ). In the field of gender studies , Martin (1991) demonstrated that cultural gender stereotypes were transposed into scientific textbooks on reproduction. She showed that women were depicted as passive, while men were portrayed as productive and heroic, and that while the menstrual cycle was described in terms of ‘wasting eggs’, the male reproductive system was described as ‘producing hundreds of millions of sperm each day’ (p. 486). Martin held that such scientific representations have social effects: when stereotypical scientific images of certain social groups are accepted as representations of nature, they become authoritative in society.
Lastly, several scholars have articulated the concern that the use of social categories in health research might both produce and reproduce health disparities ( Helberg-Proctor et al., 2017 ; Krebbekx et al., 2017 ; Meershoek and Krumeich, 2009 ; Shim, 2014 ). Klinge and Newman (2010) argued that gender bias in medical research affects how health care is provided and results in suboptimal care for women. For instance, in research on coronary artery disease, symptoms presented by women, such as fatigue and back, jaw and neck pain, have often been ignored because diagnostic standards have been established in research on men, who display other symptoms of the same disease. As a result, diagnostic tests often fail to detect coronary disease in women, which thereby leads to untreated disease and an increasing health gap between men and women.
While robust scholarship has developed with respect to the construction of ethnic, racial, sex and gender categories, the construction of (L)SES has escaped rigorous examination. To our knowledge, only the sociologist Janet Shim (2014) has investigated the construction of socioeconomic differences in health research. Drawing on interviews with social epidemiologists and lay people, she showed that constructions of social class in American heart epidemiology dismissed lay people's understanding of class differences and related health consequences. By focusing on lay people's experiences regarding health and class, Shim made a case for the value of a combined expert–lay approach to studying class differences in health. Shim's analysis, however, concerned American epidemiology and focused more on the construction of socioeconomic health differences than on the construction of SES categories.
In this study, we analysed the construction of the LSES category in European social epidemiology and in health policy advice. Specifically, drawing on the STS literature on the construction of gendered and ethnic categories, we ask how social epidemiological research and health policy recommendations have co-constructed this category. By doing so, we aim to open up research on health inequalities and policies to a new field of critical enquiry concerning the construction of categories of social difference.
In relation to our theoretical approach, we have two important remarks. First, the construction of LSES categories in social epidemiology does not imply that epidemiologists constructed these categories intentionally. In line with previous STS work, we consider the construction of social categories an unintended result of a social epidemiological thought style ( Fleck, 1979 ) that has been shaped by international epidemiological research practices and political-scientific infrastructures. Second, studying the construction of social difference in health does not mean that we deny the existence of health inequalities or the suffering with which these inequalities are associated. Instead, we discuss the categories through which these inequalities are established.

Section: 2. Methods and materials

Textual analysis provides a key method in STS to study the production of knowledge. In such analyses, texts are not considered objective representations of the world but as means by which some things are called into existence while others remain invisible. Perceived through this lens, texts are not dislocated from practices but are themselves a practice that reflects and co-constructs the socio-political world in which they are written. Thus, STS scholars do not judge the truthfulness or accuracy of text contents but analyse how they come into existence and how they affect the world that they describe ( Asdal, 2015 ; Law, 2014 ). To study the construction of LSES, we selected 22 empirical social epidemiological research publications on LSES and health published between 1977 and 2019 (Supplement 1). This period includes health inequality research from immediately before the publication of the Black Report, which is considered the most significant publication in the field as it was the first national study that established proof socioeconomic health inequalities, and proposed systematic interventions to overcome these inequalities ( Benzeval, 2002 ; Smith et al., 2015b ) until 2019. The academic publications included detailed descriptions of the methods, tools and materials used in analyses of research practices. Our initial identification of the academic research publications was based on references in scientific advisory reports dedicated to health differences. Additional articles were sourced through snowball sampling and citation searches. We included only empirical studies on health status (i.e., morbidity or mortality measures) and/or health behaviours of individuals within (not across) European countries. Furthermore, the study participants were categorised according to their socioeconomic status or a closely related concept, such as social class or socioeconomic position . These concepts are not the same, but in the epidemiological literature, they are often used interchangeably ( Glymour et al., 2014 ). We used the term ‘SES’ in our writing and only mentioned other concepts if they were cited or paraphrased.
In line with the STS literature on the interrelationships between science and policy, the second section of this paper presents an analysis of the construction of LSES in European health policy recommendations. We analysed six scientific advisory reports published between 1980 and 2013, which summarised data in multiple research publications to provide government officials with an overview of relevant and up-to-date scientific evidence on health inequalities. The initial selection of the scientific advisory reports was based on Marmot's (2013 , pp. 3–5) account of health policy development in the European Union (EU). From this overview, we chose reports commissioned by national governments in Europe and various EU bodies. We selected these reports based on strict inclusion criteria, as follows: 1) be fully devoted to health inequalities; 2) reviewed health inequalities within single countries; and 3) used SES or closely related concepts as the basis of social categorisation . In addition, under the same inclusion criteria, the Black Report Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS), 1980 , which is known to be the first major advisory document on socioeconomic health inequalities in Europe, and its successors, the Acheson Inquiry ( Acheson, 1998 ) and the Marmot Review (2010) , were added to the data set. In total, the data collection process yielded six scientific advisory reports for the analysis (supplement 2). We presented the data set to an expert in the field of social epidemiology , but no changes were made to the choice of documents.
The findings presented in this paper are based on content analyses of these two sets of documents. The analytical framework was informed by our theoretical background (Bowker and Star, 1990; Vallgårda, 2007 ; Krebbekx, Spronk and M'charek, 2017 ; Helberg-Proctor et al., 2017 ) and specifically by Bacchi, 1999 , Bacchi, 2008 ‘what is the problem represented to be’ framework and Verloo’s (2005) ‘methodology of critical frame analysis’. The first author compiled questions that guided the analysis of each document (supplement 3). These questions were discussed and fine-tuned in consultation with the second author. Thereafter, all publications were read and reread systematically, focusing on three main topics: 1) the construction of LSES as a category in research; 2) the construction of claims about the health of the LSES category; and 3) the interaction between science and policy. We compiled an overview of relevant text fragments and interpreted them in relation to the research questions. In the remainder of this article, we present the results of the analysis and describe the dominant thought style through which LSES has been constructed in social epidemiological research and the health policy domain.

Section: 3. Results

In our dataset, we identified a dominant style of social epidemiology through which LSES was constructed and reified as a problematic group in health inequality research. In the following sections, we describe this thought and its components: 1) proliferation, 2) generalisation, 3) problematisation and 4) individualisation .
In the analysis of our dataset, we observed a proliferation of SES concepts, SES indicators, and groups labelled LSES (supplement 1, columns 4–6). Throughout the literature review, we found various concepts that commonly referred to individuals' socioeconomic positions , including social class, social position, socioeconomic position (SEP) and socioeconomic status (SES). Interestingly, while ‘social class’ seemed to have fallen into disuse after the 1990s, the term was revived in publications investigating health inequalities related to ‘capital’ ( Christensen and Carpiano, 2014 ; Kamphuis et al., 2018 ; Kamphuis et al., 2015b ; ( Groeninger, 2019 )). In these articles, social class did not replace other SES concepts but was used in tandem with SES or SEP.
From 2010, several authors referred to socioeconomic trajectory or life-course SES (e.g., Elovainio et al., 2011 ; Giesinger et al., 2014; Stringhini et al., 2013 ). In these publications, SES was perceived as a dynamic attribute that varies over an individual's life course. Therefore, these authors distinguished participants' early SEP ( Akbaraly et al., 2010 ) or childhood SES ( Elovainio et al., 2011 ; Stringhini et al., 2013 ) from their midlife SEP ( Akbaraly et al., 2010 ) or (early) adulthood SES ( Elovainio et al., 2011 ; Stringhini et al., 2013 ). Consequently, SES became applicable to (very) young children . Hoffman et al. (2018) measured participants' childhood SES at age 10 years, and determined SEP at the age of four years.
In addition to the proliferation of SES concepts, we found that a wide range of SES indicators were used to operationalise SES (supplement 1, column 5–6). In most publications, at least one traditional SES indicator was used: the participants' education, occupation and/or income. In the life-course perspective on SES, new measurements of these indicators were introduced. Because young children have not yet finished schooling, have not been employed, or have generated income, additional SES indicators were introduced, such as the father's occupation, the mother's education ( Giskes et al., 2004 ), and the father's social class (Eloviano, 2011).
In addition to the use of many SES indictors, we observed that the meaning of a single indicator differed across the literature (supplement 1, column 6). For instance, some authors operationalised ‘low education’ as seven to nine years of schooling ( Helmert et al., 1990 ), while others specified less than 11 years of education ( Burgoine et al., 2017 ) In the case of Stringhini et al. (2013) , the indicator was less than 14 years of schooling. Thus, researchers have variously operationalised SES indicators. Even among studies that used the same SES indicator, a multitude of groups were labelled LSES (supplement 4).
Multiple authors contended that current SES indicators failed to capture the complexity of SES ( Christensen and Carpiano, 2014 ; Helmert et al., 1990; Laaksonen et al., 2007 ). For some, this provided a rationale for developing new SES indicators. Examples are Christensen and Carpiano (2014) , who stated that social position is not simply determined by income or schooling but also by the possession of economic, cultural and social capital. To capture these forms of capital, Christensen and Carpiano introduced a list of items, including the ownership of washing machines, dishwashers and cars, the number of museum visits and the number of social contacts that an individual ‘possesses’. Based on similar arguments, Hoffman et al. (2018 , p. 24) used, among other things, the number of books in the household to measure childhood SES. The choice of these indicators was not explained, however, which raises various questions. What did the authors aim to measure with these indicators? Were they supposed to capture literacy, intelligence or wealth ? What kind of books counted as ‘books’, and what if a family borrowed countless books from the library but did not possess books of their own? It is striking that in most studies, the choice of indicators was not explained because it is generally acknowledged in social epidemiology that the choice of indicator influences the magnitude of the observed inequalities (e.g., Geyer et al., 2006 ; Smith et al., 2015a ).
We observed not only a proliferation of SES concepts and indicators but also groups labelled LSES (supplement 1, column 6). The use of traditional SES indicators of income, occupation and/or educational attainment allowed for the labelling of only individuals with low-ranked income, occupation and scholarly attainment as LSES (e.g., Giskes et al., 2004 ; Marmot et al., 1991 ; Schrijvers et al., 1999 ). Logically, when researchers chose other SES indicators, such as household tenure or the number of books in a household, other LSES categories were constructed, including being a tenant instead of a homeowner ( Laaksonen et al., 2007 ) and ‘possessing less than 25 books’ ( Christensen and Carpiano, 2014 ). The proliferation of LSES indicators thus resulted in a proliferation of groups designated as LSES. The use of the above-mentioned life-course perspective also stimulated the proliferation of groups labelled LSES. Thus, SES was not only applicable to adults but also became a characteristic that children were ascribed at birth. Giesinger et al. (2014, p. 275) exemplified this trend by arguing, ‘Starting in utero, each stage of life may contribute to individual levels of risk and to the social gradient in risk’.
In social epidemiological research, the construction of LSES categories has evolved into a highly variable practice, resulting in a myriad of LSES groups (supplement 1, column 7). Crucially, these groups have been subsumed under the same label: LSES. Surprisingly, the basis of the ascription of the label LSES has remained vague. While all the reviewed publications specified which SES categories were created and which were ranked the lowest, it has remained unclear whether LSES referred only to the bottom category or to several lower categories and, if so, which ones. Only Kamphuis et al. (2006, p. 496) explicitly stated who was labelled as LSES: ‘people with a low educational attainment (i.e., with no education, or with primary school or lower vocational training … will be referred to as “low SES”’. Thus, while all the reviewed studies purported to examine LSES health, it remained unclear in almost all our data who the LSES research actually concerned (supplement 1, column 6).
As indicated in the previous section, LSES appeared as a label that referred to multiple groups. However, in terms of the final conclusions regarding (L)SES and health, an opposing trend appeared, namely the construction of LSES as a single group. While the authors of the selected publications explicated their SES indicators in methodology sections, most extrapolated their findings on specific LSES categories to a generalised LSES population (e.g., Elovainio et al., 2011 ; Giskes et al., 2004 ; Kamphuis et al., 2007 , 2009 ; Stringhini et al., 2013 ). Kamphuis et al. (2015a) provides an illustrative example.
In their methodological section, the authors explicated that they used low education and low income as indicators of low SEP. Interactions between food preferences and these indicators were assessed, which resulted in two findings (p. 772): 1) ‘More highly educated participants rated a healthy meal to be more important than did less-educated participants’; and2) ‘Higher-income groups rated a meal that was healthy and with a very good taste to be more important than did low-income groups’. However, in the concluding section of their study, Kamphuis et al. replaced these particular categories by a generic LSES population: ‘[h]igher socioeconomic groups valued health more than did lower socioeconomic groups’ (p. 773). Health-related findings that originally referred to populations with ‘low education’ and ‘low income’ were extrapolated to a broad and generalised LSES group. The impression was that a homogenous ‘LSES population’ existed independent of the study's methodology. Hence, the actual variability in the LSES groups was ignored.
Generalisation is an important procedure in scientific research. However, generalisations can be formulated in multiple ways with varying emphases on the locality and situatedness of claims ( Latour and Woolgar, 1979 ). Because conclusions drawn from social epidemiological research are regularly presented as impetus for policy interventions and further research, when generalised findings are applied to large groups of people, they become ‘targets’ for further research and public health interventions. For example, Kamphuis et al. (2015a, p. 773) put forward the idea that their research was essential to understanding the ‘motives for the generally less healthy behaviours of low socioeconomic groups’ to develop policies that facilitate healthy behaviour among LSES. However, nuances presented in the findings were brushed aside in drawing such conclusions. Isolated from their specific operationalisation, policy recommendations may unjustifiably broaden the groups targeted for intervention. Some authors have adhered to specific LSES categories throughout their work. For instance, Laaksonen et al. (2007, p. 784) did not propose interventions that targeted a broad LSES population but maintained the categories defined in their methodological section:
The policy implications of our results highlight the importance of supporting people with financial difficulties to prevent and reduce socioeconomic inequalities within the domain of common mental disorders . However, in our sample, this type of specification was rare, and most researchers treated LSES as a single but often very broad population.
In our dataset, LSES was not treated as ‘just’ a social category but as a category describing an inherently unhealthy population. These publications usually presented reviews of many studies that had documented the adverse relationship between LSES and health in general and then determined how the prevalence of health determinants differed between different SES categories. For instance, Droomers et al. (2002, p. 263) introduced their study with the following title: ‘Why Lower Educated People Continue Smoking’ and then stated, ‘smoking, and hence its related health risks, is much more prevalent in lower socioeconomic groups’. In doing so, LSES was described as a population known for ill health and adverse health behaviours. Similarly, according to Kamphuis et al. (2006, p. 493), ‘poorer people experience worse health with higher rates of mortality and morbidity from cardiovascular diseases, obesity, type 2 diabetes and cancers’.
The problematisation of LSES is a self-validating mechanism. First, in comparing the study results and conclusions, we found that in many articles, only measures indicating an adverse association between LSES and health were reported. For instance, in comparing mortality rates in different social groups, Nähyä (1977 , pp. 236–237) concluded, ‘[t]he consistently poor outlook for unskilled workers shows that the life of this group has risk factors to which especially great attention should be paid’. Earlier in this publication, however, several findings were mentioned, which directly contradicted this conclusion: • The risk of death is greater for social group II [the second highest social group] than for either of the adjacent groups from age 45 up to the greatest age. • Mortality from cancer of the breast, cancer of the prostate, cancer of the intestine, leukaemia in males, and diabetes seems to be concentrated in the higher classes. • Suicides in men follow the usual distribution, whereas suicides in women seem to be concentrated in the higher social groups (pp. 233–234, italics first author).
While the increased risk of certain health outcomes was found in both ‘lower’ and ‘higher’ social groups, in the conclusion, the author mentioned only the increased risk for the lowest social group. Näyhä’s conclusion regarding the ‘consistently poor outlook’ and the risk factors of the lowest social group, therefore, did not necessarily follow from the raw data analysed in the study. Instead, the conclusion was the result of choices in the analysis and interpretation.
Second, a frequent finding was that unexpected findings on SES and health were reinterpreted. While all publications hypothesised an inverse relationship between health and SES, the data used in several studies indicated worse health outcomes for HSES groups. For instance, Giskes et al. (2005) expected that a higher maternal educational level would lead to greater nutritional skills. However, the likelihood of having a protective diet decreased with an increase in maternal education. In Giskes et al. (pp. 878), the reinterpretation of their unexpected findings resulted in a theory in which these outcomes were explained by the ‘evolution of nutrition knowledge’: the observed lack of nutritional knowledge among highly educated mothers could be explained by the rapid developments in nutrition science , not by individuals' limited knowledge or cognitive capacities. Thus, the highly educated group was not held responsible for ‘unhealthy behaviour’. The theorisation of unexpected findings is a common scientific practice, but we did not observe it in data that indicated worse health outcomes in LSES groups. Apparently, worse health outcomes were assumed for this population and needed no further exploration. The only notable exception was Christensen and Carpiano (2014, p. 20), who concluded that HSES behaviour also posed health risks:
Though health research commonly theorises about the health benefits of higher social class and SES, our findings highlight the need to also consider the risk mechanisms that might undermine the benefit of certain healthier practices associated with higher social position.
In general, in social epidemiology, the understanding is that LSES is problematic in health and health behaviour. Some articles even hinted that LSES populations were biologically more vulnerable to disease. For example, according to Stringhini et al. (2013 , p. 2), socioeconomic adversity accumulates into a ‘“vulnerable” phenotype’. Similarly, Akbaraly et al. (2010, p. 88) stated that LSES could increase biological vulnerability through unhealthy behaviours and epigenetic changes. The emphasis on data and hypotheses that re-affirmed the idea of problematic LSES health, combined with the reinterpretation of contradictory findings, make the ‘fact’ that LSES is ‘unhealthy’ almost universally accepted. Hence, the image of social groups as differing from each other has arisen purely based on SES. It is worth noting that none of the articles reviewed for the present study paid attention to the development of resilience, capabilities and protective factors in difficult socioeconomic circumstances ( Visser and Haisma, 2021 ; Werner, 2013 ). Instead, adverse socioeconomic circumstances were consistently framed as health risk factors. In effect, the conflation of LSES and vulnerability has created the necessity for interventions that target a wide range of people. Thus, causal power is ascribed to (L)SES to the point that SES has become partly defined in terms of health; that is, it has become impossible to consider LSES and disease separately.
The final component in the construction of LSES concerns the overflow of problematised health status into the problematisation of personality traits . Most publications negatively valued traits to explain the links between LSES and ill health. Hence, LSES has been viewed as a personality characteristic that causes ill health, thereby leading to the application of individual measures to address health inequalities.
Across the academic publications, sociological, psychological and epidemiological research was referenced to support the view that the personality of LSES individuals contributes to their health status. For instance, according to Droomers et al. (2002, p. 270), the ‘particular personality profile of lower educated people’ contributed to the educational differences in continued smoking:
Lower educated people continued smoking because they believe that their personal life and health can be only slightly controlled by their own behaviour, and neurotic (i.e., unstable and nervous) people often need smoking to cope with daily life.
According to other studies, LSES groups were ‘more hostile’ than higher SES groups ( Marmot et al., 1991 , p. 1392), ‘less open to change and more conservative than highly educated [people]’ ( Kamphuis et al., 2015b , p. 12) and less likely to ‘transcend one's selfish concerns and promote the welfare of others and nature’ (p. 12). Furthermore, various groups of LSES people were believed to have more ‘traditional beliefs about appropriate or healthy diets’ (Kamphuis et al., 2006, p. 494). Moreover, a ‘particular personality profile’ was characterised by ‘high neuroticism’ ( Droomers et al., 2002 , p. 270), and they were ‘less concerned with healthiness than their advantaged counterparts’ (( Groeninger, 2019 ), p. 5). In addition, they were framed as being ‘inclined to eat traditional, heavier and cheaper foods’ (( Groeninger, 2019 ), p. 1044), therefore making food choices that were characterised ‘by a regime of much fat and sweet’ (p. 1044). HSES individuals, by contrast, were presented as individuals ‘known for their appreciation of refined and high-end foods’ ( Kamphuis et al., 2015a , p. 773), as paying ‘attention to the healthiness of their nutritional patterns’ (( Groeninger, 2019 ), p. 1044), as having ‘greater knowledge of dietary recommendations’ ( Giskes et al., 2005 , p. 81) and as ‘making health-conscious food choices’ (( Groeninger, 2019 ), p. 5; Marmot et al. p. 1393). They were also considered ‘early adopters’ of healthy behaviours and innovations ( Helmert et al., 1990 , p. 414; ( Groeninger, 2019 ), p. 5). Although the HSES taste for ‘smok[ing] fine cigars, enjoy[ing] fine dining and rich foods’ was considered a health risk, their ‘positive (health promoting) mechanisms’ were believed to ‘outweigh’ such health risk mechanisms ( Christensen and Carpiano, 2014 , p. 20). By consistently contrasting LSES individuals with ‘deviant’ personality traits to the positive and health-enhancing characteristics of HSES people, ‘unhealthy’ preferences and behaviour and ‘risky’ personality traits have become the expected cause of ill health among LSES.
Indeed, in various academic publications, the individualisation of health differences informed the (re-)evaluation of the findings. For instance, Kamphuis et al. (2015a) hypothesised that price considerations explained the ‘less healthfully’ eating patterns of lower socioeconomic groups. They tested this hypothesis by conducting a discrete choice experiment, which showed that price considerations were a more important motive in choosing certain foods by HSES participants than by the LSES group. To explain this unexpected finding, the authors ascribed it to a positive personality trait of highly educated people and a negative one of less-educated people, stating that it might be ‘a reflection of more highly educated groups being more cost-conscious shoppers than less-educated groups’ (p. 773). Similar to the problematisation of LSES health, these explanations did not necessarily follow from the raw data but were the result of the authors' (re-)interpretations. In this regard, it should also be noted that some authors questioned the cognitive ability of LSES individuals ( Christensen and Carpiano, 2014 ; Akbaraly et al., 2010 ; Giskes et al. 2004 , 2005 ). Giskes et al. (2005, p. 82) suggested that the socioeconomic gradient they observed might be even higher than reported, for ‘the estimates of mean intakes of the lower socioeconomic groups may not have been as reliable or valid as among the higher socioeconomic groups’. In another article, Giskes et al. (2004) stated that ‘disadvantaged groups’ performed the task of recalling, describing and quantifying their dietary behaviours ‘less accurately than their more advantaged counterparts’. The ascription of lower cognitive abilities to LSES individuals raises questions, as many (L)SES indicators, such as income or living in deprived areas ( Giskes et al., 2005 ), had no straightforward relation to intelligence.
The aforementioned use of capital to measure SES further supported the naturalisation of a problematic LSES personality. Norms and behaviours were stated to be influenced by sociocultural resources (e.g., Kamphuis et al., 2015b , 2018 ; ( Groeninger, 2019 )). Through socialisation, which is understood as a process by which patterns of attitudes, beliefs and behaviours that exist in a particular social group are transferred across generations, the ‘dispositions and behaviours of individuals become similar within each social class and generation’ ( Kamphuis et al., 2015b , p. 2). Without exception, the authors held that the HSES culture was marked by health-promoting behaviour, while LSES was believed to be distinguished from HSES by unhealthy behaviours and preferences ‘that give them a sense of “freedom from convention” ’ (p. 2).
Social epidemiology has borrowed the concept of capital and the notion of distinction from the sociologist Bourdieu, who coined these terms to explain how norms, behaviours and preferences are constantly made and remade in the competition between social groups. In social epidemiology, however, this theory is used to explain health inequalities. Thus, adverse norms, behaviours and preferences are theorised as static characteristics of LSES individuals. LSES ‘culture’ has been presumed an ‘inheritable’ set of adverse tastes, preferences and attitudes ( Kamphuis et al., 2015b , p. 3, 2018, p. 2; ( Groeninger, 2019 ), p. 2, 2019, p. 1038), leading to lifestyles that ‘become part of an identity and are used as a distinction mechanism’ (( Groeninger, 2019 ), p. 1038). Such explanations reinforce that the notion of a deviant LSES personality is a scientifically legitimate and appropriate way to think about health inequalities. Hence, the causes of health inequalities have become solidly located in LSES individuals, making them the main target of health interventions. While material circumstances and socio-political causes of health inequalities were mentioned in some early articles (e.g., Giskes et al., 2005 ; Kamphuis et al., 2007 ; Schrijvers et al., 1999 ), these potential causes received less attention in more recent articles. For instance, Groeninger (2019 , p. 5) stated, ‘it can be particularly challenging to improve the dietary behaviours of socioeconomically disadvantaged people’, as their propensity to ‘consume foods that are cheap and high in fat’ is part of their ‘distinct lifestyle pattern’.
If individual behaviour, characteristics and traits are viewed as the cause of inherited health risks, then LSES is treated as a threat to oneself and one's children and, therefore, as in need of regulation and control. This view was found in the concluding sections of some articles when interventions and policy recommendations were proposed (supplement 1, column 8). Giskes et al. (2004) , for instance, proposed that targeted nutrition promotion for socioeconomically disadvantaged mothers was the most effective, for ‘their health and nutrition knowledge may play an important role in the development of children's knowledge, beliefs and attitudes about nutrition’ (p. 878). Researchers who employed the concept of capital strengthened the idea of responsibility for offspring in the notion of socialisation. Groeninger (2019 , p. 1048) suggested that interventions focusing on young children and their parents would be the most successful in improving diets and physical activity because ‘incorporating healthy habits then becomes part of the socialisation process’. Hence, LSES individuals and their ‘transmittable’, unhealthy culture have become the explanation for health differences.
Confronted by a growing body of evidence on the extent of health inequalities, national governments and EU bodies have repeatedly commissioned groups of epidemiologists to review and summarise the data. They have also asked them to identify priority areas for the development of policies aimed at reducing health inequalities ( Murphy and Fafard, 2012 ). Our analysis of six of these scientific advisory reports revealed a style of thought that was similar to that revealed in the academic publications. In these reports, LSES was constructed as an inherently unhealthy and problematic population.
The dynamics of the academic research publications and advisory reports were comparable, but we observed three important differences. First, while the research papers demonstrated a proliferation of the LSES population, in the advisory reports, we observed the hyperproliferation of this category. This effect was due to the addled manner in which the numerous SES concepts and indicators used in these articles were transposed to the advisory reports. For example, while the authors of the Acheson Inquiry (1998) used occupational status as an SES indicator, the research on which this report was based specified other indicators, including housing conditions , assets, education and residential area . Consequently, the label LSES was used not only to refer to people with low occupational status but also to other groups, such as homeless people and people living in ‘unfit dwellings’ (p. 15). With the exception of the Black Report (1980), we observed this dynamic in all the advisory reports (supplement 2). Typically, the proliferation of groups labelled as LSES occurred subtly through the replication of other authors' conclusions, graphs and tables on SES and health. Hyperproliferation was also supported by the introduction of additional SES indicators that differed from those observed in the research publications. For instance, according to Marmot (2010, p. 11; italics first author), social position was ‘shaped by education, occupation, income , gender, ethnicity and race ’. The inclusion of these last three indicators was highly noticeable because they were absent in all the academic publications in our sample but occurred implicitly or explicitly in various advisory reports ( Acheson, 1998 ; Marmot, 2010 , 2013 ). The effect of this proliferation of indicators has been significant: the label of LSES has now been applied to immigrants ( Marmot, 2013 , p. 128; Judge et al., 2005 , p. 22), ethnic minorities (( Acheson, 1998 ), p. 16; Marmot, 2013 , p. 136) and even women ( Marmot, 2013 , p. 61). In effect, more than half of the population now bears the LSES label.
Another way in which the advisory reports have furthered the proliferation of groups labelled LSES was by conflating LSES with vulnerability. The reports not only compared health differences between various SES categories but also commented on the health of ‘vulnerable groups’. These groups were deemed to include, among others, the old, the sick, children ( Marmot, 2013 , p. 84), pensioners ( Acheson, 1998 , p. 21), drug and alcohol abusers ( Judge et al., 2005 , p. 22; Marmot, 2013 , p. 128), people with disabilities ( Acheson, 1998 , p. 20; Judge et al., 2005 , p. 14; Marmot, 2013 , p. 131), migrants and ethnic minorities in vulnerable situations ( Marmot, 2013 , p. 149), single parents ( Judge et al., 2005 , p. 14), mothers ( Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS), 1980 , Judge et al., 2005 ), and ‘people disadvantaged by different forms of social exclusion’ ( Judge et al., 2005 , p. 5). Although it was unclear whether all these groups were regarded as LSES or whether LSES was considered one of the numerous ‘vulnerable groups’, the overflow from one concept into the other has allowed for the perplexing ascription of the LSES label and the problematisation of a wide range of social groups.
The second difference between the academic publications and the advisory reports concerns the explicit claim of neutrality and objectivity. With the exception of the Black Report, all the advisory reports claimed to be based on ‘independent’ reviews that summarised or reviewed ‘the evidence’ of inequalities in health. Mackenbach (2005a , p. 2), for instance, stated, ‘the report … aims to review the descriptive evidence on the existence of socioeconomic inequalities in health’. In a similar vein, the authors of the Acheson Report ( Acheson, 1998 , p. 4) presented their work as an ‘independent review’ that identified priority areas for future policy development , ‘which scientific and expert evidence indicates are likely to offer opportunities for … interventions to reduce health inequalities’. Such references to impartiality in impersonal third-person language portray the authors as distant observers of the relationship between SES and health, thereby presenting social epidemiological research findings as an objective knowledge base for developing policy interventions that ‘work’. Marmot (2010 , p. 93), for instance, held that ‘[t]he recommendations set out … are informed by evidence of what works to reduce inequalities in the social determinants of health’. Similarly, Judge et al. (2005 , p. 38) admitted to the inconclusiveness of their evidence, arguing, ‘it is important to maximise the use of the evidence that does exist in designing and implementing future policies’. Hence, the advisory reports reproduced the idea that evidence is statistical and that better insights into health inequalities require quantitative research. In effect, the reports cut off a series of relevant publics as knowledgeable about the relationship between LSES and health, including LSES populations themselves. The norms regarding what may count as evidence were not discussed in any of the reports.
The final difference found between the academic publications and the research reports was that the latter did not ascribe negative personality characteristics to LSES. Moreover, references to an ‘LSES culture’ were absent. Instead, the reports problematised LSES regarding the economy and the financial costs of increasing health inequalities., which was the most apparent in the Marmot Review (2010, p. 18). The authors devoted a sub-chapter to explain how reducing inequalities in health ‘is vital for the economy’ (p. 18): ‘It is estimated that inequality in illness accounts for productivity losses of £31–33 billion per year, lost taxes and higher welfare payments in the range of £20–32 billion per year, and additional NHS healthcare costs associated with inequality are well in excess of £5.5 billion per year. (…) If society wishes to have a healthy population, working until 68 years, it is essential to take action to both raise the general level of health and flatten the social gradient.’
In other reports, LSES was also presented as a threat to economic prosperity. Judge et al. (2005) stated that health inequalities must be addressed ‘to maintain a just and prosperous society’, and Marmot (2013 , p. 3) deemed interventions to improve LSES health necessary because ‘doing nothing is not an economic option’. With one exception ( Hoffmann et al., 2018 ), this dynamic was absent in the academic research papers.

Section: 4. Discussion

Social epidemiological research has provided ample evidence of a correlation between low socioeconomic disadvantage and disease ( Berkman and Kawachi, 2014 ; Smith et al., 2015a ). It has been dedicated to and engaged with the task of improving the health of populations, particularly underprivileged populations. The field has developed scientific research on health inequalities as the basis for policy interventions that aim to reduce these inequalities. In the conventional account of this research, social epidemiological research presents objective scientific findings regarding the pre-existing social group of LSES ( Popay et al., 1998 ). In this study, we found an alternative account, which we analysed to determine how scientific practices have (co-)constructed LSES as a category of social difference and how this category has functioned in European health policy.
Social inequalities are a key theme in not only social epidemiology but also sociology . Influenced by Marxist theory , many early scholars studied inequality as an expression of economic–financial relationships. Piketty (2013) revitalised this approach. Other scholars, such as Elias (2000) and Bourdieu (1984) , explained how inequalities and social class experiences are shaped through competition, imitation and distinction. More recently, Bovens and Wille (2017) showed that inequality in education is reproduced in political arenas, as academics are overrepresented in democratic bodies and governing institutions. However, the question of how scientific practices co-shape socioeconomic health inequalities has not yet been addressed in sociology nor in any other academic field. In this study, we addressed this gap in the research by examining how LSES was constructed as a category in European social epidemiological research and European policy advice between 1977 and 2019.
The findings of our analysis revealed a thought style in social epidemiological research that unintendedly constructs LSES as an inherently ‘unhealthy’ population with inherently ‘deviant’ personality characteristics and an ‘adverse’ culture. We identified four specific characteristics in research practices that contributed to this process: proliferation, generalisation, problematisation and individualisation . Through these characteristics, the ‘default’ understanding of epidemiological data was that of a problematic LSES culture and the problematic behaviour of LSES individuals. We showed that this thought style was also observed in scientific advisory reports. Through the multiform labelling of LSES and the subsequent generalisation of these groups, a wide range of people has been categorised as such, which has made them an ‘obvious’ target of health interventions. Both the social epidemiological research and health policy advice that we reviewed in this study paid little attention to social and material structures that (co)shaped differences in health, such as the housing market, tax structures, and competition between social groups. In addition, any positive characteristics or health outcomes of individuals labelled as LSES were dismissed.
Social epidemiologists' concerns about persistent socioeconomic health inequalities have increased (Bakker and Mackenbach, 2005a; Broeders et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2016). While they have tried to solve this problem by producing ‘more’ and ‘better’ evidence, our study showed how this evidence has been constructed and that it has reified LSES as a given condition. Instead of a tool applied to get insight in health inequalities, LSES has been constructed as the main cause of health inequalities. Thus, people who have been labelled as LSES have been deprived of the ability to define themselves or to show ‘unexpected’ (i.e., healthy) behaviour, as any positive characteristics or good health outcomes of LSES individuals have been reinterpreted. Hence, the unhealthy LSES construct has been continuously reproduced and accepted.
Bowker and Star (1999) asserted that although the construction of categories is an intrinsic, unavoidable human act, categorisation is a moral endeavour: categories validate a particular point of view and represent a particular understanding of the world (p. 5). When they are integrated into scientific, administrative, social and political infrastructures, the moral origins of categories become less visible (p. 196). Ultimately, categories are taken for granted and stripped of their constructed, situated and moral nature (p. 299). The findings of our study indicate that the category of LSES has been taken for granted in social epidemiology. Because of the widely accepted, routine use of LSES in the landscape of data infrastructure, policy cycles, research funding, and accountability procedures, the construct is perpetually self-validating.
While our findings revealed a dominant thought style in publications and reports, social epidemiology is not a homogenous field. Several social epidemiologists have critiqued the tendency of their field towards individualisation. They have underlined the need to focus research and policies not on the LSES individual but on the structural distribution of resources and power (e.g., Bambra, 2011; Bambra et al., 2010a , Bambra et al., 2010b ; Elliott et al., 2015 ; Evans and Whitehead, 2011; Graham, 2002 ; Katikireddi et al., 2013 ; McCartney et al., 2021 ; Popay and Williams, 1998; Popay et al., 2011 ; Stronks & Nicolaou, 2018 ). For instance, McCartney et al. (2013 , p. 225) asserted that it is a matter of ‘scientific clarity and intellectual honesty’ to acknowledge that health inequalities cannot be reduced substantially if policies remain primarily aimed at individual health behaviours and cultural change. They held that structural changes in the distribution of power , income and wealth are required. Another attempt to exceed the individualising trend of health inequality research was made by Stronks and Nicolau (2018). They proposed studying health inequalities at the neighbourhood level and conceptualising the neighbourhood as a system in which individuals, services, materiality and health interact. In the analysis of these systems, individuals are considered part of the system and not as sole and primary targets of health interventions. While critical social epidemiological work has been important in addressing the dominant social epidemiological thought style, it has not reflected on how knowledge making about health inequalities is partly constructed by views of health inequalities.
Our study has the following limitations. First, although the study sample was carefully chosen, the selection was limited. While we aimed to include social epidemiological work from a wide range of countries and authors across Europe, we found that our final data set was based on studies conducted in Western Europe. Moreover, most of the scientific research was derived from two large and ongoing prospective cohort studies—the UK Whitehall II study and the Dutch GLOBE study—and were written by a restricted number of experts. We consider that this limitation to our selection reflects the social epidemiological field. In both the Netherlands and the UK, there is a long history of research on social differences in health, which has been supported and shaped by their specific political histories ( Mackenbach, 2009 ). Collyer and Smith (2020) described the Whitehall study and the work of Mackenbach as landmark research on health inequalities. They also showed that scholars in various clusters of health inequality research are often not aware of each other's work and do not refer to studies outside their own group. The fact that critical social epidemiological reflections were not part of our data set could thus be understood as a reflection of the specialisation within health inequality research and of the dominance of the thought style that we described. Second, unlike Krebbekx, Spronk, and M’charek’s (2016) study on ethnicity, we did not focus on how statistical techniques have constructed categories of social difference. Such an analysis would be a valuable next step in examining the epidemiological research style. Third, our analysis of both scientific and policy documents was based on insights drawn from STS studies regarding the interactions between both fields. While our results suggested a strong relationship between the dominant style of social epidemiological thought and policy processes, further research on the interactions between these different institutional practices is needed. The work of Smith, 2007 , Smith, 2013 ; Smith and Kandlik Eltanani, 2015 ) and Helberg-Proctor et al. (2017) could be used as a starting point.
In light of previous studies on the categorisation of social difference, our findings led to five important reflections. First, the work of STS scholars on the construction of race/ethnicity shows that these categories ( Epstein, 2007 ; Helberg-Proctor et al., 2015 ; Jenkins, 2008 ; Shim, 2014 ) do not reflect a given reality. Helberg-Proctor et al. (2017) and Krebbekx et al. (2017) assessed the effects of research methodology on ethnic categorisation. According to these authors, health research clusters merge and label populations in various ways. Helberg-Proctor et al. showed that categories bearing the same label could refer to different populations. For instance, in some health research, the label ‘Creole’ referred to people from Suriname or the Antilles, whereas in other research the Creole category consisted of ‘a mix of African, European and other ethnic groups’ (p. 491). Our description of the proliferation of LSES mirrors these findings: numerous groups were labelled LSES, but the label was applied to a wide variety of populations that ranged from those with low incomes to those who had never visited a museum.
Second, scholars that have studied the construction of race, ethnicity, sex and gender have warned against the biologisation of social difference ( Helberg-Proctor et al., 2018 ; Smart et al., 2008 ). They held that when awareness of the socio-political constructedness of categories is eroded, social difference can be easily attributed to biological causes. ( Shim, 2014 ), p. 143), for instance, described how the biologisation of heart disease informed study designs and methodologies used in cardiovascular research. According to Shim, because of the robustness of the construction and the naturalisation of difference as a ‘biological fact’, alternative understandings of gender differences and their effects on cardiovascular risk have rarely been studied. Epstein (2007) considered a similar process in the case of ethnicity. Although we found no explicit references to LSES as a biologically relevant category, the notion of an LSES culture was often conflated with biological explanations of socioeconomic differences in health. Our findings showed that according to some authors, LSES increased biological vulnerability through unhealthy behaviours and epigenetic changes (e.g., Akbaraly et al., 2010 , p. 88). Moreover, the notion of the ‘intergenerational transmission’ of LSES-related health risks (Giesinger, 2013, p. 274) and that socioeconomic adversities play a role in the ‘programming of a “vulnerable” phenotype’ ( Stringhini et al., 2013 , p. 2) have biological implications. Combined with the individualisation of LSES, such explanations might easily lead to a research focus on how socioeconomic disadvantage ‘gets under the skin’ ( Kawachi and Subramanian, 2018 ; Kubzansky et al., 2014 ; Mackenbach, 2005b ).
Third, the work of scholars on the construction of race and ethnicity has revealed that scientific-political constructions that aim to do justice to ‘cultural diversity’ enact and validate real-world effects ( Epstein, 2007 ; Shim, 2014 ). For example, Proctor et al. (2011) showed that the sheer quantity of HIV prevention programmes aimed specifically at ethnic minorities in the Netherlands was the effect of scientific publications in which these groups were constructed as ‘high risk sexual ethnic others’ with ‘high risk sexual behaviour’, which resulted in increased attention in policymaking and budgets. Meershoek and Krumeich (2009) showed that the attention to ethnicity in health care resulted in the ethnic categorisation of patients in illness certification practices and in assumptions about how migrants' ‘alien’ cultural backgrounds affected reintegration at work. Combined, this previous work has indicated that the routinised use of social categories in health research might in fact (re)produce disparities in health. Therefore, research that considers the societal and care-related implications of the unhealthy LSES construction is urgently required.
Fourth, inspired by the work of Foucault, sociologists and STS scholars have highlighted the normative dimension of the construction of social difference ( Epstein, 2007 ; Krebbekx et al., 2016; Proctor et al., 2011 ). According to these authors, the categorisation of social groups determines who is the ‘same’ and who is ‘different’, and these ideas of sameness and difference interact with dominant cultural narratives about normality, difference and hierarchy. Both Sibley (1995) and Lupton (1995) have shown that in the 19th century, non-whites, the working class and the poor were singled out as both physically and morally degenerate, as ‘uncivilised, uncontrolled, irrational, dirty, diseased’ and, thus, in need of surveillance ( Lupton, 1995 ). The findings of our analysis suggested that at present, LSES, health risks and deviance have been similarly bracketed. The LSES ‘other’ has been viewed as embodying disease, having a problematic personality and belonging to a culture marked by adverse preferences and deviant norms, while HSES represents health, intelligence and self-control. According to Haisma et al. (2018) , the representation of HSES as the norm of good health and behaviour is not obvious or desirable, as it can obscure disease in this group, and it might distort capabilities in the LSES population. Other scholars have framed dichotomic comparisons in which HSES functions as the norm in a problematic feature of meritocratic thinking, as it generates harsh judgements and stigmatisation of ‘losers’ in society (Bovens, 2007; Sandel , 2020). Recently, Tyler (2020, p. 260) recalibrated the importance of this observation in light of persisting health inequalities, referring to stigma as ‘the machinery of inequality’. Some social epidemiological studies have examined the link between stigma and health inequalities (e.g., Cook et al., 2014 ; Hatzenbuehler et al., 2013 ; Phelan et al., 2014 ; Simons et al., 2018 ). However, they have not addressed the role of scientific methods and categories in the production of stigma. Therefore, the findings of the present study underline the urgent need to critically assess the construction of LSES as part of ‘othering’ machinery.
Lastly, according to several scholars ( Moes et al., 2020 ; Fricker, 2007 ), in the historical dynamics of knowledge production, certain types of evidence are privileged, and other forms of knowledge are marginalized. Disciplines that are heavily engaged in policymaking have developed a predominant quantitative research style ( Dehue, 1995 ; Porter, 1995 ), which is also the case in the field of public health ( Adams, 2016 ; Horstman, 2014 , Horstman, 2019 ). Because qualitative studies that present the knowledge and understanding of disadvantaged communities do not fit the dominant quantitative style, they are little represented in the policy arena ( Moes et al., 2020 ). The same applies to the thought style that we described: few research studies in our dataset, which were derived through searching policy advisory documents and snowball sampling, presented any qualitative data (supplement 1, column 3). Furthermore, this thought style not only discriminates between qualitative and quantitative data but also discards perspectives of the research subjects themselves.
The findings of our analysis illuminated a dominant thought style in health inequality research, in which the knowledge of LSES individuals is deemed unreliable. Ultimately, this pattern would lead to a situation in which only the findings and re-interpretations of experts regarding a constructed LSES population would become public, while the knowledge and perspectives of the study participants—particularly of LSES populations—would not be acknowledged. This eventuality raises the question of how the evidence on which health policy is based could be diversified. In racial/ethnic and sex/gender studies, scholars have been engaged with lay knowledge and the lived experiences of research participants, thereby diversifying and broadening the knowledge of social differences (e.g., Garcia et al., 2015 ; Shim, 2014 ; Sommer et al., 2019 ). Beyond the dominant thought style that we described in the present study, a small but significant body of work on social epidemiology has explicitly engaged with LSES lay knowledge (e.g., Berg et al., 2021 ; Davidson et al., 2006 ; Greenhalgh, 2018 ; Halliday et al., 2020 ; Smith and Anderson, 2018 ; Stronks et al., 2018 ; Williams, 2000 ). For instance, Popay et al. (1998) argued that lay narratives were necessary in social epidemiological research to produce richer and more dynamic understandings of the relationship between individuals, social structures and health inequalities. Also, Williams (2000) underlined the emancipatory possibilities of this narrative method. The fact that this research was not mentioned in our dataset confirmed that separate thought styles and different methodologies exist in social epidemiology.
Based on the findings of our analysis, we suggest three directions for moving forward. First, a detailed and critical evaluation of social epidemiological methods and reasoning in the construction of LSES is vital. Because the scientific traditions that are prominent in social epidemiological research — epidemiological and biomedical methods — have not been designed for reflexivity ( Amsterdamska, 2005 ), input from other fields, such as STS, is urgently needed. Second, a fresh examination of health inequalities requires a new approach to the concept of knowing. Our findings have highlighted the implicit understanding of people as knowledgeable based on their education. Hence, it has been presumed that credible knowledge about health inequalities can be provided only by highly educated people. However, several scholars have shown the value of the practical expertise and experiential knowledge of non-academics (e.g., Brown, 1987 , Brown, 1992 ; Shim, 2014 ), disadvantaged communities (Wallerstein and Duran, 2006), and citizens (Irwin and Michael, 2003; Rabeharisoa, Moreira and Akrich, 2014). Broadening the notion of credible knowledge is an important step in the understanding of health inequalities. Lastly, health inequality research takes place in epistemic infrastructures that co-determine the discourse and the scientific method. The transformative research that we propose requires a concerted effort by funding agencies, including national and EU governments, to provide the necessary resources to ensure that reflective research on health inequalities can be conducted.

Section: 5. Conclusion

The academic field of social epidemiology is dedicated to the alleviation of health inequalities by the development of an understanding of ‘what can be done practically in the realm of SES and health’ ( Glymour et al., 2014 , p. 22). However, its research dynamics have constructed several obstacles to fulfilling this mission. The field has firmly established the link between LSES and ill health, based specifically on the documentation of deviant behaviour and adverse personality characteristics. As a result, the multiform conceptualization and use of LSES has allowed for the consistent re-validation of the ‘deviant LSES’ construct, which has become a self-validating mechanism.
It is difficult to study inequalities without applying categories of difference, but the dominant thought style in social epidemiology has constructed an inherently unhealthy and problematic LSES population. As long as the constructed nature of LSES remains unacknowledged health inequality research might continue to (re)produce the problem that it aims to solve: it reproduces a LSES population that is ‘known to be unhealthy.

Section: Credit author statement

I.J. Dijkstra: conceptualization; methodology; investigation; original draft. K. Horstman: conceptualization; writing review and editing; supervision. This author statement is agreed by all authors.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
