Title: The power of potential: Assisted reproduction and the counterstories of women who discontinue fertility treatment


Abstract: Abstract

Despite their low and inconsistent rates of success, assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs) are presented by fertility clinics and constructed in media and popular culture as an effective treatment for infertility. The ways in which such technologies medicalize women's health and bodies have been well documented by social scientists and feminist health researchers. However, little is known about the struggles women face in cases of “failure”; that is, when ART does not achieve its purported potential to assist women in their attempts to conceive and have the desired outcomes of conception and birth. Using a post-structural feminist interpretive framework combined with a narrative methodology, this paper critically examines the ways in which social and cultural narratives about gender and biotechnology shape women's accounts of discontinuing ART. Thirty-six interviews were conducted with twenty-two women across Canada who were at various stages of discontinuation and who utilized a variety of treatment types. Three inter-related narrative themes were developed to categorize the stories of struggle: (i) a growing desperation to be pregnant; (ii) confronting paternalistic medical expectations; and (iii) internalizing and resisting blame for treatment failures. These themes highlight both the explicit and subtle ways in which restrictive social and cultural narratives about womanhood and motherhood were perpetuated in clinical interactions, which ultimately made ending treatment more difficult. Our analysis illustrates how women navigated and resisted such narratives, through pausing or ending treatment despite provider recommendations and clinical messages. We suggest that fertility providers critically reflect on the potentially harmful language used during interactions with patients and recommend that discontinuation discussions become a recurring, normalized component of treatment protocols and patient-provider conversations so that women feel better supported to end treatment when they believe it is financially, emotionally, and physically beneficial for them to do so.

Section: 1. Introduction

Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) is an umbrella term used to describe the array of medical treatments and techniques used to facilitate pregnancy in women, which includes procedures such as in vitro fertilization (IVF), intrauterine insemination (IUI), intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI); egg and embryo freezing, sperm and egg donation, and gestational surrogacy; and medications such as ovulation-inducing hormones. Such treatments respond to clinical definitions of infertility, defined as “a disease of the reproductive system defined by the failure to achieve a clinical pregnancy after 12 months or more of regular unprotected sexual intercourse” ( Zegers-Hochschild et al., 2009 , p.2686).
Infertility has been ranked as the fifth highest serious global disability among women under 60 ( World Health Organization, 2020 ) and in Canada, it is estimated that one in six couples experience problems conceiving ( Government of Canada, 2019 ). In 2018, 16,852 IVF cycles were initiated within the 36 of 37 clinics that offer IVF in Canada and who voluntarily report their data to the Canadian Assisted Reproductive Technologies Register -CARTR ( The Canadian Fertility and Andrology Society, 2019 ). Public concerns over the moral, ethical and legal implications of ART ( Birenbaum-Carmeli et al., 2000 ) have waned with time and the increasing presence and normalization of biotechnologies in Canadian healthcare. The rapid uptake of IVF in recent years has largely been due to public coverage of IVF treatment offered by the provincial governments of Quebec (2010–2015) and Ontario (2016 - present) ( The Canadian Fertility and Andrology Society, 2016 ) making what was once available only to the wealthy now accessible to a much broader clientele. Like other aspects of publicly funded healthcare in Canada, fertility treatment is administered by provinces and territories, which vary in their coverage of ART. Currently, Ontario, the most populous province in Canada, is the only province that funds one cycle of IVF for those judged eligible for treatment, with wait times varying between clinics ( Stasiuk, 2020 ). Some provinces (e.g. Quebec, Manitoba, New Brunswick) offer tax credits or grants for fertility medications, consultations, and may cover certain procedures such as intra uterine insemination (IUI). Private insurance plans vary widely and may offer coverage for fertility treatment cycles or prescriptions.
The fertility industry in Canada, and elsewhere, is highly profitable. Without provincial/territorial or private insurance coverage, one cycle of IVF costs $10,000 to $14,000 CAD, which includes cycling monitoring, hormone injections, egg extraction, fertilization in lab, embryo growth in lab, freezing of remaining embryos, and fresh or frozen embryo transfer ( Dunne, 2016 ). This estimate excludes additional costs where users purchase third-party gametes. IUI costs approximately $500.00 CAD excluding hormones; and follicle-stimulating hormones (FSH) may cost between $2000 to $5000 CAD per course, with the average course being 10 days ( Dunne, 2016 ).
Cultural and social narratives about ART tend to focus on their potential to cure women's inability to conceive and reproduce. Such narratives are proliferated through messages on fertility clinic websites that promote their use of cutting-edge technology, feature patient testimonials and images of (predominantly white) babies alongside words such as “dream” or “miracle” ( Franklin, 1997 ; Hawkins, 2013 ). These messages of biotechnological potential obscure the less well known though many problems that are associated with ART, including treatment failures, pregnancy losses and embryo “deaths”, the physically arduous routine of treatment (blood tests, hormone injections, vaginal ultrasounds) and its side effects (bloating, cramping, migraines, mood changes), inadequate ART regulation and enforcement procedures ( Baylis, 2012 ; Baylis et al., 2014 ; Snow, 2015 ), the high financial burden of treatment that may lead women and couples into debt ( Chambers et al., 2013 ; Dyer et al., 2013 ), the heteronormative organization of fertility care ( Epstein, 2018 ; Mamo and Alston-Stepnitz, 2015 ), and the stratification of reproduction based on class and race ( Roberts, 2009 ; Scala, 2014 ).
In contrast to the hopeful messages that are commonly attached to this technology, the live birth rate across treatment types in Canada has been estimated at 25%, which varies depending on age and diagnosis ( The Canadian Fertility and Andrology Society, 2019 ). The realities of these relatively low success rates and the various problems associated with fertility treatment, juxtaposed with messages of biotechnological potential in clinical narratives of ART, raise important questions about how women decide to pause and permanently discontinue treatment in the face of these conflicting realities. Clinical research has identified a number of predictors of ART discontinuation, including demographic characteristics ( Farr et al., 2009 ), physical and emotional burden of treatment ( Akyuz and Sever, 2009 ; Brandes et al., 2009 ; Olivius et al., 2004 ), financial impact ( Akyuz and Sever, 2009 ; Malcolm and Cumming, 2004 ), poor prognosis and outlook towards future treatment cycles ( Akyuz and Sever, 2009 ; Brandes et al., 2009 ; Callan et al., 1988 ), and lack of support from family, friends, and providers to continue ( Callan et al., 1988 ). However, such approaches presume decisions are made statically and limits input from women themselves about their circumstances and stories. Consequently, very little is known about the decision-making processes of women who discontinue ART from their own standpoint or about the social organization of ART and the ways in which cultural values and expectations make treatment difficult to discontinue.
In this paper, we use a poststructural, feminist narrative methodology as a means to highlight women's experiences of discontinuing fertility treatment. We focus on the complex ways that public and clinical narratives surrounding ART are imbued in women's stories of treatment, demonstrating how these narratives shape women's experiences of pausing or ending treatment. In so doing, we draw attention to the ways in which their experiences are shaped by clinical and discursive contexts within which women actively negotiate the meanings of discontinuation and navigate their decisions about pausing and ending treatment.
We begin by describing common narratives associated with ART, including those concerning biotechnological potential and hope, the ways that these narratives are linked to medicalized constructions of the female body and pronatalist assumptions surrounding womanhood and motherhood. We then describe the methodology of the study from which this paper is derived. Next, we present three narrative themes that elucidate the ways in which women in our study confronted and resisted social and cultural narratives surrounding ART, as they were perpetuated in clinical interactions, and which ultimately made discontinuing treatment difficult and ambiguous. In the discussion that follows, we connect our findings to existing literature on medical treatment discontinuation and present several considerations for fertility providers, policymakers, and stakeholders.

Section: 2. Background

Despite the uncertainty associated with ART, the promotion and popularization of ART in public narratives reinforce the “potentiality” of such biotechnologies ( Taussig et al., 2013 ) to facilitate successful birth, as well as the Eurocentric pro-natal cultural values which prioritize biological motherhood over other types of family bonds ( Gotlib, 2016 ; Latchford, 2019 ; Letherby, 2002a ; Ulrich and Weatherall, 2000 ). In this sense, potentiality refers to the persistent idioms of hope through which society views the imagined benefits of new medical interventions such as ART ( Taussig et al., 2013 ). Such idioms of hope are powerful because they appear to offer previously unimagined ways in which to overcome the “negative potentials of life” ( Taussig et al., 2013 , p.S4). As they become attached to ART, these idioms of hope buttress medicalized conceptualizations of infertility that reflect and reproduce the perceived potential of these treatments to circumvent the physiological bases of infertility or situational circumstances which prevent biological reproduction (e.g. being in a same-sex partnership). Within this narrative, ART offers a way to overcome these negative potentials by lending a helping hand to women and couples who wish to have healthy biologically-related babies ( Franklin, 1997 ). Such promises of hope are problematic when they take precedence over the physical, emotional, and financial well-being of those undergoing fertility treatment, particularly when fertility clinics fail to manage hope in ways that are aligned with evidence suggesting low rates of successful childbirth. In a curious and arguably cruel twist of logic, each failed IVF cycle, rather than interpreted as evidence that treatment does not work, is viewed as providing new clinical knowledge that will increase the chances of success in future cycles ( Franklin, 1997 ).
Just as they promote hopefulness in the face of failure and uncertainty, narratives emphasizing the potentiality of ART locate the cause of unsuccessful treatment in the female body. Thus, the medicalization of infertility is disproportionately gendered, with the majority of treatments and techniques (and blame) enacted on the terrain of female bodies ( Becker and Nachtigall, 1992 ; Sandelowski, 1990 ). Critical social scientists and feminist health researchers have critiqued medicalized approaches to infertility, noting their highly contested and socially constructed character ( Morgan and Michaels, 1999 ; Sandelowski, 1990 ; Sawicki, 1991 ). Medicalized definitions of infertility fail to capture the range of experiences and causes that may lead to reproductive difficulties ( Layne, 2003 ; van Balen and Inhorn, 2002 ) and the various pregnancy intentions of individuals who are labelled infertile ( Greil and McQuillan, 2010 ). Further, clinical definitions reinforce entrenched understandings of women's bodies as essentially pathological ( Morgan, 1998 ), as reflected in clinical descriptors such as “failure to conceive” or “hostile” cervical mucus ( Moore and Cattapan, 2020 ).
In pronatalist societies, the inability to reproduce becomes problematic for women because they are unable to fulfill what is assumed to be their primary social role: biological motherhood ( Becker, 2000 ; Hird and Abshoff, 2000 ; Letherby, 2002a ; Parry, 2005 ; Rich, 1976 ; Ulrich and Weatherall, 2000 ). Compared to voluntarily childless women, who are viewed with suspicion and as being selfish and immature, involuntarily childless women are to be pitied because they cannot fulfill their supposed duty of motherhood ( Gotlib, 2016 ; Hird and Abshoff, 2000 ; Letherby, 2002a ). In addition to reinforcing pronatalist assumptions that tie womanhood to biological motherhood, the normalization of ART reinforces biological relationships as the ideal family form ( Latchford, 2019 ). While LGBTQ + couples may form biological family ties through techniques such as surrogacy, IUI, egg and sperm donation, discourses surrounding ART may exclude and other queer and trans bodies ( Epstein, 2018 ) and denigrate alternative familial structures and bonds as inferior, including chosen or adoptive families ( Latchford, 2019 ; Weston, 1991 ).
For women who are not successful in achieving a live birth with ART, these pronatalist assumptions and clinical narratives of potentiality and hope constitute a complex terrain within which they must decide when to pause or end treatment. Research suggests that women grapple with their identity after unsuccessful IVF treatment and the inability to conceive ( Letherby, 2002b ; McCarthy, 2008 ) and occupy an “ambiguous liminal space” ( Throsby, 2004 , p.9) where they must negotiate normality as women who tried but were unable to conceive. Research also suggests that discontinuation of fertility treatment may be beneficial to users and is associated with reduced levels of anxiety and depression ( Verhaak et al., 2007 ) and relief from the physical and emotional aspects of treatment. However, ending treatment may also cause those who discontinue to experience feelings of guilt for stopping ( Peddie et al., 2005 ) and a lack of closure which leaves them struggling to adjust years later ( Boden and Boden, 2007 ).
In response to Gameiro et al.’s (2012) , call for theory-driven research to “explain discontinuation” (p.653), we use a critical narrative approach to bring people with lived experience into the conversation, highlighting their struggles and experiences, and the complexity of their decision-making. Specifically, the aim of this paper is to examine and describe the role of intersecting pronatalist narratives and clinical imperatives regarding biotechnological potential in shaping women's experiences of discontinuing fertility treatment without a live birth.
Through this critical narrative approach, we provide further insight into the ambiguity and ambivalence that characterizes women's decisions to pause and permanently discontinue treatment. Our analysis contributes to previous social science research on unsuccessful ART treatment, which tends to focus on IVF, by including the narratives of women who discontinued (paused or stopped) a breadth of treatment types, procedures, and tests, either individually or combined, including intrauterine insemination (IUI), egg and sperm donation, gestational surrogacy, and ovulation inducing and follicle stimulating hormones. Our analysis of participants' narratives of discontinuing fertility treatment can inform clinical research and practice that strive for patient-centred approaches and communication to support women with pausing or ending treatment ( Dancet et al., 2011 ; Pedro et al., 2013 ).

Section: 3. Methodology

In this paper, we explore women's experiences of discontinuing fertility treatment using a narrative approach informed by post-structural feminist theory. From this position, our approach to narrative analysis examines women's stories in order to shed light on the complex ways they negotiate ART failures and discontinue treatment in relation to the social and cultural contexts in which they are embedded. Both narrative and feminist research approaches, at a broad level, are concerned with exploring marginalized experiences and how these experiences “sit at the intersection of history, biography, and society” ( Liamputtong and Ezzy, 2005 , p.132). A key focus of our narrative inquiry is how dominant cultural narratives, sometimes referred to as master narratives or dominant discourses, shape the stories that we are able to tell by setting boundaries on what is acceptable or unacceptable to tell in the way we talk about ourselves, others and phenomena broadly ( Weedon, 1987 ).
In acknowledging the influence of dominant cultural narratives in shaping how people story their experiences and negotiate their identities through their narratives, our approach is informed by post-structural theory, which aims to “displace the human subject as the centre of philosophical and social inquiry” (p.11) in order to open up space for critical engagement with dominant discourses, the limits of representation, difference and otherness ( Simonsen, 2013 ). We follow feminist analyses of women's engagements with biotechnology that have used narrative methods to illustrate how women actively construct and defend their identities as responsible citizens in relation to dominant discourses on sexual and reproductive health risks ( Polzer et al., 2014 ). By focusing on storytelling, narrative analysis enables one to examine the fluidity of decisions about and engagements with biotechnology and the ways that these are often marked with ambivalence, particularly for those who refuse or otherwise resist biotechnology. In these cases, “counterstories” are used as a way for individuals to reclaim their moral agency ( Nelson, 2001 ) and elucidate experiences which challenge master narratives.
Thirty-six semi-structured interviews were conducted with 22 women by the first author between October 2017 and June 2018. Women were recruited through the Facebook groups of four organizations in Canada related to infant or fetal loss, infertility and treatment support, and infertility advocacy, with permission from the group administrators who posted the call for participants. Participants were given a $15.00 CAD gift card for participating in this study. Ethics approval was obtained from the University of Toronto Health Sciences Research Ethics Board. Pseudonyms were assigned to all participants.
All participants had discontinued treatment by pausing or leaving permanently. For the women who had paused treatment, time since last treatment was less than one year. For the women who had left permanently, time since last treatment ranged from less than one year to over 10 years. Participants' ages ranged from 25 to 45+ years. Two participants identified as queer, one identified as bisexual, and the remaining participants identified as heterosexual. The majority of participants identified as Caucasian or white; other participants identified as Black Bermudian (1), South East Asian (1), and Metis (1). Household income ranged from 100,000 to 225,000 annually, higher than the national average ( Statistics Canada, 2020 ), which is consistent with the high cost of treatment and inaccessibility for individuals seeking treatment within the health funding systems of many developed nations ( Bell, 2009 ; Chambers et al., 2013 ; Inhorn and Patrizio, 2015 ). Treatment types included: medicated ovulation cycles; cycle monitoring; intrauterine insemination (IUI), in vitro fertilization (IVF), fibroid removal, sperm procedures for a partner-identified fertility issue, egg and sperm donation, gestational carrier, and a range of diagnostic tests. Eleven of the participants had no children; six had biological children with previous use of fertility treatment, one had a child through partner's IVF, one had a child “naturally” after leaving treatment, and three went on to adopt children or were exploring adoption.
Interviews ranged between 30 min and 1.5 h in length. In keeping with our narrative focus, the interview guide was designed to elicit participants’ stories about their experiences with ART and to allow for conversational flow, with room for flexibility and improvisation so that women could tell their stories in their own way. Initial questions were very general and asked participants to share their journey about how they came to fertility treatment, followed by more specific questions, such as their e xperiences of and during treatment, perceptions of their bodies, supports systems and relationships with family and friends, attitudes toward motherhood, relationships with providers and clinic staff, and their decision-making about pausing or stopping treatment.
Fourteen of the participants completed a follow-up interview three to five months after the initial interview during which they were asked and allowed to expand upon or clarify aspects of their stories. In keeping with narrative interviewing techniques ( Polzer et al., 2014 ), the follow-up interviews allowed the women to continue to reflect on and narrate their stories about discontinuing treatment and helped elucidate how, for many, leaving treatment was a difficult process fraught with ambiguity as it was often conflicting for them to say definitively when and whether they were done with treatment. Follow-up interviews were used to capture the richness and evolving nature of stories rather than as a form of evaluation of participants' stories. Participants were provided with a summary of the initial interview prior to the follow-up interview. Follow-up interviews were initiated by asking participants if they wished to expand, clarify or further reflect on anything from the first interview. This was followed by questions to elicit how the participant's feelings about discontinuing treatment continued to evolve and probes to follow-up on particular stories that emerged in the first interview (e.g. “how do you feel about your experiences now that a few months have passed since you stopped treatment?”, “have you decided if/when to resume treatment?”).
Verbatim interview transcripts were analyzed by focusing on the content of treatment discontinuation stories ( what was told) with a view to understand and contextualize these stories in relation to the narratives and conditions that “delineate the boundaries of individual or collective agency, voice, identity, and reflexivity” ( Pitre et al., 2013 , p.119). This “storied space” ( Pitre et al., 2013 , p.120) includes: Canadian legislation, income and public versus private services, statistics of success, geography (e.g. how close was the nearest fertility clinic from where women lived), consumer culture in medicine, social norms around womanhood and motherhood. Guided by post-structural feminist theory, transcripts were read closely for the ways in which gendered narratives (e.g. that biological motherhood is natural for women and something all women should desire) were embedded within and shaped participants' tellings of their experiences of discontinuation and their interactions with partners and providers. In addition to multiple close readings of the transcripts, post-interview memos, transcript annotations, and feedback from the first author's advisory committee were used to develop and refine narrative themes that captured women's struggles and experiences related to fertility treatment discontinuation.

Section: 4. Findings

The women's narratives illustrated that leaving treatment was neither a clear nor easy process. At the time of study participation, some women grappled with the decision to leave or take a break from treatment, while others had left for good and were prioritizing other social identities and roles, such as aunt, godparent, friend, advocate and fertility educator. For some, there was an admitted sense of relief with stopping or pausing treatment, whereas others had difficulty making the decision to leave. More often than not their feelings about ending treatment were characterized by ambivalence. In many of the interviews, it was often difficult for the women to articulate when and whether they were done with treatment. Ending treatment was easier for those participants who had a previous illness that prepared them for the potential of infertility, who were supported by their partners to both pursue and end treatment, and who were previously open to pursuing adoption or the possibility of living without children. We categorize the women's stories of discontinuation into three narrative themes: (i) a growing desperation to be pregnant; (ii) confronting paternalistic medical expectations; and (iii) internalizing and resisting blame for treatment failures. In so doing, we interpret their ambivalence about ending treatment in relation to restrictive clinical narratives about women and their bodies and a hopefulness about the potential of ART.
Contrary to pronatalist assumptions, the women in this study did not enter treatment with a desperate need to be pregnant. Rather, women's stories demonstrated flexible, changing desires for family and motherhood prior to their involvement with ART. For most, there was no static, life-long plan for children. Relationships with parents, romantic partners, and general life circumstances contributed to their changing attitudes and intentions about motherhood. Two women described their earlier commitment to never have children, one of whom explored having her “tubes tied” (Brittany). Many of the women in this study described having casual attitudes about the potential outcome of treatment: “if it happens, it happens” (Heather). However, their stories revealed that their desperation for children grew as they progressed with fertility treatment, and often after several failed cycles. Their initial approach to treatment was a stark contrast to the frustration and disappointment women expressed in their stories about ending treatment, some of whom had been trying for years without success. Similar to other research on ART, none of the participants in this study anticipated that they would stay in treatment as long as they did.
While there were certainly stories of fertility providers being frank and up front with women about their low chances of success and lack of medical understanding as to why failures are happening, the increased urgency women felt to achieve pregnancy at all costs, was at least partially produced by explicit and implicit clinical pressures to continue treatment because there was a chance (hope) that it could eventually work. The explicit character of these clinical narratives was clear in the case of Erin, a queer woman who endured ten years of trying repeatedly with a mix of treatments (IUI, IVF with and without embryo donation, surrogacy) and gave birth to a stillborn child after IVF. The impact of the clinical imperative to achieve pregnancy on Erin's willingness to continue treatment, despite the negative effect this had on her mental wellbeing, is illustrated in her story about a clinical interaction in which she was questioning whether she should end treatment due to her worsening depression. When Erin asked one of the clinic nurses about the support offered by the clinic in terms of her mental health, the nurse was frank in explaining that her doctor would never tell her to stop treatment. Erin's story demonstrates how the technological imperative to get women pregnant is prioritized over her mental health and wellbeing, and highlights the dehumanizing potential of ART. Erin: The clinic, their attitude was like, just keep coming and eventually we'll get you pregnant. And maybe they were right. So I kept being like, okay, well, let's just keep going. You hardly ever see the doctor. The doctor comes in and he spends five minutes with you. It's a cattle call. They have their procedure. And once you've figured it out, it's fine. But it's funny when you see the fresh people coming in and they're confused. It's awful. You wait and you spend five minutes with him and he goes through, and then you go see a nurse who works out your protocol with you and that kind of thing. It was after seeing him and I remember just sitting in the room and just bawling, like sobbing. And I was like, ‘should I take a break? I'm starting to lose my mind’ and [the nurse] was like, ‘you know, the doctor is never going to tell you take a break.’ Interviewer: Why? Erin: Because he wants to get me pregnant I guess. Because I was like, ‘is it too much, the drugs and everything? Should I stop?’ And she was like, ‘well, that's up to you, but the doctor is never going to tell you to take a break’. My psychological well-being is not their concern. Their concern is to get me pregnant. - Erin
By drawing attention to the ways in which conversations about stopping treatment were not within the clinical purview, Erin's story further illustrates the context that informed her continued sense of hope that treatment could work, her willingness to try again, and ultimately, the difficulty she had stopping treatment for good. Driven by her desperation, and despite repeated failures, Erin went on to do four IVF embryo implantations and used a surrogate for one implantation using her partner's eggs, none of which resulted in a viable pregnancy. Ultimately, Erin's partner told her “I cannot see you like this anymore” and finally persuaded Erin to discontinue treatment. Erin suggested that her doctors were solely concerned with getting her pregnant, rather than her psychological well-being and thus, she felt unsupported to discontinue treatment and conflicted both because she felt she was led to believe ART would be successful and because she believed biological motherhood was what her body was supposed to do. This was a common theme throughout women's stories of decision-making around discontinuation. Many felt unsupported to discontinue because the main clinical focus was on pregnancy. For Erin, the physical, emotional, and psychological impacts of treatment were not worth continuing treatment for the potential of producing a child that she felt the clinic was offering over many years.
Four participants explicitly resisted the idea that women should do whatever it takes to have a child and that, if there was still hope, they should continue. In Wendy's story, she actively resists the clinical pressure she felt to continue treatment without a break. [Taking a break from fertility treatment] was really a decision that I felt like I was out on my own in terms of the medical community. I felt really great pressure from them about my age, primarily my age, that time stands still for no one. It was very much fear based and that I needed to continue because we had a failed cycle. My husband said ‘it's up to you, whatever you want to do, like you've got to deal with this emotionally yourself. So if you want to move forward with the second cycle I'm there. If you don't want to do that then I'm there, whatever, I want to support you.’ But the doctors were not like that at all. Even some of my friends were more like time is not on your side kind of thing. And I was really digging my heels in, like I am not doing that again without taking some time to figure out some other things. I was really, really devastated by the journey up until then. - Wendy
Wendy did eventually go on to continue treatment and conceive a child. But her explicit resistance to the pressure to continue treatment cycles in this moment was not an easy task. She felt overwhelmed by the treatment process and unsuccessful cycles and received very little support and guidance from her fertility providers when she expressed wanting to take a break from treatment for her mental health and wellbeing. It was her partner who provided the support she needed to step away temporarily. Pausing treatment was not a static or simple decision for Wendy. She felt stigmatized by her healthcare providers and some of her friends about taking a several-month break from treatment.
For all women in this study, there was a juxtaposition between their sense of relief when they stopped or paused treatment, with the guilt and shame over “giving up” on treatment (Erin) and the unknown future outcome if they would have continued with treatment; a direct consequence of persistent idioms of hope perpetuated in clinical ART environments. Robin frequently asked herself “did we make the right decision [to stop]?” even after 3 years since her last IUI procedure.
Medical paternalism was a regular feature in women's narrations of their clinical encounters and a constant source of their frustration. The force of this medical paternalism and its effects on one's sense of self-worth and struggle to maintain bodily autonomy was concisely articulated by Charlotte: If I could sum it up, I felt like it was my reproductive system but they were making choices for me. I had no power over my own body. I had no choices, I had no power, I felt powerless. And they were making choices for me, and that affected how I felt about myself and affected my future. That is the most degrading experience you could ever have. – Charlotte
This experience of relinquished power over one's body and treatment decision-making meant that it was difficult for women in this study to then assert their wishes to discontinue treatment or even discuss discontinuation at all (given that this was not within the clinical purview). Thus, when it came to make decisions about pausing or stopping treatment, women often described feeling frustration and confusion. They expressed that they did not feel adequately prepared to make the final choice to discontinue treatment, especially with little support or guidance from their healthcare providers who had been the main drivers of treatment protocols.
For some women, handing over control of their bodies and decision-making meant that they invested a lot of trust in their health professionals during an emotionally and physically difficult time, which was not always respected. Natalie, a woman in a same-sex relationship, told a story of her encounter with a doctor at her fertility clinic who was performing a vaginal ultrasound. Her doctor's insensitive comments about her body not “impressing” them illustrate clinical assumptions about female bodies as deficient. So, I went in at the beginning of the cycle for monitoring and one of my ovaries was still quite large and there was still a follicle or an egg in there, that shouldn't have been there at that point in my cycle. So, we actually cancelled the cycle to wait for that to pass. The next month, I went in at the start of the cycle for monitoring again and the same doctor was there. He was like, ‘well, you didn't really impress me last month, so hopefully you impress me this month.’ And, I just remember thinking, like, I'm not here to impress you. I'm sitting there on a table with nothing on from the waist down and he's about to do this vaginal ultrasound. And, when I get uncomfortable or in an awkward situation, my coping strategy is to make, sometimes, inappropriate jokes. So, I laid down on the table and I was like, ‘well, get ready to be impressed, there's going to be sparkles here.’ I just remember, he turned like 300 shades of red, the nurses started laughing, and my partner was there too, and she was laughing as well, she was like, ‘what are you doing?’ You know, I laughed about it at the time, but, really, that was not … Like, that felt really jerky of him to say. My reproductive system is not here to impress you. Just, his comment felt really not supportive at all. - Natalie
Natalie's use of humour as a form of resistance is telling in this example, as it draws attention not only to her doctor's insensitivity (“hopefully you impress me this month”), but also to the reductive assumptions about women's bodies that are embedded in the clinic imperative to “get women pregnant”, as well as the ways that these assumptions buttress the clinical view that treatment failure resides in the female body (not in the inefficacy of the technology). By calling out the paternalistic assumptions that structure this clinical encounter, Natalie's story is also suggestive of the potential for women to disrupt these communication patterns and thus the assumptions on which they are founded.
Stories of medical paternalism within the women's accounts sometimes extended beyond the treatment encounter to include situations that considered the welfare of the future child. This was the case for those who received donated genetic materials (egg or sperm), and for whom it was mandatory to attend a session conducted by the clinic's counsellor. These counselling sessions focused on how or what to tell a potential child about their conception. Despite the popularity of donor types of conception, this inherently problematizes a child that was conceived not with the genetic materials of the parents. This was especially troubling for LGBTQ + couples using ART since they are more likely to be using donated genetic materials, either egg or sperm, when using the fertility clinic to conceive. Beyond the implicit messaging that mandatory counselling sessions are sending, if not approached inclusively, they may perpetuate a heteronormatively focused view of family. For example, before receiving donor sperm, Natalie and her partner were required to attend one of the mandatory counselling sessions at her clinic. [The counsellor's] next question was, okay, so what are you going to do about male role models? I was just like, oh my gosh, we just talked about all the people in our families and you're automatically making an assumption that there's something lacking in our family, because we're not a heterosexual couple, and stuff like that. It was just really not okay. - Natalie
As a same-sex couple, Natalie was frustrated by the emphasis of the counsellor on how she and her partner would ensure that the future child had “male role models”. Despite Natalie discussing the several important male relationships in their lives (fathers, brothers, friends) earlier in the conversation, these were invalidated because they are not the traditional parental male figure in the heteronormative family configuration which was cause for concern or questioning by this particular counsellor.
The women's narratives consistently, yet variably, suggested that the etiology of blame for the failure of treatment to result in pregnancy was located within female physiology. As described earlier, pronatalist assumptions that equate womanhood with motherhood are bolstered by discourses in reproductive healthcare which characterize infertility as “failure” or physiological deficiency. These assumptions were reflected in the participant narratives as many of the women grappled with conflicting feelings toward their bodies and voiced their frustrations that their bodies were “not doing what [they were] supposed to do” (Brittany). In this sense, participants frequently internalized blame for fertility problems, even in cases where their problems conceiving were left undiagnosed or labelled as “unexplained infertility” and when their male partners experienced fertility issues. For some of the women, this internalized blame led to them being hyper-vigilant about the ways in which their own behaviours may have jeopardized treatment success. For example, after receiving a negative pregnancy test result, Josie focused on what she did wrong to cause the cycle failure: There was one of my IVFs where afterwards I felt okay, and we went and got food afterwards and then went home. I sat in a chair, with my legs up, and I didn't do anything wrong. Then when that IVF didn't work, I was like, ‘oh my god, it's because I didn't go straight home afterwards, like, I should have gone home, I should have done this, I should have done that’ … I really was surprised at how awful it was and how I felt like I was the biggest failure in the universe and that I'd done everything wrong and I'd ruined our life and everything like that. – Josie
At the time of her participation in the study, Josie was on a break from treatment and planned to return to IVF. Even though she paused treatment for mental health reasons, she still struggled with this temporary break because she had long-desired biological children and felt that her body, rather than the ART treatment, was failing.
The women's stories also revealed how their assumptions of responsibility for infertility were reinforced by their interactions with their treatment providers. For Jacky, her internalization of blame for treatment failures is reinforced by a clinical interaction in which, after she received devastating news that she was unlikely to conceive through IUI and would need IVF right away, her partner's sperm was praised for its quality and likened to an Olympic swimmer. This clinical interaction, which draws on the romance narrative of human reproduction ( Martin, 1991 ), heightened Jacky's feelings of physiological deficiency and female inferiority. That day when I was presented with that information was one of the worst days of my entire life. I can tell you without a doubt it was the day that I felt that my youth ended. It was horrible. I needed IVF right away. And even having IVF, it would be touch and go as to whether I would ever have a child. So, my boyfriend and I … oh, and his sperm is perfect. They were referring to him as Michael Phelps in front of me. So, that made me feel really good, that I was the deficient one and he was perfect. – Jacky
These narratives of internalized blame for treatment failure are the consequence of pronatalist ideologies and assumptions about female deficiency that both shape and are reinforced during clinical encounters. This internalized blame informed the ambiguity and ambivalence the women felt as they decided to pause or cease treatment. These expectations of motherhood and assumptions about women's deficient embodiment, in combination with clinic messages of biotechnological potentiality and hope, left women in conflicted, liminal positions ( Franklin, 1997 ; Throsby, 2004 ) and with moral dilemmas about whether, when, and how to discontinue treatment.
Women also resisted the internalization of blame for treatment failures on their bodies. Charlotte's story illustrates the frustration women felt being the focus of invasive, concentrated clinical efforts to “get” them pregnant, and the subsequent blame for failures that were placed on female physiology. Charlotte describes the focus of her providers on what her body was doing wrong, with no investigation into her husband's sperm: “It was male factor infertility, and I ended up doing IUI […] I had a lot of negative responses to medication, but they never investigated my husband. It was always investigating me, yet he was the primary issue” (Charlotte). As well as demonstrating resistance to assumptions of female deficiency by rejecting the clinical focus on her body as the primary source of their infertility, Charlotte's story highlights how women often do not feel heard by their fertility providers and how medical paternalism and control of treatment protocols can leave women frustrated and confused when navigating treatment and eventual discontinuation.

Section: 5. Discussion

Our critically-informed narrative analysis provides important insight into the stories of women who are rarely heard in medicalized spaces. Our analysis suggests that women experienced ambivalent feelings about discontinuing fertility treatment and that this ambivalence is shaped by a complex intersection of narratives that emphasize pronatalist cultural expectations of womanhood and motherhood, and the potentiality of ART to treat deficient female bodies within the paternalistic purview of medicine. The women's stories reveal the ways that these clinical and cultural narratives shaped their encounters with clinic staff and the difficulty they had in navigating the moral dilemmas that ensued as they considered when and how to discontinue treatment. By prioritizing the eventual possibility of technologically-mediated pregnancy, clinics risk the emotional, physical, and financial well-being of women.
Similar to Franklin (1997) , these stories highlight how instances of “failed cycles”, such as negative pregnancy tests, and miscarriages, were rarely used by the clinic to dissuade women from continuing treatment. Rather, participant narratives show how the potential for future ART success prompted sustained hopefulness in the face of failure and made it difficult for women to discontinue treatment. While Sandelowski (1987) argues that clinical messages of ambiguity during the treatment process may play a positive role in “maintaining hope and defending against despair” (p.73), the failure to responsibly manage hope during the treatment process (e.g. with clinical statements such as “there is no reason [treatment] shouldn't have worked”) sends conflicting messages to women.
In this regard, these findings further suggest that little has changed in terms of patient experiences over the four decades since ART became available in North America. Our findings resonate with those of other researchers who have examined the negative effects of ART on women. While specific experiences of ART vary by country and patient characteristics, such as income, gender, sexuality, and race, fertility treatment continues to be experienced as difficult to end ( Harwood, 2007 ), and as having negative effects including emotional distress, change in identity, and physical discomfort and frustration ( McCarthy, 2008 ; Peddie et al., 2005 ; Throsby, 2004 ). Despite proposed patient-centred interventions in fertility care ( Boivin et al., 2012 ; Cunningham and Cunningham, 2013 ; Dancet et al., 2011 ; Duthie et al., 2017 ), our findings suggest that fertility treatment continues to be a disempowering experience for women, and that this is shaped by strong pronatalist narratives throughout the treatment process and clinical imperatives that persistently prioritize biotechnological success (pregnancy as an end goal) over the wellbeing of women. Importantly, these findings also demonstrate the multitude of ways that women resist these narratives in their clinical encounters. Such resistance was evident, for example, in their stories of pushing back against reductive comments about their bodies during clinical interactions (Natalie) and taking a break from treatment despite clinical recommendations otherwise (Wendy).
The way in which women navigated their ambivalence about discontinuing treatment with little support from clinic staff raises questions about the clinical responsibility to support women for whom ART is repeatedly unsuccessful. Our findings resonate with international clinical research that emphasizes the importance of patient-centred approaches to support women and couples during fertility treatment ( Dancet et al., 2011 ; Pedro et al., 2013 ) and that suggests that end-of-treatment counselling is key to helping patients with the emotional transition of ending treatment, especially with the feelings of loss that accompany the realization that their goals of having a child may not happen ( Klock, 2015 ; Leone et al., 2017 ). We suggest that fertility providers reflect on the potentially harmful language about womanhood and unsuccessful treatment, prioritize reflexive and empathetic aspects of care, and promote and destigmatize pausing or stopping treatment as an acceptable treatment option. To this end, discussions about discontinuing treatment should become a normal component of treatment protocols and patient-provider conversations so that women feel better supported to end treatment when they believe it is financially, emotionally, and physically beneficial for them to do so.
Though these findings emerged in the context of fertility treatment, they may have implications for other areas of healthcare where medical paternalism and discourses of technological potential may shape patient-provider relationships and affect patient autonomy and decision-making about the discontinuation of medical treatment, such as “alternative” cancer treatments ( Verhoef and White, 2002 ) and the transition to palliative, end-of-life care ( Back et al., 2008 ; Kasman, 2004 ; Winkler et al., 2009 ). As well, research on cancer treatment discontinuation may provide useful insights for fertility care providers about the importance of helping patients reflect on and structure treatment endings ( Wilson et al., 2007 ).
Future research should explore the experiences of a diversity of treatment users and their interactions with the fertility system, the unique cultural norms they confront and embody, including BIPOC women and men, and LGBTQ + individuals and couples. Qualitative research on fertility provider perspectives would provide a more fulsome picture of the narratives and discourses that shape clinic encounters and clinicians’ perspectives of treatment success and failure, and would shed further light on the struggles and difficulties patients encounter with fertility treatment and the supports needed to integrate treatment discontinuation meaningfully into fertility care.
It is almost 30 years ago that the Royal Commission on Reproductive Technologies recommended that we “proceed with care” ( Minister of Government Services Canada, 1993 ). Thus, it is time that critical social science research and perspectives on ART be incorporated into policymaking and clinical practice in order to ethically and adequately support women and couples who utilize ART.

Section: Credit author statement

Andrea Carson: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Writing- Original draft preparation. Fiona Webster: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Supervision, Writing- Original draft preparation. Jessica Polzer: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing- Original draft preparation. Sandra Bamford: Conceptualization, Formal Analysis, Writing- Reviewing and Editing.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

No conflicts of interest to declare.
