Title: Fulfilling food practices: Applying the capability approach to ethnographic research in the Northern Netherlands


Abstract: Abstract

Often, food practices are evaluated in terms of their healthiness or lack thereof, but fulfilling food practices based on other values and influenced by family members’ capabilities are overlooked. This study analyses food practices in families with low socio-economic status, and aims to explain how family households come to prioritise one food practice over another. We conducted an ethnographic study using the capability approach as an analytical framework. In-depth interviews and observations concerning food patterns and health-related choices with family members from three generations were analysed.
Two dimensions of fulfilling food practices which emerged from our study are having a healthy as well as harmonious meal. The families under study tended to prioritise having harmonious meals over having healthy meals, despite the attempts by mothers to serve healthy meals. This choice can be understood from the perspective of capabilities, such as being able to enjoy meals, eating what everybody else eats in the region, avoiding conflicts, creating good relationships with children and serving and organising meals with ease. Within the cultural environment, there prevailed a tendency not to care too much about nutritional outcomes, which also supported the preference for harmonious over healthy meals. In the decision about whether to have a healthy or a harmonious meal, children's agency often outweighed the voices of parents and grandparents.
The capability approach helped unravel the complexity of family food practices and the role of intergenerational family dynamics in a setting of low socio-economic status. Acknowledging the multi-dimensional nature of food practices, and including dimensions beyond the food domain, such as harmony at the dinner table, contribute to a better understanding of this complexity. It also helps to shed new light on opportunity deprivation in households, for example in relation to agency, which should be accounted for in health interventions.

Section: 1. Introduction

How we conceptualise health influences the design of health research, and ultimately shapes the programming of interventions ( Boeuf, 2019 ). Our beliefs about what constitutes healthy food have been dominated by the biomedical domain, and consequently, interventions have focused on improving dietary habits. However, people engage in different discourses of healthy eating that include, but are not restricted to the mainstream, biomedical domain ( Ristovski-Slijepcevic et al., 2008 ). While the discourse on biomedical healthy eating focuses on risk, what matters for people is meanings and experiences ( Horstman 2010 ; Quick et al., 2015 ). Therefore, to build meaningful interventions, we should start with what “people value and have reason to value” ( Alkire, 2005 , p. 120). This will help take into account people's contextual considerations behind fulfilling food practices. Currently, community interventions lack such evaluations of (deeper-level) social, psychological, and pragmatic concerns, including the role of the family, attitudes, and perceptions relating to health behaviour ( Everson-Hock et al., 2013 , p. 270; Verheijden and Kok, 2005 ).
People from low socio-economic classes have been particularly hard to reach in behavioural change interventions ( Michie et al., 2009 ; Bessems et al., 2020 ). Several scholars have contributed to our understanding of the food practices of low-income families and explained attitudes of low-income families towards food. For example, Redman (2019) studied the impact of class on food practices using Bourdieu's concepts of class fractions and cultural habitus ( Bourdieu, 1979 ). She focused on time spent preparing and eating food, food item types, and cooking skills; and showed that the food practices of low-income families should not be considered to be homogeneous or to reflect bad taste, but should instead be acknowledged as heterogeneous and built in a context of necessity. Daniel (2020) applied an economist/nutritionist lens for her study on the unhealthy food practices of a low-income population in Boston. She concluded that underlying their children's poor dietary habits was parents' worry about having to throw food away. Thus, they were giving in to their children's wishes for unhealthy foods, instead of encouraging them to try less preferred but healthy foods. Laraia et al. (2017) studied unhealthy food choices as a bio-behavioural response to livelihood insecurities, observing that poor dietary practices can be understood as a biological response to stress. From these examples, we learn that food choices are made in the complex contexts of people's daily lives, and that families of low socio-economic status prioritise their food practices according to responses to stress, family life complexities, and income constraints.
By applying a multi-dimensional approach, our study makes a contribution to this literature. Previous research on this topic has shown that food practices should be approached not from one dimension, but from the complexity of dimensions ( Siniscalchi and Harper, 2019 ; Kendall and Brennan, 2016 ). We developed a framework for a theory-based ethnography based on Sen's capability approach and cultural schema theory Visser et al., 2016 to allow for a multi-dimensional and emic understanding of food practices from an intergenerational perspective. Using this framework, we aim to unpack the meanings attributed to food practices and to identify the capabilities at the individual as well as at the family level that contribute to achieving fulfilling food practices. This approach will help us better understand the real opportunities of each of the family members in poor households, and how they are able to use such opportunities in their interaction with the wider environment.
In our study, we explicitly take into account the family household using a three-generation approach. Earlier studies have shown that family life has a major impact on the decisions made about food practices ( Ferrer et al., 2014 ; Harris, 2020 ). The interaction between family members can elucidate how the individual and the family interact and shape family food practices. Kime (2011) and Parikh et al. (2007) underscore the importance of understanding the meanings and the experiences of all family members involved in a given household, including the children, parents, and grandparents. Biological, genetic traits are transferred from one generation to another. Equally, however, food norms, rituals, and practices are passed on over generations ( Warin et al., 2016 ; Vogel and Mol, 2014 ). It is in the “messiness” of the family context that food practices are developed; and in many contexts, the homes of grandparents still play a role in the (food) care patterns of households ( Jongenelis et al., 2019 ; Eli et al., 2016 ). Thus, the relationship between the three generations is extremely important in public health research. Nonetheless, many public health studies have focused on one generation only ( Farrow, 2014 ; Gruber and Haldeman, 2009 ). A common assumption is that parents use their parental power to determine the food practices and health behaviour of the family, while the influence of the children and the grandparents remains undervalued ( Farrow, 2014 ; O'Connell and Brannen, 2014 ).

Section: 2. Conceptual framework

The capability approach makes explicit the relative importance of the multiple dimensions of well-being ( Sen, 1999 ), while the cultural schema theory provides a deeper understanding of these dimensions ( D'Andrade, 1981 ). Our conceptual model has been introduced elsewhere ( Visser et al., 2016 ). Since the analysis in this paper is shaped by the concepts of the capability approach, we will briefly present its constitutive elements here. Central to the capability approach is the notion that people's opportunities and freedom underlie the extent to which they can live the life they value. The capability approach ( Fig. 1 ) is built on three main concepts: 1) functionings (the valued and achieved doings or beings of an individual), 2) capabilities (or opportunities), and 3) agency (or the ability to pursue one's goals). Download: Download high-res image (255KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Concepts of the capability approach ( Chiappero-Martinetti and Venkatapuram, 2014 ).
In the context of food practices, the concept “valued functionings” can be translated as “fulfilling food practices”. What is fulfilling depends on what people value, and is thus embedded in their social and cultural reality, and it is multi-dimensional. People's fulfilling food practices or functionings can originate from a desire to act in a certain way (for example, by eating healthy meals) or a desire to achieve a certain state (for example, being well-nourished). In the capability language, these desires translate into doings and beings. People's real opportunities to live the life they have reason to value are central to the capability approach ( Gasper, 2007 ). Thus, applying this approach can uncover why some people achieve their fulfilling food practices, while others do not or cannot achieve theirs.
Capabilities are shaped by individual endowments and conversion factors. These endowments and resources either enable or disable a transformation into capabilities. In family households, all individual resources (e.g., schooling of the individual family members) can contribute to the capabilities of the household ( Biggeri and Karkara, 2014 ). Sen has criticized resource-based theories, like those from Rawls (2009) and Dworkin (1981) , for failing to pay attention to contextual influences, such as social and environmental factors ( Pierik and Robeyns, 2007 ). In contrast, Sen's capability approach includes social and environmental circumstances as distinct elements that must be taken into account in order to understand people's realities ( Khan, 2011 ), which according to Sen are the conversion factors. For example, if people lack access to shops, or if the government or the dominant societal culture imposes a social or legal norm on them, people can find it much more difficult or even impossible to create opportunities that would enable them to achieve a fulfilling food practice. This points towards the concept of agency, or the ability to pursue one's goals, as the third concept of the capability approach.
A person's agency or lack thereof influences the extent to which people have real opportunities to achieve their valued outcomes ( Crocker and Robeyns, 2009 ; Alkire, 2005 ). Agency refers to people's ability to scrutinise critically their options, decide for themselves, and act to realise their purposes ( Crocker, 2008 , p. 221). Crocker (2008) , in line with Cortina (2002) , has shown that capabilities are relevant not only because they enable a person to live a fulfilling life, but also because they enable her or him to exercise agency. Understanding issues of agency within the context of three generations of family will provide us with insights into how priorities between the capabilities of several family members can result in food patterns that are not necessarily valued by each of the members.
In this paper, we present findings from empirical data while focusing on the multi-dimensionality of food practices using an emic perspective, and operationalising the conceptual framework introduced earlier ( Visser et al., 2016 ).

Section: 3. Methodology

We applied an ethnographic approach to establish good rapport with research participants, and to gain an understanding of the context in which food practices were developed ( Peterson and Pike, 2002 ; Morey and Luthans, 1984 ).
To contextualise the findings of our ethnographic research, we present background information on Dutch food guidelines and practices. In the Netherlands, food guidelines are communicated to people as the “disk-of-five”, which includes five food groups (1. Drinks; 2. Vegetables and Fruits; 3. Spreads and Cooking Fats ; 4. Dairy, Meat, Fish and Eggs; and 5. Bread, Grain Potatoes). These guidelines indicate that eating more or fewer products from these groups can increase or reduce the risk of certain health outcomes ( Brink et al., 2017 ).
A report by the Dutch National Institute for Public Health and Environment ( Geurts et al., 2016 ) described the typical food intake by the Dutch as follows: “Dutch consumers eat on average 1 kilo of foods and drink 2 L of beverages daily, divided into breakfast, lunch and dinner, and 4 in-between moments. Per person, we consume an average of about 350 g of milk, 100 g of meat (products), 125 g of vegetables and 125 g of fruit and nuts per day.” In addition, the report recognised that food choices are based primarily on values, and to a lesser extent on scientific findings: “Consumers make most food decisions based on routine and habit. Knowledge and motivation play a relatively minor role in food choice. When safety, health and sustainability play a role in food choices, it is the value as perceived by the consumer that is considered. This is not always in line with the scientific consensus. Besides habits, knowledge and motivation, the social and physical environments play a role. The ubiquitous and ever-present food supply in the immediate environment strongly influences the food choices.”
Although most families in the Netherlands are familiar with the food guidelines ( van der Vossen and Hoeymans, 2016 ), other motivations underlie how families prioritise food practices.
We studied the food practices of families in the eastern part of the province of Groningen. This area is known for the high level of overweight among adults and children. The socio-economic status of the average family is low, and interventions to reduce the prevalence of overweight in the population have been unsuccessful ( Mead et al., 2017 ; Luten et al., 2013 ). Within this region, we selected the municipality of Oldambt as the study site for our ethnography of family food practices, because it is characterised by high levels of adult (61.5%) and childhood (18.8%) obesity (GGD Groningen, 2013 ). In addition, Oldambt has a high percentage of families who live under deprived circumstances, as indicated by: (1) its overall high ranking in Kids Count ( Steketee et al., 2014 ), i.e., 22nd out of 431 municipalities (first place being the municipality with the worst score in the Netherlands); (2) its high percentage (71.8%) of children living in a household receiving social welfare ( Steketee et al., 2014 ); and (3) its poor ranking in terms of its average (standardised) household income (bottom 10 in the Netherlands) ( Statistics Netherlands, 2014 ).
The municipality of Oldambt has a total population of 38,000 inhabitants. It consists of one (small) city (Winschoten, 18,500 inhabitants) and around 20 villages and hamlets. Oldambt has been known and is still known for its large farms, agricultural landscape , clay soil, and expansive views ( Schroor and Meijering, 2007 ). The land, mostly used for agriculture (79.4%), generally consists of arable land and meadows in the older polders ( Statistics Netherlands, 2014 ). It has been suggested that farming in the region has exerted a strong influence on the current mentality and cultural identity of the population of Oldambt ( Westerman, 2011 ). From the 19th century onwards, the wealth of farmers increased and their farms grew bigger. Starting in 1890, the Oldambt farmers reduced the salaries of their workers. The lowering of workers’ salaries and the increasing mechanisation of agricultural production caused tensions between workers and farmers to grow. The strike of 1929 represented the largest confrontation between the farmers and the workers of Oldambt in the history of the municipality, and the region became known for its rebellious workers and ongoing class tensions. While workers lost their employment at these farms, some of the farmers turned their farms into modern family farms or shifted their focus to other agricultural activities such as cattle breeding , whereas other farmers abandoned the agricultural sector altogether ( Botke, 2002 ). Large segments of the current population in Oldambt still identify with the working class and are resistant to outside interference, an aspect which also feeds into their political choices.
To gain a deeper understanding of the food practices of the participant families, the principal investigator (PI) lived in a rural village in the municipality of Oldambt for a period of six months. She learned the local dialect and interacted with families on a daily basis. Her first contact with the community in the field was established through gatekeepers. For example, gatekeepers facilitated the involvement of the PI in voluntary work: she was active in a local food bank, local youth activities (including cooking workshops for low-income families), and a local low-income mothers' group. Through these activities, she became acquainted with low-income families. During these voluntary activities, the PI was able to introduce the research, and families were recruited to voluntarily participate in the study. These families would in turn suggest other families who might like to join the study. Families could join the study if they had children in the 8–12 age group and had been living in the region for more than 5 years. We decided to focus on this age group because the children would be young enough to consume their meals at home; but also old enough to participate in the research, understand the topic of food choice, and play an increasing role in their family's food practices. Grandparents were included if the children in the family ate at their grandparents'homes more than once a week. While the families were not compensated financially, they did receive copies of the photos the children took for the photo-elicitation interviews. The study sample consisted of 13 families, including six families in which the grandparents also participated. Table 1 shows the characteristics of these families. Table 1 . Characteristics of family households. Name (pseudonym) Composition of the core household Age parent(s) and children Income level (relative to national income) Family Adema Married, 2 children Grandmother: aged 66 Low income (under 25.000 euros) Interviewed: Father: aged 36 Anna (grandmother) Mother: aged 34 Ellen (mother) Children: aged 11 and 14 Marieke (daughter) Family Bakker Divorced, 2 children Grandmother: aged 70 Low income (under 15.000 euros) Interviewed: Mother: aged 32 Anja (grandmother) Children: aged 6 and 8 Linda (mother) Ricardo (son) Family Foekema Divorced, 2 children Mother: aged 37 Low income (under 15.000 euros) Interviewed: Children: aged 8 and 12 Bianca (mother) Brian & Michael (sons) Family De Groot Married, 1 child Father: aged 55 Low income (under 15.000 euros) Interviewed: Mother: aged 50 Yanna (mother) Child: aged 12 Chantal (daughter) Family Havinga Married, 2 children Father: aged 49 Low income (under 15.000 euros) Interviewed: Mother: aged 49 Judith (mother) Children: aged 9 and 14 Mark (son) Family Hofman Divorced, 2 children Mother: aged 32 Low income (under 15.000 euros) Interviewed: Children: aged 5 and 9 Lilian (mother) Pieter (son) Family Kloosterhuis Married, 2 children Father: aged 41 Average income Interviewed: Mother: aged 40 (30.000 euros) Gea (mother) Children: aged 10 and 12 Kelvin & Denise (son and daughter) Family Lukkien Married, 2 children Grandmother: aged 64 Low income (under 15.000 euros) Interviewed: Father: aged 34 Anita (grandmother) Mother: aged 33 Harm & Dorien (parents) Children: aged 11 and 14 Bouke (son) Family Niewold Married, 3 children Father: aged 38 Low income (under 10.000 euros) Interviewed: Mother: aged 31 Marie (mother) Children: aged 11, 9, and 8 Aarob, Erben & Cynthia (sons & daughter) Family Oosterhuis Married, 3 children Grandmother: aged 65 Average income (30.000 euros) Interviewed: Father: aged 54 Erna (grandmother) Mother: aged 41 Dennis & Francisca (parents) Children: aged 11, 13, and 15 Priscilla (daughter) Family Rubingh Married, 2 children Grandmother: aged 68 Low income (under 15.000 euros) Interviewed: Father: aged 42 Roelfien (grandmother) Mother: aged 40 Agina & Tammo (parents) Children: aged 11 and 15 Wesley & Stefan (sons) Family van der Vaart Divorced with new partner, 3 children Grandmother: aged 67 Low income (under 25.000 euros) Interviewed: Father: aged 39 Rika (grandmother) Stepmother: aged 37 Wobbe & Janka (parents) Children: aged 9 and 11 Jarno & Annelie (son and daughter) Family Westra Married, 1 child Father: 46 Low income (under 15.000 euros) Interviewed: Mother: aged 44 Patricia (mother) Child: aged 10 Dewi (daughter)
Ethnography is a methodology used to understand the world as experienced and understood by people in their everyday lives ( Crang and Cook, 2007 ). It often builds on participant observations and (formal and informal) interviews about practices of daily life. In our research, we used a field diary to record field observations and to highlight the important topics and findings that emerged during the fieldwork. Since the field diary also provides insight into the research process of the researcher and serves as an audit trail of the researcher's experiences ( O'Reilly, 2009 ), it contributes to the scientific rigour of the research. The field observations helped to contextualise the social and cultural setting of the research, as described by Hennink et al. (2011) . The PI examined (silent) norms and values regarding food and food practices by engaging in food-related activities, such as shopping in the supermarket, eating with the households and families, and joining in community festivities.
The researchers developed interview methods to serve specific groups in the participating sample. Photo-elicitation interviews were designed specifically for the children in the study. The photo-elicitation interviews served as the introductory activity for the 13 participating families. Children were each given a disposable camera, and they were in charge of that camera for a week. They were asked to take photos of products, settings, or items they associated with food. In the interviews that followed, participants were asked to discuss the photos while covering the following topics: description of and motivations for taking the pictures; feelings associated with the pictures; food practice processes (if possible, detailed in pictures), including ideas for meals, food purchases, and food preparation; habits related to food; different food environments; the healthiness or unhealthiness of the items, settings, and products in the photos; and experiences with food-related health problems. We conducted and recorded 16 photo-elicitation interviews. Siblings were interviewed separately, with the exception of two families in which they were interviewed together.
In-depth interviews were conducted with parents and grandparents. These interviews started with a description of the family's meals on a weekday and on a weekend day. Other topics covered in the in-depth interviews included food practice processes, including ideas for meals, food purchases, and food preparation; childrearing practices related to food (the participant's current and own childhood practices); different food settings; food and knowledge; food norms and habits; the roles of family members; the roles of the community and the local setting; barriers to fulfilling food practices; food and health; and policy and interventions. We conducted and recorded 22 in-depth interviews with the participant parents and grandparents. Spouses were interviewed separately, with the exception of one family in which the parents were interviewed together. The interviews took place between October 2012 and April 2013.
All participants gave permission for the interviews and the recording of the interviews, based on the ethical guidelines of confidentiality (use of pseudonyms), minimisation of harm, and attention to power relations between researcher and participants ( O'Reilly, 2009 ). We adhered to these guidelines by anonymising the names of the participants and not disclosing other private information in an identifiable manner. In cases in which the participants were recruited through the gatekeepers, informed consent was obtained from the gatekeepers as well as from the participants. The parents as well as the children themselves were asked for their informed consent before the interviews with the children took place. The research was approved by the research ethical committee of the Faculty of Spatial Sciences, University of Groningen.
The interview data and original field notes were transcribed verbatim and analysed with the software package Atlas Ti. ( Smit, 2002 ). The photos of the photo-elicitation interviews were digitalised. The data were initially stored on the PI's personal computer, anonymised, and subsequently uploaded on a protected shared drive, in accordance with the European General Data Protection Regulation guidelines.
The interviews and the field diary were coded using a thematic analysis ( Vaismoradi et al., 2013 ). Inductive and deductive codes were developed, categorised, and analysed through a two-stage coding process. The first stage of coding was both inductive (including in vivo) and deductive (based on the themes in the interviews and theoretical notions) and resulted in 451 codes. Examples of inductive codes are: differences weekday-weekend day: vegetables; differences parents-grandparents: responsibility; endowments: physical condition; and “different than at home” (in vivo). In the second stage, the PI categorised the codes and grouped them into meaningful categories (31 categorical codes and 10 thematic codes). The thematic codes were: valued food practices, food-related attitudes and norms, intergenerational roles, limitations and freedoms in the home, limitations and freedoms in context, perceived capabilities, food and health, food practices, differences setting, and food products.

Section: 4. Findings

The participants in this study contribute towards an intergenerational ensemble of food practices. Our findings show the complexity of the food practices among three generations that emerge from the personal and socio-cultural factors that enable these families to live a good life.
The families in our study indicated that they believed that their food pattern is typical of the Netherlands. The children and the parents talked about breakfast, lunch, and dinner as the three main meals over the course of the day. However, they also distinguished “other food moments' in between those main meals, including in the morning around 10 o'clock (coffee moment), in the afternoon around 3 o'clock (when the children got out of school), and in the evenings after dinner (an extra snack or small meal). The families indicated that their daily food pattern was monotonous, consisting of the same meal pattern and the same time pattern, although almost all family members reported that the pattern on weekdays differed from the pattern on weekends. The differences between the patterns on weekdays and on weekends were related to convenience (more relaxed meal settings, less cooking), structure (less punctual), and consumption of vegetables (fewer or different vegetables).
To provide an example, we provide descriptions of a regular daily meal made by a daughter, a mother, and a grandmother of the De Groot family. Independently of each other, they all described the same dish:
Chantal ( child ): Other than that we eat the common dishes, such as stamppot boerenkool. 1 That is what we normally eat around here [in this region].
Judith ( mother ): [And why do you eat stamppot boerenkool at least once a week?] I don't know. All four of us enjoy that dish and we always did. It suits us and the region. And then you stick to it.
Anna ( grandmother ): Here [in this region] you eat more potatoes and more to the south they eat more pastas, those kinds of things. The [people in the] countryside here generally like potatoes more and the mashed potato dishes.
These comments made by members of the De Groot family clearly demonstrate that food practices are embedded in the socio-cultural environment. The comments by the grandmother, the mother, and the daughter show how the region and its local dishes reflect the family's identity and shape their food patterns. Anna even claimed that the family's food patterns set them apart from families in other parts of the country. The cultural rooting of a dish such as stamppot boerenkool also reflects a level of harmonisation across the generations; as Judith's comment indicates, all of the generations felt happy when they ate such a dish.
Thus, eating local dishes can contribute to having fulfilling food practices. For children and for their parents and grandparents, engaging in "common" food practices seems to fulfil a desire to feel united as a family, and as a community.
Eating ordinary, traditional food is one of the dimensions of fulfilling food practices we present in Fig. 2 . Fig. 2 displays all the dimensions of families' fulfilling food practices that emerged from the interviews with the participants. The balloons present the multiple dimensions of food practices, and the sizes and the order of the balloons in the figure indicate how the family members prioritised these valued food practices. The food practices are categorised into two interlinked domains: the food domain (upper level in the figure) and the social domain (lower level in the figure). Download: Download high-res image (269KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Multidimensionality of food practices.
The figure illustrates the multidimensionality of fulfilling food practices. It highlights what is being valued by the various family members. For example, in the food domain, they frequently prioritised tasty and ordinary food over healthy food, which implies that the social and cultural aspects of foods are valued highly in relation to food practices. In the social domain, having a harmonious meal, having happy children at the table, and being happy as a caregiver emerged repeatedly as valued food practices. In our study setting, in general the children prioritised tasty food; the fathers prioritised tasty and harmonious food; the mothers prioritised harmonious and healthy food; and the grandparents often prioritised traditional, tasty, and healthy food. Most of the participants of all three generations agreed that they tended to prioritise having a harmonious meal over having a healthy (nutritious) meal. For example, Lilian, a mother of two children, commented:
Lilian (mother) : I would rather have a nice and peaceful meal than having to force them to eat everything that is healthy. They eat their potatoes with some gravy and meat; I am happy with that.
Based on the families’ accounts, healthy and harmonious food practices emerged as two important fulfilling food practices. In this paper, we analyse the capabilities to achieve these two dimensions of fulfilling food practices, since these are most mentioned in relation to prioritising food practices. In the following section, we will show why the families felt more capable of achieving a harmonious meal over a healthy meal, while pointing out individual capabilities and their enablers and disablers.
Most of the parents defined fulfilling food practices as those that helped them build good relationships with their children, while also ensuring that their children grew well and stayed healthy. Thus having a harmonious meal and having a healthy meal were cited by the parents as valued food practices. While some of the parents said they saw the process of prioritising these food practices as complicated, others viewed this process as very straightforward. The grandparents reported experiencing the same struggles, but added that they felt a different level of responsibility for their grandchildren's health.
When discussions moved away from the basic need to eat for survival, they often shifted towards the desire to achieve healthy food practices. Some of the families indicated that they perceived a healthy food pattern as guiding their food item choices. When families spoke about healthy food, they often referred to the ‘disk of five’ and common sense as their guideline for achieving healthy food practices.
Wobbe (father) : Knowledge about healthy food? Well ehm, what you see and hear, from your family, and the disk of five … we use that for ourselves, not so much for our children. We eat ‘brown’ bread and we use wholegrain flour for pancakes and also whole grain for pasta. But I notice the girls [daugthers] eat white bread and snack a lot. You have to keep a close eye on them, especially when you put unhealthy food on the table.
In general, the parents acknowledged that giving their children healthy food is important, because it is one way of contributing to their healthy upbringing, and they acknowledged that it takes time and effort to get children to eat healthily.
From a mothers' group (Roos) : And then my daughter asked: ‘Mommy, why do we have these small pieces with the potatoes?’ And then I said: ‘Well those are vegetables and they are healthy. That's why mommy puts them with the potatoes.’ She responded: ‘But I do not like those, can't you make it without them?’ I said: ‘No, those are veggies, you will grow big and healthy if you eat them.’
During a mothers' group meeting, the mothers shared their strategies for ensuring that their children ate vegetables. Roos was determined to help her child eat vegetables. Among this group of mothers, she demonstrated one of the highest levels of persistence in reaching her goal of serving her family healthy meals. Through her continuous efforts to point out the value of healthy food, she hoped to educate her daughter about nutrition . However, her daughter indicated that the healthiness of food was not her main priority. Other children acknowledged the importance of eating healthy food, although most said it did not drive their food practices. They often cited other values of food practices, such as “eating tasty food”.
Ricardo ( child ): I think my mom does pay attention, that she thinks we should eat fruit and vegetables. But I don't like it.
In this statement, Ricardo shows that he was aware of the food values his mother was promoting, but indicates that his priorities lay elsewhere, and did not include eating fruits and vegetables. In Ricardo's family, eating healthy food was defined as eating fruit and vegetables. In reference to healthy food, the children in this study used terms such as “have to”, “fruits, vegetables”, “not fun”, “energy”, and “adults”; whereas in reference to unhealthy food, the children used terms such as “allowed to have”, “fun”, “tasty”; and “children”. Thus, the children linked more negative terms to healthy meals, and more positive terms to other products and meals. The search for ways to make having a meal a more positive and harmonious experience convinced parents that having harmonious meals was a fulfilling food practice.
The participant family members indicated that they saw having harmonious meals as the most important fulfilling food practice in the social domain. In this study, harmonious meals are meals that are referred to as congenial, agreeable [in Dutch: gezellig], no fuss, quiet meals. The mothers reported that they wanted their children to be quiet (i.e. not cause a fuss) and satisfied at the dinner table. Both the parents and the grandparents said that they were often short on time and were busy. Thus, members of all three generations indicated that they appreciated having meals in which there were no fights between family members at the table, and in which the adults could enjoy some peace.
Marie (mother) : They or their friends always lift the lid from the pan when they come home from school and you see their faces , and you know: ‘This is not good!’ […] I have had enough of it! I cook what THEY like!
Marie showed that she tried to create harmony and quiet at the table by aligning her cooking with the preferences of her children. She reported that the facial expressions of her children when they lifted the lid of the pan motivated her to follow their preference and cook something different in order to have a harmonious meal. Because her husband worked nights, Marie often had to prepare dinner alone. She indicated that this situation has made her value having harmonious meals even more, adding that she was very frustrated that her children were much more enthusiastic about her husband's cooking than her own. The children confirmed their enthusiasm for their father's cooking in their interviews. Dewi, an only child, also expressed enthusiasm for her parents' cooking, saying that they created nice meals by cooking her favourite dishes.
Dewi (child): We often eat what I like. When everybody likes different things, which is the case in my friends' house, they always have to fight at the table. And then their mother decides what they eat. I like that we always have relaxed meals, because we eat the things we like and it's easy-going at the table.
Dewi reported that she observed differences in the level of harmony at meal times between households. She acknowledged that it was easier for her to enjoy a harmonious meal, because she did not have to compete with the preferences of siblings. She added that she also believed that her parents were happy with having a congenial atmosphere during meals.
Anita ( grandmother ) is happiest when the children eat their food agreeably: My granddaughter always eats the potatoes and my grandson eats the meat, they are happy and I am happy, because we do not have to fuss about things.
Most of the mothers and grandmothers reported a desire to create a harmonious environment in which the preferences of the children were at the forefront. Previous studies have found a similar desire among mothers to have a smooth family life ( Pettigrew and Pescud, 2013 ; Devine et al., 2006 ). Not having to argue about meals can help parents balance the many other challenges they face in their lives. Several of the parents in our study indicated that they did not want to make things even more difficult. The children reported that harmonious meals occurred in two circumstances namely, situations in which they were required to follow their parents’ instructions not to fuss about the meal; and situations in which they used the achievement of a harmonious meal to get what they wanted.
Having a harmonious meal does not necessarily mean that the meal is not healthy. While the parents and grandparents reported that a harmonious meal was often achieved when they did not serve vegetables, they also said that it could be achieved by choosing vegetables that the children liked. In general, a harmonious meal was defined as a meal that did not involve force, in which the children ate larger portions of potatoes and meat, but perhaps not vegetables.
In conclusion, family members must negotiate fulfilling food practices. Having a harmonious meal could be a compromise that was reached at the cost of a healthy meal. For some families in this study, this trade-off was in line with their valued food practices; while for other families, it conflicted with the valued food practices of one or more of the family members (usually the mother). In the following section, we will briefly discuss the role of individual and family endowments in achieving fulfilling food practices, and then explore in more depth how food practices are negotiated between family members, and between the family household and the broader social and cultural environment.
We have identified the endowments that underlie the capabilities to ensure a healthy meal or a harmonious meal. Among the endowments the participants mentioned are financial resources, as well as health issues and access to knowledge. Financial constraints were mentioned most often in relation to developing valued food practices, but only by the parents in the study. Their children often did not consider financial resources in their food practices.
Bianca (mother): Everyone says you need to eat fruit twice a day, you hear that on television, but I think fruits are very expensive. This week I bought some apples, because I know it is good for Michael. For his diet, apples are better than bananas and he especially likes red apples. But I almost never buy fruit.
Michael, who is overweight, is one of Bianca's two sons. To manage his diet, Bianca had to balance a desire to help him with the cost of buying healthy food. Whenever she bought food, she always kept her son's preferences in mind. Since many of the families felt that buying healthy food was beyond their means, they placed more value on achieving harmonious meals instead. Bianca explained how these trade-offs were made in her household.
Bianca: Because my boys almost never eat their vegetables, I focus my expenditure on potatoes and cheap meat and buy some vegetables they like. Otherwise I can just throw it away. I often prepare potatoes and Brian and Michael will eat those, with some gravy on top. I always say: ‘At least eat your meat and three spoons of your potatoes.’
According to Bianca, financial constraints led her to shift her focus towards products that help the family have a harmonious meal, despite Michael's weight problem and the need for a healthy diet. Daniel (2020) concluded that financial constraints are the reason why low-income families do not insist on or make frequent attempts to persuade their children to eat vegetables, because they cannot afford to throw food away, as Bianca also reported. Other health issues, such as allergies (e.g., allergies to certain fruits or milk products), could also be a barrier to eating healthy products. Moreover, mental health problems could be another barrier to cooking a healthy meal and having a harmonious meal. The parents or grandparents who reported feeling depressed or anxious also indicated that they were less capable of serving a harmonious meal for their family, since they were not able to fulfil their (grand)children's wishes, or, in some cases, to cook any meals at all.
Bianca's comment also shows that knowledge is another resource underlying the capability to develop healthy food practices. She indicated that she learned from watching television that she should eat fruit twice a day, and that her children learned about food and health at school.
Bianca: They took part in a breakfast at school once and then it was explained to them what is healthy and so on. And then they come home with some drawings and they forget.
Bianca explained that for children, such knowledge fades quickly. Other parents said they believed the school should not play a role in health education, because this is the role of the parents. The families explained that they learned what constitutes a healthy or a harmonious meal from different sources, including from friends, the media, or educational institutions.
Judith ( mother ): You know, I often cook potatoes and give them some ketchup and then there is silence, we can all eat. I learned that is a good technique from a friend. What we also do is let the children eat first, and we eat afterwards.
Among the strategies the parents reported about how they achieved a harmonious meal were putting sauces on the table, and having separate meals, based on the premise that if they had fewer distractions, they could focus on supervising their children. For most of the families, these endowments were only a small part of the story of how they juggled food practices capabilities, with external factors such as the socio-cultural environment playing a larger role. Judith also referred to the internal relations in households, and families’ endeavours to achieve a harmonious meal. In the next section, we discuss these family dynamics in more depth.
The negotiation of agency between the family members plays a large role in achieving valued food practices. Since the family members valued different dimensions of food practices, choosing one practice implied a (perceived) lack of agency for one or more household members. For example, achieving a healthy meal implied that the children were not able to exert their power within the household, because of their preference for a tasty meal.
Michael ( child ): My parents always decide on the food, because, well especially my mother thinks, we cannot choose something healthy. But I did think of something healthy once and then I told her […. ] I always hate it when she cooks healthily.
However, unlike in the above example, most of the children indicated that they exercised their agency and asked for certain food products to be included in their family's meals. Many of the children indicated having an explicit and overt role in the food choice process. This role depended not only on the children's ages, but also on the general parenting strategies in the household, and on the role the children had been assigned from a young age. Many of the children who had a big say in their family's food practices demonstrated that they were aware of their agency, and that they could pick their own food.
Brian ( child ): And then my mom often asks us what we would like to eat. We always say fish fingers, but ehm, when we do not have those, we take french fries .
Brian reported that he felt strongly about expressing his opinions about food choices. Brian and his brother lived with their mother. Both brothers spoke in detail about their parents' separation and about the food practices in the homes of both parents, indicating that they had a say in the choice of food in both households. Thus, the brothers showed that they were fully aware of the strings they could pull with their separated parents and that they could eat what they liked. Their mother, Bianca, indicated that she valued healthy dishes, and was still learning how to negotiate the situation with her children, as well as with her ex-husband. In some of the other households, children's agency was more implicit. Parents in those households indicated that their children did not have a say in what was served. Nevertheless, the children in the same households reported that they had a powerful role in their family's food practices.
Denise ( child ): They [parents] do not always listen to me at first instance, but when I ask for something else, my mother will cook me something else, some other vegetables for example. She has a separate dish for me, fortunately.
Denise explained that although she was not always directly involved in choosing the family's food, she could negotiate with her parents to make different side dishes. The mothers in our study reported that when they felt strongly about achieving healthy food practices, they used their parental power, as they put it; and thus only gave in on some of the healthy products, or, alternatively, just bought their children's favourite vegetable or fruit. These mothers expressed more confidence that their children were eating healthy food. A comment from Linda, a divorced mother of two, shows that she shared power with her children, or let them believe they had some power, in negotiating healthy meals. According to Linda, her children were most happy when they felt that they also had a say in what was being served.
Linda (mother ) explains: I discovered that the children enjoy having a little power, that they can make their own choices. Can I have this then? Or can we have a big dessert ? You can satisfy them with that. And then they think they have the power, but actually I still have the power. Or maybe I should not call it power.
This example illustrates how food practices are being negotiated between the family members, and how agency can be used strategically to achieve a healthy meal. In most of the families under study, the mother exerted agency when attempting to fulfil the practices of healthy food, while the father was more likely to see food as a basic need. Thus, fathers reported caring less about whether the food was healthy, saying that they preferred to eat what they liked and were familiar with, and emphasising the importance of a harmonious meal setting. Tammo shared his experience in the following comment.
Interviewer (SV): And do you have any influence on what food is on the table?
Tammo ( father ): Well, I am the picky one, just like the children. So Agina [mother] knows that she shouldn't put out food that I do not like, because then the children see my face and also won't eat it.[…] We also have my bread [white bread] and Agina's bread [multigrain bread]. The boys often choose my bread.
In his comment, Tammo showed that he was aware of his status with his sons, which he could use to influence the family's food practices. He reported that he was unable to hide his emotions in relation to food, and that he was not willing to change this position and support his wife's efforts to serve a healthy meal, by, for example, compromising on the choice of bread. While it may appear that this put Agina in a vulnerable position, interestingly, she indicated that she did not see it that way. As everybody had his or her preferred bread, there were no conflicts about food in the family, and harmony was maintained.
In the households of most of the families, grandparents played a special position in negotiating and achieving a healthy or harmonious food pattern. Due to their status in the family, the children in those households appeared to be more receptive to the food and meals served by their grandparents, just as they were to the food served by their father. Thus, the grandparents reported that they seldom had to exert their power explicitly. Dorien from the Lukkien family described the situation at the home of Anita, her mother. Anita is the grandmother of Dorien's son, Bouke. He had lunch each day at Anita's house which is close to his school. They had also been regularly sharing meals as a family since Anita lost her husband. Dorien explained Anita's role as follows:
Interviewer (SV): Do you think about what Bouke eats at his grandmother's?
Dorien ( mother ): No, she decides for herself. Grandma wants to spoil him, that's why she is his grandmother. She does not educate, she indulges. I am fine with that.
The example of the Lukkien family shows that the bond between the generations can be very tight. The trust between Dorien and Anita allowed them to form their own food practices with Bouke. Sharing meals frequently meant that they shared customs and norms, and this gave Anita the freedom to choose Bouke's meals herself. For example, Bouke indicated that he preferred to eat his grandmother's pancakes, because he thought his grandmother was the better cook. In general, the grandparents in our study showed that they were capable of serving harmonious as well as healthy meals, and the grandchildren often reported that they accepted the healthy meals made by their grandparents more than those made by their parents.
Fig. 3 exemplifies how different family members exercise agency in achieving their fulfilling food practices. Download: Download high-res image (246KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Agency division at the dining table.
In conclusion, it appears that the grandparents, the parents, and their children in our study negotiated their influence on what foods were being served. However, the family dynamics and the agency of the children, the fathers, and the grandparents in food practices often made it difficult for the mothers to achieve their individual fulfilling food practices, while the fathers and the children were more capable of fulfilling their preferred food practices.
We now want to turn our focus to the families’ external relations, and how these relations influenced the decision to prioritise having harmonious meals over having healthy meals. In our analysis, the external environment represented a deeper layer of conversion factors that played a critical role in the process of prioritising food practices, including the immediate socio-cultural context and national health programmes and interventions.
The food practices of the participating families had been shaped by the internal relations in the family household as described above; and by the local community in which these households were embedded. The adult participants indicated that they felt strongly about their own socio-cultural environment, because it allowed them to make their own decisions.
The social environment supported families in obtaining information about food. Because the families in this study had limited financial resources, the social environment facilitated support between family members. For example, family members shared food or tips on how to cook a meal with little money.
Anna ( grandmother ): We often share leftovers with my two sons, especially my soups and stews. I save them [the leftovers] and deliver to my sons. In that way I can still care for them a bit [haha].
Anna's comment shows that because of the geographical proximity of her family, she was still able to take care of her children, even though they had their own families. While the food that was being shared may have been healthy, the main motivation for sharing was to strengthen the family's ties and to create harmony, as observations from the field diary indicate:
Samantha has been depressed about the loss of her brother for quite some time. This makes life hard at times. Because Samantha and her father are also both suffering from diabetes, it is even more important that they look after each other and support each other when they do not feel well. In these difficult circumstances it is important to stick to their own normal pattern rather than to change their food practices. From their parents, Heiko and Samantha learned to focus on the importance of family, their love and support. That is what they also want their children to experience, to have a close-knit family without too much fuss. Living close to each other makes this easier.
Heiko and Samantha were dealing with a stressful family situation, suffering from loss of family members and from illness. When we talked about the importance of harmony in the family, the participants frequently reflected on this value in relation to the many other responsibilities that made up family life. They often emphasised that they did not want to further complicate things by creating stressful food situations. Furthermore, the cultural environment favoured the capabilities underlying having harmonious meals, such as being normal (meaning; acting without pretension). Many of the families said they felt loyal to their culture (regarding food), and followed local food practices that contributed to harmony at the dinner table, such as eating potatoes and meat, while avoiding vegetables. The participants indicated that they felt comfortable in an environment and around people who acted “normal” and down-to-earth, and who did not make things difficult.
Ellen ( mother ): We just don't want to make things difficult. We do what the children like and that makes a nice meal.
Anna ( grandmother ): Norms? Well, when you eat like a lion and without nagging.
Aljo ( father ): I just would like to eat [in] the same [way] as I do at home. Just with your fork, mashing it all together. You cannot do that in a restaurant. I tried it once, but I just did not feel at ease. At home you can do whatever you please.
Anna described two norms in relation to her cultural upbringing that explain how she considered food: having reasonable portion sizes and eating without nagging. Aljo said that he felt uneasy when he had to change the way he ate, as he would in a restaurant. For many of these families, change was seen as complicated.
These comments show that the participants strongly preferred being in uncomplicated situations, with a focus on autonomous decision-making and traditional patterns. The main influences on the families' food practices were their close ties. They felt that whether people outside of these close ties confirmed their individual choices was of minor importance. The participants related these preferences to an aversion to hierarchy, and to allowing “higher ranked” people to dominate their private decision-making. According to them, the region's history of hierarchical relations between workers and farmers was still reflected in its cultural norms, which affirmed them in their conviction that things are "good as they are” (not taking orders from someone higher in rank) and in their belief in being “down-to-earth”.
Rika ( grandmother ): Here [in this region] we do not listen that much to other people, we do our own thing. Family and friends matter, but that's it. Everyone can say something about your eating habit , but you should not care too much about what others say.
Roelfien ( grandmother ): These villages, were originally [in Dutch: van huis uit], a bulwark of communists and only 3 km down the road, here in Oostwold, it is very Christian. These often conflicting views on society cause rivalry between the villages. Especially the communist villages have a rich history, you have to go back in time to really understand the people here. You see, in this part of the country we always had many riots, and many of these feelings are still deep-rooted. The population still has strong feelings against hierarchy, which has to do with the hierarchy between farmer and worker. My husband had those strong feelings as well. It is the feeling that you are just not good enough and always get the crumbs. And among the younger generations you still feel it, maybe that's why we still have that mentality. You cannot compare it to the older generations, but I sense it still leaves marks on the younger generations.
The feeling of being subordinate to higher classes, as Roelfien put it, awakened feelings of resistance that persisted over time, generations, and several facets of life. The hierarchy was also felt in policy and practical “prescriptions” regarding food. This resistance to hierarchy was reflected in the attitudes of the family members towards policy interventions. In general, the adults indicated that the policy environment did not contribute to their capabilities; rather, interventions tended to constrain their individual freedom and their personal development. Some of the parents said they believed that the school should not interfere in their family's food habits and customs, because these were the parents' responsibilities, not of the school nor the policy system. Parents and grandparents also said that they wanted to be able to make independent choices. The following response from a mother reflects her cultural identity, and demonstrates how prevention and intervention policies could constrain the parents' capabilities to develop their valuable food choices.
Bianca ( mother ): I think it is nonsense, those food lessons; you do not have to do that at school. They have to learn about math and writing. They eat at home and I can teach them about things here.
In the interview, Bianca was expressing a desire to return food practices to the internal relations in the household. She was upset and angry about how her children were being treated at school, which suggests that her children were being told to do something at school that she viewed as a family matter, and over which she had little influence.

Section: 5. Discussion

We conducted an ethnographic study of food practices in the municipality of Oldambt, in the eastern part of the province of Groningen in the Netherlands. We applied the capability approach to investigate how the socio-cultural structures, family dynamics, and agency of three generations have shaped their family food practices. First, we used the capability approach to help us identify multiple dimensions of food practices. We categorised these food practices into the food domain and the social domain, referring to discourses of food beyond the biomedical domain ( Ristovski-Slijepcevic et al., 2008 ). Second, we used the concepts of the capability approach (capabilities, endowments, agency, and conversion factors) to examine how families came to prioritise having harmonious meals over having healthy meals. From a policy perspective, this is very relevant, because health programmes aim to improve health outcomes such as childhood obesity by promoting healthier food practices. Such interventions tend to have little impact in regions with low socio-economic status. Third, our paper acknowledges the importance of developing an intergenerational understanding of food practices by acquiring a deep understanding of family dynamics and of the agency of all family members. Finally, we focused on individual freedom in achieving a valued food practice, rather than on desired public health outcomes, as is usually the case in health research.
Table 2 categorises our findings according to the concepts of the capability approach as they were presented in the section on findings: fulfilling food practices (referring to capabilities), endowments, and socio-cultural contexts and health promotion programmes (referring to conversion factors). The findings are categorised separately for children and for parents and grandparents. The last two groups are combined, because the items identified for each of the concepts of the capability approach were highly comparable. Table 2 . Findings reflecting the elements of the capability approach. In bold capabilities which lead to fulfilment of a harmonious meal. Empty Cell Important endowments for this generation Important conversion factors for this generation Important capabilities for this generation Children - Good health (allergies, mental health issues, e.g. ADHD, ADD) - Social environment (divorce, conflict situations) Being able to obtain information - Possessions (housing conditions, means of transport - Cultural environment (traditions, norms, i.e. gender roles) Being able to enjoy your meal - Access to information (Internet, tv, peers, school) Being able to control food practices Being able to be normal, be similar to peers Being able to choose freely/make autonomous decisions Being able to not care (Grand)parents - Sufficient financial means - Social environment (divorce, conflict situations) Being able to move about and reach shops - Good health (allergies, physical and mental health issues, e.g depression/back pain) - Cultural environment (traditions, norms (i.e. gender roles), hierarchy aversion) Being able to purchase food - Possessions (housing conditions, means of transport) Policy environment (interventions, school programmes) Being able to cook - Access to information (Internet, Tv, friends) Being able to serve and organise Being able to obtain information Being able to enjoy your meal Being able to avoid conflicts Being able to create good relationships with (step)children/grandchildren Being able to control food practices Being able to be down to earth Being able to support people Being able to choose freely/make autonomous decisions Being able to not care
We found that family households prioritise several dimensions of fulfilling food practices to achieve healthy and harmonious meals. In the socio-cultural environment of our study setting, and as illustrated in Table 2 , we found that household capabilities facilitated the achievement of harmonious meals over having healthy meals. Previous studies stated low socio-economic status is one reason why families find it difficult to develop healthy food practices: either because they have limited financial resources to buy healthy food, or they may have limited knowledge about healthy food ( Gombert et al., 2017 ; Redman, 2019 ). Although our study confirmed the assumption that financial constraints can make it more difficult for families to achieve healthy meals, we found that a broader spectrum of values, opportunity, and agency structures for children, parents and grandparents underlie family food practices. We thus conclude that family members appreciate harmonious outcomes over healthy food outcomes as a consequence of having more multidimensional capabilities to achieve harmonious outcomes.
Families considered ‘healthy’ meals to be more than just the nutritional value of the meals. Harmonious meals can contribute to a ‘healthier’ (more congenial) atmosphere in the house and a ‘healthier’ (more equal) division/allocation of agency amongst family members. For children, five capabilities underlie the fulfilling food practice of having harmonious meals: the capabilities to enjoy a meal, to not care what others say, to control food practices, to be down-to-earth, and to make autonomous decisions. The capability to control food practices motivated children to choose tasty food, while the same capability motivated mothers to regard serving healthy meals as a fulfilling food practice. For parents and grandparents, two additional capabilities underlying a harmonious meal were identified: the capability to avoid conflict and the capability to build a good relationship with the (step/grand)child. Other studies have also found that enhancing family relationships, rather than serving healthy food, is often the primary goal in food practices ( Schuster et al., 2019 ; Dixon and Isaacs, 2013 ) because pursuing these psychosocial goals increases feelings of closeness between parents and children, and contributes to the family's capabilities and insights into their fulfilling food practices.
Among the families in our study, family dynamics and agency, as well as the social and cultural environment, determined the extent to which these capabilities could be transformed into valued food practices. The families built their food practices on socio-cultural norms, such as the urge "to eat what people commonly eat around here", to be ‘down-to-earth’, and the belief that their own knowledge is more important than the knowledge and advice of government or other institutions, as encapsulated in health promotion programmes. This set of beliefs is rooted in the historical background of the region where the families live, which includes a long tradition of hierarchical relationships between gentlemen farmers and workers.
In our study setting, most of the cooking was done by the mothers and grandmothers. Thus, mothers were in a central position to prioritise having a healthy or a harmonious meal. Although mothers valued healthy food practices and were well informed about what they had to buy or what was needed to cook healthy dishes, they were frequently not able to exercise such capabilities, because the agency of the other family members outweighed theirs. In these family interactions, we found that the children were most able to exert their agency and to succeed in having family meals that they themselves valued. It appears that children are becoming more aware of their choices, and they are becoming more critical of the food that is being served to them ( Devine et al., 2006 ; Gladstone, 2020 ; Curtis et al., 2011 ). This awareness allowed the children in our study to occupy a fairly strong position in their own family. We also found that fathers often had a decisive role in food practices, showing clear preferences and pronounced tastes, including a preference for harmony at the dinner table over healthy food. However, fathers generally left mothers to make the ultimate choice between the preferences and tastes of the family members. Like Harris et al. (2020) in their study focusing on fathers' perceptions of meal time interactions, we found that the fathers in our study valued family meals as an opportunity to connect and communicate with their children, and, as a result, placed less emphasis on directing their children's healthy eating behaviours . Harris et al. (2020) also had the same preference for harmony; i.e., "it was not worth the fight". This observation resonates with the parental capabilities we identified: "being able to avoid conflict", and "being able to have good relationships with the children". We also found that negotiation skills were very important for mothers to exert their agency because some of the mothers were able to give their children a say, while remaining in the driver's seat. For example, some of the mothers were able to maximise their capabilities to have healthy meals by striking compromises, such as agreeing to serve certain vegetables, but not giving up on vegetables entirely. Similarly, Hebestreit et al. (2017) found that mothers often exert a positive influence on their children's food consumption because they tend to adhere to dietary guidelines , whereas fathers often encourage their children to eat unhealthy foods.
Family dynamics and agency on the one hand, and the socio-cultural environment on the other, can be important cues for understanding why interventions tend to fail in regions such as Oldambt in particular, and in settings of low socio-economic status in general ( Kaufman and Karpati, 2007 ; Fielding-Singh and Wang, 2017 ). In recent debates on the links between the medical and the social outcomes of food practices, there has been increased focus on the role of individual agency in health-related interventions ( Kongats et al., 2019 ; Sun, 2008 ). Recently, Gombert et al. (2017) suggested using the capability approach to study food choice as informed by the interplay of socio-economic structures and agency. Since agency, choice, and social structures are interdependent, these social structures, rights, and freedoms can shape the environment for people to achieve their valued practices positively or negatively ( Lewis 2012 ). Looking through the lens of capabilities makes it clear that the route to tackling health inequalities is not just through the availability of resources, such as healthy foods and money, but also through activating multiple capabilities to perform valued food practices using these resources ( Gombert et al., 2017 ).
Several theoretical frameworks have been used to study food practices within particular socio-cultural contexts ( Redman, 2019 ; Laraia et al., 2017 , Daniel, 2020 ), and to examine how such deeper social and cultural structures inform the agency and the choices of vulnerable groups ( Dowler, 2008 ; Hart and Page, 2020 ). Most of these frameworks reflect the food domain of food practices, with healthy food practices as the main (biomedical) focus. We argue that we have to develop a multi-dimensional approach to food practices. For this reason, we applied the capability approach ( Sen, 1999 ) to analyse the findings from our ethnographic field work ( Visser et al., 2016 ). In their literature review, Gladstone et al. (2020) found that, while there is a recent body of research that has used the capability approach to analyse data on children's capabilities, studies on children's health are lacking in this field. Hart and Page (20120) used the same approach to study the role of school food education and school food culture in the UK, and how it could be used to support the capabilities of school children to adopt healthy behaviours. Our work adds to this body of literature but is also distinct from it, in that we did not study food capabilities in relation to nutritional health behaviours per se, as Hart and Page (20120) did, but instead we studied multiple capabilities as freedoms where health is more than just physical health and includes values such as a congenial atmosphere or a sense of agency. Our participants were averse to interventions and school nutrition programmes , because in their view this advice interfered with their perceived autonomy and freedom. Creating awareness about such community perspectives can help policymakers better understand why lifestyle interventions fail, which demonstrates the need to co-create interventions. In the Netherlands, one recent citizen-initiated lifestyle intervention was very successful in terms of participation levels, and resulted in improved social health outcomes ( Horstman, 2019 ).
This study has strengths and limitations. The use of the capability approach in conjunction with an ethnographic methodology allowed us to obtain an emic perspective on people's valued food practices. It helped us understand what factors underlie these valued practices, and the reasons why they can or cannot be achieved. Because of the ethnographic nature of our research and the purposive sampling techniques we used, our results may not be generalisable to the larger population. However, we clearly showed that we must go beyond the food dimension in order to understand people's valued food practices. Our findings demonstrate that the capability approach can be applied in other populations to generate equally relevant findings that can lead to changes in the direction of interventions which promote healthy lifestyles.

Section: 6. Conclusion

In conclusion, the use of the capability approach as the conceptual framework for this ethnographic study on food practices has not only shed light on the importance of resources and conversion factors, it has been instrumental in elucidating the multidimensionality of what it is that is fulfilling in family food practices. Understanding that food practices can be fulfilling in more ways than from the nutritional perspective can only contribute to the development of public health messages that resonate with and are embedded in the reality of the target population, and thus have a better chance of being effective. Agency acts as a crucial mechanism in negotiating family food practices. The use of such an approach is crucial for understanding the opportunity deprivations within households and alleviating health inequalities.

Section: Author Credit statement

Sanne Siete Visser: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing, Visualisation, Project adiminstration, Hinke Haisma: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing, Writing – review & editing.

Section: Authorship

Sanne Visser (first author) was responsible for the Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal Analysis, Data Curation, Visualisation and Project administration of this study and was responsible for Writing the original draft. She has been the first responsible in writing the manuscript.
Hinke Haisma (second author) was responsible for Resources and Supervision of the study and was responsible for Writing – Review and Editing.

Section: Ethical standards disclosure

This study was conducted according to the guidelines laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki and all procedures involving human subjects were approved by the Research ethical committee of the Faculty of Spatial Sciences, University of Groningen. Written consent was obtained from parents and their children involved in the study. Verbal consent was obtained from all adults involved in the study. Verbal consent was witnessed and formally recorded.

Section: Financial support

This research was supported by Healthy Ageing, Population and Society ( HAPS ), funded by the University of Groningen, Groningen , The Netherlands.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

None.

Section: Acknowledgements

We would like to thank all families involved in the research.
