Title: What is in the palliative care ‘syringe’? A systems perspective


Abstract: Abstract

The diffusion of palliative care has been rapid, yet uncertainty remains regarding palliative care's “active ingredients.” The National Consensus Project Guidelines for Quality Palliative Care identified eight domains of palliative care . Despite these identified domains, when pressed to describe the specific maneuvers used in clinical encounters, palliative care providers acknowledge that “it's complex.” The field of systems has been used to explain complexity across many different types of systems. Specifically, engineering systems develop a representation of a system that helps manage complexity to help humans better understand the system. Our goal was to develop a system model of what palliative care providers do such that the elements of the model can be described concretely and sequentially, aggregated to describe the high-level domains currently described by palliative care, and connected to the complexity described by providers and the literature. Our study design combined methodological elements from both qualitative research and systems engineering modeling. The model drew on participant observation and debriefing semi-structured interviews with interdisciplinary palliative care team members by a systems engineer. The setting was an interdisciplinary palliative care service in a US rural academic medical center. In the developed system model, we identified 59 functions provided to patients, families, non-palliative care provider(s), and palliative care provider(s). The high-level functions related to measurement, decision-making, and treatment address up to 8 states of an individual, including an overall holistic state, physical state, psychological state, spiritual state, cultural state, personal environment state, and clinical environment state. In contrast to previously described expert consensus domain-based descriptions of palliative care, this model more directly connects palliative care provider functions to emergent behaviors that may explain system-level mechanisms of action for palliative care. Thus, a systems modeling approach provides insights into the challenges surrounding the recurring question of what is in the palliative care “syringe.”

Section: 1. Background

Palliative care is an emerging interdisciplinary clinical specialty “that provides relief from pain and other symptoms and supports quality of life for patients with serious illness and their families.” ( Von Gunten and Lupu, 2004 ) A 2016 meta-analysis of clinical trial evidence demonstrated that palliative care interventions are associated with improvements in patient quality of life (QOL) and symptom burden, increases in advance care planning , and decreases in health care utilization ( Kavalieratos et al., 2016 ). Some trials have additionally demonstrated increases in longevity ( Temel et al., 2010 ; Morrison et al., 2011 ).
In response to enthusiasm about its ability to simultaneously improve health outcomes and decrease health care costs, the diffusion of palliative care services has been rapid. Nevertheless, uncertainty remains regarding the “active ingredients” of palliative care. Kelley et al. state, “future studies of palliative care must begin to test and identify the actual components of palliative care that are provided and received. Such methodological rigor is necessary to establish the evidence for best practice.” ( Kelley and Meier, 2010 ) This evidence is particularly important as the field seeks to classify the care needs of complex patients, distinguish between “primary” and “specialty” palliative care, expand education and training to scale services, and identify measures for palliative care quality improvement , accreditation, and research.
While no detailed model exists in the literature for what palliative care providers do, the National Consensus Project Guidelines for Quality Palliative Care identified eight domains of palliative care ( Ferrell et al., 2018 ; Ahluwalia et al., 2018 ) (see Table 1 ). In addition, a recent analysis of data from a trial of early integration of palliative care with oncologic care identified symptom management, coping, treatment decisions, and advance care planning as provider-reported components associated with patient-reported outcomes and changes in end-of-life care ( Hoerger et al., 2018 ). Despite these identified domains, when pressed to describe the specific maneuvers used in clinical encounters, palliative care providers acknowledge that “it's complex.” ( Pask et al., 2018 ). Table 1 . Palliative Care Domains and guidelines based on the National Consensus Panel Guidelines for Quality Palliative Care. Empty Cell Domains of Palliative Care Example 1 structure and process of care communication and case management 2 physical aspects of care symptoms such as pain, dyspnea 3 psychologic and psychiatric depression, distress, coping 4 social aspects of care caregiver burden 5 spiritual, religious, and existential closure 6 cultural cultural sensitivity 7 care at the end of life bereavement, comfort care 8 ethical and legal advance care planning
Palliative care is “complex” because it is difficult to conceptualize palliative care domains simply. Familiar palliative care components—such as coping or advance care planning—are difficult to conceptualize in a detailed concrete sequential process—the sequence of who does what, when, how, and where. Sequential processes are common in the medical field. For example, a complex surgery to remove the head of the pancreas called a pancreaticoduodenectomy can be described simply, concretely, and sequentially as a detailed multi-level description found in textbooks, even though the procedure itself is highly technical ( Minter and Doherty, 2010 ). Palliative care experts have sought to develop conversation maps to teach some palliative care procedures, such as advance care planning ( Bernacki et al., 2015 ), goals of care conversations ( Childers et al., 2017 ), breaking bad news, and responding to emotion ( Back and Arnold, 2009 ). However, ‘complexity’ in palliative care arises because many care situations are characterized by reciprocal, non-linear relations, unpredictability, and uncertainties ( Hodiamont et al., 2019 ).
General systems theory has been used across many fields to explain non-linearity and uncertainty in natural and built systems in which the number and interconnections of system elements manifest emergent behaviors that no subset of elements have ( Von Bertalanffy, 1951 ). For example, the number and interactions of individual cars on the road lead to the emergent behavior of traffic jams. Several authors have suggested systems theory frameworks as a lens for understanding complexity in palliative care ( Hodiamont et al., 2019 ; Munday et al., 2003 ; Marshall and Myers, 2018 ; Grant et al., 2021 ). Most commonly, the theory of complex adaptive systems conceptualizes a complex system as a “collection of individual agents with freedom to act in ways that are not always totally predictable and whose actions change the context for other agents” ( Plsek and Greenhalgh, 2001 ). Fundamentally, the theory of complex adaptive systems describes a system whose internal system is revised by feedback, which leads to changes in behavior. Hodaimont et al. identified the criteria contributing to the complexity of palliative care situations from the professional's perspective as those arising from three subsystems: the system patient with further subsystems of physical, psycho-spiritual, and socio-cultural; the patient's social system ; and the system team ( Hodiamont et al., 2019 ).
While researchers have applied the theory of complex adaptive systems (CAS) to classify complexity in palliative care, CAS as a theory within the larger systems thinking framework has not led to a clearer description of what palliative care providers do—in other words, the functions performed by palliative care providers. This is because CAS focuses on the interaction of “agents” that leads to complexity rather than a focus on analytically describing the system with such complexity. Consequently, there are no established descriptions or models of palliative care tasks, actions, or processes.
Healthcare delivery systems are engineering systems—“a class of systems characterized by a high degree of technical complexity, social intricacy, and elaborate processes aimed at fulfilling important functions in society.” ( De Weck et al., 2011 ) We posit that palliative care—as a specialized healthcare delivery system—is also an engineering system and thus embodies all five characteristics of engineering systems. First , it exists in the real world. Palliative care indeed does exist in the real world. Second , it is artificial in that it does not exist purely in the natural world without human intervention. Palliative care is a human-constructed clinical specialty. Third , it has dynamic properties, in that system properties change with time. For example, the delivery of palliative care services to a patient varies over time. Fourth , it has hybrid states, where the state of the system can be characterized by a mix of both continuous and discrete. For instance, palliative care providers (continuously) measure the emotional state of patients and family members during a clinical encounter, but clinical encounters occur in (discrete) intervals. Fifth , it includes some human control. For example, the delivery of palliative care can only occur through human decision-making.
The field of engineering systems recognizes that complexity makes systems more difficult for humans to understand. It is therefore not surprising that palliative care descriptions exist principally as domains. While the focus of prior research utilizing complex adaptive systems was on defining and describing the complexity, engineering systems is concerned with developing a representation of the system that helps manage complexity and therefore helps humans better understand the system ( De Weck et al., 2011 ; Cameron et al., 2016 ). To develop a representation of a system requires at least two foundational systems engineering constructs that describe a system ( Blanchard et al., 1990 ). First, what the system is composed of (i.e., system form) and second, what the system exists to do (i.e., system function).
This paper aims to develop a model of what palliative care providers do such that the elements of the model can be described concretely and sequentially, aggregated to describe the high-level domains currently described by palliative care, and connected to the complexity described by providers and the literature. In this paper, we use a systems perspective to propose a working model for specialty palliative care services.

Section: 2. Methods

The committee for the protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College (CPHS) approved this study (CPHS# STUDY00031197).
Our study design combines methodological elements from both qualitative research and systems engineering modeling ( Sage and Rouse, 2014 ; Friedenthal et al., 2014 ; Haskins and Forsberg, 2007 ; Buede and Miller, 2016 ). To follow the highest qualitative research standards, we incorporated all elements of the Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research (Appendix 1). ( Tong et al., 2007 ) Our overall study design is visually described in Fig. 1 . The study design included direct observation of members of the interdisciplinary palliative care team by a trained healthcare systems engineering researcher (ISK, systems engineer, Ph.D., female) at a single rural academic medical center over three months in several settings, including outpatient, inpatient, and the intensive care unit (ICU). The direct observations were followed by debriefing interviews. Qualitative data were used to develop the system model using a systems engineering methodology that included an iterative model development and model validation process. Download: Download high-res image (273KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Study Design. Overall study design combines methodological elements from qualitative research and systems engineering modeling.
The rural academic health center where direct observations and interviews occurred is a National Cancer Institute (NCI)-designated cancer center with a mature interdisciplinary palliative care service established in 2000. The palliative care program includes inpatient palliative care consultation for a 450-bed tertiary referral hospital , outpatient palliative care services, an inpatient palliative care unit, a joint palliative care fellowship program for physicians and advanced practice nurse practitioners, and an affiliated home hospice service. Most patients in the catchment area are non-Hispanic white, 47% are rural, and 10% are below the poverty level.
The sample of palliative care providers included both medical doctors and advanced practice registered nurses in the palliative care program at a rural academic health center. All palliative care providers who were asked to be observed accepted. Purposive sampling was used to incorporate sample variations in provider type and care setting. A palliative care provider was shadowed over a half or full-day. Direct observations and interviews were conducted face-to-face for several patient and family visits and interdisciplinary team meetings. To minimally disrupt the delicate and sensitive conversations and environment—with at times many patient, family, and provider participants all needing to provide permission to record—we opted to forgo audio recording and relied on field notes. Furthermore, given the abstract nature of palliative care activities , the transcript alone may not incorporate many unspoken cognitive-based activities. Instead, following these direct observations, we interviewed providers to debrief and clarify their actions and activities on the same day. This process required the observer to not only capture what was being said and visibly performed but also to model “in the moment” to ask about and confirm the more abstract cognitive activities during the interviews that directly followed observation. We also took advantage of the teaching setting to observe providers explicitly stating and explaining the decisions behind their cognitive and physical actions to medical students and palliative care fellows. Therefore, the interview guide was a series of prompts to explicate the contents of the fieldnote. Table 2 describes the number and role of the individuals observed and interviewed for model development and validation. Table 2 . The roles of the individuals observed and interviewed. Stakeholders Model Generation Model Validation Palliative Care Stakeholders ( n = 25, 17 females and 8 males) Palliative Care MDs 7 9 Palliative Care APRNs 2 1 Palliative Care RNs 4 2 Palliative Care MSW and LICSW 2 1 Fellows and Medical Students 6 0 Palliative Care Administrative Staff 3 0 Patient and Family Stakeholders ( n = 60) Patients 32 Not Applicable Family Members 28 Not applicable
In this section, we detail what we mean by modeling from a systems perspective and describe how the qualitative data were coded and modeled.
Systems engineering uses two foundational constructs to begin to describe a system ( De Weck et al., 2011 ; Blanchard et al., 1990 ; Sage and Rouse, 2014 ; Buede and Miller, 2016 ). First, systems, be they natural or built, exist in physical form and can be described by their components. Second, every system, natural or built, exists for a reason–to perform a function or set of function(s). System function is described by the activity being performed and the object of that activity. Interestingly, the constructs of a system mirror the constructs of a sentence ( Cameron et al., 2016 ). The subject + predicate or subject + verb + operand construction in language is mirrored in systems as form + function or form + activity + operand. For example, in palliative care, the palliative care provider (subject) measures (verb) the patient's psychological stress (operand). Consequently, modeling system function refers to identifying the sets of “activity + operand” at a more detailed level than the current high-level descriptions of palliative care. By doing so, elements in the more detailed-level set can then be placed in a sequence to reflect any palliative care encounter.
Observations, interviews, and coding were performed by an expert healthcare systems engineering researcher (ISK). To address the coding by a single expert, we applied the framework method developed by Richie and Lewis ( Ritchie et al., 2013 ) with an iterative validation process from systems engineering. This work used notes and discussions to identify “activity + operand” sets that describe palliative care functions. We began coding “activity” based on previously described high-level healthcare delivery functions: measure , decide , and treat ( Farid, 2018 ). These high-level functions, also described as “a set of practices,” are evident in all medical models of clinical practice and involve information gathering (measure), formulation of a diagnosis and deciding on how to proceed next (decide), and the delivery of appropriate treatments (treat) ( Engel, 1977 ; Farre and Rapley, 2017 ). We began with the most common and obvious “operand” in healthcare—the patient.
Following each day of direct observations and interviews, the systems-engineering interviewee (ISK) modeled existing system elements from the case(s) in a Systems Modeling Language (SysML) software called MagicDraw (No Magic Inc., Texas). This approach included re-reading the notes and identifying all activity + operands, and iteratively updating the model. The identified functions and their nomenclature were iteratively discussed between the system engineer (ISK) and the senior palliative care provider-researcher (AEB) throughout the research process, including during and after the data collection and coding processes and the internal and external validation processes. Discussions served as a reflective opportunity to intersect the positionality of ISK as a systems engineer and cancer researcher trained within an engineering and medical school and AEB as a palliative and end-of-life researcher with more than 15 years of ethnographic research experience at multiple academic medical centers across the United States and as a palliative care provider who completed a palliative care fellowship within the last five years.
Engineering models are typically validated after the completion of stakeholder data collection ( Haskins and Forsberg, 2007 ). Given the abstract nature of palliative care activities and the need to validate as close to real-time as possible, we incorporated mini-validation cycles during interviews. After completing data collection, we internally validated our model with individual palliative care providers and with members of the interdisciplinary palliative care team in a group setting. Finally, we presented the model to an internationally known palliative care expert for external validation.
After developing the system model, we mapped the model functions onto a recent clinical case to demonstrate utility. First, the clinical case was narrated by (AEB) and transcribed by (ISK). Then, the same systems modeling framework was applied (ISK) to map each sentence into an “activity + operand” function.

Section: 3. Results

A total of twenty-five palliative care stakeholders and sixty patients and family members were observed. Table 2 describes the role of the individuals observed and interviewed. We identified a total of 59 functions performed by palliative care providers. Fig. 2 shows these functions arranged in a grid. The columns represent the highest-level representation of activities , and the rows describe who these activities are performed for, also called operands. Besides the apparent patient-operand, family members and caregivers were also identified, collectively termed family-operands. Interestingly, we identified two additional operands: non-palliative care and palliative care providers. These provider operands are also human resources of the healthcare delivery system, so we classified them as resources. This designation implies that palliative care provides activities directed to the human resources of its own system; in other words, the system acts on itself. Consequently, palliative care providers would be described as reconfiguring agents in engineering systems terminology. Download: Download high-res image (2MB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . The 59 Palliative Care Functions . Functions are described by "activity + operand". The three primary activities aremeasure, decide, and treat. The individual operand or resource is detailed further to describe several aspects (or states) of the individual. “Overall holistic” refers to the operand's overall preferences and goals that holistically encompass any other states. “Cultural” refers to beliefs, values, traditional practices, and language with respect to race, ethnicity, gender identity and gender expression, sexual orientation, immigration and refugee status, social class, religion, spirituality, physical appearance, and abilities [NCP Guideline] ( Ferrell et al., 2018 ). “Psychological” refers to psychological and psychiatric aspects of care such as cognitive, emotional, coping, and psychological conditions.
From a qualitative research perspective, Fig. 2 represents a description of the coding tree and themes. From a systems engineering perspective, Fig. 2 represents an activity diagram, which typically includes arrows between functions to denote the order of functions over time. We recognized that minimal consistent order exists between functions and that just about every function can follow any other. Consequently, and to not clutter the figure, we did not draw any arrows between functions.
To comprehensively describe the functions provided to the operands, we detailed the model further to describe operand states. We included the nomenclature following the National Consensus Project Guidelines for five individual health states : physical , psychological , social , spiritual , and cultural . In addition, we included an overall holistic measure, which was commonly ascertained by providers to represent an individual's overall state. We included the patient's state within the healthcare system as the clinical environment. Finally, we included the individual's state within their personal environment , consisting of all aspects of work, home, community, legal, and financial. It is worth noting that the operand describes who the object of the activity is for or about, but not necessarily who the provider is speaking to. For example, a patient in a coma has no ability to communicate their wants or needs, yet the palliative care provider can ascertain their goals (Function 1 – Measure patient overall holistic goals) from family members.
We identified twenty-one activities across all seven operand states for the patient-operand. The treat activities include the typical descriptions of palliative care—advance care planning, coping, decision support, and symptom management. It is worth noting that here, delivering decision support is the treatment, whereas the cognitive calculation by the provider “if it is the right time to have the conversation” and asking the patient for permission are the decision activities.
We identified fifteen activities across five of the seven operand states for family-operands. Palliative care does not typically provide physical health or coordination for family members' clinical environment. Otherwise, palliative care is unique in that it truly delivers services to patients and their families.
We identified ten activities across three operand states for non-palliative care providers: overall holistic , psychological , and clinical environment . The most common activity is to measure and decide on the non-palliative care provider's clinical environment in order to communicate and coordinate effectively. In addition, palliative care providers measure, decide, and deliver palliative preference-sensitive communication, meeting providers where they are. In doing so, they are also sensitive to the emotional situations that arise to support non-palliative providers as needed. Finally, these interactions serve as an opportunity to deliver palliative care coaching.
We identified thirteen activities across four operand states for palliative care providers: overall holistic , psychological , spiritual , and clinical environment . Palliative care providers performed self-reflection and peer-to-peer support activities. For example, the interdisciplinary team (IDT), ‘Wisdom Wednesday’ seminar, and fellow debriefing provided forums to discuss difficult cases, receive feedback, and brainstorm strategies. These activities not only support palliative care clinical decision making, but they also support psychological, spiritual, and overall provider well-being. Amongst the self-reflection activities, such as Function 49 – Determine continually (PC provider) situation-concordant priority, tone, and language, providers actively check their own thoughts and emotions to deliver situation-concordant priority, tone, and language to all.
Although we observed formal academic teaching functions and teaching sessions provided insight into expert providers' articulations of measure-treat-decide cognitions in the model, we did not include academic teaching in the model. Instead, it is an additional function directly related to the academic education of new palliative care providers and not necessarily a function directly related to delivering palliative care. Internal and external palliative care team providers provided feedback to validate the functions described, their nomenclature, and the extent to which these functions cover the activities they perform by providing examples and asking if and where these examples fit into the model. All interviewed internal palliative care team members and one external palliative care expert provided this feedback during individual meetings. Interviewed and non-interviewed interdisciplinary palliative care team members provided this feedback during a single focus group conducted during a section research meeting. In addition, we received written feedback from a medical social worker and continuing care manager who said, “ I was fascinated that a complex, multi-level interaction could be observed, broken into discrete factors and described in linear fashion.”
We present a narrative description of the clinical case in Fig. 3 . In brief, the inpatient palliative care service was consulted for goals of care by the intensivist staffing the medical intensive care unit on day #8 of mechanical ventilation for an elderly patient with confirmed Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in April 2020. The patient's surrogate decision-makers were two adult children available only by telephone due to the pandemic-related visitor and travel restrictions. The case involved three discreet palliative care telephone encounters with the surrogate(s), three discreet encounters with the intensivist , and one interdisciplinary palliative care team meeting for input on the case over three days. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . The Narrative for the Palliative Care Case. Each segment of the case is numbered and followed by the relevant palliative care function s. The numbers corresponding to the segment of the case are visualized in Fig. 4 .
We illustrated the mapping of the functions onto the case in Fig. 4 as an image with three sections highlighting the functions used on the y-axis and their timing on the x-axis. Palliative care functions were utilized over three days and ten encounters, which are modeled as three events. The case utilized twenty-six unique functions and a total of forty functions for the full case. While the interactions are not strictly typical, given the requirement to support surrogate decision making remotely early in the Northeast's COVID-19 pandemic surge in Spring 2020, elements of the case are instructive, including the way that the palliative care provider ‘acts on’ the non-palliative care provider after receiving interdisciplinary input from other palliative care team members (e.g., “reconfiguring agent”). Elements of the case have been suppressed to preserve confidentiality. Download: Download high-res image (401KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Palliative Care Case Mapped to Functions . Each x-axis segment corresponds to the associated narrative value. The y-axis represents the 59 palliative care functions by operand (patient or family) or resource (non-palliative care provider or palliative care provider).

Section: 4. Discussion

We used a systems-based approach to systematically organize and categorize palliative care functions into concrete activities that are utilized sequentially to reflect what providers are doing on a moment-by-moment basis. While many functional components are not explicitly instantiated in the National Consensus Project Guidelines domains, palliative care providers recognized these functions as a more comprehensive description of the range of tasks they perform. Mapping the functions to a clinical case highlighted the utilization of several functions—some even simultaneously—and the need to move between these interacting functions at times in a split second. Naturally, the need to utilize many interacting elements and move between them quickly is a hallmark description of complexity—not only in perceived difficulty but also in the likelihood of producing emergent behaviors, which refers to what appears, materializes, or surfaces when a system operates ( Cameron et al., 2016 ). For example, palliative care providers use their skills to sense people and the situation around them to precisely intervene in time and with language that directs an encounter to a positive outcome. Emerging behaviors extend beyond the clinical encounter and appear at the healthcare delivery system level. For example, as palliative care providers perform functions applied to non-palliative care providers as internal resources, over time, new referral patterns appear, higher quality primary palliative care is delivered, and increases in palliative care directed co-management cases appear as partnerships increase with referring providers.
The intrinsic feeling that palliative care providers describe as “complex” is indeed technically accurate from a systems perspective due to the interactions and dependencies between palliative care functions. These functions are intrinsically inter-related since the health states they affect are also inter-related, both within the same person and across multiple individuals, as previously described by Hodiamont et al. and Carduff et al. ( Hodiamont et al., 2019 ; Carduff et al., 2018 ) In the former, it is well-accepted that multiple aspects (physical, psychosocial, spiritual) within an individual can affect each other ( Ohrnberger et al., 2017 ; Powell et al., 2003 ; Swinton, 2001 ; Salsman et al., 2015 ). In the latter, one aspect may influence several individuals (patient, caregiver, family members). For example, a patient hearing negative news and expressing their emotions may affect their family member's ability to hold in their feelings. In such a situation, not quickly assessing and addressing a patient's psychological state could lead to both the individual and family's psychological states escalating. This example, along with the clinical case, highlight the importance of time and its potential to lead to emergent properties. While the illustrated case occurred over 3 days, it is worth noting that the decision made on the seconds-scale by the palliative care provider had the potential to completely shift the trajectory of the case. These fast-paced changes are possible since most of these functions are cognitive or affective.
Palliative care functions applied to internal resources over a prolonged time produce emergent properties as a cumulative effect of the work that extends beyond an encounter and applies to the healthcare system level. For example, every palliative care interaction with a referring provider occurring directly or indirectly during joint meetings serves as indirect palliative care training for referring providers. In that way, and over time, more and more referring providers will be aware of palliative care, possibly more comfortable handling difficult conversations, and more likely to refer earlier in the patient's care trajectory, to name a few possibilities. From the perspective of palliative care, the functions performed to address the palliative care provider and team states (spiritual, psychological, overall, and clinical environment) can also produce emergent behaviors of team cohesion and even higher job satisfaction than other specialties, despite the emotional toll many may envision in such a role ( Graham et al., 1996 ; Sansó et al., 2015 ; Clark et al., 2007 ). From a systems perspective, palliative care providers would be considered reconfiguring agents, as their functions are directed to the healthcare delivery system and resources within the system. While the intention of these palliative care functions is to support the patient, family, referring provider, and palliative care provider and team, nevertheless palliative care providers may directly reconfigure the healthcare delivery system by introducing new or improved processes or training, such as the Serious Illness Conversation Guide ( Bernacki et al., 2015 ) or indirectly reconfigure the system with day-to-day interactions with other human resources that in time change their behavior.
To answer the question of what is in the palliative care syringe requires reflection on both reductionist and systems thinking. In the classic biomedical model, treatment historically used drugs with biochemical methods of action to describe the effect of what's in the syringe. While this may explain the method of action for a few functions, such as pain management by providing opioids to a patient, it does not explain the holistic method of action. Instead, a chorus of functions acting on several operands and resources provided at different times and time scales require a systems viewpoint to capture the full method of action.
This system-based description of what palliative care does can be applied in several ways. First, this framework can be used to classify the number, types, and degree of skills required to support the care needs of complex patients. As the field expands palliative care, it is critical to distinguish between primary and specialty palliative care. It may be that specific functions can be provided by primary palliative care, and others functions beyond the patient-operand may need to be provided by a specialist. Indeed, there may also be instances when a function provided to the patient may require a specialist by the sheer level of skill required to fulfill this function. It may also be that two distinct providers are needed because the palliative care specialist is ‘acting upon’ the referring provider's affective and cognitive decision-making processes. While many palliative care education and training focus on communication skills ( Kelley et al., 2012 ), the awareness of this framework can help providers more concretely describe the evolution of the functions performed. This framework could help distinguish between what palliative care providers do (the functions they perform) and the skills needed to perform these functions. For example, a trainee may not recognize that a skilled provider is conversing with a patient while sensing the reactions from family members; using this framework can help the provider point to mental decisions they made as to when they decided to shift their tone or attention. Finally, by recognizing the many functions performed beyond the typical clinical encounter and with the means to describe any clinical case concretely and sequentially, it may be possible to identify palliative care measures for quality improvement , accreditation, and research. For example, recognizing the system-level effects of the functions identified may support the definition of system-level palliative care outcome measures for palliative care intervention studies ( Barnato and Khayal, 2021 ).
This study's strengths include systematically modeling palliative care to develop a working model of palliative care functions. By doing so, we can now describe the perceived complex, non-linear process in a linear fashion, as we demonstrated by mapping the functions onto the clinical case. Consequently, in contrast to previously proposed expert consensus domain-based descriptions of palliative care ( Hodiamont et al., 2019 ; Munday et al., 2003 ; Marshall and Myers, 2018 ), this model directly connects palliative care provider actions and tasks to emergent behaviors that may help explain system-level mechanisms of action for palliative care. Of course, our model relies on a systems engineering conceptual framework; other conceptual frameworks applied to the same data would naturally produce a different model. Nevertheless, our novel approach complements prior work focusing on interactions within the patient-provider encounter using such conceptual frameworks as the cognitive model of stress and coping ( Folkman, 1997 ; Lazarus and Folkman, 1984 ), goals of care conversations ( Childers et al., 2017 ), conversational dynamics model ( Earle et al., 2008 ) and emerging work ( Shalev et al., 2022 ; Brenner et al., 2022 ) exploring the interactions between palliative care providers and referring providers using the conceptual frameworks of holding environment ( Cabaniss, 2016 ; Winnicott, 2018 ), and psychotherapy-based model of clinical supervision ( MacCulloch and Shattell, 2009 ; Edmonds et al., 2015 ). While our study has strengths, it also has limitations. The study included a single engineering modeler, which was partially alleviated by iterative validation throughout the data collection phase. This study observations included a single healthcare system. This limitation is partially alleviated by observing a large palliative care program with multiple services. It may also have been mitigated by the senior palliative care provider-researchers' experience after 15 years of ethnographic research on palliative care at multiple academic medical centers across the U.S, which may strengthen the model's external validity. As palliative care services evolve either in a specific healthcare system or as a field, these functions may need to evolve as well.

Section: 5. Conclusion

This systems-based modeling and reference frame provides insight into the challenges surrounding the recurring question of what is in the palliative care “syringe.” The active ingredients are more than a bundle of “domains” or “components” that can be assessed analogously to the completion of a laboratory test or delivery of an infusion. Although there may be some parallels with behavioral interventions, assessing and responding to other members of the health care team's psychological state and offering cognitive reframing to facilitate goal-aligned medical decision-making for a patient is decidedly unique. It is possible that one way to differentiate primary from specialty palliative care is if the provider delivering palliative care is expected to perform any functions for the non-palliative or palliative care provider. The palliative care provider and the team were our primary focus as we identified palliative care's functions. Future directions to this work will include applying the model to describe a systems-based method of action for palliative care and a means to measure palliative care functions within and across organizations. This work may differentiate skills relevant for primary versus specialty palliative care and offer more insight into the affective, cognitive, and social processes underlying the unique contributions of specialty palliative care to health care delivery outcomes for patients with serious illness.

Section: Funding

This work was supported by the American Cancer Society [RSG-18-017-01 CPHPS]; the Susan J. and Richard M. Levy Academic Cluster in Health Care Delivery at Dartmouth ; and the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation . The sponsors had no involvement in the study design; in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; or in the decision to submit the article for publication.

Section: Availability of data and materials

The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Section: Credit author statement

Inas S. Khayal: Funding acquisition, Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Validation, Writing – original draft preparation, Writing – review & editing; Amber E. Barnato: Funding acquisition, Data curation, Validation, Writing-Reviewing and Editing.

Section: Declarations of competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Section: Acknowledgments

The authors thank members of the palliative care interdisciplinary team at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center for their input on model development and validation, including Matthew M. Wilson MD, Elizabeth Byrnes LCSW, Meredith MacMartin MD, Sharon Keller RN, Maryellen C. Corliss RN, Donna L. Soltura MSW, Amelia M. Cullinan, MD, Kathryn B. Kirkland MD, and external expert, Robert Arnold MD, for his input on model validation.
