Title: Safety net, gateway, market, sport, and war: Exploring how emergency physicians conceptualize and ascribe meaning to emergency care


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Metaphorical expressions and conceptualisations are widely used in medical discourse to convey complex and abstract concepts. Our study uses a novel way to examine the spontaneous use of metaphors by emergency physicians as they articulate their experiences of practicing emergency care. These co-constructions shed light on the values and beliefs that shape their emergency care practice.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We invited 25 Taiwanese emergency physicians to participate in one-to-one semi-structured interviews.

Abstract_Section: Results

Drawing on social constructionism theory, systematic metaphor analysis method and Metaphor Identification Procedure (MIP) we identified metaphorical linguistic expressions in their talk, grouping them into five-overarching conceptual metaphors. We argue that these metaphors underpin emergency physicians’ experiences of practicing emergency medical care: Safety Net, Gateway, Market, War, and Sport.

Abstract_Section: Discussion

The Safety Net, Gateway, and Market conceptualisations highlight physician-patient relationships and the social mission, resource allocation , and consumerism aspects of emergency care practice. The Sport and War conceptualisations highlight the physician–physician relationship and the demanding, team-based nature of emergency care practice.

Abstract_Section: Conclusion

We propose that the choice of metaphorical conceptualisation deployed by emergency physicians has implications on their embodiment of professional identities. This discussion of using metaphors to study professional identities contributes to the literature concerned with finding creative and innovative ways to research identities. Future studies may utilize metaphors to gain a comprehensive understanding of physicians’ professional identities in other specialties.

Section: 1. Introduction

Metaphors are everywhere, we effortlessly use them as we go about our everyday talk. Representing our underlying conceptions of the world, metaphors are an inexorable process of language and thought ( Kövecses, 2002b ; Lakoff and Johnson, 1980 ). As such, they can shape our perception of the world and our actions ( Musloff and Zinken, 2009 ). Understanding the various metaphors healthcare professionals use in healthcare contexts sheds light on how they think about themselves and their relationships with patients ( Mustacchi and Krevans, 2001 ; Nugus et al., 2009 ; Rees et al., 2007 , 2008 ; Reisfield and Wilson, 2004 ). Thus, metaphor usage in emergency medicine research reveals how scholars are beginning to acknowledge the value of metaphors in organising and framing complex concepts such as handover ( Hilligoss, 2014 ; Nugus et al., 2009 ), overcrowding ( Bullard et al., 1996 ; Chen et al., 2017 ), and the role of emergency social workers ( Selby et al., 2018 ). However, literature examining how emergency physicians use metaphors to articulate emergency care and practice (i.e., how they handle their workload) and make sense of their experiences of being emergency physicians is lacking. We aim to fill this gap in the literature by examining the metaphors through which emergency physicians construct their experiences of practicing and delivering emergency medical care. In doing so we explore the potential implications these constructions have on their identities as emergency physicians.
The notion that our conceptual system is inherently metaphorical is well established ( Gibbs et al., 2004 ; Kövecses, 2002a ; Lakoff and Johnson, 1980 ). Consequently, it is widely acknowledged that we rely on conceptual metaphors to structure our understanding of the world, language, actions, and of novel and abstract concepts ( Kövecses, 2002a ; Lakoff and Johnson, 1980 ). Furthermore, scholars propose that most of these metaphors used to structure our conceptual system are rooted in our embodied experiences of the world. Thus, experiences comprise the source from which we draw upon to make sense of these novel or abstract concepts (the target domain ) ( Gibbs et al., 2004 ; Jamrozik et al., 2016 ). As such, conceptual metaphors can be defined as an understanding of an abstract concept in terms of a concrete concept; the source domain (comprising concrete concepts) and the target domain (comprising abstract concepts) are mapped together ( Gibbs et al., 2004 ; Jamrozik et al., 2016 ; Kövecses, 2002b ; Lakoff and Johnson, 1999 ).
Metaphors play a great role in facilitating medical communication. Whether it is medical students talking about what it is like to be a doctor, patients describing their experience of a disease or doctors’ place in the medical hierarchy, the media explaining a new disease, or doctors explaining the mechanism of a disease; metaphors have been used to conceive, visualise, and interpret these complex concepts and experiences ( Bleakley, 2017 ; Lakoff and Johnson, 2003 ; Rees et al., 2007 ; Reisfield and Wilson, 2004 ). Metaphors help us convey norms and shared experiences. Indeed, for medical professionals, the use of metaphors conveying shared experience has been a key driver in drawing attention to shared beliefs towards professional practice. For example, traditionally medicine was seen through the religious metaphor (e.g. medicine as a calling), with doctors ministering to the sick , but more recently the source domain of business has been drawn upon (e.g. medicine as a factory) ( Masukume and Zumla, 2012 ). Likewise, a study looking at the use of metaphors by pharmaceutical advertisement and consumers in online reviews found that they relied on shared source domains such as war, container, sport, journey, and machine indicating a shared conceptualisation of the body, illness and treatment ( Delbaere, 2013 ). Furthermore, research examining media portrayals of the zika virus epidemic found the war metaphor being used to guide discourses around disease and health management strategies ( Ribeiro et al., 2018 ). Taken together, how healthcare professionals conceive of their practice can have entailments that variously affect our health and life ( Masukume and Zumla, 2012 ).
Existing literature on metaphors and metonyms associated with emergency doctors draws parallels between the emergency work environment and the stock market trading floor, grocery store, and traditional Chinese market ( Bullard et al., 1996 ; Chen et al., 2017 ). All three conceptualisations portray the emergency medical environment as busy, each highlighting different degrees of organisation, crowdedness, and efficiency. Another study looking at emergency physicians’ discourse around handoffs found that they described handoffs as persuasion , competition, expectation matching, and collaboration, highlighting the shared experience of emergency physicians in dealing with non-medical, social issues, as they facilitate the transfer of patients, and responsibilities ( Hilligoss, 2014 ). These studies lay the foundation for the use of metaphors in discourse around the emergency profession . Despite this foundation, the current discourse around emergency care, the perceived contribution of emergency medicine, and emergency physicians in the health care system remains complex, and ambivalent.
Emergency care and its provision are multidimensional concepts fraught with ambiguity from providers' (administration, emergency professions) and patients' perspective ( Pope et al., 2019 ). “The defining attributes of the emergency care concept are abstract” and emergency care is often misconstrued as acute or urgent care ( Davis et al., 2020 ). Further, our understanding of emergency care is mediated by contradictory discourses in society and media (i.e., televised scripted shows, disaster news reports), adding to the concept's ambiguity ( Curry, 2008 ; Nugus et al., 2009 ).
As the epicenter of inter-professional practice, emergency care is vital to the provision of primary care and continuity of patient care. A lack of understanding of the emergency care concept, how emergency care contributes to healthcare, and the link between emergency medicine and other specialties is detrimental to inter-professional practice ( Zink, 2011 ). To date, emergency physicians have been accused of being incompetent ( Curry, 2008 ) and stealing patients. Unlike other emergency care providers, physicians are responsible for patient safety and liable for adverse events due to malpractice. The presence of high stakes professional dilemmas, and efforts to resolve tensions over professional boundaries and patient ownership during handovers, further complicates their practice of emergency care ( Hilligoss, 2014 ; Monrouxe et al., 2015 ; Nugus et al., 2009 ; Pope et al., 2019 ). This translates to loss of physicians' billable hours and delays in healthcare delivery, endangering patients’ lives. Indeed, insights into emergency practice provide other specialties with a better understanding of emergency practice and how it aligns with their own specialty, thus informing collaborative practice , facilitating effective and efficient continuity of care ( Jones et al., 2005 ).
Furthermore, the specialty continues to provide quality, efficient, and cost-effective care through teams of highly skilled emergency physicians ( Curry, 2008 ; Zink, 2011 ). Indeed, emergency medicine is at the forefront of major cases and pandemics like, SARS , MERs , and now COVID 19 , yet there is limited insight into how emergency care providers reconcile uncertainty, patients' needs, time pressure, resource demands, changing healthcare policies, alongside their practice values and beliefs to assign meaning to their work. Given the important contribution made by emergency physicians during times of crises, understanding how they construct their challenging work experiences through metaphor use, and the potential implications of such conceptualisations, are key areas for examination.
Additionally, we argue that it is important that we examine spontaneously produced metaphors from physicians' interviews as opposed to conducting a corpus study of metaphors. The former affords a more comprehensive conceptualisation of emergency care based on physicians' lived experiences ( Schmitt, 2005 ), representing the diversity of physicians’ conceptual models used to co-construct meaning about their work experiences ( Gergen, 2011 ), offering insights into how they enact their professional identities. Therefore, a clarification of the concepts of emergency care is imperative for informing future workplace interventions aimed at enhancing the professional identities of emergency physicians and providing support to emergency physicians during practice.
We examine emergency physicians’ conceptualisations of their practice experiences by addressing the following research questions: 1) What metaphors do emergency physicians use to describe their experiences of emergency care practice and of being an emergency medicine physician ? 2) How does the meaning conveyed or encoded by such metaphor use shed light on how emergency physicians construct their professional identities and ascribe meaning to their profession?
In doing so, we analyse how identities are discursively constructed through language by focusing on both what is being said and how it is being said ( Monrouxe and Rees, 2015 ).

Section: 2. Methods

Social constructionism theories propose that language can be used as a tool to relate our realities and to construct our inter-subjective social realities ( Berger and Luckmann, 1966 ; Rees et al., 2019 ). Interestingly, this view also extends to realities about our identities, who we are, as well as more generally shaping a profession's image ( Fealy et al., 2018 ). Through engaging in discourse we construct, co-construct, deconstruct, and reconstruct not only our perceived realities of the world around us but also the realities of who we are, facilitating a consensual view of our world ( Fairhurst and Grant, 2010 ; Gergen, 2011 ). Individuals interacting in the same social context, develop common language through which ideologies and conceptual frameworks of their realities may be expressed and enacted ( Keller, 2006 ; Leeds-Hurwitz, 2009 ). In line with these studies, other researchers have conducted systematic analyses of language to examine how professional identities are narratively constructed ( Atkins, 2004 ; Monrouxe et al., 2015 ).
Building on this, we propose that emergency physicians' conceptualisations of emergency care and professional identities are a function of how they physically experience emergency practice, the emergency environment, their interaction with other people (social and physical), and reflections about emergency practice. We argue that emergency physicians' metaphorical linguistic expressions provide an image representation through which complex realities about their world can be viewed and interpreted to convey their construction of professional realities and identities ( Lakoff and Johnson, 2003 ). Indeed, metaphorical linguistic expressions do not exist on their own, but are derived from a set of common metaphorical concepts which share sources and targets ( Lakoff & Johnson, 1980 , 1999 ). As such, whether consciously or unconsciously used, metaphors are tools we employ to frame our understanding of abstract concepts through concrete (embedded) concepts ( Kövecses, 2002a ; Lakoff and Johnson, 1980 ). Metaphor analysis methods, such as systematic metaphor analysis, reconstruct these metaphorical concepts associated with metaphorical expressions found in discourse ( Lakoff and Johnson, 2003 ; Schmitt, 2005 ). Formulating conceptual metaphors helps structure participants' language, providing deeper insight into their thought processes and actions. In turn, a closer examination of conceptual metaphors can infer and communicate participants' perceptions, attitudes, actions, and intentions about an abstract concept through cross–domain mapping of target and source domain features ( Jamrozik et al., 2016 ; Kövecses, 2002a ). While not necessarily reflecting a complete mapping of the source to the target, cross–domain mapping still facilitates a transfer of some basic knowledge and experiences of the source to the target, enhancing our understanding of participants’ conceptualisation of the abstract concept ( Kövecses, 2002b ).
Taiwan's nationwide health insurance provides access to health services and resources to all citizens. This research was conducted at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, a network of hospitals with 10,050 beds located in Taiwan. The annual emergency department patient flow (2017) was 477,708, with 106 attending physicians, 62 residents, 471 nurse practitioners, and 58 nurse practitioners across the four emergency departments of the medical centre ( Table 1 ). Table 1 . Study participants’ demographic information alongside total sample population size. Empty Cell Branch 1 Branch 2 Branch 3 Branch 4 Total Participant numbers 11 6 4 4 25 Age Range 31–47 28–45 32–46 30–43 28–47 Average 37 ± 5.2 36 ± 7.1 38.3 ± 6.4 37.5 ± 5.4 37 ± 5.6 Years in EM (avg.) Range 4–20 0.7–18 4–17 2–19 0.7–20 Average 10.4 ± 5.1 8.7 ± 7.0 11 ± 5.9 11.9 ± 7.3 10.3 ± 5.8 Sex Male 9 4 4 2 19 Female 2 2 0 2 6 Rank Attending 9 4 3 3 19 Resident 2 2 1 1 6 ED census* 186,552 138,780 75,876 76,500 477,708 ED staff/branch Attending 44 28 18 16 106 Resident 28 17 8 9 62 Nurse 217 155 47 52 471 Nurse Practitioner 27 16 4 11 58
We undertook a qualitative study using individual semi-structured interview methods. The Institutional Review Board of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital provided the approval for this study. Using convenience sampling, we invited all emergency physicians in the medical centre to participate through posters placed on the emergency departments’ notice boards across the branches. We also solicited the help of our co-investigators in making announcements in departmental meetings. Participants showing interest were directly contacted via phone by the research assistant.
Twenty-five participants, comprising 6 residents and 19 attending physicians attended interviews on a voluntary basis (See Table 1 for further details). The sample is homogeneous with all participants being the same nationality and predominantly male (mirroring the male/female ratio of the medical centre) and having been exposed to the same training protocol and similar work cultures. There is, however, some variance in terms of age (ranging 28–47: mean = 37.0, SD = 5.6) and work experience (ranging 2-months-20 years: mean = 10.4, SD = 5.8 years).
Participants were prompted to engage in lengthy explorative and reflective discussions about emergency physicians' work (the focus of the study). The interview focused on the nature of emergency medical care delivery, their workload, institutional demands, how they managed the workload and their perception of the contribution made by emergency medicine . A single interviewer (RN) conducted all the interviews with an average duration of 62 min. Participants were briefed about the content and objective of the study (with metaphors not being mentioned due to the emergent nature of this analytical focus). They read and signed the consent form before the interview. All participants were compensated for their time. The interviews were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim to preserve their figurative and paralinguistic characteristics. Before sending interview audios for transcription, participants' names were replaced by unique identifiers representing their participant number, gender, age, rank and years of experience as an emergency physician (e.g. #1F37-AP10 = participant #1, a 37-year old female, attending physician, with 10 years' work experience, #6M25-R4 = participant #6, a 25-year old male resident with 4 years’ work experience).

Section: 3. Data analysis

Following the interviews, the study team noticed how participants often used powerful imagery to describe their daily work activities. To gain a deeper understanding of this we employed a metaphor analysis method ( Low and Cameron, 1999 ) and systematic analysis method ( Schmitt, 2005 ) to guide data analysis. All transcripts were initially coded by hand. This involved listening to all audio recordings and reading through transcripts. Our initial target domain comprised emergency care or practice (experience of being an emergency physician, emergency medicine, emergency department). We browsed through healthcare journals to find associated metaphorical concepts. This unsystematic gathering uncovered generic metaphorical concepts associated with healthcare generally (war, paternalism, sports, market, consumerism) but not specific to our target area.
We then identified MLEs in our interview transcripts. As we did so we discovered that participants’ conceptualisation of emergency care extended to the contribution that the emergency department and emergency medicine made within the hospital, their interactive patterns with patients, other members of the emergency department, and physicians in other specialties. Furthermore, Chinese Mandarin speakers use emergency medicine and emergency department interchangeably resulting in some MLEs referring to emergency departments while others referring to emergency medicine. Therefore, we opened our target area scope to encompass these domains rarely discussed in the literature.
We used the Metaphor Identification Procedure of Vrije Universiteit (MIPVU) developed by the Pragglejaz group to make distinctions between literal and non-literal meanings of lexical units found in our data that had the potential of being metaphorical linguistic expressions (MLEs) with respect to their context ( Semino, 2007 ; Steen, 2010 ). Using a standard and replicable method to identify MLEs is essential in reducing bias and establishing the reliability of our data analysis process ( Schmitt, 2005 ; Steen, 2010 ). We followed the steps below using the original transcripts in Chinese Mandarin: 1. Reading each transcript to gain a general understanding of the narratives 2. Identifying potential metaphorical lexical expressions and coding meaningful excerpts of surrounding text 3. a) Finding each lexical expression's contextual meaning b) Finding the basic, concrete, contemporary definition of each lexical expression using a corpus based Chinese to English online dictionary ( https://www.mdbg.net/chinese/dictionary ). This dictionary divides sentences into their lexical expressions and provides all the possible meanings, usage, history of each lexical unit and labels figurative use of lexical expressions (i.e., for idioms and metaphors). An independent professional translator also translated and back-translated selected excerpts c) Comparing basic and contextual meanings 4. Labelling the lexical expression, indicating whether or not it is lexical
During the initial hand-coding phase, NSN and YCC independently identified and verified the MLEs (metaphors, similes, idioms). For further verification, three researchers NSN, YCC, and XX used the MIPVU guide, engaging in iterative discussions. All three researchers are proficient in English and Chinese.
Following this, we reconstructed the metaphorical concepts potentially underlying these MLEs. Schimtt's (2005) systematic metaphor analysis views conceptual metaphors as potential mappings rather than absolute mappings. Similarly, our formulated conceptual metaphors represent potential mappings that exist in emergency physicians' talk about emergency practice based on their socio-cultural context and our understanding of this context ( Schmitt, 2005 ). To link metaphorical expressions with their potential metaphorical concepts, NSN and YCC independently conducted the second round of coding using ATLAS.ti software. The procedure comprised: Reading transcripts and identifying MLE's in the text for contextual their meaning and underlying theme; identifying each MLE's potential source domain; and categorising MLEs according to their source domain based on their concrete definition. Our categorisation revealed that, within the same source domains, participants used MLEs to describe different target domains. Following Schmitt (2005) , we drew together MLEs sharing the same source and target domains, classifying them under the same conceptual theme.
The development of conceptual metaphors was iterative, including the constructing and reconstructing of metaphorical concepts and selecting conceptual metaphors representing the most prevalent and coherent storyline identified in the data. Mapping target and source domains within each conceptual metaphor formed the basis of discussions around entailments that could be drawn. We referred back to the transcripts, to provide support for conceptual themes, conceptual metaphors, and our interpretation of their entailments.
Acknowledging our role as co-constructors in the interpretation of these metaphors ( Schmitt, 2005 ), another member of our team (LVM, who has extensive research experience in identity and metaphor research) reviewed our analysis and provided another perspective on the interpretation of our data. We also presented our findings to emergency physicians, some of whom were involved in the study as participants, in a series of workshops. Their feedback served to reinforce our results.

Section: 4. Results

We identified five predominant conceptual metaphors, with safety net, gateway, and market highlighting the doctor–patient relationship; sport and war revealing relationships between emergency physicians and physicians from other specialties. Following Kövecses (2002a , b) , we present metaphorical linguistic expressions in italics and conceptual metaphors in small capital letters.
In this conceptual metaphor, key features of a safety net (final line of defence, bottom of the safety net, buffer, bottom, or sinking) are tightly mapped onto features of emergency practice or care (emergency physicians, function of emergency department, the state of patients) respectively. Using expressions such as part of the social safety net and final line of defence on the safety net , participants demonstrate how emergency medical care involves providing emergency disaster relief services on a larger scale to patients ( Table 2 , MLE 1). Participants articulate that the emergency department also serves as a driftwood, the last rescue and buffer for patients against any further harm. They pick up the slack of other departments who may reject certain patients due to their ambiguous medical conditions or low socio-economic status ( Table 2 , MLE 2–3). Within the safety net conceptual framework, a close doctor–patient relationship is highlighted; participants describe themselves as the bottom of the safety net and guardians of public safety. They take up social responsibilities by seeing patients from all background portrayed as sinking to the bottom of the society without prejudice ( Table 2 , MLE 4–5). This illuminates the relationship they have with patients as their last remedy, after all the other social systems put in place have failed. Table 2 . MLEs showing emergency medical care as a safety net. 1. "I think that emergency physicians are a part of social safety net … we are involved in emergency medical service, mass casualty incidents … any major social event … they are a group of physicians who engage closely with public health or … belong to a part of the social safety net … emergency physicians are the final line of defence on the social safety net " [#21M40-AP16]. 2. "The emergency department is like the last driftwood and a shelter for people at the bottom of society. The clinic can refuse to take … drug addicts, beggars, alcoholics … but when they … collapse or lose consciousness, they are sent to the emergency department … so a major difference between the clinic and the emergency department is that the emergency department is the last … shelter or rescue for people with low socio-economic status" [#22F34-AP9] 3. "So [the emergency department] also carries the responsibility of social welfare and serves as a buffer. That is, sometimes when patients don't know where to seek help, they go to the emergency department" [#19F33-AP8] 4. " … most people from relatively low-levels of the society who may have low access to better medical care, these include the homeless or drug addicts … usually don't go to the outpatient clinic and local clinic, but they come to the emergency department … so I think from the public safety's viewpoint, the emergency department also functions as a guardian " [#13F47-AP20] 5. " … The emergency physician is the bottom of the social safety net … when other social security systems … are unable to help the patient, he continues to sink to the point of physical harm … he is sent to the emergency department ….the emergency department is part of the social safety net. We are often serving people at the bottom of the society. They may not have time to see a doctor, may be economically disadvantaged, or have a lower social status. Thus, I think the major role that we play is the provider of social security services" [#1M36-AP6]
Deploying the ‘opening’ source domain, participants rely on key entities (entry, gate, gatekeeper, guard) to understand aspects of emergency practice (emergency department, emergency physicians), conceptualising emergency care as the gate, door and entrance to the healthcare system ( Table 3 , MLE 1). Their talk on ‘opening’ reveals an interesting dynamic in the physician-patient relationship. Participants drew on guard , gatekeeper , gate god expressions, demonstrating how they creatively control and manage access to medical resources without rejecting patients ( Table 3 , MLE 2–3). The gatekeeper and gate guard image is extended to show how emergency physicians deliver emergency care through providing directions , ushering patients to other health care resources. Consequently, the emergency department is portrayed as a hub (a sub-concept of gateway) , pooling all kinds of resources from other departments and directing patients to these resources ( Table 3 , MLE 4–5). Thus, participants highlight that the emergency department's strategic position at the entrance of the hospital also makes it a centre of activity (hub), integrating resources from other departments. Table 3 . MLEs showing emergency medical care as a gateway into the healthcare system. 1. " Over 60% of patients are admitted through the emergency department … yeah, they [emergency departments] are … the door gods and doorkeepers " [#8M46-AP15] 2. "When a patient can't find his way, who will he ask? It is definitely the guard at the gate. We are the gate guards … When patients arrive, we triage patients and resolve their confusion … so we are the hospital's gate … in general, the role of an emergency department in the health care system is like a gate … so I think it [emergency department] is the gate into medical care and [emergency physicians] are gatekeepers " [#25M36-AP10] 3. "The emergency department is a " gatekeeper " … no matter what happens, assuming that there is a disaster … the emergency department is the first point of contact where the patients are brought to" [#3M41-AP17] 4. "So, it is actually a big hub. By means of limited man power, patients are directed towards hospital's ward" [#12M30-R2] 5. "It is the entrance to the hospital [from] the society. It also functions as a hub. You need to integrate resources from all areas into the emergency department" [#11M43-AP17]
Participants sometimes employ market related language to talk about emergency care (emergency department, emergency physicians, patients, emergency care delivery). Participants relate emergency care to a service window and public relations window providing customer care service and managing the flow of information to and from the public ( Table 4 , MLE 1). Drawing on the market source domain, participants describe their ‘transient’ relationships with patients as being their medical agents, helping patients deal with their respective problems ( Table 4 , MLE 2). The objective of emergency medical care delivery is likened to that of a hotel check in counter , a convenience store such as 7–11. It involves multitasking to provide efficient and high quality service to numerous customers ( Table 4 , MLE 3). However, despite their effort to provide high quality care, participants narrate that the care delivery process is fraught with a couple of problems. They use expressions like traditional market ( Table 4 , MLE 4) and hospital shopping to describe lack of organisation in the workplace and abuse of health care resources respectively. They express concerns over unreasonable patients who perceived emergency care to be similar to a drive through service delivery ( Table 4 , MLE 5), likening their unreasonable complaints to those of picky customers online . Table 4 . MLEs showing emergency medical care as a market. 1. " As far as the emergency department is concerned, it is the window that receives the most patients, because more than half of the inpatients are admitted from the emergency department, so it is a source of income … for the hospital, the ED is a must have, because it is also a public relations' window … There are major news events coming from the emergency department" [#19F33-AP8] 2. "As a medical agent of a patient who may not understand medical care, you have to help him find a suitable department or an expert … because in the end the patient is a transient guest. He won't stay long with you. But if he comes to seek your help to solve a problem, from the patients' perspective, you are just helping him as his medical agent " [#21M40-AP16] 3. [the] emergency department is a bit … like a convenience store , with long queues. Everybody makes use of the time lag. Some staff help the customers pay bills, some help you fill the coffee … people used to say that [the emergency department] is like … the check-in counter at a hotel. I've always thought that … [the emergency department] operates like the 7–11. Within a short time, you need to make sure that these customers in the queue won't get angry, are able to purchase their coffee and items on time, and then leave. I think this is quite important … Therefore, in my opinion, only emergency physicians can manage to do this" [#22F34-AP9] 4. "Actually, most of the emergency departments in this country [look] like the traditional markets. That means any passer-by can walk in and ask you where the toilet is, [sometimes] impatient patients can walk directly into the clinic and ask you whether it is or not yet their turn" [#4M36-AP11] 5. "The environment in this country's emergency department is kind of like a drive through. It is not only cheap but fast. And if the patients feel that the [service] doesn't meet their expectations or they are not treated the way they expected … they think, "I've paid my health insurance so now that I am here, I'm going to use the cheap and high quality service " [#20M40-AP13]
Our analysis identified the use of MLEs drawn from the domain of competitive sports in describing the delivery of emergency care, highlighting the tight relationship that exists between physicians. Here we find key features of the sports domain (baseball stars' career, playing by the rules of the game, changing running lanes, batons or balls and being in a relay team) being mapped to correspond with the features of the domain of emergency care (emergency physicians' career, adhering to professional standards and institution's requirements, changing specialty, and so on).
Participants draw parallels between a baseball stars' career and their own career to highlight the demands and short life span associated with the profession ( Table 5 , MLE 1). Despite experiencing challenges towards meeting all the demands placed on them by the institution, they seem to understand that, to retain their positions in the specialty, they have to play by the rules of the game ( Table 5 , MLE 2). They portray the actions of individuals who leave the specialty due to the high trade-offs and pressure as changing running lanes on an athletic track ( Table 5 , MLE 3). Despite recognising their strength in not losing to any specialty when it comes to diagnostic skills ( Table 5 , MLE 4), participants acknowledge health care delivery as a team sport drawing on relay race and ball game schemas to frame their relationships with physicians from other specialties. Competing against time and the concept of the god of death , they stress the importance of stabilising and handing over patients, conceptualised as batons, to subsequent specialties who are described as the next leg of the relay ( Table 5 , MLE 5). Similarly, in the ball game schema, physicians from other specialties are conceptualised as players in the backline who are tasked with receiving patients, portraying this action as catching the ball at the back . Table 5 . MLEs showing emergency medical care as a sport. 1. "I think that … emergency physicians are like … professional baseball stars whose career cannot last long. Because after all, the nature of our work is physically demanding and stressful … thus, I feel that an emergency physician's career cannot last for too long" [#22F34-AP9] 2. "This country in particular requires doctors to take on teaching, service and research [roles]. I believe that only a few people can do all three things at the same time …. .I think that the requirements are not reasonable. However, if you want to work with everyone in this environment, you have no choice but to play by the rules of the game … only C-level executives have the power to change the rules of the game " [#1M32-AP6] 3. "In fact, when facing these pressures, there is a price to pay … you sacrifice things such as family [time], personal interests, and personal life. Well, with so many trade-offs, some people choose to prioritize family ….without making these sacrifices they [just] … change into another running lane " [#8M46-AP15] 4. “Yes … I think we know where our strengths lies relative to others [physicians from other specialties] … I think in diagnosis, it's unlikely for us to lose to other physicians. Because we are cross-disciplinary, other specialties only focus on things related to their specialty” [#20M40-AP13] 5. "Suppose that today [as] an emergency physician I stabilize an [unstable] patient … he survives and goes for an operation … I hand over the baton to the next leg … as if I was in a relay team. I successfully pass the baton to the next runner. Well, I don't know whether the last runner is able to reach the finish line … sometimes I compete with time … and compete with the god of death … If I win the competition today, it means I have beaten the god of death" [#7M36-AP8]
Participants draw from their own perception of the concept of war, mapping key aspects (battlefield, fighting, allies, backup, bombs, weapons) into emergency practice (emergency work setting, case management , physicians from other specialties, and so on). They conceptualise the emergency medical care team as waging a war against illness in a battlefield with everyone fighting the same battle ahead ( Table 6 , MLE 1). Participants express urgency when engaging in the battle against illness by describing competent emergency physicians as engaging in a blitzkrieg like war and one that does not wade in mud and water . Critical patients with uncertain conditions are conceptualised as bombs that might explode at any time ( Table 6 , MLE 2). Participants' talk also reveals a complex relationship between them and physicians from other specialties. They use attack to describe disagreements they have with physicians from other specialties while also portraying them as allies, backline-backup , and weapons ( Table 6 , MLE 3). Participants' talk also illuminates the paradox that exists in how hospital resources, support, and expertise are perceived. They talk about the importance of having backup and weapon s in dealing with their workload, stressing the difference between medical centres with stronger backup and smaller hospitals where physicians fight alone without weapons ( Table 6 , MLE 4). Their talk also indicate that they revere emergency physicians who are without these resources yet are still able to successfully handle acute patients’ conditions ( Table 6 , MLE 5). Table 6 . MLEs showing emergency medical care as war. 1 "We are all together in the battlefield , you wouldn't think someone will unexpectedly stab you in the back … when everyone is fighting the same battle ahead , even those at the back help" [#7M36-AP8] 2 "You never know what kind of patients you will encounter. Would they be bombs ?..the patient's presenting symptoms may not be clear, but in fact his disease is very dangerous and at that moment you can't identify it … when [the bomb] suddenly explodes , you will be like … Wow! OMG! How could this happen?" [#18M36-AP19] 3 "We don't seem to have control! You can only take note of the kind of weapons in your hands … check what specialists are behind you, internal medicine physicians, surgeons, or physicians in any other specialties are your allies and weapons … if today you encounter the same patient in a regional hospital, the way you handle [the case] would be different. When you don't have these weapons behind you … the best situation for the patient would be to transfer him to other hospitals" [#2F33-AP9] 4 "in emergency departments [we] work as a team … if you were alone, of course you would be a lone army putting up a brave fight … because this is a relatively large hospital, so there is more backline support … there are more medical resources, compared to when you are in a smaller hospital fighting alone " [#21M40-AP16] 5 "When I have a lot of patients and under a lot of pressure, I firstly, delegate tasks because I am not the only one on the battlefield … having many weapons in a hospital, [means] you have many helpers, and many physicians in the backline , so you might feel like you are really awesome. But in fact, being an awesome physician comes when you go to a small, far-away place [hospital], where there are no weapons , no cannons , and people [still] respect you a lot. Wow, then you are great!" [#4M36-AP11]

Section: 5. Discussion

Our study set out to examine emergency physicians' conceptualisations of emergency care, the experience of practicing emergency medicine and the experience of being an emergency physician. Using systematic metaphor analysis we analysed MLEs found in emergency physicians' talk about their profession. Our analysis revealed five main conceptual metaphors of Safety Net, Gateway, Market, Sport, and War. The use of metaphorical expressions in our everyday talk is prompted by conceptual metaphors which reflects our conceptual system ( Lakoff & Johnson, 1980 , 1999 ). Therefore, the conceptual metaphors formulated in this study to structure emergency physicians’ metaphoric talk represent some of the ways that emergency physicians conceptualise their profession.
Scholars postulate that, in addition to drawing parallels between the basic elements of a source domain to the target, we can also draw parallels between the additional knowledge and logical deductions or implication of a metaphor's source to the target ( Kövecses, 2002b ; Lakoff and Johnson, 1980 ). This additional knowledge of the source is known as the metaphor's metaphorical entailment , which is defined as the transmission of rich additional knowledge or characteristics of the source to the target domain. For example, Kövecses (2002b) explains how the Knowing Is Seeing conceptual metaphor maps the source to the target domain as follows: seen objects are knowledge, having a sense of sight is equivalent to being knowledgeable, seeing ability is equivalent to knowledge acquisition ability. Thus, our choice of conceptual metaphor activates several metaphorical entailments that can be used to transfer our thought processes, embodied experiences, attitudes, actions, and intentions from the source to explain various aspects of the target domain ( Ponterotto, 2000 ). Likewise, we argue that the metaphors used by emergency physicians have entailments that either highlight or hide certain aspects of our target domain (the experience of practicing emergency care).
The safety net conceptual metaphor paints a picture of emergency medical care as the net placed at the bottom of the society, dissipating the impact that disasters and socio-economic issues can have on the public's health . This is associated with several entailments. It portrays the emergency physician-patient relationship as guardianship, illuminating the protective, albeit hierarchical, aspect of emergency care delivery. Such a conceptualisation reveals a belief that being an emergency physician may entail doing public- and social-related work beyond the original scope of emergency care. Consequently, the safety net construction of emergency care delivery, and the guardian construction of emergency physicians' identity, places the burden of public health in the hands of emergency physicians. The safety net source domain has been used in other studies to describe the role of emergency medicine ( Hock et al., 2005 ) and programs helping patients with mental illness ( Lawn et al., 2016 ).
The gateway conceptualisation paints a picture of emergency care delivery transcending the imaginary border between society and the hospital. Unlike the traditional negative entailment usually associated with gatekeeping source domains, our participants' discourse reflects the transfer of the ushership entailment: portraying the physician-patient relationship as an ushership. Emergency physicians conveyed their beliefs about their work as granting patients' access to healthcare, rather than withholding it. Within this conceptualisation, emergency care entails determining the patients' course of treatment, starting the treatment process and directing the patients to resources in other specialties where direct access may be restricted. Such beliefs are in line with the interactionist approach of a ‘narrative frankness’ strategy used by emergency triage nurses to establish patients' reasonableness and legitimacy for the use of health resources even when their cases do not fully meet the inclusion criteria for emergency ( Wamsiedel, 2020 ). We propose that this kind of conceptualisation is more likely in countries with social health care systems ( Wamsiedel, 2020 ) or countries that adhere to The Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) ( Simonet, 2009 ).
The market metaphor highlights how healthcare delivery is seen through the lens of consumerism , widely reported in previous studies ( Mustacchi and Krevans, 2001 ). Within this framework, emergency care sometimes involves offering services unrelated to acute care: services that facilitate patients' convenience, protecting patients-hospital relations. The physician-patient relationship is constructed as customer care service. This conceptualisation reveals positive and negative entailments: whilst emergency physicians portray a sense of satisfaction in catering to their clients’ needs, advising them about the best course of treatment, they also express challenges in dealing with entitled patients. In the former portrayal, a positive-physician-patient relationship is highlighted while in the latter a more problematic physician-patient relationship is revealed. This conceptualisation may be more pronounced in the Taiwanese cultural context, where the National Health Insurance provides citizens with increased access to health care .
Both sport and war metaphors have been widely used in inter-professional collaboration highlighting negative and positive entailments ( Axelsson and Axelsson, 2009 ; Bleakley, 2017 ; Bleakley et al., 2014 ). Similarly, our data indicates the conceptualisation of emergency medical delivery as sport and war enables emergency physicians to describe inter-professional team-dynamics in emergency care. Within the sport and war conceptualisation, the relationship between emergency physicians and physicians from other specialties is portrayed as teammates and members of the same troop respectively.
The most salient entailment of sport and war source domains is positive, portraying successful workload management as a winning strategy and successfully waging war by playing one's part well. The entailments of active participation, mutual trust, team spirit and an ally-team effort are also transferred to our target domain. A less salient entailment of the sport and war metaphors found in our data, captures the diverse approaches of delivering medical care often witnessed in inter-specialty collaborations. Within this context, the embodiment of emergency physicians' professional identities as frontline athletes and frontline soldiers are pronounced. This conceptualisation of role enactment and boundaries of inter-specialty collaboration is congruent with findings from a previous study suggesting that successful inter-professional team work relies on the operation of three logics; assimilation (flexibility in boundaries and adoption of outgroup's perspectives), segregation (clear demarcation of boundaries) and integration (complementing each other's roles) ( Skyberg and Innvaer, 2020 ).
The sport and war conceptual metaphors are also used to articulate the complex and demanding nature of emergency care. The high stakes win-or-lose sport and war metaphorical entailments reveals a positive construction of emergency physicians' identities as quick witted, multi-skilled, agile, resilient, and heroic. However, the same win or lose entailment of sport and war also reveals emergency physicians’ concerns over dealing with a heightened sense of urgency, uncertainty, institutional expectations and the sacrifices they make for their profession.
Some MLEs within the sport and war conceptual metaphors revealed direct associations with physicians' embodied experiences: passing the baton to the next runner , catching a ball , handling bomb patients that explode paint an image capturing actions and feelings (sprinting, catching, physical exhaustion, panting, sweating, anxiety). The MLEs also reflect somatosensory experiences (the sensation of holding a baton or something volatile like an explosive), facilitating knowledge about handling bombs or fundamental rules in sports of passing the ball or baton to the next player to be carried over to explain abstract experiences of emergency practice (case management, handover). Through this knowledge transfer, we come to understand how emergency physicians enact their professional identities through embodied task performance. As such, we postulate that emergency physicians’ professional identities involves elements of endurance, working fast, being collaborative, strategic, and (most importantly) being physically fit.
Through the analysis of emergency medicine metaphoric linguistic expressions, our study provides a broader, more explicit conceptualisation of emergency care than before. While emergency physicians' use of metaphors broadly reveal their strong sense of duty and dedication to the delivery of quality emergency care, each suggests a different aspect of importance. Moreover, each highlights various types of interactions amongst emergency care stakeholders (i.e., physician-patient relationships and physician-physician relationships). For instance, even though war and safety net both have the entailment of protection, safety net's protection is more nurturing while war's protection may be territorial. The same applies for sport and war. While they both highlight the high-stakes nature of emergency care, the consequences of losing may be more subtle in the sport than the war conceptualisation. Therefore, we propose that such differences in conceptualisation may influence emergency physicians' perceptions of the meaning of their work, therefore shaping emergency practice and healthcare outcomes ( Crescitelli et al., 2021 ).
Nonetheless, we have identified a common language through which ideologies about emergency care and practice can be discussed ( Leeds-Hurwitz, 2009 ), which can be used to underpin future discourses of emergency care and practice. Indeed, previous studies have illustrated the power of language in shaping people's perception of a profession's image ( Fealy et al., 2018 ). Therefore, our study contributes to the literature aimed at educating the public, policy makers, and physicians from other specialties about emergency care so that they can recognise the specialty's unique contributions. For example, the metaphors employed by our participants represent a wide range of scaffolding through which they construct their embodied professional identities – first responders, fast and strategic practitioners, guardian, usher, customer care service representative, team player and trooper – thus our results may act as a rough map for incoming residents ( Masukume and Zumla, 2012 ) and be used as basis for initiatives aimed at developing inter-professional education and collaboration for improving the quality of patient care ( Jones et al., 2005 ).

Section: 6. Limitations

Metaphor analysis as a method has several limitations, therefore our results are discussed in light of these limitations. A major limitation is that the use of metaphors is deliberate and also non-deliberate ( Steen, 2010 ). Some metaphorical expressions could be mapped into more than one source, hence more than one conceptual metaphor. Furthermore, the development of conceptual metaphors is highly subjective ( Schmitt, 2005 ). This is an area of criticism for the conceptual metaphor theory. To date, we cannot make claims of a direct association between metaphorical thoughts, actions, speaker's intentions and metaphorical expressions they employ, nor can we completely justify the process of narrowing down the choices of conceptual metaphors and interpretation of their entailment ( Semino, 2007 ). Furthermore, we make no claims regarding the frequency or dominance of metaphors. While counting is becoming a common practice in metaphor research, evidence supporting the contribution of this to our overall understanding of metaphors is not well established ( Gibbs, 2015 ). Furthermore, using frequencies is counterproductive to our aim of highlighting participants' nuanced experiences ( Monrouxe and Rees, 2020 ). Thus, we engaged in an iterative discussion process focused on formulating, assigning and reassigning different conceptual metaphors to our MLEs categories. We are also mindful not to claim that our study covers all metaphorical conceptualisations of emergency care and practice. This is due to the homogeneous nature of our sample and unique characteristics of our study context. Furthermore, metaphors carry universal and cultural-specific aspects of language and thought. Even when there is a partial overlap in the cross-cultural use and understanding of metaphors, the nuanced understanding of embodied experiences and entailments are subject to the speakers' and interpreters' culture ( Lakoff and Johnson, 1999 ; Schmitt, 2005 ). The Taiwanese culture, healthcare policies and economic status all influence how emergency care is delivered and the metaphorical expressions available to our participants. For example, the metaphorical expressions associated with safety net and gateway might to reflect an increased accessibility to healthcare in Taiwan and the collectivist nature of its society.
Future studies may benefit from collecting data on metaphor use across institutions and countries with different health and economic contexts to see if some of the same conceptualisations are held by a wide range of emergency physicians. This may also help to reveal additional conceptualisations of the target domain. We also wonder whether the results can be generalisable to other specialties. This is an empirical question, and it calls for future studies to explore the similarities and differences in the use of conceptual metaphors and their entailments in different specialties.

Section: 7. Conclusion

Emergency physicians' beliefs and values on the practice of emergency medical care and experience of being an emergency physician are abstract and implicit concepts. Examining the pattern of metaphors used in emergency physicians' discourse provided a novel way to look into these concepts. Viewing the delivery of emergency medical care through safety net and gateway conceptual metaphors echoes the social function of emergency care practice and the social mission bestowed on emergency physicians to promote and provide patient-centered care regardless of the patient's socio-economic status. Whereas conceptualising the delivery of emergency medical care as a market provides insight into the shift in healthcare delivery from a socially oriented model to a commerce-oriented model of care. The conceptualisation of the practice of emergency medical care through sport and war metaphors, reveals the fundamental importance of emergency physicians' position at the forefront facing uncertain and unsafe conditions while working under time pressure. These two conceptualisations also reveal the collective effort of physicians to provide state-of-the-art emergency care through inter-specialty collaboration. Finally, our study which is among the first to use conceptual metaphors from emergency physicians' stories about their profession, gives a glimpse of the different ways emergency physicians co-construct their professional identities.

Section: Credit author statement

Yu-Che Chang: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Nothando S. Nkambule: Formal analysis, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Xaviera Xiao: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Roy Y. L. Ngerng: Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – review & editing. Lynn V. Monrouxe: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Resources, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors offer their sincere gratitude to our participants and the project's co-principal investigators Chia-Te Kung, Cheng-Ting Hsiao and Shu-Chen Liao who helped in the participants' recruitment process. The authors also acknowledge the support provided the funding from the Ministry of Science and Technology Taiwan (Grant Number- MOST 105-2511-S-182 -001 -MY3 ).
