Title: Aiming for Universal Health Coverage through insurance in Ethiopia: State infrastructural power and the challenge of enrolment


Abstract: Abstract

Many developing countries are considering insurance as a means of pursuing Universal Health Coverage. A key challenge to confront is how to achieve high levels of health insurance enrolment. For voluntary schemes this entails mass awareness raising and promotional activity, though as schemes move to compulsory enrolment, monitoring and enforcement are required. This paper focuses on Ethiopia, which has made state health insurance for the informal sector a central pillar of its Universal Health Coverage strategy. The paper shows that high enrolment requires particular forms of state capacity, captured by Michael Mann's concept of state ‘infrastructural power’. The paper draws on detailed case studies of insurance implementation in the Tigray and Oromiya regions of Ethiopia to illustrate variation in state infrastructural power and the implications for health insurance. Findings suggest that the potential of state health insurance as a means of promoting health access for a broad section of the population may be limited to the minority of countries or regions within countries exhibiting high levels of infrastructural power.

Section: 1. Introduction

Universal Health Coverage (UHC) is high on the global development agenda, including as one of the Sustainable Development Goal targets for 2030. UHC is a situation in which ‘all individuals and communities receive the health services they need without suffering financial hardship when paying for them’ ( Lancet, 2016 , p. 2837). Consequently, many see health insurance as an important component of UHC strategies ( Lagomarsino et al., 2012 ) given the potential to limit out of pocket spending and finance healthcare.
Achieving UHC through insurance has, though, proven challenging. Across the global south, insurance schemes exclude large numbers in the informal sector because people struggle to pay premiums and due to the ‘huge task’ of ‘enrolling and collecting premiums from nonindigent farmers and informal sector workers’ ( Hsiao and Shaw, 2007 , p. 77). Consequently, many argue that funding informal sector coverage through general taxation is more feasible ( Kutzin, 2012 , Harris, 2019 ).
Nonetheless, some countries have pushed ahead with insurance. The Ethiopian government aims for universal coverage through state-administered schemes, including Community-Based Health Insurance (CBHI) for 90 per cent of the population in the informal sector. Past research highlighted the importance of political legitimacy and ideology of self-reliance in shaping the government's health insurance strategy ( Lavers, 2019 ). Meanwhile, evaluations show CBHI's positive impacts on healthcare utilisation and financial hardship ( Mebratie et al., 2019 ), while those most likely to enrol include former state officials ( Mebratie et al., 2015 ) and recipients of state social transfers ( Shigute et al., 2017 ). Furthermore, as discussed below, official enrolment data show significant variations in enrolment rates between regions within Ethiopia. For example, in 2017, while Amhara, Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples' Region (SNNPR) and Tigray had enrolled 49–56 per cent of their populations in areas where the scheme was operational, the comparable figure for Oromiya was just 25 per cent.
This paper builds on existing research on CBHI, as well as a growing literature on the ‘sub-national turn’ in political science that highlights the importance of examining the uneven reach and capacity of states within countries ( Snyder, 2001 ; Soifer, 2015 ; Giraudy et al., 2019 ). The paper focuses on how the Ethiopian state promotes CBHI enrolment with a view to better understanding its potential contribution to UHC. Sub-national comparison within Ethiopia usefully illustrates the challenge due the ability to control for programme design—a common issue with international comparisons—and internal variations in state capacity. This analysis demonstrates that mass enrolment and the enforcement of health insurance mandates places demands on the state's capacity and reach, conceptualised here as ‘state infrastructural power’ ( Mann, 1984 ). In Ethiopia, as in many other countries, the state's ability to mobilise its population varies internally based on historical factors, recent political dynamics, and gender norms. The result is that party-state structures, which penetrated society in Tigray provided effective mechanisms for CBHI enrolment. In contrast, the party-state struggled for legitimacy in Oromiya, impeding CBHI promotion.
An important contribution of the paper, therefore, is to demonstrate that pursuit of UHC through insurance depends on state infrastructural power. Research on the evolution of health insurance in today's welfare states tends to assume sufficient state capacity to enforce health insurance mandates. Yet, this capacity cannot be assumed in many countries currently confronting UHC. While there are examples where countries have succeeded in raising enrolment based on the power of the state to mobilise its population, this degree of state infrastructural power is uncommon.
The paper begins by discussing comparative experiences with health insurance and UHC, before outlining the analytical framework and research design used in this study. The next sections introduce the Ethiopian government's plans for health insurance and analyse the political dynamics that shaped state infrastructural power in Ethiopia. The paper then turns to the Tigray and Oromiya case studies . The final section concludes, highlighting the implications for health insurance.

Section: 2. Insurance and the challenge of universal health coverage

The first countries to cover broad sections of their populations through health insurance moved gradually from voluntary to compulsory enrolment. Coverage extension took place over decades, alongside economic transformation, which eased the challenge of enrolling the informal sector. Bismarck's 1883 reforms in Germany made health insurance compulsory for just 10 per cent of the population, with self-employed farmers only covered 90 years later ( Bärnighausen and Sauerborn, 2002 ). Similarly in Japan and South Korea , compulsory insurance built on voluntary schemes, but the self-employed and farmers were only included years after initial reforms ( Yang, 1991 ; Ikegami et al., 2011 ).
Voluntary enrolment demonstrated the benefits of insurance, aiding enforcement of subsequent compulsory schemes ( Bärnighausen and Sauerborn, 2002 ; Ikegami et al., 2011 ). Yet this gradual approach is clearly problematic for countries targeting UHC by 2030. Moreover, phased expansion depended on structural transformation of the economy and formalisation of employment. Modernisation theorists’ expectations that developing countries would follow advanced economies to development and formalisation have been dashed. Instead, formal sector schemes create vested interests , resisting subsequent expansion and pooling with less well-off groups ( Kutzin, 2012 ).
Recently, countries including Thailand have achieved universal coverage, funding extension through general taxation and bypassing the administrative challenge of collecting informal sector contributions ( Harris, 2019 ). Yet those uncovered in these middle-income countries amounted to approximately 30 per cent of the population. How feasible such an approach would be in a low-income country with a larger uninsured population is open to debate. Indeed in African countries, health insurance often entails compulsory insurance for a small formal sector, with informal sector coverage limited to voluntary Community-Based Health Insurance (CBHI). Critics argue that with low enrolment and poor management, CBHI makes little contribution to UHC ( Carrin et al., 2005 ).
Yet, there are countries that have achieved high informal sector enrolment. China's New Rural Cooperative Medical System stands out with 97 per cent coverage of the rural population by 2011 ( Li et al., 2011 ; Yu, 2015 ). The state subsidises premiums yet still requires household contributions. Studies stress that insurance is voluntary, apparently making China an exception to the rule that ‘[n]o country has attained universal population coverage by relying mainly on voluntary contributions’ ( Kutzin, 2012 , p. 867). However, there is a severe lack of research on how China bucked this trend. Existing studies highlight enrolment targets in government officials' performance evaluations, resulting in massive outreach campaigns ( Yu, 2015 ). Given the lack of research, it is unclear whether this strong state pressure challenges the scheme's formally voluntary status.
On a different scale, Rwanda stands out in Africa for mass enrolment in its Mutuelles de Santé. Unlike voluntary and community-managed CBHI schemes, Rwanda's Mutuelles are state-managed and compulsory ( Chemouni, 2018 ). A 2006 law requiring all Rwandans to enrol in health insurance resulted in 90 per cent coverage by the late 2000s. Though focusing on the national policy process, Chemouni (2018) suggests that expansion was based on enrolment targets in officials' performance contracts and utilisation of decentralised state structures for mass mobilisation ( Chemouni, 2018 ). The health insurance law also prescribes fines for failure to enrol and there are reports of arrests and denial of services for those that refuse ( Chemouni, 2018 ).
China and Rwanda therefore demonstrate that there is no inherent reason why compulsory insurance cannot be applied to the informal sector. One of the few things that China—with the largest population in the world—and Rwanda—among the smallest—share is the enormous capacity of the state to mobilise the population. Many developing countries states lack such capacities. Ghana is frequently highlighted in health insurance debates since enrolment was made a legal requirement in 2003 ( Jehu-Appiah et al., 2011 ). However, this aspirational mandate has never been enforced. Indeed, it is doubtful the state would have the capacity to do so or whether Ghana's highly competitive politics would be compatible with the stringent measures taken in Rwanda. Consequently, enrolment has stagnated around 30–40 per cent. As such, the limited existing research on these cases leads to the hypothesis that state capacity to mobilise the population is an important factor shaping enrolment.

Section: 3. Researching the politics of health insurance enrolment

As discussed above, there is a lack of theoretical work on the political factors shaping health insurance enrolment. Most existing studies on enrolment pay no attention to politics, instead examining the impact of, for example, people's willingness to pay , income levels and access to health facilities. Yet, past experience is clear that voluntary enrolment is insufficient to achieve universal coverage, thereby highlighting the importance of states' capacity to ensure compliance.
While many consider state capacity to be an important factor shaping development outcomes, there remains great debate about how state capacity can best be conceptualised (for good recent overviews, see vom Hau, 2012 ; Centeno et al., 2017 ). Indeed, theorists have sought to operationalise state capacity in different ways for particular research purposes. Major themes of research on state capacity have focused on state autonomy from societal interests (e.g. Skocpol, 1979 ; Evans, 1995 ) or bureaucratic quality, emphasising the importance of meritocratic recruitment and an esprit de corps (e.g. Geddes, 1994 ; Gorski, 1995 ). While past research has shown the importance of these aspects of state capacity in general and they are likely to be of relevance to the effective administration of a health insurance fund , for example, the challenge of achieving universal enrolment presents a quite different challenge regarding the territorial reach of the state. While the acceptance of state policies and rules regarding health insurance enrolment as legitimate are likely to be important, universal enrolment will ultimately rest on the state's ability to enforce compliance. This enforcement capacity will depend on the existence of a dispersed network of officials reaching across national territory who can mobilise people, raise awareness and enforce laws.
For this purpose, the research turns to Michael Mann's (1984 , 1986) concept of state infrastructural power as a means of capturing relevant aspects of state capacity. Mann conceptualises two distinct forms of state power: despotic power, namely the ability of the state to make decisions independent of civil society, and infrastructural power, the ability to actually implement those decisions across national territory. State infrastructural power is, therefore, distinct from the goals to which it is directed. While the complex relations between despotic and infrastructural power have been the subject of considerable debate ( Mann, 1984 , 2008 ; Lucas, 1998 ; Soifer and vom Hau, 2008 ; Fortin-Rittberger, 2014 ), the concept of infrastructural power is useful for present purposes since it highlights both sub-national variation in the reach of the state, and the relational nature of state power ( Soifer, 2008 ; Soifer and vom Hau, 2008 ).
The paper focuses on three relevant aspects of infrastructural power. Vitally, each is likely to vary within national territory ( Giraudy et al., 2019 ). First, is the availability and training of state officials on which implementation must rest. Past research has shown that the greater availability and training of local level officials increases the state's capacity to translate national initiatives into local implementation plans and to respond to societal needs ( Soifer and vom Hau, 2008 ; Ziblatt, 2008 ). With respect to health insurance, greater availability of better-trained staff is likely to lead to increased enrolment due to improved scheme administration and time allocation to promotional activities.
Second, infrastructural power highlights the importance of state-society relations. Infrastructural power is enhanced where the state can mobilise societal organisations in the pursuit of its objectives and constrained where it faces opposition ( Migdal 1988 , 2001 ). State legitimacy facilitates engagement between state and non-state actors and increases the likelihood that people will comply with state initiatives, thereby facilitating ‘the actual exercise of state infrastructural power’ ( Soifer and vom Hau, 2008 , p. 227). Where legitimacy is limited, however, the state may still be able to implement its plans through threats of punishment or outright coercion, if it possesses the necessary capacity and power over society ( Soifer, 2008 ; Soifer and vom Hau, 2008 ; Levitsky and Way, 2010 ; Slater, 2010 ). Where a state lacks enforcement capacity, enrolment will, in practice, be voluntary and, based on comparative experience, relatively low. Importantly, societies and the state's mobilisation capacity are not homogeneous, but are differentiated by gender, class, ethnicity and religion. Of importance to the subsequent analysis, gender norms shape intra-household and state-society relations, and thereby the state's differential ability to mobilise men and women.
Third, infrastructural power concerns relations between state agencies ( Soifer and vom Hau, 2008 ; Soifer, 2015 ). To achieve its objectives, the central state must influence lower level officials, through performance evaluations, discursive narratives or coercion. Where higher-level officials have greater power over frontline officials and set easy-to-monitor performance targets, insurance enrolment is likely to be enhanced. Where central government has little control over local officials, greater local discretion will undermine enforcement.
To examine the impact of state infrastructural power on health insurance enrolment, this paper pursues a comparative process tracing methodology, commonly used in political science to identify the causal process leading to particular outcomes ( George and Bennett, 2004 ). Process tracing entails triangulation between data sources to reconstruct a sequence of events. As such, process tracing enables the researcher to test the explanatory power of a theory against rival explanations through in-depth case studies , increasing confidence in a particular explanation ( George and Bennett, 2004 ; Bennett and Checkel, 2014 ). In comparative research, cases are selected that vary in key factors of interest to highlight the causal processes at work.
Case studies draw on multiple data sources, which are used to build up a picture of the processes being examined. These include administrative statistics and qualitative data. In each sub-case 25–30 key informant interviews were conducted with officials from the wereda (district), kebele (sub-district, known as tabiya in Tigray) and kushet (hamlet, known as zones in Oromiya) administrations, social elites and individual residents, as well as ten focus group discussions with participants and non-participants. All respondents were informed of the study's purpose and verbal consent was provided prior to interviews. Interviews were recorded, except at respondents' request. Ethical approval for the Effective States and Inclusive Development Research Centre of which this project is part was secured from the University Research Ethics Committee at the University of Manchester. Based on the research proposal, the Ethiopian Public Health Institute concluded that additional ethical approval was not required. The Ethiopian Health Insurance Agency and Regional Health Bureaux in Oromiya and Tigray provided approval and letters of permission.
Social desirability bias constitutes an important limitation of the study. In a context in which the party-state attempts to regulate social and political life, and to shape norms regarding ‘good’ behaviour, it is challenging to get respondents to talk openly about their experiences ( Østebø et al., 2018 ). Moreover, whatever reassurances are provided, the expectation is that researchers have ties to party-state or donor agencies, which may influence respondents' answers. Moreover, women in conservative rural communities are generally not expected to engage socially with men outside their household, and social norms mean that many women find it difficult to speak publicly.
The research employed a number of strategies in an attempt to minimise these limitations. First, a male and female researcher conducted field research in each site to ensure female researchers conducted all interviews with women, in an attempt to promote open discussion. Second, all field researchers were fluent in local languages—essential at a time of rising inter-communal tensions—and sought to gain respondents’ trust through extended, informal discussions and, in several cases, repeat interviews. The research was aided by the timing of fieldwork, at a moment of unprecedented optimism about politics, particularly in Oromiya, due to changes in regional and federal leadership. The result was that several respondents engaged in critical reflection to a degree that is uncommon with external researchers. However, these strategies are imperfect and some limitations are inevitable.

Section: 4. Ethiopia's Community-Based Health Insurance

Ethiopia's health insurance strategy built on international experiences, with Rwanda's Mutuelles particularly influential ( Lavers, 2019 ). CBHI was launched in 2011 in 13 pilot wereda (districts) and has rapidly expanded since 2013. In 2016 schemes were standardised with premiums set at 240 birr (approximately GBP 6.50) a year per household and 10 per cent of the population, classified as ‘indigents’, are provided with free coverage. The land tax system is used to collect CBHI premiums (interview respondents EG12, EG13, see annex). Following 1970s land-to-the-tiller reforms, a large proportion of rural households has some landholdings and therefore pays taxes . In principle CBHI is voluntary. However, the government plans to make enrolment compulsory by 2025 (EG13). For now, CBHI has an ambiguous status, with one figure long involved in the scheme acknowledging it has ‘an element of compulsory, an element of voluntary’ (ED29). The CBHI treatment package is relatively generous, covering outpatient treatment , surgery and prescriptions, as long as patients follow the referral system.
The 2015 Health Sector Transformation Plan (HSTP) aimed to establish CBHI in 80 per cent of wereda and achieve 80 per cent coverage by 2020 ( MoH, 2015 ). The rollout rests on the existing health extension system, which has attracted praise for its contribution to progress in basic health indicators ( Banteyerga, 2011 ; Rieger et al., 2019 ). Health extension builds on and reinforces the gendered division of labour in Ethiopian society, with women seen as the main means of changing health and sanitation behaviour within the household (for a detailed discussion of the gendered nature of these structures, see Maes et al., 2015 , Closser et al., 2019 , Jackson et al., 2019 ; on gender in Ethiopia in general, see Smith, 2013 ). Two women Health Extension Workers (HEWs) per kebele (sub-district) are responsible for implementing 16 health extension packages covering basic health and sanitation. Women that complete all 16 packages graduate as ‘models’ and are assigned to lead groups of five follower households known as 1-to-5 networks and women's development teams (comprising five or six 1-to-5s). Parallel male development teams focus on agriculture.
Participation in development teams and 1-to-5s is unpaid, though people are often pressurised to participate and sometimes compelled ( Emmenegger et al., 2011 ; Maes et al., 2015 ; Closser et al., 2019 ). Moreover, local political party structures monitor development teams, which play important roles in disseminating party propaganda, as well as ‘development’ activities. Recently, kebele have been classified as ‘models’ where 80 per cent of households are themselves models. CBHI enrolment targets are to be included in the performance evaluations of state officials, development teams and the criteria for model kebele. As the deputy director of the federal health insurance agency noted, once these targets are set, ‘the naming and shaming will come’ (EG12), with good performers lauded for their success, while poor performers face the stigma of low rankings compared to their peers.
Based on official data, CBHI expansion is impressive, albeit insufficient to meet HSTP targets. It should be noted that many respondents expressed doubt about data accuracy, a concern reinforced by the divergent enrolment figures reported during fieldwork. Nonetheless, by mid-2017, CBHI was operational in 384 of Ethiopia's 800 or so wereda, with 11 million people enrolled out of a population of more than 100 million (EG13) and expanding rapidly.
Scheme financial viability requires large numbers of people to enrol by paying premiums. Two measures capture this objective: enrolment as a percentage of the eligible population; and ‘indigent’ members as a percentage of those enrolled. Fig. 1 plots these measures for the four regions where CBHI is operational. Data points in the bottom right corner constitute good financial performance, with high enrolment and a small proportion of exemptions. Based on UHC's concern with avoiding financial hardship, any data point on the right hand side would be considered a success. Three regions—Amhara, SNNPR and Tigray—perform similarly in enrolment and fee exemption. Given questions about data accuracy, it would be unwise to draw conclusions about the small variation between the three. Oromiya, however, stands out for weaker performance with lower coverage and higher exemptions. Fig. 2 provides the comparable graph for wereda. Despite considerable variation within regions, wereda in Amhara, SNNPR and Tigray cluster in the range of 30–90 per cent enrolment with few exceeding 30 per cent fee exemptions. Oromiya is again an outlier, with some relatively good performing wereda, but many with very low enrolment and heavily reliant on fee exemptions. Download: Download high-res image (390KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . CBHI enrolment by region. Download: Download high-res image (492KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . CBHI enrolment by wereda and region.
This paper asks whether state infrastructural power can explain variation in health insurance enrolment. As such, the research selected Tigray, one of the strongest performers, and Oromiya, the weakest. As discussed in the following section, selection of Oromiya and Tigray also contrasts regions with very different histories and present relationships with federal and regional governments. Close relations between the TPLF and the Tigrayan population were strengthened in recent years in the face of anti-Tigrayan sentiment elsewhere in Ethiopia. In contrast, despite the longstanding illegitimacy of the OPDO, significant hopes were vested in Abiy Ahmed as a representative of the Oromo people.
Within regions, two wereda (district) sub-cases were chosen, one from the original pilots, which by the time of fieldwork had been operational for seven years, while CBHI in the other site was in the second year of operation. The intention was to explore the challenges facing schemes in early and later phases of implementation. Clearly, selecting just two wereda from large regions means sub-cases cannot be representative of regions or the country. Instead the cases illustrate implementation challenges. Nonetheless, where two independent sub-cases within a region share clear commonalities and these differ from another region, this may indicate a more general pattern.
Case selection enables consideration of some plausible explanations for enrolment beyond variations in infrastructural power. While these factors may influence enrolment to a degree, none provides a convincing explanation for the variation described above. One possibility is that enrolment is driven by economic factors, with wealthier individuals better able to pay premiums. However, based on this, the expectation would be higher enrolment in Oromiya, which contains the most economically productive areas of the country, than Tigray, a much poorer region, rather than the reverse. Moreover, evaluations show that enrolment is relatively even across income quintiles, with some of the poorest individuals in receipt of the Productive Safety Net Programme (PSNP) programme among those most likely to enrol ( Mebratie et al., 2015 ; Shigute et al., 2017 ). To control to some degree for variation in wealth between sites, study wereda in Tigray and Oromiya were among those classified as chronically food insecure and included in the geographically-targeted PSNP. Naturally, this selection of food insecure wereda places limits on the generalisability of findings beyond areas where the PSNP operates.
Another potential explanation for variation in enrolment is population density since a more concentrated population reduces the challenge for the state of reaching households and promoting enrolment. However, Oromiya is, at 105 people per km 2 , more densely populated than Tigray at 55 persons per square kilometre ( CSA, 2009 ). Regional averages mask considerable variation within regions. However, selected wereda in Oromiya have population densities of 146 (Kuyyu) and 114 (Merti) people per km 2 compared to 79 (Ahferom) and 57 (Hintalo Wajirat) for Tigray ( CSA, 2009 ). Based on this, one might expect higher enrolment in Oromiya than Tigray, rather than the reverse. In contrast, however, Oromiya has a population estimated at more than six times that in Tigray and a territory more than three times Tigray. Consequently the size of Oromiya likely poses administrative and coordination challenges that could partially explain lower enrolment.
Finally, another factor shaping enrolment is likely to be the availability and quality of health services, with access to high quality services likely to provide an incentive to enrol. Existing evidence is rather ambiguous, however. Studies show variation in health service provision, with Tigray generally outperforming Oromiya ( Eregata et al., 2019 ). In itself, this is likely to be a reflection of higher infrastructural power in Tigray. Surprisingly, however, evaluations have found that enrolment is more likely among those living far from health facilities, albeit that reduced health centre waiting times are associated with increased enrolment ( Mebratie et al., 2015 ). Access to health facilities in the specific study sites is discussed in the case studies that follow.

Section: 5. Ethiopian state building and the legacy of state infrastructural power

This section provides a brief overview of the historical processes and recent political events that have shaped state infrastructural power, with important implications for CBHI scale-up. Ethiopia has a history of several thousand years, originating in contemporary Tigray, Amhara and neighbouring Eritrea (see Fig. 3 ). In contrast, most of the Oromo and other ethnic groups inhabiting the west, south and east of what became Ethiopia were only incorporated through conquest by Emperor Menelik II at the end of the nineteenth century ( Zewde, 1991 ). Within the central highlands, comprising much of contemporary Tigray, Amhara, Oromiya and SNNPR, initial variation in state structures gave way to relative uniformity under Haile Selassie (1930–74) and the military-Marxist Derg regime (1974–91). Download: Download high-res image (1MB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Ethiopia under the EPRDF
The Derg initiated a ‘project of encadrement , or incorporation into structures of control, which was pursued with remarkable speed and ruthlessness’ ( Clapham, 2002 , p. 14) across highland areas. The Derg conducted land-to-the-tiller reforms, villagisation and agricultural collectivisation to ‘“capture” … the peasantry in a way that subjected them increasingly to state control’ ( Clapham, 2002 , p. 15). In Tigray, the Derg was contested from the mid-1970s by the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front (TPLF). The TPLF mirrored Derg encadrement, creating administrative structures in liberated areas and carrying out land reform. However, while the Derg alienated the peasantry through villagisation and surplus extraction, the TPLF's Maoist strategy was built on winning peasants' support ( Young, 1997 ). Though tested at times, close relations between the TPLF and Tigray's rural population have persisted to the present.
Having liberated Tigray by the late 1980s, the TPLF formed the Ethiopian Peoples' Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) coalition to represent Ethiopia's ethnic groups. The EPRDF took power in 1991, creating a federal system to provide self-administration for the main ethnic groups. Furthermore, the EPRDF launched a state building project that fused party and state, and expanded the party-state's reach beyond the Derg's kebele, down to the household level through development teams and 1-to-5s ( Emmenegger et al., 2011 ).
The EPRDF was explicitly a vanguard party based on democratic centralism ( EPRDF, 2010 ). As such, debate within party structures was encouraged, but once the vanguard decided on a course of action, everyone was expected to comply, with failure to do so taken as an act of resistance ( Vaughan and Tronvoll, 2003 ). Where an objective was made a national priority and party-state structures were mobilised in its pursuit, as with CBHI, popular adherence to state initiatives was expected, not merely voluntary, whatever the formal status of the programme.
The Oromo People's Development Organisation (OPDO) was created as the EPRDF's Oromo branch in the late 1980s. While the OPDO controlled Oromiya since 1991, it was regarded as a creation of and accountable to the TPLF rather than the Oromo people ( Clapham, 2009 ). This changed only very recently. Anti-government protests swept Oromiya from late 2015 sparked by expansion plans for Addis Ababa, but driven by unemployment and landlessness, ethno-nationalism and the heavy handed military response. Protests led to the replacement of the OPDO leadership with Lemma Megersa as regional President and Abiy Ahmed as deputy in 2016. This leadership aligned themselves with the protestors, achieving a remarkable turnaround in perceptions of the OPDO. When protests forced the resignation of Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn in early 2018, the OPDO's Abiy Ahmed was selected as party chairman and Prime Minister, despite opposition from the once dominant TPLF. In 2019-20 Abiy merged the EPRDF coalition into the integrated Prosperity Party, with the TPLF leaving the coalition it founded in protest. In late 2020 tensions between the Prosperity Party and the TPLF boiled over into open conflict, with the TPLF forcibly removed from power in Tigray. As the party reform and conflict occurred some time after fieldwork was concluded, it is not discussed in detail here.

Section: 6. Party-state infrastructural power and CBHI enrolment in tigray

This section analyses the two Tigrayan cases in terms of the three components of infrastructural power: staff availability and competence; state-society relations and intra-state relations.
Ahferom wereda was one of three CBHI pilots in Tigray. By 2017, the wereda had 45 per cent enrolment, of whom 29 per cent were ‘indigent’. Within Ahferom, fieldwork focused on Ende Mariam kebele where enrolment was 96 per cent with 17 per cent indigent. In Hintalo Wajirat wereda, CBHI was in its second year of operation. In the first year, enrolment reached 53 per cent, with 21 per cent indigent. However, enrolment had dropped to 19 per cent. Within Hintalo Wajirat, fieldwork focused on Tsehafti kebele, which achieved 60 per cent the first year before declining to 48 per cent, with 23 per cent exemptions.
In terms of staffing, both sites established wereda and kebele Health Insurance Initiative Steering Committees responsible for CBHI. However, officials frequently complained that CBHI was added to existing responsibilities, with no additional hiring, stretching officials’ ability to cope with the already heavy workload (THK1, THK4). CBHI was a joint responsibility of the kebele leadership, though HEWs had primary responsibility. HEWs worked with the sub-kebele structures that shape state-society relations to promote CBHI among the population.
Kebele were sub-divided into four kushet , which were further divided into male, female and youth development teams and 1-to-5 networks to which every household was assigned. Development teams were the central mechanism for implementation across virtually every aspect of the kebele's work, with the result that the development teams effectively controlled access to key livelihood supports, such as PSNP transfers, emergency food aid, agricultural inputs, microcredit and vocational training (THF9, THF10) ( Lavers forthcoming ). Alongside these ‘developmental’ roles, development teams and 1-to-5s mobilised people for political activities and were evaluated by party-affiliated women's and youth leagues (TAK5, TAK7, TAZ2).
Development teams were supposed to meet fortnightly and 1-to-5 networks weekly, with attendance monitored and compulsory. While this likely exaggerated their activity, respondents unanimously reported that meetings took place regularly and it was straightforward for researchers to observe meetings. That said, the performance of women's development teams was widely considered inferior to the male equivalents, due to women's other responsibilities in social reproduction and economic activities. Several respondents also noted that development teams were less effective in remote areas, where officials visited less frequently.
The 1-to-5s—like the EPRDF—operated on the principle of democratic centralism , with party decisions considered binding on all. Accordingly, once the network decided on a course of action, compliance was mandatory. As one 1-to-5 member noted, ‘you should accept what the majority decided. There is no formal punishment but you will be outcast and criticised for not accepting the majority's decision’ (TAI1).
Development teams therefore provided a vital means of structuring state-society relations and mobilising the population. However, infrastructural power depended not just on the existence of these structures, but also intra-state relations and policymakers' ability to direct structures to desired activities. The EPRDF had a well-established system of performance assessment known as gim gema . Used by the TPLF to promote discipline and accountability during the struggle, gim gema spread throughout the party-state since 1991 ( Vaughan and Tronvoll, 2003 ). All officials underwent gim gema, self-critiquing their performance before their superiors and those they represented, and were then criticised by others. Good performance in gim gema should lead to access to promotion and training opportunities. In contrast, criticism was seen as a ‘disgrace or disrespecting the community who elects you’ (THZ1), potentially leading to dismissal.
National development targets, including for CBHI, were cascaded through tiers of state administration. Each wereda, kebele and kushet prepared performance plans based on these targets, and administrations were ranked against one another. In both wereda the CBHI target was 80 per cent, while the kebele had 100 per cent targets, also among the criteria for a kebele to be identified as a ‘model’. Indeed, Ende Mariam kebele's achievement of 96 per cent enrolment resulted in its classification as a ‘model kebele’.
Performance assessment was not limited to state officials. Development teams were regularly assessed and ranked against each other also. There were no material rewards for development teams; however, team leaders were subject to gim gema. Individuals and households were also annually assessed according to their adherence to government policies and initiatives. Households who adopted all 16 health extension packages and enrolled in CBHI were classified as models ; half models were those that meet at least some of the model criteria; and non-models failed to meet any.
Overall, this evaluation system focused the attention of the party-state infrastructure on CBHI enrolment. The result was, according to one kebele official, that ‘massive public mobilisation and awareness creation activities are in place’ to enrol people in the programme (TAK4). These efforts focused on development teams. While CBHI promotion particularly involved women's teams, in line with the health extension programme, HEWs worked with their male counterparts—the agriculture-focused Development Agents—and the male development teams to convince them to enrol. Engaging with men was particularly important given that male household heads generally control the household budget. Respondents reported that CBHI promotion took place at every male and female development team and 1-to-5 network meeting. According to one team member, ‘we always discuss health issues and the need to be member of health insurance’ (THF5).
While development teams were the most important mechanism of CBHI promotion, insurance was a prominent focus of all kebele and kushet meetings. The party-state also used its influence to direct non-state actors, including the church, revolving credit associations ( equb ) and burial associations ( iddir ) to promote CBHI. Every community resident is a member of at least one iddir, which collect regular contributions and cover funeral expenses.
Responsibility for collecting premiums was decentralised, with kushet leaders and HEWs going door-to-door to collect premiums with other mandatory contributions, such as land taxes and party membership (TAK2, TAK5, THK1, THK4). Though land is in short supply, 80 per cent of households in Ende Mariam (TAK2) and 88 per cent of households in Tsehafti (THK1) had some landholdings, requiring them to pay taxes . Land tax is particularly important as the tax receipt is widely used as proof of holdings. Nonetheless, collecting CBHI premiums alongside mandatory payments likely further blurred the voluntary status of CBHI.
Despite these activities, officials reported difficulty convincing people to enrol. The poor quality and availability of health services was a major deterrent, particularly in Tsehafti where the health post had limited service due to drug shortages (THK4). Consequently, patients had to travel to a neighbouring kebele at additional cost. Health services were less of a problem in Ende Mariam where there was a health post in the kebele and the kebele is a few kilometres from Enticho town, which had a primary hospital. Yet even here, the quality of health services deterred enrolment (TAK5, TAZ2). Another barrier was the cost of premiums and what is widely considered to be an insufficient quota for ‘indigent’ households given levels of poverty and food insecurity.
In both sites, the full weight of the party-state was mobilised to encourage the local population to enrol despite the cost and quality of health services. Having achieved high enrolment rates, however, the party-state promotional activity declined in Hintalo Wajirat leading to a reduction in enrolment. The implication drawn was that annual campaigns to promote re-enrolment were required (THK4).
CBHI largely rested on promotion rather than compulsion, albeit in a context in which residents depended on the party-state and were aware that failure to adhere to state initiatives was taken as a sign of resistance. However, fieldwork did highlight instances of officials forcing individuals to enrol. In Ende Mariam, the kebele initially announced that CBHI members would be given priority in the allocation of places in the poverty-targeted PSNP, providing a major incentive for the poorest to enrol (TAK4, TAK5) (echoing Shigute et al., 2017 ). Officials insisted that while PSNP participants were previously required to enrol, this was no longer the case.
The Tigray case studies suggest that high levels of party-state infrastructural power underpinned the relative success of CBHI. This power depended on the decentralised party-state structures and the performance evaluations used to direct these, but also, to a degree, the ability to mobilise non-state actors such as churches and burial associations. To paraphrase Mann, the party-state in Tigray had certainly ‘penetrated’ society; arguably, it had subsumed it. Given overwhelming party-state dominance, the local population's dependence on the party-state for nearly every aspect of their livelihoods—from land to agricultural inputs and credit to social transfers and food aid—and clear communication from the party-state of what constituted ‘good’ behaviour, the voluntary status of the CBHI scheme was blurred to say the least.

Section: 7. Erosion of the party-state and limits to mobilisation in Oromiya

The Oromiya cases present a stark contrast. As in Tigray, the cases comprise one wereda, Kuyyu, from the original 13 pilots and one, Merti, which was part of the scale-up. In Kuyyu enrolment was 27 per cent with 37 per cent indigents. Within Kuyyu, fieldwork focused on Halelo Cerri kebele where enrolment was 45 per cent, with 21 per cent indigent. Merti achieved 51 per cent enrolment in the first year, with 24 per cent exempt from premiums, though wereda officials were concerned at extremely low re-enrolment the following year. Fieldwork focused on Shamo Gado kebele, where just seven people re-enrolled in the second year after first year enrolment of 52 per cent (OMK4).
Kebele administrations in the sites used existing health committees to oversee CBHI rather than a dedicated health insurance committee. In terms of staffing, respondents at the wereda and kebele—like their Tigrayan counterparts—voiced concerns that a major new initiative was launched without additional staffing. Like in Tigray, each kebele had two HEWs with similar qualifications to those in Tigray. While there was little difference in staffing between the Tigray and Oromiya sites, the differences in infrastructural power were clearer across the other two dimensions.
Regarding state-society relations, in Oromiya, each kebele was divided into several kushet. However, the kushet administrative structure only existed in Merti, not Kuyyu (OKK6). All residents were assigned to male and female development teams and 1-to-5 networks, and state officials acknowledged the importance of these structures for delivering services. However, the development teams were ‘theoretical’ (OMW5) or ‘just on paper’ (OMZ4).
While most respondents stated that development teams had declined over time, some argued they had never been very effective. Indeed, past research suggests the OPDO long faced a challenge getting development teams to work effectively ( Emmenegger et al., 2011 ). Particularly problematic for CBHI was that women's development teams were most dysfunctional. Several respondents highlighted the 2015 national elections as the last time the structures were active, with development teams used for campaigning and voter registration. Indeed, the political nature of development teams was one reason for their failings. The leadership crisis within the OPDO and the growing unwillingness of the local population to acquiesce to its demands contributed to the development teams' decline (OMK3, OKK4). Unsurprisingly, given development teams' dysfunction, the democratic centralism that required strict adherence to party-state initiatives, had fallen away in Oromiya. In the words of one respondent: ‘If you like you apply it, if you don't like, you can leave it. It is voluntary’ (OKI1).
Party-state infrastructural power in Oromiya was limited by the absence of these structures, which constrained mobilisation capacity. Nonetheless, the kebele administration, health extension workers and remnants of the development team structure could be applied to CBHI promotion. Intra-state relations and the ability of higher-level officials to direct local level officials to desired objectives were therefore key. In principle, the system of performance evaluation in Oromiya was very similar to that in Tigray. However, performance evaluation also depended on the party, with a marked deterioration in recent years.
Performance was assessed through gim gema, with administrations and officials ranked against their peers. CBHI targets were included in the evaluations for wereda health bureaux, kebele administrations, HEWs and kushet administrations (where operational). Kuyyu, as one of the original pilots, was given a target of 90 per cent enrolment, but this was reduced to 60 per cent given low enrolment. Halelo Cerri kebele still had a target of 100 per cent enrolment. Given the recent establishment of CBHI in Merti, the wereda and Shamo Gado had initial targets of 50 per cent. Merti wereda received a laptop in recognition of its first-year success, along with an increased target of 80 per cent enrolment, just as enrolment collapsed in the second year (OMK4).
However, respondents emphasised that the regularity of evaluations and pressure on officials to meet targets had declined sharply. While performance evaluation was relatively rigorous until 2015, it fell away since, with either no or mere token evaluations (OMK4, OKK4, OKK6). Oromiya also differed from Tigray regarding model households and kebele. There had been no annual assessment of model households for several years, with the result that CBHI had yet to be added to the model criteria. In sum, therefore, infrastructural power was severely constrained by the party-state's limited capacity to mobilise society, and the government's inability to direct activities of lower levels, undermining efforts to promote enrolment.
HEWs admitted that ‘much hasn't been done with … development teams on raising awareness about CBHI’ (OKK5). Meanwhile, the development agents that worked with the male development teams stated that ‘it does not concern us. It is the responsibility of HEWs’ (OKK4). This again stood in marked contrast to Tigray, where development agents actively promoted CBHI and was likely to be particularly important given that male heads control the household budget.
In the absence of development teams, HEWs and other kebele officials promoted CBHI at community meetings and social gatherings. Yet the once numerous meetings were reduced to two per year due to low attendance and community resistance (OMK3, OKK2). Attempts to mobilise non-state actors were also less successful than in Tigray. While the local Muslim leader did discuss CBHI during Friday prayers, iddir and equb leaders did not participate. Meanwhile a clan leader in Shamo Gado who promoted CBHI in line with a wereda request, felt he had been misled given the inadequacies of the health service, ‘when the government fails to deliver what it promised it makes us elders liars … This was what happened with the health insurance’ (OMC3).
Complaints about healthcare quality were cited as the main reason for low enrolment. Yet it is not clear that health services were any worse in the Oromiya sites than in Tigray. Tsehafti kebele in Tigray stood out as having particularly limited access to health services compared to the other three sites, all of which are situated near small towns with health centres or primary hospitals. In Oromiya, as in Tigray, another stated reason for non-enrolment was the cost of premiums. Since 2016 premiums were the same in both regions and, while income and expenditure data were not available, the common perception was that the Tigray sites were poorer than those in Oromiya. As such, wealth does not provide an obvious explanation for lower enrolment in Oromiya.
The party-state's attempts to raise CBHI enrolment went beyond awareness raising, with many respondents reporting that they were coerced into enrolling. As in Tigray, one approach was to threaten PSNP participants with removal from the programme or to deduct premiums from PSNP transfers. Most respondents stated that this had happened previously but was not the case any longer. More common was that landholders were told they could not pay their land tax until they had paid the CBHI premium. There were no records on landlessness in either site, but in Halelo Cerri kebele there were 1302 landholders and 1329 households (OKK6), suggesting that, as in Tigray, most households had some land and therefore paid taxes. Failure to enrol in CBHI therefore directly risked the loss of land and livelihood.
Several members of the kebele administration and HEWs readily admitted that people were forcibly enrolled to meet targets. A former kebele cabinet member noted, ‘People were still resisting and unwilling and what we did was we told them it is a must to pay with the land tax and we won't take the land tax from them unless they pay for the insurance with it’ (OKF1).
Most problematic is that many people who were forced to enrol did not even receive health insurance cards. HEWs and focus group respondents highlighted instances where premiums were collected but officials did not complete their registration forms or where people were unaware what they were paying for. This then is one of the more perverse outcomes of the performance evaluations whereby officials progress towards their targets without any contribution to the real objective of insuring people against health costs.
Clearly, compared to Tigray, the party-state in the Oromiya sites had far less infrastructural power and this constrained its ability to promote CBHI. This is largely attributable to state-society relations, with the collapse of development teams, and intra-state relations, with the reduction of performance evaluation, since 2015, rather than staffing issues. Yet, party-state infrastructural power had long been lower in Oromiya due to the OPDO's limited legitimacy. Indeed, it seems likely that a lack of legitimacy is at least part of the reason for local officials resorting to outright coercion to raise CBHI enrolment.

Section: 8. Conclusions

Developing countries pursuing UHC through insurance face the challenge that health services are frequently patchy, reducing the incentive to enrol, and a large proportion of the population work in the informal sector, without clear mechanisms for collecting premiums and enforcing enrolment. As underscored throughout this paper, these barriers to enrolment heighten the challenge for state infrastructural power.
Ethiopia's CBHI has responded to this challenge in a number of ways. CBHI has utilised the land tax system, which due to past land reforms reaches a large proportion of the rural population, to collect premiums. Meanwhile, development teams extend the territorial reach of the party-state down to the household. Given the dependence of most households on the party-state for key livelihood resources—such as land access, agricultural inputs, credit, social transfers and food aid—development teams were hugely influential on individual behaviour.
The health extension system has proven fairly effective in the dissemination of a set of basic health extension packages, mobilising development team members—in particular women—and monitoring individual behaviour. There are limitations to this one-size-fits-all approach, and this party-state infrastructure has not yet met the more complex challenge of providing quality healthcare countrywide. Nonetheless, the extension system is also well suited to the promotion and monitoring of CBHI enrolment. Yet, this paper shows that the effectiveness of these structures varied significantly within Ethiopia based on the history of party-state-society relations and with the gendered nature of these structures. In the Tigray sites, development teams for both men and women were used to promote CBHI enrolment and these were comparatively well placed for the task. In contrast, in the Oromiya sites recent political changes resulted in the collapse of party-state infrastructural power, with women's teams that were central to the health insurance strategy in the region particularly affected. This was to the detriment of CBHI enrolment. Selection of food insecure sites may limit the generalisability of these findings. However, almost all of Tigray is food insecure, while the Oromiya cases show that the PSNP has provided local officials with influence over programme participants, aiding enrolment. This suggests that government enrolment capacity may be weaker in food secure areas.
Official data up to 2017 suggest that CBHI schemes in Amhara and SNNPR were performing relatively well in terms of enrolment. While these regions were not included in the case studies conducted, research on the health extension system in Amhara suggests a decline over time as a result of the difficulty of recruiting model women to lead development teams ( Maes et al., 2019 ), while anecdotal reports suggest recent political upheaval has led to a decline in state infrastructural power in these regions in the last two years ( Lefort, 2018 ). Furthermore, the federal government's removal of the TPLF from office by force in late 2020 and the devastating conflict that has affected Tigray since seem likely to have had a similarly detrimental impact on state infrastructural power in that region. Consequently, the experience of Oromiya and concerns about other regions reinforces questions about the plausibility of Ethiopia's CBHI strategy. The key conclusion here is therefore that while state capacity has a long historical legacy, the construction of high levels of infrastructural power can be reversed, particularly in extreme circumstances such as conflict. Moreover, as Mann (2008) noted with respect to the collapse of the Soviet Union , where a high level of state infrastructural power is based on the strength of a single party that is fused with the state, any political transition poses significant risks for state infrastructural power and thereby implementation of state programmes, including health.
Given the importance of infrastructural power, it is hardly a surprise that Rwanda has emerged as a rare African case where the government has achieved something approaching universal health insurance enrolment. Rwanda shares many characteristics with Tigray, as a small, densely-populated territory with a long history of a centralised state reinforced by the state building efforts of a dominant party. Though more research is warranted on how Rwanda has achieved such high enrolment, high levels of state infrastructural power are likely to be an important factor. Yet it is highly questionable how viable Rwanda or Ethiopia is as a model for other African countries. Rwanda and Ethiopia are exceptional in the degree of infrastructural power possessed by the state. Most African states simply do not have the infrastructural power that would appear to be such an important factor in these relative successes.

Section: Author statement

Tom Lavers: Conceptualisation, methodology, data management, analysis, writing, project administration.

Section: Acknowledgements

The research for this paper was conducted as part of the Effective States and Inclusive Development Research Centre (ESID) at the University of Manchester , UK, a project funded by UK Aid from the UK government ( Department for International Development , grant no. PO 5113 ) for the benefit of developing countries. However, the views expressed and information contained in it are not necessarily those of, or endorsed by the UK government, which can accept no responsibility for such views or information or for any reliance placed on them. The paper was written during a Leverhulme Research Fellowship ( RF-2019-126 ). The research was conducted with the support of the Organisation for Social Science Research in Eastern Africa (OSSREA) . Field research at the wereda and kebele level was conducted by Moges Belay, Senait Abrha, Yerosan Mesfin and Dunyat Haile. Research assistance for the literature review was provided by Kate Pruce. Nick Scarle created the map. I am very grateful for the support and contributions of all these people and organisations. Responsibility for any errors remain with the author.
