Title: Market characteristics and zoonotic disease risk perception in Cameroon bushmeat markets


Abstract: Abstract

Behavioral practices are one of the key factors facilitating zoonotic disease transmission, especially in individuals who have frequent contact with wild animals, yet practices of those who work and live in high-risk animal-human interfaces, such as wild animal ‘bushmeat’ markets in the Congo Basin are not well documented in the social, health and medical sciences. This region, where hunting, butchering, and consumption of wild animal meat is frequent, represents a hotspot for disease emergence, and has experienced zoonotic disease spillover events, traced back to close human-animal contact with bats and non-human primates. Using a One Health approach, we conducted wildlife surveillance, human behavioral research, and concurrent human and animal biological sampling to identify and characterize factors associated with zoonotic disease emergence and transmission. Research was conducted through the USAID Emerging Pandemic Threats program between 2010 and 2019 including qualitative studies of bushmeat markets, with selected study sites prioritized based on proximity to bushmeat markets. Sites included two hospitals where we conducted surveillance of individuals with syndromes of acute febrile illness, community sites where we enrolled actors of the animal value chain (ie. hunters, middlemen, transporters), and bushmeat markets, where we enrolled bushmeat vendors, butchers, market managers, cleaners, and shoppers. Mixed methods research was undertaken at these sites and included investigation of bushmeat market dynamics through observational research, focus group discussions, quantitative questionnaires, and interviews. Participants were asked about their risk perception of zoonotic disease transmission and specific activities related to bushmeat trade, local market conditions, and regulations on bushmeat trade in Cameroon. Risks associated with blood contact and animal infection were not well understood by most market actors. As bushmeat markets are an important disease interface, as seen with CoVID19, risk mitigation measures in markets and bushmeat alternative strategies are discussed.

Section: 1. Introduction

Zoonotic agents cause an estimated 75% of emerging and re-emerging diseases in humans ( Woolhouse and Gowtage-Sequeria, 2005 ; Jones et al., 2008 ), and the origins of many of these pathogens, including among others Ebola, HIV, and Marburg have been linked to hunting of wild animals ( Wolfe et al., 2005 ), which, after being killed are referred to as ‘bushmeat’ across Africa (see Fig. 1 ). The Congo Basin, where hunting, butchering, and consumption of, and contact with, wild animal meat is frequent, represents a hotspot for disease emergence, and zoonoses seem to evolve in dynamic response to anthropogenic forces ( Lloyd-Smith et al., 2009 ). The region has witnessed spillover events, many of which have been traced back to close human-animal contact with bats and non-human primates (NHPs) ( Leroy et al., 2009 ; Reed et al., 2014 ; Munster et al., 2018 ). Human Ebola virus disease outbreaks have been linked to chimpanzees, gorillas and duiker antelopes ( Le Guenno et al., 1995 ; Leroy et al., 2004 ), all wild animals hunted and sold as bushmeat at markets and restaurants. The hunting of wildlife for human consumption is valued at several billion dollars annually and provides an essential source of protein for hundreds of millions of rural people living in poverty globally ( Brashares et al., 2011 ); the scale of the bushmeat trade in the Congo Basin was estimated at > 1 million tons per year 20 years ago ( Wilkie, 1999 ) and has certainly grown. It has been assumed that bushmeat provides a cheap, accessible source of food for the poorest members of society ( de Merode et al., 2004 ), though others suggest that demand for bushmeat grows as household wealth grows ( Wilkie et al., 2005 ; Fa et al., 2009 ; Godoy et al., 2010 ). Growing urban demand for bushmeat substantiates this latter hypothesis, and as bushmeat prices increase with proximity to urban areas, hunters gain more from selling in urban areas, thus reinforcing the wild animal value chain from rural to urban markets. The importance of bushmeat to the livelihoods, subsistence, socioeconomics and traditional cultures of people in the Congo Basin and the frequent human-animal contact in the region, combined with high species diversity , creates multiple avenues for potential emergence and transmission of zoonotic diseases. Download: Download high-res image (845KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Map of study sites, including hospitals & wild animal markets in Southern Cameroon.
The densest rainforest in Cameroon is found in South and Southeastern regions, and along with neighboring Gabon and Equatorial Guinea, is a biological and socio-cultural extension of the Congo Basin region. The scope and breadth of the Cameroon wildlife trade is significant throughout the country and within the central African region. An inventory of the four main markets in the Cameroon capital, Yaoundé, estimated sales of 840–1080 tons of bushmeat per year in the 1990s ( Bahuchet and Ioveva, 1999 ), and Edderai and Dame (2006) identified 15 markets and 145 restaurants and roadside cafes in Yaoundé selling wild animal meat, providing an occupation for 249 people, of whom 84.3% were women. Between the Sanaga River and the Nigerian border, an estimated 350 tons of wild animal meat were traded in urban markets and 394 kg in rural markets per year ( Fa et al., 2006 ). Economically, the wild animal trade in Cameroon has been estimated to have a gross financial benefit of 97 million Euros annually (~104.8 million USD) ( Lescuyer and Nasi, 2016 ). This is mostly in the informal sector, is 36% more than the official estimates derived from public accounts, and is about 0.17% of the GDP of Cameroon, roughly equivalent to the formal mining sector in the country. Rural household consumption of wild animal meat in Cameroon amounts to an estimated 142 million Euro gross annual economic benefit (~153.4 million USD) ( Lescuyer and Nasi, 2016 ). The distinction between subsistence and commercial use of wildlife for food is blurred, with meat from the forest supplementing both diets and incomes, and bushmeat often represents both the primary source of animal protein and an important cash-earning commodity for the population in the Congo Basin ( van Vliet, 2011 ).
Many papers have reported on the importance of the bushmeat value chain in Central Africa from economic, environmental, and sociocultural perspectives, on macro and individual levels ( Fa et al., 2006 ; LeBreton et al., 2006 ; Lescuyer and Nasi., 2011; Nasi et al., 2011; Fargeot et al., 2017; Chausson et al., 2019 ), but here, we expand the literature with results from a social science perspective across a decade of community work. This study aimed to identify, characterize and describe the specific behaviors, beliefs, and practices regarding animal contact among actors in Southern Cameroon in: 1) the wildlife value chain, 2) local wildlife markets and 3) individuals in surrounding communities serviced by these markets who presented to two local hospitals with syndromes suggestive of potential viral diseases of zoonotic origin. Our secondary research questions included: 1) Can we identify bushmeat market conditions that could facilitate the emergence and spread of zoonotic disease? 2) Can we identify factors that make the bushmeat trade difficult to control? and 3) Might these suggest any new and innovative ideas for potential risk-reduction interventions ?

Section: 2. Methods

Human behavioral research was conducted through the USAID Emerging Pandemic Threats (EPT) program. EPT sought to minimize social, economic and health impacts of pandemic threats in developing countries to prevent, detect and control pathogens with an emphasis on early identification, spillover mitigation and response to pathogens from animals before they can significantly affect human health (USAID, 2020).
From 2014 to 2019, PREDICT focused on concurrent sampling of animals and humans, as well as behavioral surveillance. Sites for human recruitment included three locations: Meyomessala (pop 31,366; 2005 national census) Sangmelima (pop 64,227; 2012 estimate) and Ebolowa (pop 76,885; 2012 estimate). These sites were selected both for animal sampling, to look for the presence of priority zoonotic viruses in wild animal meat, and for behavioral research among actors in the wild animal value chain in markets that sold wild animal meat. Standardized questionnaires regarding socio-demographics and animal exposure were collected from all participants, including specific questions about contact with bats, non-human primates and rodents, as well as other wild animals. These three sites have bushmeat markets that lie at the intersection of multiple roads that serve as trade corridors for neighboring Central African countries including Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, and the Republic of the Congo. Concurrent animal and human biological sampling was conducted in the communities, along with behavioral data collection. In two hospital sites, Meyomessala and Sangmelima, we conducted syndromic surveillance of sick individuals with fevers of unknown origin and select syndromes of interest based on CDC or WHO guidelines that are suggestive of viral pathogens of zoonotic origin. In community sites (Meyomessala, Sangmelima, Ebolowa) we enrolled actors of the animal value chain at bushmeat markets and surrounding communities; participants were vendors, butchers, market managers, cleaners, hunters, and middlemen/transporters. At hospitals, participants answered a standardized questionnaire about their illness, animal contact, and perceived zoonotic disease risk. In communities, some participants answered the same standardized questionnaire and others participated in semi-structured interviews. Details of study participants by site and location are available in supplemental materials.
During PREDICT, qualitative work, which involved interviews and focus group discussions were conducted in two phases: the first was a pilot phase, which aimed to test and refine data collection instruments, and to collect data on risk perceptions of various animal value chain actors from hunters to vendors around Cameroon. During the second phase, semi-structured interviews and focus group discussions were conducted with actors in the bushmeat value chain, along with concurrent animal and human biological sampling and testing. Our interview guides covered topics such as human movement, socioeconomics, biosecurity practices, illness, medical treatment, burial practices upon death, and the nature and frequency of human-animal contact (See Appendix A for interview and focus group guides, and Appendix B for questionnaire.).
All qualitative interviews were based on the PREDICT 2 interview guide (see electronic supplement attached), were recorded using digital audio recorders and were transcribed. If necessary, interviews were translated from local languages, such as Fang and Bulu, into French by local scientists fluent in both languages. Francophone staff then thematically coded all interviews and focus group transcripts using the PREDICT Universal Codebook, a standardized list of thematic codes used to detect similarities and contrasts across sites. We used the qualitative research analysis program, Dedoose v8.
Gaining trust and access to participants was enhanced by use of local data collection personnel experienced in working in similar settings in Cameroon. To address high levels of suspicion among participants that data might be used to orient law enforcement and confiscations, the teams used gatekeepers, key informants known and trusted by the target population to help gain access to bushmeat vendors. These gatekeepers included lead physicians in hospitals, market managers, and lead vendors in markets, and they facilitated communication in the market among participants. The team obtained verbal informed consent from each participant, and an information sheet about the study was provided, and a copy left with each person. All interviews were recorded and interviewees that did not wish to be recorded were not included in the study. Additional details on research ethics and approval are available in Appendix F .
In order to investigate the factors that influence a person's level of interaction with wildlife and their perception of the risk of these activities, we applied multivariable logistic regression to the data collected from questionnaires, with stepwise inclusion of predictive variables of interest; while controlling for extraneous or potentially confounding factors and assessing model residuals for homogeneity. Model assumptions were met for all logistic regression analyses. Analyses were performed using Stata 13 (Statacorp, College Station, TX). In Results, Odds Ratio (OR) and 95% Confidence Intervals (CI) are provided along with p-value where significant (p ≤ 0.05). In particular, we were interested in determining the role that gender and age play in the likelihood of wildlife interaction, as well as in investigating site-level differences in behavior and risk perception. Because participants enrolled in hospitals and those enrolled in the community were selected using a different set of criteria, the focus of comparisons is between hospitals.

Section: 3. Results

The study sites lie west of the Dja Faunal Reserve, which is also a World Heritage Area in Danger listed for its ecological value ( UNESCO, 2016 ) and at risk from overhunting. Meat is brought from the forests surrounding Sangmelima and Meyomessala to the market either directly by hunters, by transporters who buy meat from hunters and deliver it to the markets, or by resellers (locally called ‘buyam-sellum’)who travel to villages to buy from multiple hunters to then resell bushmeat to vendors at the market or restaurant owners for a higher price. The meat is usually carried in large rice sacks (or sometimes suitcases to disguise it from authorities).
Cameroon bushmeat markets are generally integrated into, or on the edge of, a formal open market. Bushmeat vendors sometimes set up temporary tables and informal stands along the road, displaying their recently butchered or whole dead animals. Since the Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife (MINFOF) discourages bushmeat trade in favor of wildlife conservation throughout Cameroon ( Nkoko et al., 2018 ), market infrastructure normally does not make formal provisions for the bushmeat sector. While covered stalls and concrete or tiled counters are available for domestic animal sales, bushmeat is typically exposed and displayed on unhygienic surfaces such as cardboard, plastic sheeting, or wooden planks, often on the ground. At PREDICT 2 sites (Meyomessala, Sangmelima and Ebolowa), vendors mentioned displaying meat “off the ground” as one of the main measures they took to reduce risk, but only at the urging/regulations of authorities.
We engaged with 285 animal value chain actors in both pilot and subsequent ethnographic studies, including vendors (48), butchers (36), market cleaners (6), market managers (9), shoppers (135), leaders of local market associations (5) and other key informants (46). Of these, 110 semi-structured interviews and 8 focus group discussions were conducted with actors in the bushmeat value chain in sites where concurrent animal-human sampling occurred (Meyomessala, Sangmelima, and Ebolowa). Characteristics of interview respondents and hospitalized participants are included in Appendix E .
Between 2016 and 2019 (EPT PREDICT 2), we collected a total of 651 questionnaires from participants in hospitals and communities. 436 participants were hospital patients in Meyomessala and Sangmelima and 215 were individuals from the Sangmelima community. Male and female participants were evenly represented in the hospital settings, while males made up 68.8% of people enrolled from Sangmelima community. The mean age of participants was 30.7 years (SD = 17.9) for Meyomessala hospital, 32.8 years (SD = 15.7) for Sangmelima hospital, and 43.7 years (SD = 15.4) for Sangmelima community.
In general, participants from the community sites reported higher contact with wildlife compared to the hospital participants; this was anticipated given the targeted convenience sampling approach of enrolment, where the target population included hunters or any individual buying or selling bushmeat to earn a living. In the community, 91.9% of males reported hunting rodents and 55.4% reported hunting non-human primates (NHPs); this is in contrast to just 4.5% and 0% of females respectively. Furthermore, over 70.1% of people who reported hunting rodents and 67.1% reporting hunting NHPs were adults over age 18.
Table 1 shows participants’ animal exposure during their lifetime, divided among those enrolled at the two hospital sites and one community site. Table 1 . Proportion of respondents from each site answering “yes” to questions related to their exposure to wild rodents, bats, and non-human primates (NHP). In your lifetime, have you ever … Meyomessala Hospital Sangmelima Hospital Sangmelima Community n = 218 n = 218 n = 215 Rodents % Yes % Yes % Yes Kept a rodent as a pet? 0.0% 4.6% 0.9% Handled a rodent? 30.2% 11.5% 28.4% Raised rodents? 0.0% 0.5% 0.5% Found rodent feces in or near your food? 44.0% 56.4% 29.8% Had rodents inside your house? 25.4% 73.4% 42.8% Cooked a rodent to eat? 38.8% 28.9% 74.4% Eaten a rodent raw or undercooked? 15.0% 1.8% 13.5% Eaten a rodent that was known to be sick? 17.7% 2.3% 2.3% Eaten a rodent that was found dead? 26.9% 1.8% 15.8% Been scratched and/or bitten by a rodent? 30.2% 11.5% 28.4% Hunted or trapped rodents? 22.9% 6.9% 64.7% Slaughtered a rodent? 19.9% 13.3% 52.6% NHP Kept an NHP as a pet? 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% Handled an NHP? 4.1% 6.0% 13.5% Raised NHPs? 0.0% 0.0% 3.3% Found NHP feces in or near your food? 0.0% 0.0% 3.7% Had NHPs inside your house? 0.0% 0.0% 0.5% Cooked an NHP to eat? 3.2% 19.7% 42.8% Eaten an NHP raw or undercooked? 0.0% 2.3% 7.9% Eaten an NHP that was known to be sick? 0.0% 0.5% 1.4% Eaten an NHP that was found dead? 0.5% 2.3% 4.2% Been scratched and/or bitten by an NHP? 0.0% 1.4% 5.1% Hunted or trapped NHPs? 0.9% 5.5% 38.1% Slaughtered an NHP? 0.5% 6.0% 33.0% Bats Kept a bat as a pet? 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% Handled a bat? 0.0% 0.5% 1.9% Raised bats? 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% Found bat feces in or near your food? 0.0% 0.0% 0.9% Had bats inside your house? 0.0% 0.0% 0.5% Cooked a bat to eat? 0.0% 0.5% 0.0% Eaten a bat raw or undercooked? 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% Eaten a bat that was known to be sick? 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% Eaten a bat that was found dead? 0.5% 0.0% 0.0% Been scratched and/or bitten by a bat? 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% Hunted or trapped bats? 0.0% 0.5% 0.5% Slaughtered a bat? 0.0% 0.5% 0.5%
Details of logistic regression analysis for interactions with wildlife are shown in Table 2 . In this analysis, we focus our comparisons of community bushmeat dynamics between the two hospital sites (N = 436) however all between-site comparisons (n = 651) were conducted but were not significant (see Appendix C. ). Table 2 . Multivariable logistic regression analysis investigating the effects of location, gender, season, and age, on human interactions with wildlife, as reported in Mayomessala and Sangmelima hospitals. Outcome Hunt Rodents Adj-R 2 = 0.134 Hunt NHP Adj-R 2 = 0.178 Slaughter Rodents Adj-R 2 = 0.144 Slaughter NHP Adj-R 2 = 0.142 n = 436 OR 95% CI p-value OR 95% CI p-value OR 95% CI p-value OR 95% CI p-value Site Meyomessala Hospital Ref ref ref ref Sangmelima Hospital 1.256 0.555–2.842 0.585 6.558 1.421–30.270 0.016 3.477 1.568–7.710 0.002 13.539 1.745–105.023 0.013 Gender Female Ref ref ref ref Male 5.245 1.922–14.312 0.001 7.118 1.545–32.795 0.012 1.764 0.866–3.594 0.118 2.761 0.836–9.119 0.096 Season Wet Ref ref ref ref Dry 0.458 0.164–1.273 0.134 0.482 0.127–1.825 0.283 0.714 0.323–1.578 0.405 0.746 0.224–2.489 0.634 Age (years) 2–30 Ref ref ref ref 31–90 4.581 1.677–12.513 0.003 3.592 0.964–13.382 0.057 7.011 2.656–18.505 <0.001 2.279 0.690–7.526 0.177 Constant 0.009 0.002–0.033 <0.001 0.001 0.000–0.011 <0.001 0.009 0.003–0.030 <0.001 0.002 0.000–0.017 <0.001
More participants from hospitals reported hunting rodents (6.2%) and NHPs (3.2%) for food or sale, compared to bats (0.2%). When controlling for location, age, and season, we found that men were 5.3 times more likely to hunt rodents compared to women (CI: 1.9–14.3, p = 0.001), and were 7.1 times more likely to hunt NHPs (CI: 1.6–32.8, p < 0.012). When comparing hunting practices between hospital locations, while controlling for confounding factors, it was found that people from Sangmelima hospital were 6.6 times more likely to hunt NHPs (CI: 1.4–30.3, p = 0.016), but no significant differences were observed for rodent hunting.
People from Sangmelima Hospital were also 3.5 times more likely to slaughter rodents than those from Meyomessala Hospital (CI: 1.6–7.1, p = 0.002), and 13.5 times more likely to slaughter NHPs (CI: 1.8–105.0, p = 0.013).
Across hospitals, seasons, and genders, respondents 30 years or older were 4.6 times more likely to hunt rodents compared to those aged <30 years old (CI: 1.7–12.5, p = 0.003), 7.0 times more likely to butcher rodents (CI: 2.7–18.5, p < 0.001) and there were no significant differences between individuals under and over 30 years old reporting hunting or butchering NHPs.
There were also no significant differences in the likelihood of either rodent or NHP slaughtering being reported between males or females in the hospital settings.
“Risk” in the study was defined as any situation or behavior whether perceived or real, that caused a potential, elevated exposure to pathogen transmission from animals to humans.
Meat display surfaces were rarely cleaned and when butchering, individuals often used an old tin sheet or piece of cardboard, but did not report consistent cleaning of these surfaces. Furthermore, vendors reported butchering meat on the same counters where dry meat is displayed for sale, meaning that dry meat can be contaminated with fresh blood from other animals. Young children were often with vendors at their stall and babies were often observed close to the exposed meat.
In all observed markets, public water sources were limited or non-existent, and most water came from wells or pumps, often located outside the market and carried for butchering and cleaning work. Perhaps due to the lack of available water, participants reported that they do not wash their hands at the markets. Rather, soap is reserved for cleaning when they get home. “ Soap is at the house for when you return in the evening. We don't use soap here.” “ Le savon, c'est à la maison quand tu rentres chez toi. On n'utilise pas le savon ici. ”
After butchering, individuals reported wiping their hands dry with a rag, newspaper, or grass found nearby rather than rinsing them. Some vendors report rinsing meat with water and we observed that this water is not changed throughout the day; rather, it was discarded at the end of the workday.
Many individuals working in bushmeat markets reported accidental knife or machete wounds. Most of these cuts are minor enough that the butcher doesn't stop work to tend to the wound. If the cut is more serious, butchers reported applying salt or lemon juice to stop the bleeding or clean their wounds with alcohol and then bandage them, or simply apply a bandage without alcohol, if these materials are available.
Regression analysis was conducted on risk perception questions ( Appendix C ). Risk perception was not uniform across sites: fewer respondents reported being worried about outbreaks in their local market in Meyomessala Hospital (OR 0.1, 95% CI: 0.08–0.3, p < 0.001) and the Sangmelima community (OR 0.1, 95% CI: 0.07–0.2, p < 0.001) compared to Sangmelima hospital. No differences were noted between genders or seasons, but adult respondents from all age groups were more likely to report being worried about outbreaks than respondents aged <18 years (OR up to 3.1, 95% CI: 1.6–5.9, p = 0.001). This question was asked generally, and did not refer specifically to Ebola or other named outbreak events.
Study participants were also asked whether they believed there was any risk of handling or slaughtering wild animals while they had a cut or open wound. Of the participants who responded with either “yes” or “no” (n = 538), once again those from Sangmelima hospital were more likely to think that working with an open wound is a risky behavior (Meyomessala OR 0.02, 95% CI 0.007–0.06, p < 0.001; Sangmelima community OR 0.04, 95% CI: 0.01–0.1, p < 0.001). Similar to other responses concerning risk, more adults tended to believe that working with an open wound was risky compared to children aged <18 (OR up to 10.3, 95% CI: 3.4–31.8, p < 0.001). Finally, participants enrolled during the wet season tended to be more likely to believe working with an open wound was risky compared to those enrolled during the dry season (OR 1.6, 95% CI: 1.0–2.5, p = 0.05) however this effect was limited. Within the Southern region where all sites were located, the wet season is Mar 16-Nov 15, and other months are dry.
To investigate potential collinearity, we examined what impact the response to one risk perception question had on an individual responding in a particular manner to the other question. We found that those who responded that they believed that butchering animals with an open wound was risky were also 4.0 times more likely to be worried about outbreaks in their local market (n = 649, OR 95% CI: 2.5–6.5, p < 0.001), while those who reported they didn't know whether this is a risky behavior did not provide any significant predictive ability as to whether they were also worried about disease outbreaks (OR 1.46, 95% CI: 0.9–2.5, p = 0.157).
Information on participants' level of education was obtained through questionnaires and considered as a predictive variable for wildlife exposure and risk perception. However, level of education and age were positively correlated in this dataset (Pearson's Chi-squared value = 117.5, p < 0.001), making inclusion of both variables in a single model unwise. While replacing age variable(s) for education did not produce exactly the same results in models, differences were small (<5%), no changes in association significance were observed, and no additional confounding associations were noted. Significant associations were observed in one additional model for the age variable compared to the education variable, and therefore age, rather than education, was used as the predictor of choice for all models. In all sites at least half of participants had completed secondary school and between 12 and 19% had some college/university/professional education. Levels of education were remarkably similar across all three sites.
The questionnaire data was supported by in-depth interviews where the majority of those interviewed in the markets did not perceive themselves to be at risk for the transmission of zoonotic diseases. They did not believe that live animals or animal meat could transmit diseases to humans, nor did they believe that they were at elevated risk for illness.
Of the various ways that people might get sick from meat, bushmeat vendors recognized that rotten or improperly prepared/cooked meat and eating the meat of an animal found dead in the forest were risky. Hunters say that it is an accepted rule that they should not collect meat from animals which were found dead, but a few hunters also admitted that other hunters would collect animal remains and sell them to vendors. Of the hunters we interviewed, 17% reported that they had collected a dead animal to eat it themselves and 8% reported that they had collected a dead animal to sell it. Aside from these particular cases, vendors tended to reject the possibility of infectious disease transmission between animals and humans, aside from dogs or snake bites, because they have never seen or recognized such transmission occurring. Rural areas of Cameroon have a subsistence economy and multiple generations of hunters and trappers have lived off wild animal meat from the surrounding forests for decades, meaning human-wildlife interactions are common and regular, however despite this consistent interaction, interviewed hunters and vendors explained that they had never witnessed any instances of illness related to such contact.
Many individuals expressed an acceptance of the risks associated with butchering and preparing meat. However, rather than associating cuts and butchering as risky in relation to contact with animal blood, or risk of disease transmission, vendors perceive the risk to be related to getting a bad wound and injuring themselves so they couldn't work. They state that cuts are a common occurrence in this line of work and said that the only way to avoid cuts is to employ proper butchering techniques, which are learned with experience. Butchers explain that they limit their risk by carefully positioning their hands on the meat so as to limit contact with knives. They also report that they quickly chop up meat, which limits their time butchering - a practice that some believe reduces their risk for accidental cuts. Most individuals do not wear gloves while working with meat, claiming that gloves rip, are cumbersome or too slippery, and make it difficult to hold the meat.
The Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife (MINFOF) is the government agency tasked with regulation of hunting and sale of bushmeat, and they are the enforcement entity responsible for meat confiscation or requests for proof of permit documentation (See MINFOF mandates, Appendix D .). Numerous bushmeat value chain actors, and especially vendors, complained about authorities and their often inconsistent bushmeat regulatory practices. One vendor said: « One has the impression that the law hits only the small vendors and acts like it doesn't see the big vendors, the real poachers … » « On a l'impression que la loi frappe seulement les petits vendeurs … et la loi fait comme si on ne voit pas les gros vendeurs, les vraies braconniers … ») (Vendor, 38)
«You [referring to authorities] pass by those who come back with 100 pieces of protected animal meat, yet you arrest me when I buy an antelope. » « Tu passe a côté de ceux qui rentrent avec 100 gigots de viandes d'espèces protégés et tu viens m'arrêter …. là où j'ai payé mon lièvre. » (Vendor, 61, Female, Sangmelima)
Vendors also mentioned crocodiles, gorillas, chimpanzees, giant pangolins, elephants, and black and white colobus as protected species and that meat from these species is often not displayed on counters for sale; rather they sold it to people in trusted networks to avoid detection by officials.
Vendor's relationships with authorities appeared more cordial in rural markets than in urban ones where there has historically been tension, stemming from authorities seizing vendors' meat, requiring them to pay high daily/weekly fees, or fining them for not having permits. Punitive force is most palpable where there is bushmeat coming from protected areas , such as in Djoum, which is near the Dja Faunal Reserve, as well as in Yaoundé markets where large amounts of bushmeat, including protected species, is coming from rural villages.
The season also plays a role in how much vendors feel “harassed” by MINFOF authorities. Vendors mentioned that the months of May, June and July, which are closed for hunting, as months they have the most frustration with regulators. Participants indicated that authorities were more frequent in the markets during this period to enforce the law with either warnings or fines, or to confiscate meat from vendors.
Many participants, especially female vendors, spoke of the importance of their involvement in the bushmeat trade to their livelihoods and their ability to pay for their children's school costs. When asked whether she has help from her children butchering animals at the market, one female vendor from Sangmelima said, « Non ! mes enfants vont à l’école. Est-ce que je vais amener mes enfants au marché ? Mes enfants vont à l’école. Je fais tout ça pour que les enfants aillent à l’école … Je n'ai pas fait l’école, ma fille. C'est bien de savoir que toi tu n'as pas beaucoup fréquenter, mais … c'est pour cela que je me débrouille que mes enfants fréquentent./No! My children go to school. Would I bring my children to the market? My children go to school. I do everything so that they go to school. I didn't go to school, my dear. It's fine knowing that you didn't have the chance to go to school much, but that's why I manage: for my children to attend school.» This reflects a heightened awareness among bushmeat value chain actors of the importance that their children receive formal education and indicates that they recognize education as a pathway to other potential employment. Other vendors also reported that they do not want their children to participate in the bushmeat trade as a career.
In purchase price negotiations in markets, starting prices varied according to the perceived purchasing power of the buyers and the final price was the outcome of a negotiation between vendor and buyer. More individuals in urban areas have higher purchasing power than in rural areas, a factor that is partly responsible for the higher prices in urban markets along with higher transport costs and market fees. In rural markets, meat is often available cooked and sold by ‘cooking pot vendors’ or from small restaurant owners in or on the edge of the market. A serving of cooked bushmeat costs ~500fcfa (~0.89 USD) on average in small rural markets. In midsize town markets or in the capital of Yaoundé, a serving of bushmeat is more expensive, costing between 1000 and 1,500fcfa (~1.80–2.70 USD) for the same quantity. When there is no bushmeat, the same vendors also prepare fish, chicken, or beef, which might cost approximately 500–1000fcfa (~0.89–1.80 USD).

Section: 4. Discussion

Our study provides some highlights of ten-years of research in bushmeat markets in Cameroon, with an overview of the markets from observations, quantitative analysis of associated risks, and behaviors and practices of bushmeat actors. We use these observations to propose some potential interventions and recommendations as to how to implement those interventions.
The data described here presents a complex network of actors, local market conditions, and regulations driving the trade of bushmeat in Cameroon. Qualitative and quantitative data highlighted behaviors, practices, and beliefs that pose risks for zoonotic disease emergence. Market observations and interviews revealed poor sanitary conditions, inadequate water availability, and infrequent or absent handwashing coupled with frequent contact with animal body fluids. Furthermore, the risks associated with blood contact were not well understood, and most market actors demonstrated a lack of knowledge of risk of infection; participants who did acknowledge disease transmission risk generally ignored these risks due to economic circumstances or past experience.
Markets themselves were characterized by a lack of sanitation facilities and very little infrastructure available to bushmeat vendors. Vendors indicated that counters where butchering occurred were not cleaned after each animal is butchered, or even cleaned daily, so animal blood from multiple species mixes regularly and is present on meat sold by the vendor each day. The water used for cleaning in markets comes from local wells and pumps, which are not all reliable, close-by or sterile. Water is kept in buckets by vendors but not regularly changed and may often be reused. The lack of accessible water leads to reduced handwashing and washing with dirty water; these practices may lead to transfer of pathogens between objects in the market and increase the likelihood of infection of workers. This demonstrates the need for interventions in markets related to sanitation which should include both market infrastructure and behavior change.
Making handwashing facilities more accessible in markets may increase hygiene levels and if used appropriately will reduce likelihood of infections. However, one of the challenges is that many of these markets have no reliable, nearby water supply for use by vendors in other parts of the market as well. The infrastructure and systems required for installation will be more complex than a simple extension of an existing water supply but would require planning, capital investment and an ongoing maintenance and bill paying system. If costs were passed on to vendors and to buyers, this would result in an increase of merchandise price across the market, and if the funds would need to be mobilized by local authorities (eg. local council who owns these markets) then a funding source would need to be identified. Any investment in water supply should also be coupled with handwashing stations with soap dispensers provided by market cleaning services and MoH signage specifically targeting handwashing for individuals involved in food preparation and handling in markets.
Although half of respondents with whom we conducted questionnaires had completed secondary school, the majority of participants in qualitative interviews reported leaving school at an early age and reported that their children do not currently participate in the bushmeat trade. Vendors also reported that they use cash generated from bushmeat sales to pay for the costs of their children's schooling. This reflects a heightened awareness among bushmeat value chain actors of the importance of their children attending formal education. Directing youth towards more education may lead to less reliance of younger Cameroonians on the bushmeat trade, reflecting the perception that education may present a pathway to alternative future employment.
Older respondents tended to be more worried about outbreaks. This may be a reflection of the larger role that bushmeat plays in the lives of older individuals (who were also more likely to hunt), as well as life experience that they may have had with prior outbreaks, and hence the additional consideration that they give to their potential exposure. There are often unintended consequences of bans on bushmeat that accompany outbreaks, and this criminalization can fuel fears and rumors in communities under health, social and economic strain from an outbreak ( Bonwitt et al., 2018 ). The heightened sensitivity of this older demographic to zoonotic outbreaks suggests that interventions related to risk communication and raising awareness should seek to engage more mature members of the community to vehicle and champion messages and act as advocates for behavior change. Of course, youth also need to be involved and sensitized as future leaders and to remind elders of adherence to programs, so school-based education that includes public health/hygiene and conservation/animal protection messages is recommended. Variation in community practices, such as hunting or bat trapping, and different opinions among people in different age brackets underline the importance of localised and adapted interventions to ensure targeted outcomes, especially regarding public health messaging before, during and after zoonotic disease outbreaks.
We noted differences between sites in terms of both exposures and risk perceptions. Such differences could be explained by different levels of forest conversion to farmland, differing employment opportunities, different levels of access to hunting materials across the various sites (eg Meyomessala vs Sangmelima), or different source populations in the communities (ie hospital patients are coming from a broader catchment than the local community), but these hypotheses would require further investigation. Zoonotic disease transmission prevention interventions require appropriately targeted messages based on scientific evidence that take community differences into account. For example, the PREDICT team determined that following the release of the new Bombali virus finding (Goldstein et al., 2018) in bats, we needed to develop a tool for community education and engagement about the finding. The resource, entitled Living Safely with Bats ( PREDICT Consortium, 2018 ), incorporated social scientific data collected about beliefs about bats, common human-bat contact, and context specifics about their interactions to produce a One Health protective/preventive messaging tool. To refine and test the format and key messages, focus groups were held with participating communities and feedback was solicited from project country teams.
Many individuals in rural Cameroon rely on bushmeat for both subsistence and income, and this livelihood pressure appears to trump perceptions of health risk from wild meat. In the present study, perception of disease risk from animals seemed to be more significant among hospitalized patients than among community members or market workers; this may be a product of different priorities of populations or perhaps a more health-sensitive population, already thinking about illness due to their hospitalization. However, broadly speaking, bushmeat risk perception was fairly low within our study population; Baudel et al. (2019) also found through a knowledge, attitude and practices study in Southern Cameroon that people who ate bats had a lower perception of the danger related to bat meat consumption, further supporting this assumption.
While bushmeat regulations are a natural source of frustration for many bushmeat vendors as they curb supply, they are an essential conservation requirement of well-managed wildlife populations in their ecosystems through sustainable hunting. MINFOF serves as the enforcement arm for protecting endangered species , and it is their job to confiscate meat that has been illegally hunted, whether obtained during the closed hunting season when animals are reproducing or from protected species that should not be hunted at all. However, the perceived inconsistent implementation and lack of fairness in application of the regulations is a source of conflict between regulatory authorities and vendors. As bushmeat vendors feel unfairly persecuted by wildlife authorities, it may be challenging for public health/education messaging to be taken seriously by actors without first working to obtain trust and rebuilding relationships. Working in a One Health framework of wildlife, livestock and human health in a multi-ministerial approach is recommended, to discuss the best engagement strategy, messaging, actions and personnel to be involved for effective community buy-in. Local engagement of trusted, local educators or leaders will be essential to spark awareness that hunting, butchering, and consumption of wild animal meat may represent a conduit for disease emergence. Participants in this study complained that the small bushmeat vendors are fined while the big hunters go unmonitored. The confiscations, fines, and enforcement of regulations forbidding the sale of bushmeat have also created an environment of secrecy and informality in trade. As protected species are also being sold by vendors, either hidden within or outside the markets, any proposed interventions would need to take the clandestine and informal component of the value chain into account. Intervention specialists that are not able to access these individuals or sites would need to work out how to ensure messaging was relevant and accessible in those non-market informal areas and populations. Moreover, actions should be extended to villages where hunters and their families are also exposed, including women who butcher animals for home use or for sale in informal restaurants along roadsides.
There is an additional danger that educational messages or campaigns to reduce bushmeat reliance that focus on bushmeat being risky, bad, infected or likely to transmit disease will be relatively ineffective. Discussions held during this study and elsewhere by the authors highlight the difficulties in convincing those that work with wild animals about credible health risks since most subjects have had wildlife contact their entire lives and have not personally seen a link between contact and any observed illnesses. When asked ‘do you know that animals can give us diseases?’ one female vendor in Ebolowa said, « On nous a toujours dit. Mais comme nous depuis, que moi je suis né, même dans mon village nous on en consomme, même mes grands-parents, même mes parents … Nous, on n'a pas peur parce que je suis né avec, j'ai grandi dans la viande. je mangeais étant tout petite./That's what they always tell us. But ever since I was born, we've eaten it. Even my grandparents, even my parents … We are not afraid because I was born with it, I grew up in bushmeat. I ate as a little girl. »
An alternative to the anti-hunting discourse is to provide ideas and opportunities allowing individuals to reduce the risk of pathogen transmission from bushmeat but without completely discouraging hunting and bushmeat consumption. While this may not eliminate risk altogether, neither will an ineffective anti-hunting campaign. A more balanced approach recognizing the contribution of hunting to culture and livelihoods, but with pathways towards reduced individual risk, could if scaled successfully, reduce community or population-level risk. This approach should be designed as compatible with other interventions that seek to bolster enforcement of existing laws or regulations through development of mutually advantageous opportunities, such as offering a reduced permit fee to vendors for attending an educational awareness session on animal conservation and zoonotic disease prevention. Building trust between hunters/vendors and the authorities would be enhanced by cooperative interventions, where the authorities are perceived by target communities as accountable partners, working to understand the actual risks and realities and seeking solutions to reduce risk without damaging and destroying traditions, cultures and livelihoods.
Alternatives to bushmeat are often suggested as a solution to reducing bushmeat hunting pressure on wildlife and reducing risk of cross species transmission of pathogens. The diversification of income sources for village hunters is seen as an option to limit reliance on bushmeat, under the hypothesis that hunters will invest their time in a more lucrative activity and abandon hunting if alternative sources of income are available to them. The range of alternative sources of income is wide, but includes the development of small-scale production systems, eco-tourism, craft work, non-meat forest product collection and sales, etc. Conservation projects have introduced bushmeat alternatives in communities, such as cocoa seedlings, intended to spur farming as an alternative income generating activity, or beekeeping activities as an alternative to bushmeat hunting ( van Vliet, 2011 ). However, a number of socioeconomic factors may determine whether hunting communities are interested in or will accept alternative livelihood interventions, so these factors must be considered along with an understanding of people's original motivation for engagement in the wildlife trade. In order to evaluate whether bushmeat alternatives are feasible, studies must track their cultural, social, environmental, and economic impacts by considering meaningful outcomes, such as technical feasibility, economic sustainability, social appropriation, and conservation impacts ( van Vliet, 2011 ). Engagement of key stakeholders (communities, governmental institutions, national research centers, etc.) in conducting the research provides local validation of whether alternatives and behavioral risk prevention measures are acceptable to the community and viable as a practice.
Despite several studies seeking to evaluate the impact of these alternatives, there have not been any strong success stories ( Wells and McShane, 2004 ; Van Vliet, 2011 ; Wicander and Coad, 2015 ). A few examples of interventions targeting alternatives to the production of animal source foods include introducing or enhancing domestic animal meat production and farming of wildlife. However, a clear understanding of consumer preferences (stated and actual) in terms of taste preferences, habits, cultural attachment, and symbolic value for both wildlife and domestic animals is needed before any efforts in supplying alternative protein sources are attempted in a given community ( vanVliet and Mbazza, 2011 ). Wildlife farming projects have been attempted with wild rodents such as Thryonomys swinderianus (cane rat), Cricetomys emini (pouched rat), and Atherurus africanus (brush-tailed porcupine). Each of these is an important hunted wildlife species making them readily acceptable in the local markets. In Gabon, Cameroon, and Congo, cane rats were found to be well adapted for farming and to consumer preference, but these farms were not economically viable as farming is more time consuming and costly than hunting (Chardonnet, 2004) and cane rats are responsible for damaging crops and are far too common in rural areas for hunters to be motivated to farm them ( Van Vliet, 2011 ). In addition to these limits, these mini-livestock can also facilitate the emergence of zoonotic diseases, as rodents are often hosts of leptospirosis and salmonellosis which affect humans, and outbreaks of rat-transmitted diseases have also occurred in cane rat farms in Gabon causing high mortality rates among captive stock ( Jori et al., 2005 ).
Given the importance of the bushmeat sector both socially and economically, effective risk-reduction and zoonotic disease prevention interventions are required. However, these interventions need to focus on more than simply raising awareness of risk, as only a small percentage of individuals that recognize disease risks from wildlife contact reported taking any precautions (4% of hunters and 2% of those that butchered) ( LeBreton et al., 2006 ). Interventions targeting consumer behavior may help to reduce bushmeat demand in urban areas, and certainly understanding the cultural and socio-psychological factors is crucial to guide such interventions ( Chausson et al., 2019 ). We suggest that in addition to the infrastructure considerations highlighted above, communication strategies seek to include messages aiming to raise awareness along with easy, inexpensive and convenient steps that individuals can undertake to reduce their risk. These kinds of steps enhance the possibility of success as they are more adapted to self-efficacy and self-regulation, both of which are considered predictors of success in behavioral interventions ( Teixeira et al., 2015 ).
In terms of specific interventions, we recommend the design of basic preventative educational messages for vendors and butchers about germ theory and how diseases spread. Messaging should focus on the facts: that while animal-to-human transmission is rare, it is possible. While human-to-human transmission risk is often the main focus of educational public health messaging, training sessions should be held with receptive community members on safe butchering and ‘healthy hunting’ techniques aiming to reduce risks for pathogen transmission. Training and educational workshops should be inclusive, especially involving youth and women of all ages who do a great deal of the butchering at home and who are frequently involved as buyers and vendors of bushmeat. These trainings would nurture trusting, productive environments and work from within to support bushmeat actors to adopt safer practices over time. Trainings and educational interventions should cover general disease risks from wildlife and bushmeat, steps to take to avoid infection, and managing injuries that happen during butchering to prevent disease transmission.
In Cameroon, there is already widespread use of text messaging to distribute public health messages. Along with radio spots and poster campaign messaging, this SMS strategy could also be used for bushmeat related messaging in the context of wildlife conservation and public health. However, such a nationally scaled campaign would need to stay general as it would be difficult to target specific populations and communities with focused messages pertaining to their unique social, economic and ecological context.
A measurable, evidence-based framework is needed for the implementation of interventions given the complexities and dynamics of the bushmeat trade in Cameroon, the diversity of actors involved and the interacting and complex nature of health risks. Through our research we have identified some basic intervention recommendations that could be adopted to reduce individual and community-level risks created through hunting and butchering of wildlife. To implement these interventions, we recommend using an evidence-based practice COM-B framework for behavioral change ( Michie et al., 2011 ), which evokes ‘capability’, ‘opportunity’, and ‘motivation’ to move a target group toward uptake. We also recommend social mobilization, engaging trusted local actors to lead interventions in the various target communities. This approach has already been used effectively to ensure that the basic sanitary education and health promotion information reaches its target community ( WHO, 2014 ). From our data we see an opportunity to work with older individuals who are already more likely to recognize risk and may be willing to share this perspective with younger individuals in the same communities and who would also be trusted leaders, more likely to be listened to and believed. Clearly the bushmeat trade dilemma presents complex environmental, economic, social, cultural and ethical challenges, and proposed interventions must envision a balanced compromise between biodiversity and wildlife conservation and human health and livelihoods ( Cawthorn et al., 2015 ).
A risk management approach for hunting and the bushmeat trade that engages social science perspectives for understanding how wildlife and people are interlinked, and community and partner engagement to reflect the needs of all involved, should help operationalize an effective One Health intervention strategy in the Congo Basin.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the Government of Cameroon for their permission to conduct this study, and the dedicated PREDICT staff and team members that led and conducted these investigations and supported our analyses, insights, and conclusions. We also thank other members of the PREDICT-2 consortium with which the protocols for this study were jointly developed ( https://ohi.sf.ucdavis.edu/programs-projects/predict-project/authorship ).
