Title: Care providers, access to care, and the Long-term Care Nursing Insurance in China: An agent-based simulation


Abstract: Abstract

China piloted a publicly funded Long-term Care Nursing Insurance (LTCNI) with an aim to improve access to long-term care (LTC) for older people in China in 2012. Existing studies showed that the scheme has been successful in meeting some goals, but little is known on how the availability, price and quality of the local care providers affect access to care. Using an Agent-based Modelling approach, this paper simulates the effects of the LTCNI on access to care by considering quality, costs and availability of the local care providers. Our simulation is based on Qingdao city—the first city in China that piloted the LTCNI. We found considerable discrepancies in terms of access to services among the LTCNI beneficiaries. The poor are more likely to choose nursing home care with low costs albeit these services may be of poor quality. The demand for home-based services is high, but these services are not distributed according to population needs and are not available in some districts with high concentration of older people. Consequently, a large proportion of disabled older people have no access to home-based services. We urge policy makers to improve the benefit package of the LTCNI, especially for the poor. We also suggest that more resources should be directed to promote and improve the availability of home-based services in areas with a large number of older people.

Section: 1. Introduction

Population ageing has created a global challenge without precedent: the number of older people is expected to grow from an estimated 524 million in 2010 to nearly 1.5 billion by 2050, with most of the increase taking place in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) ( World Health Organization, 2015 ). In China, the total number of those aged 65 and above stood at approximately 110 million, or 8% of the entire population in 2010. The proportion of older people is projected to reach 26% by 2050, exceeding that of most EU countries ( National Bureau of Statistics of P. R. China, 2011 ; World Health Organization, 2015 ). It is projected that 68 million of the older people in China will experience some degrees of disabilities in China by 2030, and approximately 18.6% of these people may require assistance for daily living activities ( UNESCAP, 2015 ). The demand for equitable and efficient LTC is rising rapidly, and finding a suitable mechanism to finance LTC has become a pressing policy concern for the Chinese government.
In order to meet the growing needs of the older people, the Chinese government piloted the Long-term Care Nursing Insurance (LTCNI)—a dedicated insurance that covers professional LTC and geriatric services for those with substantial or critical needs. By 2016, the LTCNI had been piloted in fifteen cities in China covering more than 38 million of older people ( Yang et al., 2018 ). Early assessments of this scheme showed that it made LTC services more affordable for disabled older people by significantly reducing out-of-pocket payments of the services ( Lv and Wu, 2016 ; Deng and Guo, 2015 ), however, most of these studies do not take into account the characteristics and availability of the care providers in the local areas. Existing literature suggests that the availability of care providers, prices and quality of the LTC services can have significant effects on overall access to care ( Allan and Forder, 2012 ). This is particularly relevant to China's case as ample studies have shown that the China's LTC infrastructure is largely under-developed—the vast majority of the rural areas and some of the urban areas do not have sufficient LTC providers/facilities to meet the demand of older people ( Xie et al., 2012 ; Xu and Tang, 2007 ; Yang et al., 2016 ; Chao and Zhang, 2017 ). Although home-and community-based services are preferred by older people and their family members, these services remain non-existent in less developed areas due to factors such as the lack of skilled care workers and physical environment ( Feng et al., 2012 ). Funded care home places are often limited to those who are in poverty or have no children, and costs associated with living in a private care home can be hefty for the poor ( Feng et al., 2012 ). A study conducted in urban areas in Fujian province showed that the average price for a care home place ranges from RMB2000 (£230.4) to RMB3000 (£345.7) per month, but only 9.8% of the older people reported to be able to afford such a price ( Hong, 2015 ). In addition to the high costs, the inadequacy in the quality of care has also been identified as an issue. A survey conducted in nine provinces in 2012 showed that less than half of the older people were satisfied with the quality of the services they received ( Hong, 2015 ). The waiting list for public-funded care homes, which are usually of good quality and low prices, are usually long ( Feng et al., 2012 ).
Based on the discussion above, this paper seeks to examine the effects of the LTCNI on access to care by considering characteristics of the local care providers. In particular, we are interested in knowing whether and to what extent factors such as quality, costs and availability of care in the localities may affect access to care for the LTCNI participants from different income groups. Using Agent-based Modelling (ABM) as the main study method, we base our analysis on four urban districts in Qingdao—the first city in China that has piloted the LTCNI.

Section: 2. Long-term care nursing insurance in Qingdao

This section provides an overview of the key features of the LTCNI in Qingdao, i.e., eligibility rules of the LTCNI, covered services and service costs. This information is largely garnered from various government policy documents ( Municipal Government of Qingdao P.R. China, 2012 ; Qingdao Human Resource and Social Security Bureau, 2012 ), and will be used to inform the parameters in the analysis.
Eligibility rules: Enrolment in the LTCNI is tightly linked to individuals' Social Health Insurance (SHI) status. China currently has three SHI schemes – the Urban Employee Insurance (UEI), covering urban residents in formal employment, the Urban Resident Insurance (URI), covering urban residents without formal employment, and the New Rural Cooperative Scheme (NCMS), covering rural residents. Eligible participants in the LTCNI must be urban residents enrolled in either the UEI or the URI. In addition, they must have critical LTC needs (often being bedridden) as determined by a 10-item Activity Daily Living (ADL) questionnaire. A diagnosis from hospitals or care providers confirming an applicant's condition is also required for enrolment.
Covered services: Three types of service can be covered, depending on needs of the participant: 1) hospital care at designated secondary or tertiary hospitals providing 24-h intensive care for the elderly with critical LTC needs, 2) nursing home care intended for older people who require continual care and have substantial difficulties in coping with normal ADL, and 3) home-based nursing care including weekly care visits by doctors or nurses. Regular inspections and an annual review of care providers are carried out to ensure the quality and safety of the services.
Service costs: Service costs are fixed at RMB170 (£19.60) per day for care provided at secondary and tertiary hospitals, RMB65 (£7.51) per day for nursing homes, and RMB50 (£5.77) per day for home-based care ( Qingdao Human Resource and Social Security Bureau, Qingdao Finance Bureau et al. 2014 ). No premiums or excess are required for participants. Reimbursement rates for medical costs are different for participants in different SHI schemes, ranging from 90% for UEI participants to 80% for URI participants with an annual contribution of RMB110 (£12.70).

Section: 3. Methods

We use ABM as the main method for the analysis for the below reasons: First, long-term care systems are complex and comprises of various stakeholders ( Atun, 2012 ; Lipsitz, 2012 ; Braithwaite, 2018 ). ABM is particularly useful in articulating micro-level interactions between different stakeholders ( Sturmberg and Lanham, 2014 ). In this study, we are interested in knowing how the LTCNI influences access to care based on the interactions between characteristics of the individuals, costs, quality and availability of the services. Literature suggested that the poor are more sensitive to price elasticity of LTC services compared to those from the rich, hence they are likely to react differently to the same benefit package of the LTCNI compared to the rich (Folland, Goodman et al. 2016). These interactions need to be taken into account in the analysis, and the conventional regression method lack the analytical strength to capture the non-linear dynamics of these interactions. Secondly, ABM is able to provide evidence-based policy recommendations by simulating different policy scenarios. This is particularly useful for low- and middle-income countries such as China where empirical data are often not available ( Cherng et al., 2016 ). In this study, we compare the results on access to care by simulating a number of scenarios regarding different distribution of home-based care providers and the adoption of different charging systems for nursing home care.
We use Andersen's behavioral model of health service to guide our model structure ( Andersen, 1995 ), and identify two agents in our model: LTC service users (eligible urban residents with LTC needs) and LTC service providers. For service users, factors influencing individuals' use of LTC services are categorised as predisposing characteristics (e.g. age, gender), enabling resources (e.g., income, SHI status, place of residence), and needs (e.g. severity of disability) ( Andersen, 1995 ; Zhu, 2015 ). For the providers, availability (e.g. number of beds available), affordability (e.g. monthly service costs) and usability (e.g. quality and location) of health services are key factors that influence individuals' access to care ( Aday and Andersen, 1974 ; Lei et al., 2016 ). Three types of LTC service provider are included in the model: hospital care, nursing home care and home-based care ( Yang et al., 2016 ).
The baseline population is constructed based on demographic and household structures of four urban districts in Qingdao (i.e. District 1: Shibei, District 2: Shinan, District 3: Licang and District 4: Laoshan). We derived the population age structure from Qingdao Population Statistics 2010 ( National Bureau of Statistics of the People Republic of China, 2010 ). In particular, Districts 1 and 2 represent districts with large proportions of older people, whereas Districts 3 and 4 represent districts with relatively younger age populations ( Table 1 ). Table 1 . Descriptive statistics of baseline population. Percentage District 1 District 2 District 3 District 4 Age: 40–49 16.9% (16.6%) 15.0% (17.1%) 13.9% (14.9%) 14.1% (16.3%) Age: 50–59 15.0% (16.7%) 14.2% (15.6%) 11.0% (12.8%) 10.9% (12.5%) Age: 60–69 9.2% (7.8%) 9.3% (8.5%) 5.8% (6.4%) 6.2% (6.3%) Age: 70- 7.3% (8.1%) 8.9% (8.2%) 6.3% (5.7%) 6.4% (5.0%) Note: Values adopted in our model are derived from Qingdao population statistics, 2010 ( National Bureau of Statistics of the People Republic of China, 2010 ).
We consider the below characteristics for each individual agent i : age ( age i ), gender ( sex i ), number of ADL ( ADL i ), social health insurance (SHI) status ( ins i ), income ( inc i ), care giver type ( cg i ) and district ( L i ) where the individual resides. Based on a needs assessment of 10 ADL items, only older people with critical needs are eligible for care provided by hospitals or nursing homes (more than 5 ADL limitations, ADL i >= 5), whereas less severe cases are only eligible for care provided by home-based care providers (more than 3 ADL limitations, ADL i >= 3) ( Municipal Government of Qingdao P.R. China, 2012 ; Qingdao Human Resource and Social Security Bureau, 2012 ). Individual's SHI status is an important parameter in the model as it determines the level of benefits that the individual is entitled to. As mentioned in an earlier session, only individuals enrolled in URI and UEI are entitled to funded LTC services. We derived the parameters of our baseline population from the China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Survey (CHARLS) 2011 ( Peking University, 2011 ; Zhao et al., 2014 ) and local municipal statistics ( National Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of China, 2010 ). Table 1 , Table 2 provide the summary statistics of the baseline population and the comparison with CHARLS 2011, respectively. Table 2 . Descriptive statistics of baseline population aged 45 and above. Empty Cell District 1 District 2 District 3 District 4 CHARLS a Sex ( sex ) Male (1) 50.58% 50.63% 50.26% 50.1% 51.36% Insurance ( ins ) UEI (1) 35.98% 33.13% 30.36% 31.44% 43.48% URI (2) 16.91% 18.42% 16.71% 18.9% 19.11% Number of ADL limitations ( ADL ) 1-2 3.16% 3.98% 3.43% 4.73% 3.73% 3-4 0.82% 0.7% 0.46% 0.56% 0.71% 5-6 0.79% 0.93% 0.69% 0.38% 0.88% Household Income in RMB ( inc ) Mean 12956 14511 19282 17637 17976 S.D. 28964 27739 31458 32014 42797 a Distribution of urban samples in CHARLS, 2011.
We consider the below characteristics for each service provider s j : type ( st j ), Service capacity - number of beds available ( sa j ), service quality ( sq j ), monthly service costs ( sc j ) and District ( L j ). Values of service type, capacity and district of each provider are drawn from local municipal statistics ( Qingdao Municipal Bureau of Human Resources and Social Security, 2016 ). For nursing home, care we categorise the service providers into four groups based on quality and service costs as suggested in the literature ( Chu and Chi, 2008 ; Liu et al., 2015 ): Type I (high quality, high costs) representing private providers that provide high quality services for high costs; Type II (high quality, low costs) representing public providers that provide high quality services with relatively low costs; Type III (low quality, low costs) representing facilities with low quality and costs; and Type IV (average quality, average costs) representing the majority of the providers with average quality and average costs ( Feng et al., 2011 ). For home-based care, we assume service quality is the same among service providers, thus the value is assigned randomly with a uniform distribution across the same range. Table 3 shows the variable description. Table 3 . Variable description for service provider. Variable Definition Description Service type st i ∈ {0, 1,2} Type of service providers: 0 as designated hospital care, 1 as nursing house care, and 2 as home-based care Service capacity sa i ∈ N Number of available beds for LTC services Service quality sq i ∈ (0, 3] Service quality; a larger value indicates better services Service costs sc i ∈ (0, 5000] Monthly charge of LTC services Districts L i ∈ {d i } District where the service provider locates
We assume individuals are rational and will make decisions based on a utility function ( Grossman, 1972 ; Kolstad and Chernew, 2009 ). Each individual follows a two-stage process to choose service providers as shown in Fig. 1 . First, an older person makes a decision on the type of the services (e.g, hospital, nursing home, home-based care) based on his/her characteristics and eligibility (stage 1); second, he/she may choose a particular service provider based on an estimation of each service provider in terms of service quality and costs (stage 2). Download: Download high-res image (410KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Two stage process of choosing service providers.
Taking into account the health needs, availability of care-givers, and affordability—whether the out-of-pocket care costs exceed income, the probability of choosing each care type P s t , i ∈ ( 0,1 ) is calculated by a binary logit model as exp ( V s t ) ∑ s t exp ( V s t ) , where V st is defined in Equation (1) , and I n x ( x ) : R → [ 0,1 ] is a function defined as 1 − e − x ( Train, 2003 ). β and β‘ are weights of each factor and evenly distributed (=0.33) such that ∑ i ∈ { 1,2,3 } β i = 1 and ∑ i ∈ { 1,2,3 } β ' i = 1 . (1) V s t = { β 1 I n x ( i n s i ) + β 2 I n x ( a g e i ) + β 3 I n x ( i n c i ) f o r s t = 0 β 1 ' I n x ( c g i ) + β 2 ' I n x ( a g e i ) + β 3 ' I n x ( i n c i ) f o r s t = 1,2
Subsequently, each individual i with the chosen care type st will select a particular service provider s j by using the Monte-Carlo simulation approach ( Reuven, 1981 ) based on the estimation of a utility value U t i l s j s t and the corresponding probability P s j of each service provider (Equations (2) , (3) , (4) , (5) , (6) ) ( McFadden, 1973 ; Holm et al., 2016 ). Weights ω i , i ∈ { 1,2,3 } are assigned evenly (=0.33) indicating that there is no preference of any particular factor. ts sj,i represents the unit of time staying at service provider s j . (2) P s j ( t ) = e U t i l s j s t ( t ) ∑ s j , s t j = s t e U t i l s j s t ( t ) (3) U t i l s j s t ( t ) = ω 1 E v a S Q + ω 2 E v a S C + ω 3 E v a T S (4) E v a S C = { 1 − e − ( i n c i − s c j ) / i n c i i f i n c i > s c j 0 o t h e r w i s e (5) E v a S Q = 1 − e − s q j ( t ) (6) E v a T S = 1 − e − t s s j , i
From the provider's side, we provide three scenarios for the distribution of home-based care providers across four districts. Scenario 1 with a random distribution without considering the size and needs of the local population; Scenario 2 with a distribution based on population size ; and Scenario 3 with a distribution based on population needs (the percentage of population with at least one ADL limitation). The scenario analysis is informed by extensive fieldwork in Qingdao in 2016 that home-based care provision is not always available, and this is particularly true to those who live in districts with high concentration of older people ( Yang et al., 2019 ). We did not run this scenario analyses for nursing home care because unlike home-based care, there is no distance restriction on the choice of nursing home providers, therefore, the distribution of nursing home providers is unlikely to affect access.
We assume the exit rate of services, primarily due to death, is 20% for the whole simulation, 20 iterations in total, and thus 1% at each iteration ( Lu et al., 2017 ). Individuals cannot select a service provider that has no capacity or a nursing home service provider with a service cost higher than their household income. Service cost for each individual is calculated based on the total service costs after SHI reimbursement. Also, individuals are unlikely to change their service provider after a long period of stay, denoted by ts sj,i .
Regarding home-based care, the eligibility policy states that individuals can only choose a home-based care provider within 4 km away from their home and from the same district ( Qingdao Human Resource and Social Security Bureau, 2012 ). Since we do not have the detailed location data on individuals and service providers, we assume that the individual can only choose a home-based care provider from his/her home district.
The change of service quality s q j ( t ) ∈ [ v , u ] depends on the number of individuals currently enrolled, denoted as cap j (t) and is specified at Equation (7) , where α is a control parameter that reflects the extent to which the increase of bed occupancy affects the service quality. This assumption is consistent with the literature in China that the quality of the nursing service provision largely depends on the availability of caregivers in the nursing homes ( UNESCAP, 2015 ). Most of the carers lack appropriate training and qualification and skilled caregivers are in great shortage ( CGC, 2011a ; Fang, 2013 ). An increase of bed occupation will compound the staff shortage thus worsening the service quality. (7) s q j ( t ) = { s q j ( t − 1 ) ( 1 + α Δ c a p j ( t ) s a j ) u i f s q j ( t − 1 ) > u v i f s q j ( t − 1 ) < v

Section: 4. Results

Our simulation is based on an approximate scale of 1:20 of the total population and service providers in four urban districts of Qingdao. A total of 41,473 households (109,552 individuals), 4 designated hospitals with 200 beds, 10 nursing homes with 500 beds and 132 home-based care providers with 1,400 beds are included in the simulation ( Qingdao Municipal Bureau of Human Resources and Social Security, 2016 ). We run the simulation for 20 times, 20 iterations for each run, and use the average values for the analyses. There is no significant difference between average values of 20 runs, 30 and 50 runs.
The baseline population has 3,060 individuals with at least three ADL limitations. Among these individuals, around 62% of them have chosen long-term care services. Approximately 8% of individuals prefer designated hospital care, 21% of individuals prefer nursing home care and 70% of individuals prefer home-based care. The following section will discuss the effects of the LTCNI on nursing home care and home-based care, respectively.
Fig. 2 summarises the occupancy rates of nursing home providers with different service quality and costs across different income groups (from the poorest to the richest) and insurance groups (UEI or URI). The size of the bubble indicates the occupancy rate, and the colour of the bubble indicates different income groups. X-axis shows service quality, whereas y-axis shows service costs. As shown in the graph, service providers with either relatively high quality or low costs are the most preferred ones. The poor are more likely to choose a nursing home with a low cost albeit these services are often of poor quality. Services with better quality but higher cost are primarily utilised by people with a higher income. Download: Download high-res image (442KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Nursing home bed occupancies by income groups and SHI status.
Fig. 3 illustrates the occupancy rates of home-based care and the rates of individuals with LTC needs but unserved by any providers by districts. Confidence intervals are also plotted in the graph. As mentioned above, we present three scenarios by how home-based care providers are distributed. For the first scenario, we assume a random distribution without considering the size or needs of the population. For the second scenario, we assume that providers are distributed according to population size . For the third scenario, we assume providers are distributed based on the LTC needs of the population (the size and percentage of population with at least one ADL limitation). We plot the range of values from 20 runs and the average values are linked by lines. We find that, since home-based care is only available to people who are living in the same district ( Qingdao Human Resource and Social Security Bureau, 2012 ), the availability of service providers has a significant impact on access to care. For Scenario 1, a larger number of individuals are not served at districts with high concentration of older people, i.e., Districts 1 and 2. Even for Scenario 2, we still find a significant proportion of disabled older people that are unserved in District 2. We also find that occupancy rate is relatively low in Districts 3 and 4 because these districts have a younger age structure compared to other districts. In general, Scenario 3 performs better than other scenarios in terms of meeting the needs of the disabled older people and maximizing the occupancy rate of the providers. A random distribution of care providers will lead to inadequate supply of home-based care in districts with high demand. Download: Download high-res image (259KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Occupancy rates of home-based providers and the rates of individuals with LTC needs but not served by districts and by scenarios.
Since empirical data are not available at the service provider level or district level, we could only conduct scenario analyses and interpret the simulation results strictly under the key assumptions set in the previous section. However, our simulation results are consistent with the findings from our previous fieldwork conducted in Qingdao in 2016 ( Yang et al., 2019 ), though more rigorous quantitative validation is required for future work.
We perform two sets of sensitivity analyses. The first set examines how individual's preference of service quality and costs may affect their use of nursing home care ( Brennan and Strombom, 1998 ; Hussey et al., 2013 ; Kolstad and Chernew, 2009 ). In the main analysis, we assign equal preference of quality and cost—meaning that the individuals have no preference of quality over costs (ω 1 = 0.33, ω 2 = 0.33, ω 3 = 0.33). In the sensitivity analyses, we assume 1) individuals prefer quality over cost (ω 1 = 0.6, ω 2 = 0.3, ω 3 = 0.1) and 2) cost over quality (ω 1 = 0.3, ω 2 = 0.6, ω 3 = 0.1) respectively. We observed some increase regarding the occupancy rates of the nursing homes with better quality or lower cost, but the general trend remains the same Table A , Table B ( Appendix 1 ).
The second set of analysis compares the effects of the LTCNI on access to nursing home care with two alternative service cost charging structures. We plot access to nursing home care (y-axis) against cumulative percentage of population ranked by income (x-axis) ( Appendix 2 ). The curves represent different scenarios. In Scenario 1, we assume that for those who are poor, aged 70 and above, and without children, nursing home is provided free of charge; for those with an income below the poverty line, we assume 60% of the nursing care cost is subsidized ( Yang, 2018 ). In Scenario 2, we assume that 70% of the costs can be reimbursed for UEI participants and 50% for URI participants. We also provide simulation results based on the assumption that Type II nursing home (high quality with low cost) may only be available to older people whose income are below the poverty line ( UNESCAP, 2015 ), as Scenario 3. We plot use of nursing home care against cumulative population from poor to rich. The results indicate that with more targeted resources directed to the poor, all scenarios improve the use of nursing home care for the poor, compared with the baseline scenario (the case of Qingdao's LTC from the main analysis). In particular, Scenario 1 is based on a means-tested method meaning that those poor disabled childless older people will have access to free or highly subsidized nursing home care. Scenario 1, as shown in the graph in Appendix 2 , will significantly improve access to care for the extremely poor, especially for those without any co-resident children. Similarly, Scenario 2 is based on the assumption that the nursing home care will be reimbursed through the SHI. With relatively high reimbursement rates of the SHI compared to the current LTCNI, Scenario 2 will also improve access to nursing care for those who are less better-off ( Appendix 2 ).

Section: 5. Discussion

Our study is among the first to use ABM to simulate the effects of a LTC financing policy on access to care by taking into account the availability and characteristics of the local care providers. It uses an innovative computational approach as a policy evaluation tool and offers evidence-based recommendations on LTCNI to policy makers in China.
Our findings show that those who have low incomes and are enrolled in the URI have poorer access to LTC and are less likely to use care home services compared to those who have high incomes and are enrolled in the UEI. The results are not surprising as the UEI participants—who have formal employments, are entitled with more comprehensive benefit packages of the LTCNI compared to the URI participants. We also find that poor participants are more likely to choose services of low cost as high-quality nursing homes are often unavailable or too expensive for them to afford. The characteristics of the local care providers, in particular, the availability of the providers have a significant impact on access to home-based care. Our scenario analyses show that the current LTC system does not respond well to the demand of the population due to the fact that the home-based care providers are not distributed/located according to population needs. In districts with a higher concentration of older population, home-based care providers are in great shortage.
In light of the results, our study offers three lines of policy recommendations. First, although the LTCNI only targets older people with disabilities , significant disparities exist in terms of the types of benefit packages among the LTCNI participants. We suggest that the government should look into ways to improve the overall benefit packages of the scheme. Our sensitivity analyses (Scenario 2) show that a high reimbursement rate will lead to better access to care, especially among the poor. In particular, benefit packages need to be improved for the URI participants who are often poor and come from a lower socioeconomic background. Our sensitivity analysis (Scenario 1) show that if the LTCNI could provide the poor and childless older people with access to free or highly subsidized care, the scheme will significantly reduce access gaps between the poor and rich. There are good examples from Japan and South Korea . In Japan, LTC insurance has a reduced rate of standard service costs for meals and an upper limit for the out-of-pocket payments for people with low incomes ( Tamiya et al., 2011 ). The Korean LTC insurance system exempts the poor from co-payments ( Kim and Choi, 2013 ). Similar measures should be considered for the LTCNI in China so that the access gap between the poor and the rich can be minimised, although greater subsidization may come with a greater public funding requirement.
Secondly, the Chinese government has been actively promoting the construction and development of nursing homes over the past decade, however, resources also need to be directed to the development of home-based LTC services. Previous studies have shown that lack of financial support and physical infrastructure, especially in rural areas, has hindered the development of home- and community-based services ( Feng et al., 2012 ). Our results are consistent with previous findings: despite the demand, home-based services are often unavailable in districts with a high density of older people. More resources should be directed to home-based care. Attention should be paid to reduce regional inequities in access to home-based care. Regions with a high percentage of older people are often rural or areas or areas with low economic development, and the government should ensure a minimum package for the LTCNI in all regions, and direct more funding towards the development of LTC in poor areas.
Thirdly, our simulation results show that access to care can be greatly improved if care providers are distributed according to population needs. The National Health Services (NHS) England allocates their funding using a resource allocation formula which is based on a number factors such as population size, demographic characteristics, clinical needs of the population, etc ( Smith, 2008 ). For the social care sector in England, the Adult Social Care Relative Needs Formula are used to divide central budgets between local authorities (LAs) according to differences in need ( Vadean and Forder, 2018 ). The use of systematic formulae for allocating funding ensures that resources are directed appropriately to disadvantaged groups and areas. This is particularly relevant to China, and the government should adopt similar measures and take advantage of the national census or administrative data to understand population needs when making funding allocations.
This study has a number of limitations. We do not account for the effect of culture on caring for older people as we do not have any relevant empirical data. Neither do we include a time horizon in the model due to the same reason. Our model assumes a static population and a fixed amount of service provision. With available empirical data in the future, it would be also interesting to simulate the population dynamics, and to investigate the relationships between the growing LTC needs and supply and how this will affect access across different income groups Our analysis is limited to older people living in urban areas, but with rural to urban migration , future research is needed to assess the effect of LTC insurance on access to care for rural people in China.

Section: Acknowledgements

This project is funded by the Future Research Leadership scheme by the Economic and Social Research Council in the U.K.
