Title: Detached co-involvement in interactional care: Transcending temporality and spatiality through mHealth in a social psychiatry out-patient setting


Abstract: Abstract

This article explores how the integration of digital technology into healthcare processes of social psychiatry impacts the healthcare professional-patient relation. To this end, it adopts a new materialist perspective, viewing the context of social psychiatry as an assemblage of human and technological components and their relations. We draw on a qualitative study of the introduction of an mHealth platform including shared calendars, messaging, and video calls into the care processes of a social psychiatry out-patient setting in Denmark. The study demonstrates how technology acceptance is facilitated by familiarity and relational trust, how the platform streamlines routine care tasks by providing shared structures, and how the platform allows for a multi-channel approach to interactional care. The analysis reveals an emerging type of care interaction, detached co-involvement , which appears to strengthen the healthcare professional-patient relation and concomitantly increase patient autonomy by facilitating temporally and spatially detached albeit more frequent interactions. The implications of these findings extend beyond the context of social psychiatry. First, they demonstrate that the careful integration of digital technology into care processes has the potential to increase the involvement of and even empower mentally vulnerable patients. Second, they demonstrate how adding such technology can extend an assemblage temporally and spatially and, consequently, allow components to remain attached to it while they attach to and detach from other assemblages.

Section: 1. Introduction

Mentally vulnerable patients such as adults with intellectual disabilities and psychiatric conditions often need extensive support and guidance with general activities of daily life to be able to live in the community ( Power, 2013 ). The care for patients in need of such adult social care represents a significant chunk of healthcare spendings and spending growth ( Burchardt et al., 2016 ). Adult social care places high demands on healthcare professionals such as general practitioners ( Andersen et al., 2019 ) and social workers ( Tufte, 2013 ), who are already challenged by limited resources, limited time, and the ensuing less-than-optimal circumstances for delivering care ( Huston, 2003 ).
Technological solutions such as mHealth platforms and other digital assisted living solutions are increasingly touted as enablers of cost-efficient care, for example in the case of care for the elderly ( Bemelmans et al., 2012 ). The integration of such digital technologies into the social care process for mentally vulnerable patients raises ethical concerns about the depersonalisation such solutions may imply ( Sharkey and Sharkey, 2010 ), all the more so in the face of technological advances in cognitive systems that would allow for imitating social care relations ( Gough and Spencer, 2019 ).
This article studies the integration of digital technologies into healthcare processes targeting mentally vulnerable patients. As a case, we consider an mHealth platform including shared calendars, messaging and video calls in a social psychiatry out-patient setting in Denmark. Through its mHealth app, this platform offers various tools to organise and structure the everyday practices of its users: healthcare professionals such as social psychiatric nurses and social workers as well as patients of social psychiatry with typically severely impaired mental and social functions.
Through a qualitative study , we aim to understand how the integration of digital technologies into healthcare processes of social psychiatry impacts the healthcare professional-patient relation through a new materialist perspective, viewing the context of social psychiatry as an assemblage of human and technological components and their relations. Here, we are both interested in how the healthcare professional-patient relation affects the integration of digital technologies and how this integration, in turn, affects this relation.
This article contributes to and nuances the on-going debate on the benefits and risks of the digitalisation of healthcare processes by showing that the prudent integration of digital technologies into healthcare processes has the potential to increase the involvement of and even empower mentally vulnerable patients, in particular if these technologies are applied in pre-existing trustful healthcare professional-patient relations and with the goal of improving those relations. Furthermore, we argue that mHealth platforms have the potential to assist in the formation of latent assemblages that support an emerging type of care interaction, detached co-involvement , which seems to strengthen the healthcare professional-patient relation by facilitating temporally and spatially detached interactions.

Section: 2. A new materialist perspective on adult social care

There is a long tradition of studying psychiatric care through social constructionist and post-structuralist perspectives, reaching back at least to Foucault (1987) and his work on mental illness and psychology, where he departs from the traditional psychoanalytical tradition in the book's second part added in 1962. This perspective views discursive statements as constituting and shaping the material world ( Feely, 2020 ) and has been criticised for having a (too) strong focus on texts and textuality, as well as human agency while leaving the biological body and other materialities out of the equation ( Fox, 2016 ).
In what has been labelled the “material turn” in analogy to the earlier “linguistic turn”, social constructionist epistemology has been modulated by monist or “flat” ontologies, where all entities exist in the same category and, consequently, no entities are more fundamental than others. Monistic sociologies, i.e., sociologies building on monist ontologies, eschew dualisms such as human/non-human ( Fox and Alldred, 2018 ) and consider semiotic and material entities as coexisting on the same ontological plane ( Feely, 2020 ).
One new materialist perspective on monist sociology builds on the concept of assemblages. Deleuze and Guattari (1987) view assemblages as comprising heterogeneous components with flows of heterogenous substances between them and subject to processes of deterritorialisation (change) and reterritorialisation (stabilization). These components can range from human agents to technologies and surrounding spaces and are assessed not by what they are but by their capacities, i.e., what they are able to do and what they actually do in the assemblages that they are currently attached to ( Fox and Bale, 2018 ).
While inherently relying on a monist ontology, the Deleuzian-Guattarian concept of assemblage can be amended with the concept of subassemblages ( DeLanda, 2006 ), i.e., the containment of smaller assemblages in larger ones. In this article, we embrace DeLanda ’s (2006) assemblage theory, which is founded in relations of exteriority, where components can be attached and detached from different assemblages, affecting their capacities in turn.
Assemblage theory provides a foundation for studying the integration of technology into care contexts such as social psychiatry. First, it has been employed to study the integration of personal health technologies in everyday care and health assemblages and the ensuing micropolitics between human and non-human components ( Fox, 2017 ). Second, it allows for studying the often neglected mundane materialities of care ( Latimer, 2018 ), which are intimately connected to the delivery of care through temporalities, spatialities, and practices of care ( Buse et al., 2018 ). The use of mHealth in mental health contexts recasts the temporalities and spatialities of healthcare delivery ( Pickersgill, 2019 ), shaping therapeutic assemblages through the multiplicity of sites and synergies between online and offline engagements ( Trnka, 2021 ). Third, and last, technology and materiality can serve as a relational extension ( Latimer, 2018 ), contributing to the constitution of care relations and, thus, stabilising or changing the ordering of the care setting.

Section: 3. The social psychiatry assemblage

Care in the context of social psychiatry is challenging and depends on a complex set of formal care relations and interactions between patients, social psychiatric institutions, and other regional and municipal health actors ( Andersen et al., 2019 ). The formality of the care relations and interactions in mental health settings is sustained among others by healthcare professionals' and patients' desires of ‘preserving face’ ( Pollock, 2007 ). The social psychiatry out-patient setting targets mentally vulnerable citizens with impaired mental and social functions, including, but not limited to, those who suffer from intellectual disabilities such as speech and language problems or psychiatric conditions such as schizophrenia and personality disorders. Such out-patients often need extensive professional support and guidance to be able to live in the community, including, but not limited to, help with everyday tasks ranging from remembering to take their medicine to dressing appropriately and maintaining interpersonal relations.
The overall assemblage of social psychiatry contains at least the social psychiatric institution itself, its buildings, the associated healthcare professionals, and the organisation of its care processes. Furthermore, it contains a number of regulations and health policies as well as relations to the other regional and municipal health actors such as general practitioners, medical specialists, and municipal social workers. For the sake of studying the impact of the integration of digital technologies on the healthcare professional-patient relation, we restrict our attention to the subassemblage of the social psychiatry out-patient setting. Further, we restrict the components to human agents such as social psychiatric nurses and social workers associated with the social psychiatry, technologies such as phones or the mHealth app, and mundane materialities such as the coffee room of the healthcare professionals and the homes of the patients.
More concretely, we consider a social psychiatric out-patient setting in which social psychiatric nurses and social workers operate from a shared headquarter while patients live in their homes. The headquarter is co-located with the social psychiatric in-patient and assisted living facilities and occupies one floor in a larger mid-20th-century institutional building, creating a somewhat sterile but comfortably furnished office environment. Outside the building, there is a car park with company cars available to healthcare professionals to conduct home visits. The out-patients’ homes are typically variations of affordable rural housing and are located at significant distances from both urban centres and the social psychiatric institution.
Prior to the introduction of the mHealth platform, there were three prevalent subassemblages of the social psychiatry out-patient assemblage concerning the flow of care coordination, care interactions, and perceptions: the home visit assemblage (patient with their full body – healthcare professional with their full body – the home of the patient with its architecture, furnishing and the patients’ everyday items such as clothes and foods), the phone call assemblage (healthcare professional with their voice – telephone – patient with their voice), and the care coordination assemblage (coffee room including whiteboard and calendar on the wall – healthcare professionals with their full bodies – the patient with their voice).
An important goal of the social psychiatry assemblage and, particular, the social psychiatric out-patient subassemblage is to support the patients in becoming increasingly autonomous in managing their daily lives and realising their potential towards improved social function and normality. In their study of the genealogy of Danish psychiatry, Clemmensen and Køppe (2019) show that ideas surrounding pathology, normality, and their complex kinship have a prevailing place in the debates of both academics and practitioners. They underline the importance of further research into the potential of and the issues surrounding patient autonomy and patient involvement in social psychiatry.

Section: 4. Methods and data

The qualitative data underlying this study were collected as part of a collaborative research project studying the impact of integrating digital technologies into healthcare processes. The first author employed various qualitative methods including in-depth interviews with social workers and social psychiatric nurses, assisted interviews with patients, and observations in a Danish social psychiatry out-patient setting in 2018 and 2019. These methods have ethnographic character as the informants and their practices were studied in natural settings such as the homes of four patients or the offices of healthcare professionals, and their multiplicity allows for methods and data triangulation ( Denzin, 1978 ). Qualitative and, in particular, ethnographic methods in medical sociology have a long history ( Charmaz and Olesen, 1997 ) and are routinely employed to study the materialities of care ( Buse et al., 2018 ).
In addition, two focus group interviews were carried out to gain insights into similarities and differences ( Jackson, 1998 ) of the experiences with the mHealth app through facilitated dialogue between different groups of users: one interview with two social psychiatric nurses and three social workers and another including three of the four patients of social psychiatry that were also visited in their homes together with their assigned social workers and nurses. These group interviews relied on a thematic interview guide ( Holstein and Gubrium, 1995 ) and can, thus, be considered semi-structured.
The two social psychiatric institutions associated with the collaborative research project constituted an intrinsically serviceable sampling frame. We used purposive sampling for our intensive case study ( Bernard, 2011 , p. 46), allowing us to obtain access to informants in the otherwise hard-to-access context of social psychiatry. The pool of informants was sampled to ensure coverage of both involved healthcare professions . Patient participants were referred to by the social psychiatric nurses after careful considerations of their suitability for participating in such a study. We excluded informants without sufficient experience with the mHealth app considered in our study.
The recruited sample of 17 informants consisted of 5 social psychiatric nurses, 8 social workers, and 4 patients of social psychiatry. The primary data consist of interview recordings, transcriptions, and fieldnotes covering observations and reflections. The in-depth interviews were conducted fully open, using a thematic interview guide rather than one structured by questions. A total of 14 informants (4 nurses, 6 social workers, 4 patients) were observed in 9 observational sessions (4 at the homes of patients and 5 at the office of the healthcare professionals), while 3 informants (1 nurse, 2 social workers) only participated in one of the focus group interviews.
The fieldnotes were found valuable in particular when analysing the patient interviews, which constitute the most challenging part of the data for a multitude of reasons: there was only a limited opportunity to establish rapport with the patients as the interactions with them were limited in time and under the observation of the assigned social workers; the patients were often addressing the assigned social workers rather than the interviewer; several patients had issues understanding the questions or formulating answers beyond simple affirmation or denials.
Consent was obtained for recording interviews as well as for publishing short, non-identifiable, translated excerpts from interview transcriptions. This consent was written for the healthcare professionals and oral for the patients. To maximise anonymity and minimise the risk of reidentification, we refrained from assigning pseudonyms and from specifying gender, age, diagnoses, and similar attributes of our informants. We implement the best practice recommendations of Saunders et al. (2015) regarding informant anonymity by only using their (professional) roles and by splitting unrelated accounts. Where necessary, we carefully redacted or changed details irrelevant to the analysis in order to ensure anonymity. The data collection for the study was reported to the Danish Data Protection Agency as part of the collaborative research project. Ethical clearing by the Danish National Committee on Health Research Ethics is not required for research that neither performs medical interventions nor handles biological material.
The use of ethnographic methods in the context of psychiatry presents both challenges and opportunities and requires careful considerations of the ethical and moral implications of the study ( Skultans, 2005 ). The first author had no prior experience with the context of social psychiatry but extensive experience in qualitative health research in similar contexts including care for the elderly and, accordingly, approached the study neither as a naïve outsider nor as an informed insider but as an insider-outsider occupying the space in between ( Dwyer and Buckle, 2009 ).
We carefully considered and communicated the “observer-as-participant” role of the researcher ( Gold, 1958 ) during observations of the interactions between healthcare professional and patients in order to minimise the potential impact on the patients. Furthermore, observations involving patients were performed only in settings which the involved healthcare professionals considered to be safe for the patients given their impaired mental and social functions. Visits to the homes of patients and interviews with them were only performed under the supervision and guidance of their assigned social workers or nurses. The role of the researcher in all observational settings involving patients has been to follow and carefully observe the interactions rather than to set the research agenda.
For analysing the data, the authors worked as a hermeneutic community with the first author taking the expert perspective and the second author challenging this perspective from a naïve point of view ( Arnold and Fischer, 1994 ). We coded, conceptualised, and categorised our data inductively, arriving at the thematical categories presented in the following section. We analysed these categories through a three-stage approach: identifying components and relations, mapping flows, and exploring processes of stabilization and change ( Feely, 2020 ).

Section: 5. Findings

The findings of our study are presented in the following four subsections. First, we show that acceptance of the mHealth platform to be integrated is facilitated by a synergy of familiarity and relational trust. Second, we show how the integration of the mHealth platform provides shared structures with the potential to optimise the execution of routine tasks by establishing a context of mutual control and autonomy between healthcare professionals and patients. Third, we show how the platform allows for a multi-channel approach to interactional care, diversifying the portfolio of potential care interactions. Fourth and last, we explore an emerging care interaction style described as detached co-involvement and its implications for the healthcare professional-patient relation.
A fundamental prerequisite for the successful integration of new technology is the acceptance by its users. When a complex component such as an mHealth app is plugged into an assemblage, in order to be able to affect the flows in the assemblage, this new component has to form relations with other components. In our case, these other components are the mHealth app's users, i.e., patients of social psychiatry and healthcare professionals affiliated with the social psychiatry institution. Initially, given the prevalence of severely impaired mental and social functions among the patients, we were concerned about their capacities to form meaningful relations with the multi-functional mHealth app, which integrates among others shared calendars, video call functions, and messaging functions.
Contrary to these concerns, the patients and mHealth app seemed to form relations rather quickly after the app was plugged into the assemblage. The consensus among healthcare professionals is summarised in response to the question of how long it was taking before patients gained the capacity to use the app independently with sufficient confidence:
The app is so easy to use that already just after downloading it, patients understand how the basic functions work. It is not that complicated.
Nurse, group interview
Given that the mHealth app and the platform behind it objectively constitute a highly complex component of the assemblage, we continued to explore the likely reasons for the perceived ease of use:
The new patients that are referred to us now are mostly young people. They have grown up in a world of mobile devices. Today everyone is “facetiming” [video calling] , and we need to keep up with it.
Nurse, group interview
The other informants participating in the group interview nodded to confirm this reflection. Most patients of social psychiatry routinely enter assemblages with their smartphones, which offer functionalities and interaction patterns similar to the mHealth app, as part of their everyday practices outside of the context of social psychiatry. The established relations in these assemblages seem to have affected patients' perception of technological complexity, making an objectively complex new technology appear simple to its users. We identify flows of familiarity between these everyday assemblages and the social psychiatry assemblage, which affect the mHealth app's capacity to present its functionality in an understandable way and, consequently, the patients' capacities to interact effectively with it. This affect flow, thus, strengthens the budding relation between patients and the app – see Fig. 1 (a). Download: Download high-res image (348KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Flows of (a) familiarity and (b) trust during the introduction phase of the mHealth app.
We found several further instances pertaining to the impact of familiarity on the acceptance of the technology by its users in our interview data and fieldnotes, both from the perspectives of healthcare professionals and patients. When challenged regarding the boundaries of usability in the case of severe mental impairments, concessions were made:
There are patients who cannot figure out how to use the app. They do not and will not understand how it works. But the majority of patients are able to use it.
Nurse, in-depth interview
While apparently, not all patients are able to form a sufficiently strong relation with the app to be able to use it confidently, these cases indeed seem to be the exception rather than the rule.
Our data further demonstrate that the forming of an effective relation between patients and the mHealth app is also positively affected by the established relation between patients and their assigned healthcare professionals, and, particularly, the trust that is embedded in that relation. The approach to introducing new patients to the app centred around an established relation:
The assigned social worker downloads the app together with the patient and thoroughly introduces them to its functions.
(nurse, in-depth interview).
Our fieldnotes contain reflections of the researcher that the healthcare professionals displayed uniformly high levels of satisfaction with the mHealth app: “all social workers and nurses seem happy with the app”. Furthermore, several healthcare professionals hinted at their patients being accustomed to following the recommendations of their associated healthcare professionals.
To summarize, the introduction of patients to the app by their assigned and trusted healthcare professionals supports the forming of a trustful relation between patients and the app. In other words, the trust embedded in the healthcare professional-patient and the healthcare professional-app relations flows to the patient-app relation – see Fig. 1 (b). Together, the identified flows of familiarity and trust support the timely forming of an efficient patient-app relation in our social psychiatry assemblage.
In a social psychiatry out-patient setting, routine care needs to be coordinated both between healthcare professionals (e.g., information on patients, allocation of tasks) and between healthcare professionals and patients (e.g., medication regimes, scheduling of interactions).
In our setting, before the introduction of the mHealth app, care coordination flowed between healthcare professionals through synchronous communication in the form of staff meetings and phone calls, aided to some degree by paper files, a wall calendar, and a whiteboard in the office – see Fig. 2 (a) for a schematic summary of the traditional care coordination assemblage encountered. An informant reflected on the shift to the mHealth app: Download: Download high-res image (405KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Flows of coordination (a) before and (b) after the shift to the mHealth app.
Before you had a file with papers, where you recorded all the details on the patient. We agreed to get rid of all the paper files. We created a group calendar in the platform, which allows us to get information on the patients assigned to us for each day. It details amongst others which patients to visit, what the patients have to do today etc.
Nurse, in-depth interview
Keeping an ever-updated overview of appointments and, particularly, tasks is seen as one of the main advantages of mHealth-enabled care coordination:
By marking the completed tasks, we always know what is going on. Then, it is easy to see if something new comes up, like someone needs to get a lift.
Nurse, in-depth interview
The flow of care coordination mainly through the mHealth app as depicted in Fig. 2 (b) allows for increased temporal and spatial flexibility: updated notes, calendars, and tasks are available and can be updated anytime and anywhere. Furthermore, the shift in the flow of coordination has allowed staff meetings to become more focused, cf. the fieldnotes: “shorter and more effective staff meetings: in-depth focus on patients’ challenges rather than trivial calendar coordination”.
Prior to the introduction of the mHealth app, the coordination of routine care between healthcare professionals and patients was relying to a large degree on agreements made during home visits (e.g., arranging the next visit) and phone calls (e.g., reminding to take medicine). The introduction of the mHealth app with its ability to actively remind patients of tasks is welcomed by patients as described during a home visit:
Patient: I think it [the app] gives us more structure.
Researcher: Why?
Patient: Because one can see what one has to do. It helps me a lot to see what I have to do each day.
The fieldnotes unfold the meaning of “seeing” by summarising the further interactions with and observations of the patient: “by seeing, the patient referred to visual indicators such as notifications and red blinking highlights in the app's calendar as well as iconographic representations”. The visually (and auditorily) intrusive nature of the app imbues it with the capacity to take over selected routine care tasks such as reminding patients of tasks they are supposed to perform. In turn, this affects the patients' capacities to take over responsibility for parts of their routine care.
This contribution to the structuring of everyday practices of mentally vulnerable patients is seen as one of the main tasks and goals of providing care in a social psychiatric setting:
People who are mentally challenged need a good structure to function [at an adequate level] . They need to be reminded to take their medicine, to take a shower, to eat breakfast, to clean up or to meet with the local psychiatrist or their general practitioner. We can use the app to do so. It offers all tools needed to remind them and follow-up on their everyday tasks.
Nurse, in-depth interview
When patients tick off completed tasks, healthcare professionals neither have to call them to remind them to perform tasks nor call them a second time to follow-up on the tasks’ completion. The flow of routine care coordination from the patient is likewise reduced:
We have fewer calls from patients confused when their assigned social worker should visit them. This source of confusion has been minimised, as they always can check the shared calendars. Everyone knows what they have to do.
Nurse, in-depth interview
The shared structures offered through the platform such as shared calendars, notes on patients, and task lists, thus, clearly have the potential to affect agents’ capacities in the social psychiatry care coordination assemblage by redirecting flows of routine care coordination through the mHealth app, with direct flows between human agents being freed up to address more profound issues.
To deliver care in a social psychiatry out-patient setting, healthcare professionals interact with patients and perceive their current physical and mental state.
In our setting, before the introduction of the mHealth platform, interaction and perception could flow through two types of synchronous communication channels: phone calls and home visits – see Fig. 3 (a) & (b). The mHealth app offers two additional channels: asynchronous text messaging and synchronous video calls – see Fig. 3 (c) & (d). Download: Download high-res image (533KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . Flows of interaction and perception through (a) home visits and (b) phone calls, (c) video calls, and (d) asynchronous messaging.
Unsurprisingly, we found that most phone calls regarding routine care interactions had been replaced by asynchronous messaging. More interestingly, the asynchronous channel turned out to be used also in situations where phone calls were rarely, if ever, used:
The messaging function of the app is really useful. Patients often send us short messages about how their day is going, how they feel. They use emojis a lot – happy smiley, sad smiley, hugging face. So, we know better what to expect from our next interaction, and which patients maybe need some additional attention.
Social worker, group interview
The introduction of asynchronous messaging to the social psychiatry assemblage unlocks new capacities of patients regarding informal and short communication of their state independent of temporal and spatial constraints that contribute to the flows of perception.
When the focus also is on interaction, we found video calls to replace most of the remaining phone calls. Video calls allow for integrating not only auditory but also visual representations of the bodies of the human agents into the assemblage, increasing the flows of both interaction and perception:
If the patients say they feel really bad, we can make sure they have access to their assigned social workers or nurses through a video call. Often it helps when they can see a person on the screen who can talk to them and calm them down.
Social worker, in-depth interview
Beyond eye-contact with the patients, the video calls also provide further important clues for social workers and nurses:
Some of our patients tend to say they are just fine during phone calls, but during a video call, it's not so easy for them to hide their problems.
Nurse, group interview
The visual says a lot more than just the auditory. W e are becoming better at reading the patients. Did they just get out of bed? Is their hair a mess? Have they changed their clothes since last time? There are many things to observe.
Social worker, group interview
The video call assemblage integrates parts of the patients’ homes that become visible on the camera, both inadvertently and by explicit request of the healthcare professional. This allows for a flow of perception from the mundane materialities of the home to the healthcare professional that is virtually absent in phone calls and is more reminiscent of the flows in the home visit assemblage.
While the home visit assemblage exhibits the highest potential for increasing healthcare professionals’ capacities to perceive the body language of patients and the materialities of their home, this does not necessarily translate to the highest actual capacities of doing so:
When you meet patients physically, you don't ask questions in the same way. During a video call, you can ask about body language: “I can see you sitting with your head lowered. Why is that?“. One can also pay more attention to patients' tone of voice. One can be more observant through video calls!
Nurse, in-depth interview
The reflection that video calls allow for being more observant might seem paradoxical at first, but the physical detachment and the limitation of the interaction possibilities appear to legitimate and increase the capacity for more direct and explicit verbal interaction and sharpened analytical focus. The intensified focus is offset by shorter interaction times:
When having a conversation with a patient through a video call, you don't use the same face-to-face time. When you visit them at home, time flies by. You won't spend an hour on a video call, that's simply not happening. Here, you have a saving of time that you can use on something else.
Nurse, group interview
This typically shorter temporal extension of the video call assemblage compared to the home visit assemblage is further amplified by an obvious reduction in the need for time-consuming transportation to the patients who live in up to 30 min driving distance:
Transport time is saved! Our staff is happy that they don't have to drive around – and sometimes drive in vain.
Nurse, in-depth interview
These combined savings in time are reinvested in more frequent contact with the patients, e.g., daily video calls and one home visit per week instead of two home visits per week. In addition to the scheduled video calls, the patients also can request these:
If a patient calls us or sends a message stating they would like a video call, we make sure they will receive one.
Nurse, group interview
This temporal flexibility regarding when to assemble the video call assemblage strengthens the relation between healthcare professionals and patients:
When I see my assigned social worker on the screen and talk to him, afterwards I feel just like he really visited me.
Patient, in-depth interview
The additional channels and corresponding assemblages introduced through the integration of the mHealth app into the social psychiatry assemblage, thus, allow for interactions and perceptions to flow more frequently and on-demand in less time-consuming care interactions.
One of the biggest challenges for patients of social psychiatry are feelings of social isolation , loneliness, and dependency.
In our setting, the introduction of the mHealth app to the social psychiatry assemblage had the obvious potential to affect and foster such feelings, e.g., if one were to replace home visits with video calls. From the patients’ point of view, every human-to-human contact is perceived as important:
It is better when he [the assigned social worker] comes here physically to talk to me. But I am still happy to be able to have video calls, as it is just in addition to the physical visit.
Patient, in-depth interview
The idea hinted at in this quote – that the mHealth app provides means of supplementation rather than replacement – surfaced in every single group and in-depth interview with both healthcare professionals and participating patients. In many cases, it was explicitly spelt out:
I'd still say that physical interactions such as home visits are necessary. I think it [the app] is a really good supplement. Not a replacement, but a supplement.
Nurse, in-depth interview
Some healthcare professionals had initially been resisting the idea of integrating the mHealth app to the assemblage:
I'm a bit old school, and I think that all new things can also be dangerous, and I can therefore sometimes be sceptical. But it [the app] is a super good supplement, and I can see that I'm interacting with patients more frequently because we have the video calls. Some of the communication I have with the patients now would not happen without the video calls!
Social worker, in-depth interview
In this case, the healthcare professional had arrived at a similar view after having had a chance to form a relation with the app. A follow-up discussion during a group interview with healthcare professionals underlined that forming a relation with the mHealth app was critical for healthcare professionals to understand its potential to affect the capacities of agents in the assemblage, and that forming this relation required prolonged exposure to and experience with the mHealth app.
In some cases, the supplementary communication mediated by the platform had directly positively impacted the outcome of the care processes:
One of my patients is having a difficult time and isn't at home that much. He decided to put his house on sale, and that and other things make it difficult for him to stay there. We've had many video calls, where we slowly came to the conclusion that he should rather stay at his parents' place. Right now, we are still having many video calls with him because he's still feeling bad mentally. I wouldn't be able to support him that much without the app, as I would not be able to visit him at home that often.
Nurse, in-depth interview
Here, the more frequent flow of care interactions allowed the social psychiatric nurse to strengthen the healthcare professional-patient relation and to better target the care delivered by staying involved with the patient via the mHealth app during a challenging transitional process.
In addition to a strengthened healthcare professional-patient relation, the temporal and spatial flexibility of the video call assemblage allowed for continuing the care process in a detached manner independent of the physical location of the patient. Such spatially-detached continuity of care is perceived as beneficial:
The app makes her [the patient] more independent. She can visit her parents or friends and still have a connection to her assigned social worker.
Nurse, group interview
The detachment of care interactions from temporal and spatial constraints is seen as an essential ingredient to increased motility and ensuing autonomy of social psychiatric patients:
The app also makes patients more independent. They can communicate with us, but they are not tied up to their physical space. The videos are just a more flexible supplement to home visits.
Nurse, in-depth interview
Forming a relation with the mHealth app was never forced on the patients, giving them the freedom to decide whether to embrace it or not. Consequently, patients felt increased ownership of their relation to the app and, ultimately, their everyday lives . This freedom was aligned with the goal of increased autonomy underlying the intended treatment outcomes:
This app is only an offer, not something we are forcing them to use. This is something I want to underline: the more freedom they get, the more autonomously they can act. And this is an integral part of what we want to achieve here – we want to make them as autonomous as possible.
Nurse, in-depth interview
The app was not only perceived to increase autonomy through its support of spatial flexibility but also provided tools that further increased patients’ feelings of ownership over their everyday lives. The mHealth app assists patients in achieving autonomy at the small scale of mundane everyday tasks:
We encourage the patients to enter the tasks themselves and also to mark when they have completed them. In this way, they get some kind of ownership. Only if they forget to do so, we remind them to mark the completed ones when we are meeting them next time online or at home.
Social worker, in-depth interview
The participating patients confirmed that the delegation of tasks and task management, as well as the unobtrusiveness of healthcare professionals’ following-up through the shared structures of the app rather than through face-to-face interaction, enhanced their perception of autonomy.
The relation formed by healthcare professionals and patients in the social psychiatry assemblage can be described as detached since the subassemblages they enter together with the mHealth app are spread out to a higher degree over time and space than previously possible. At the same time, we found that healthcare professionals' co-involvement in the patients’ practices of everyday life and, consequently, their mutual relation was strengthened through both sharpened focus and increased frequency of care interactions. We refer to this emergent style of care interaction as detached co-involvement .

Section: 6. Discussion and conclusion

Our analysis has demonstrated how the integration of the mHealth app into the social psychiatry assemblage has affected and has been affected by the relations between and the capacities of the other components. Particularly, we have seen how trust embedded in existing relations has been embedded in the relation between app and patients. While the topic of whether one can trust non-human agents is still widely debated in sociological research on trust, a new materialist perspective that avoids the sociological binary of human vs non-human ( Fox and Alldred, 2018 ) has allowed us to appreciate how trustful relations between human and non-human agents influence other relations and, consequently, the capacities of these agents.
Furthermore, and more importantly, we have seen how the synergy of shared structures for streamlining routine care coordination and new channels for care interaction has enabled the emergent care interaction style of detached co-involvement . In this interaction style, the “temporally and spatially enfolded” ( Buse et al., 2018 , p. 3) direct healthcare professional-patient relation is supplemented with a temporally and spatially more flexible relation mediated through the healthcare professional-app and the patient-app relations.
To function to some degree in their everyday lives , patients of social psychiatry typically depend on an assemblage of healthcare professionals and services from social psychiatry, general practice, and municipal health services ( Andersen et al., 2019 ). While this assemblage and its relations should ideally be built around a ‘logic of care’ with an ideal of ‘good care’ ( Mol, 2008 ), the care to be delivered often takes a back seat to bureaucratic aspects of diagnosis and care delivery ( Andersen et al., 2019 ).
Detached co-involvement with its more frequent ad-hoc informal interactions provides an opportunity for healthcare professionals and patients to overcome the focus on ‘preserving face’ and formal care interactions and the consequent inertia of the formal healthcare system ( Pollock, 2007 ). Together with the streamlining and delegation of routine care tasks, this allows for increased focus on more profound issues than routine tasks during the interactions, further strengthening the healthcare professional-patient relation and supporting the emergence of adaptive rather than one-size-fits-all models of patient-centred care ( Naldemirci et al., 2018 ).
The capacity of the mHealth app to mediate flows of care interactions and perception through video calls also increases the depth of these flows: the bodies of healthcare professionals and patients are incorporated more fully into the video call assemblage than possible in the phone call assemblage, which does not allow for the observation of clothes, body language, or facial expressions. This echoes the findings of Fox (2017) in the context of personal health technologies , which he views as devices that allow for incorporating bodies into assemblages. In addition, our findings demonstrate that the video call function of the mHealth app also manages to incorporate parts of the mundane materialities ( Latimer, 2018 ) of the patients' homes.
The integration of the mHealth app into the social psychiatry assemblage directly affects the temporalities and spatialities of care and indirectly also the practices of care ( Buse et al., 2018 ). The temporal and spatial flexibility of detached co-involvement does not only have the potential to increase the flow and depth of care interactions, but it also has the potential to increase patient autonomy: patients are increasingly able to manage their care tasks and live their everyday lives without too much concern for having to be in the right location at the right time for receiving care. The mHealth app creates the capacity of patients to continuously keep themselves attached to the social psychiatry assemblage, even as they enter and exit other assemblages.
We refer to a temporally and spatially extended assemblage that is not constantly active but always attached as a latent assemblage . While stability in the setting of relational extension and motility ( Latimer, 2018 ) is achieved by constant shifts in attachment and detachment from materials of extension, stability in a latent assemblage is the result of the constant attachment to one particular material of extension that simultaneously acts as the adhesive and the spinal cord of the assemblage.
In what is only apparently a paradox, the latent social psychiatry assemblage provides a basis for healthcare professionals to continuously assist patients to be more self-reliant and autonomous and to enter more routinely other assemblages, e.g., with their immediate social environments such as families and friends. This newfound capacity of patients deemphasises contexts of chronic pathology and allows patients of social psychiatry to lead a life closer to what they perceive as normality ( Clemmensen and Køppe, 2019 ).
This capacity for increased normality could be seen as empowering the patients. Arguably, most patients of social psychiatry lack the social, cultural, and economic ‘health capital’ ( Schneider-Kamp, 2021 ) to score high on the three classic dimensions of patient empowerment – patient education, patient participation, and patient control ( Ouschan et al., 2000 ). Nevertheless, patterns of empowerment can be found as the latent social psychiatry assemblage, as argued above, supports the fourth dimension of patient empowerment – patient autonomy ( Schneider-Kamp and Askegaard, 2020 ).
Even in the light of promises of artificially intelligent systems that might one day become able to convincingly imitate compassionate and caring social care relations ( Gough and Spencer, 2019 ), we hold this truth to be self-evident, that care cannot be provided by technology alone but only surfaces as an emergent property ( Latimer, 2018 ) of the interactions and relations in an assemblage of human and non-human components. A lack of face-to-face encounters between human actors has e.g. been shown to lead to decreased motivation and eventual dropout in the context of eHealth interventions for type 2 diabetes ( Lie et al., 2017 ).
Our findings demonstrate, that, under certain circumstances, technological solutions such as mHealth platforms can enhance care processes, care relations, and care outcomes, also for mentally vulnerable groups such as patients of social psychiatry. These circumstances include the existence of organisational champions of the technology among the healthcare professionals, the availability of technological frontline support, and the managerial support to reinvest time savings into the improvement of the healthcare professional-patient relation. Even when these circumstances are met, it is important to point out that for the positive effects of detached co-involvement to emerge and to avoid repercussions, a fine balance between face-to-face and online care interactions has to be stricken.

Section: Credit author statement

Anna Schneider-Kamp: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Resources, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Visualization, Supervision, Project Administration, Funding Acquisition. Barbara Fersch: Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Funding Acquisition.

Section: Acknowledgements

The data collection for this study was part of the collaborative research project VIND co-funded by the European Union ( ERDF ) and the Danish state (SVF). The funding sources had no involvement in the study design, in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data, in the writing of the articles, or in the decision to submit it for publication.
