Title: Public health in the making: Dietary innovators and their on-the-job sociology ☆


Abstract: Abstract

Diet is understood to be one of the most important influences on public health and chronic disease , and is particularly implicated in the so-called ‘obesity epidemic’. Yet interventions aiming to improve the population's dietary habits have failed to translate into widespread health improvements. Simultaneously, the knowledge landscape has become increasingly contentious, with fat activism challenging dominant approaches to how obesity is framed and addressed. This paper is based on 24 ethnographic interviews, and explores the work of health practitioners promoting therapeutic carbohydrate restriction (‘low-carb’ diets) for people with metabolic health conditions. Drawing on Michel Callon's study of technological innovation, I show practitioners engaging in ‘on-the-job sociology’—situated sociological work to justify, and forge a space for, innovative dietary intervention. These innovators employ physiological explanations of hormones, satiety (or hunger), and pleasure (or shame), supported with personal experience, to emphasise material connections between particular eating habits and the sustainability of dietary improvement in everyday life . They resist fat activist influence on healthcare practice (that has resulted in practitioners avoiding conversations about diet, fatness and health), as well as the more extensively critiqued practices of health promotion . Deflecting blame/shame from individuals, innovators spotlight the role of the food industry in undermining public understandings of food and physiology, and dietary improvement that is achievable and sustainable. Through on-the-job sociology , innovators forge a space to engage patients in collaborative dietary experimentation and improvement. This study highlights the importance of on-the-job sociology in the contemporary knowledge landscape, providing new insights about public health in the making.

Section: 1. Introduction

Over recent decades, epidemiological knowledge of population health has underpinned public health and disease prevention activities in industrialised healthcare economies such as the UK. Calculations of the ‘burden of disease’ ( Lopez et al., 2006 ) have been allied with biomedicine to develop interventions targeting so-called cardiovascular ‘risk conditions’ ( Adams, 2016 ; Davis and Gonzalez, 2016 ; Heyman et al., 2009 ). Healthcare has focused on pharmaceutical solutions to address a constellation of biomarkers such as hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia , and hyperglycaemia (diabetes). Biomarkers are easily modified and then transformed through statistical modelling into measurable impact on disease ( Adams, 2016 ; Boyce et al., 2010 ; Gough, 2015 ).
Obesity, understood as another epidemiological risk factor, is more challenging to address than biomarkers, and is considered an intractable problem—as the widely-employed metaphor of ‘obesity epidemic’ denotes ( Saguy and Almeling, 2008 ). Health promotion heavily targets overweight and obesity ( Greenland et al., 2004 ; Shim, 2014 ) and behaviour change intervention is promoted as a first-line approach in treatment recommendations ( NHS England and NHS Improvement, 2021 ; NICE, 2014a , 2014b ). Behaviour change interventions are based on concepts of personal responsibility for ‘lifestyle’ ( Hansen and Easthope, 2007 ; LeBesco, 2011 ; Lupton and Chapman, 1995 ; Saguy and Riley, 2005 )—specifically diet and exercise habits. Although pharmaceutical treatments and bariatric surgery are also sometimes employed, they are subject to strict eligibility criteria and the options available are dependent on local commissioning arrangements ( NHS England and NHS Improvement, 2021 ).
Within this contemporary healthcare context, dietary advice and support (the focus of this article) have been rhetorically promoted but, in practice, marginalised. Interventions are allocated only a small fraction of healthcare budgets and consist of referral-based programmes that are either nationally-commissioned (e.g. NHS England, 2016 ) or locally-commissioned (funded through Public Health budgets and/or Enhanced Services ( NHS England and NHS Improvement, 2021 )). The evidence base for these interventions has been to a significant degree shaped by commercial interests ( Clapp and Scrinis, 2017 ; Fabbri et al., 2018 ) which have in turn shaped contracts with providers. Consequentially, contemporary forms of dietary support are mostly short-term packages, delivering highly-standardised and (often) generic messaging, which are designed to be ‘cost-effective’ (i.e. delivered by low-paid staff). Interventions are fragmented across settings, use variable eligibility criteria, and are inaccessible to many who could (in theory) benefit from them ( Cupit, 2018 ; Fabbri et al., 2018 ; Tudor et al., 2020 ). Dietetic services are also controlled by eligibility-criteria and shaped by systems of professional training and governance that limit dieticians' autonomy and the integration of emerging scientific knowledge ( DeVault, 1995 ; Moutou et al., 2021 ).
In routine healthcare, dietary advice and support are similarly peripheral to broader scope of health practitioners' work. Practitioners are expected to “make every contact count” using ‘brief’ or ‘very brief’ injunctions ( Cavill and Ells, 2010 ; Public Health England and Health Education England, 2016 ) but dietary support can have limited priority within socially-organised systems of (for example): performance measurement ( Cupit et al., 2020 ); training ( Mogre et al., 2018 ); and workforce organisation ( Stenner et al., 2011 ). These systems and processes utilise a limited set of more tractable epidemiological biomarkers as primary actionable knowledge, consequentially prioritising pharmaceutical forms of intervention ( Davis and Gonzalez, 2016 ) and squeezing out other ways of knowing about how patients can be supported with sustainable dietary change ( Mol, 2008 ). Such socially-organised systems establish patterns of practice as “the way things are done around here” ( Deal and Kennedy, 1982 ).
In this article, I draw on an exploratory study of a dietary intervention, in which I investigated how therapeutic carbohydrate restriction (‘low-carb’ diets) were being promoted by some early-adopter health practitioners in the UK (mostly in general practice). I employ Smith's (1990a , 2006 , 2005 , 1987) ‘institutional ethnography’ (IE)—to investigate the work of these practitioners. Low-carb practitioners resisted the dominant, epidemiological systems of knowledge governing their practice ( Devault, 1999 ; McCoy, 2006 ; Talbot, 2020 ), but also found themselves having to navigate other forms of resistant knowledge arising from ‘fat activism’—which was sparking societal debates about how people with fat bodies should be represented and/or targeted for intervention. Controversies along these lines are increasingly influential in healthcare practice, leading to many health practitioners being uncomfortable with initiating discussions about weight-related health ( Blackburn and Stathi, 2019 ).
I draw on Callon's (1987) study of technological innovation, which showed that innovators (from two competing companies) not only utilised technical know-how, but also “skills more commonly found in social scientists” to understand, and attempt to reshape, the social environment within which they were innovating ( Callon, 1987 ). As Callon's (1987) study demonstrated, it is not only sociologists who participate in sociological analysis . So too do others, whose work with new technology necessitates that they figure out how it will fit into and/or change society. My analysis shows how low-carb practitioners (innovators) “[constructed] hypotheses and forms of arguments that [pulled] them into the field of sociological analysis” ( Callon, 1987 ) as they introduced a new dietary protocol. [I employ a broad ‘technology-in-practice’ conceptualisation of technology in this article (see, for example, Allen, 2009 ).] I highlight what I am describing as innovators' ‘on-the-job sociology’—an important part of their resistance to the ruling regimes that organised their (and their patients') work ( DeVault, 2014 ).

Section: 2. Fatness: an evolving knowledge landscape

Although concerns about obesity and the ‘obesity epidemic’ are well-established within healthcare policy and practice, some people in this domain have challenged this dominant epidemiological way of knowing. Central to controversies about obesity ( Patterson and Johnston, 2012 ) are various ‘framing contests’—battles about how fat bodies (and their health status) are represented ( Kwan, 2009 ; Saguy and Riley, 2005 ). Diverse arguments have been employed, but the debate has polarised around an epidemiological ‘health promotion’ narrative , ‘that treats obesity as a biomedical fact, a health risk and an “epidemic”‘, and a ‘fat activism’ narrative ‘that adopts a critical view of obesity as a moral panic driven by political interests and cultural values’ ( Patterson and Johnston, 2012 ). Such polarisation reflects longstanding sociological discussions over the relative roles of ‘agency’ (people's individual/group ability to make changes, which is emphasised in the health promotion approach) and ‘structure’ (the societal structures that shape/constrain that ability and are emphasised in the fat activism approach) ( Stones, 2015 ).
It is the health promotion approach that has dominated UK policy over recent decades ( Bunton et al., 1995 ; Davis and Gonzalez, 2016 ). Buttressed by evidence from nutrition science ( Scrinis, 2008 ), emphasis has been placed on people's individual, and moral, responsibility to eat a healthy diet, maintain a healthy weight, and thereby prevent metabolic disease associated with conditions such as obesity and type 2 diabetes ( Hansen and Easthope, 2007 ; LeBesco, 2011 ; Lupton and Chapman, 1995 ; Saguy and Riley, 2005 ). Healthcare practitioners have been tasked with reinforcing people's individual health work, through educational prompts and encouragement to attend programmes known as ‘lifestyle interventions’ ( Bombak et al., 2020 ; Fuller, 2015 ; NICE, 2014c ). As Lupton (1995) has highlighted, this “apparatus” of health promotion has become a powerful form of moral regulation.
Countering such health promotion narratives, fat activism has arisen as a form of critical scholarship and a social movement, highlighting the moral perils of individual responsibilisation . Drawing on Goffman's (1963) theorisation of ‘stigma’, researchers have shown how narratives and stereotypes that circulate in society “discredit” or “taint” particular groups of people, such as those with fat bodies ( Biltekoff, 2013 ; Malterud and Ulriksen, 2011 ; Purdam et al., 2016 ). As Malterud and Ulriksen (2011) note, stigmatising attitudes are both enacted by healthcare providers, and perceived by patients accessing healthcare services—who may struggle to access services as a result.
Fat scholars and activists have campaigned against framings of an ‘obesity epidemic’ and for greater acceptance of fat bodies within society ( Cooper, 2021 ; Kirkland, 2008 ; Lazuka et al., 2020 ; Saguy and Almeling, 2008 ). They have challenged the simple causal mechanisms that are frequently promoted or implied within healthcare research , policy and practice, and argued that fatness should not be associated with unhealthiness ( Kirkland, 2011 ; Monaghan et al., 2013 ). Many have called for ‘an end to seeing obesity as a significant health issue’ ( Medvedyuk et al., 2018 ), and used concepts of social justice and feminism to argue for government intervention to be focused instead on social inequity and discrimination ( Saguy, 2012 ).
As fat activism has become more influential, tensions between different forms of knowledge about fat bodies have been heightened across policymaking, healthcare practice and public domains ( Blackburn and Stathi, 2019 ; MacLean et al., 2009 ; Piggin and Lee, 2011 ; Rodney, 2018 ). Rooted in identity politics ( Cooper, 2010 ) and providing a conceptual language that supports people to ‘save face’ as they negotiate self-image ( Guendouzi, 2004 ; Kelly and Morar, 2018 ), fat activism has—through off-shoots such as the ‘body-positivity movement ( Cohen et al., 2020 )—helped establish ‘dieting’ as a “dirty word” (a taboo topic directly linked with judgmental attitudes to body-size and identity), “complete nutribollocks” ( Wolrich, 2021 ), and a boring topic of conversation ( Reid, 2020 ). Fat activists have pushed back against initiatives such as Cancer Research UK's billboards connecting obesity and cancer which, they claimed, were likely to reinforce stigma ( Devon, 2019 ). Similar (though somewhat less public) challenges have been levelled at representations of sugar consumption and ‘addiction’ ( Throsby, 2019 ).
Within academic sociology , researchers have almost unanimously adopted a ‘fat activist’ position that Warin (2015) describes as “discursive critique” of health promotion discourse--employing fat activist arguments to unpick the language, culture, and representation that produces ‘obesity’ ( Sencindiver, 2017 ). Whilst recognising the importance of social constuctionist critique, Warin (2015) argues that it has neglected “the material or biological dimensions of fatness”—and that this limits sociology's impact on public health and (in)equalities. She contends that “to ignore the materiality of bodies is to ignore the significant social injustices that accompany bodies, which is precisely the critique [sociologists] have been levelling at biologists for years”. Warin (2015 , citing Lam, 2012) makes the case for the careful and discerning use of approaches which “allow us to understand fat bodies as ‘products of complex biosocial processes which are not reducible to any of their elements; they are neither simply nor primarily a biological fact, nor are they purely socially constructed artefacts’”.
My analysis builds on Warin's (2015) work, responding to her call for studies that focus on the “interplay and connectedness” between biological science and concerns about how fat bodies are framed and targeted for intervention. It is this interplay and connectedness that dietary innovators found themselves forced to address in real world practice. I show how these dietary innovators negotiated a position of resistance and activism ( Talbot, 2020 )—working out how the dietary technology could both fit into the established knowledge landscape, and also produce societal change ( Callon, 1987 ).

Section: 3. Low-carb innovators’ disruptive knowledge

My empirical case is the work of healthcare practitioners promoting a ‘real-food’ ‘low-carbohydrate’ dietary protocol in UK clinical practice. These practitioners are part of an activist international movement (including researchers, clinicians and patients) who typically draw on versions of the ‘Carbohydrate-Insulin Model’ of obesity ( Ludwig et al., 2021 ). In this model, the development of obesity is a consequence of hyperinsulinaemia and poor metabolic health—contradicting the more established ‘Energy-Balance Model’ which positions obesity as a causal ‘risk factor’ for disease, and as a target for intervention through calorie reduction ( Hall et al., 2018 ).
Drawing on aetiological understandings of metabolic disease , low-carb activists challenge the foundations of established ‘healthy eating’ and weight loss guidelines which promote: low (saturated) fat foods; 5 portions of fruit and vegetables per day; the consumption of whole grains; and the reduction of red and/or processed meat ( SACN, 2021 ) —as per the Eatwell Guide ( Fig. 1 ). Download: Download high-res image (1MB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . The eatwell guide for the UK ( Public Health England, 2016 ).
Low-carb innovators instead advocate: ‘real food’ (especially the avoidance of ultra-processed foods); a low daily carbohydrate intake (20–130 g/day) [compared with an average intake of UK adults (19–64years) of 212 g ( Public Health England, 2020 )]; and (usually) a high proportion of naturally-occurring (often saturated) fats—as exemplified in the ‘Real Food Guide’ ( Public Health Collaboration, 2020 ) (see Fig. 2 ). Their approach has been flexible (adapted in discussion with individual patients), focused on nutritional quality, and has usually discouraged calorie-counting and the use of energy-deficit protocols for weight-loss. Download: Download high-res image (651KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 2 . Real food lifestyle ( Public Health Collaboration, 2020 ).
The low-carb movement has become increasingly influential, with the emerging metabolic science (on which the carbohydrate-insulin model is based) capturing the attention of practitioners seeking solutions to their own, or their patients', intransigent health problems ( Cupit and Redman, 2021 ). Many patients have independently discovered low-carb, and subsequently introduced the approach to their doctors (as was the case for David Unwin, the movement's figurehead in the UK). Low-carb innovators in UK family practice report that patients are highly-receptive to a low-carb protocol, and (with support) have been able to make radical improvements to their health (as measured using a range of metabolic markers)—improvements that were not impossible through established dietary approaches. Patients have also reported multiple benefits of low-carb intervention, including reduced hunger, weight loss, and improvements in a very wide range of chronic conditions ( Cucuzzella et al., 2017 ). Similar experiences have been widely disseminated across, for example, professional conferences, YouTube and other channels (see Fig. 3 ). Download: Download high-res image (676KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 3 . ‘Graph of the week’: An illustrative example of patient success, produced by David Unwin (@LowCarbGP) [shared with permission].
Although several key guidelines now highlight low-carb as a valid treatment option (for weight-loss/Type 2 Diabetes ( British Dietetic Association, 2018 ; SACN, 2021 )), established systems of evidence production, review, and dissemination have been slow to support the use of this technology. Indeed controversies about the science and the sustainability of low-carb intervention persist ( Ross et al., 2020 ). Consequently, innovators have adapted or bypassed systems and processes for ‘lifestyle intervention’, establishing alternative ways of delivering low-carb support. For example, many had invested considerable time and effort developing support that was not available as part of routine clinical care (e.g. private/individualised email contact, low-carb group sessions, low-carb information resources) (see Cupit and Redman, 2021 ). Such work has drawn on their own experiences of testing, tinkering and fine-tuning low-carb in their own lives and bodies ( Mol, 2008 ). I study the disruptive knowledge (and practice) of these low-carb innovators in the analysis that follows, particularly focusing on their rhetorical work (‘on-the-job sociology’), which was important in justifying a ‘space’ for low-carb intervention in the face of opposing discourses about fatness.

Section: 4. Methods

I employed Smith, 1990a , Smith, 1990b , 2006 , 2005 , 1987) ‘Sociology for People’ [also known as ‘institutional ethnography’ (IE)] to take the standpoint of low-carb innovators and study their knowledge practices ( Smith, 1987 , 2003 ). The IE approach is described in detail elsewhere (see, for example, Campbell and Gregor, 2002 ; Rankin, 2017a , 2017b ; Smith, 2006 ; Smith and Turner, 2014 ), and has previously been reported in this journal. It is noteworthy that IE is not just a method of data collection (as the term ‘ethnography’ can imply) but a complete ontology governing the whole research process ( Smith, 2005 , chap. 3). Its approach is materialist—“starting with attention to what is materially there, that is, from people and what they do, rather than from ideas about people, or even their ideas about themselves” ( McCoy, 2021 ).
IE's mode of enquiry provides a way of exploring problems from a particular location within a complex knowledge landscape ( Cupit et al., 2021 )—in this case, from the standpoint of low-carb innovators. I focus on their knowledge practices, bringing into view the social relations that govern their work—and in which they also intervene . By mapping socially-organised knowledge and practice from that standpoint, new opportunities for change can be identified, that focus on institutional systems rather than the deficits of particular groups such as people with fat bodies or practitioners offering lifestyle advice.
Knowledge about eating and dietary intervention can be studied using IE's concept of ‘institutional discourse’, defined by Smith (2014, chap. 9) as “relations coordinated by texts, […] a sphere of activity, of the doings of actual people who are actively engaged in utterances, their own and others'”. Both health promotion and fat activism (see section 2 ) can be considered as spheres of activity, in which knowledge is generated and utilised about how practitioners should act in relation to fat bodies. Within these discursive spheres, texts are written, read, discussed and acted upon—and people and their practices are represented in texts and talk. This is a dialogic process, in which people across policy, management, and practice participate--and knowledge and practice are continually shaped and reshaped as people activate different forms of knowledge.
In Fig. 4 , I sketch some of the various institutional discourses that are involved in shaping dietary intervention—conceptualising various domains of knowledge and practice, whilst recognising that these are fluid and intersecting, and that particularities of dietary intervention are shaped variously across healthcare settings. For the purposes of this article, health promotion and fat activism discourses are highlighted as important spheres of activity that frame discussions about diet. The food industry is also particularly relevant to the analysis that follows. Download: Download high-res image (513KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 4 . Institutional discourses (spheres of knowledge and activity) organising the provision of dietary support: a sketch based on Smith's (2006, p. 3) ‘small hero’ illustration.
Institutional forms of knowledge, embedded in institutional discourse, can be highly influential coordinators of people's activities ( Smith, 2005 , p. 77). Health promotion policies, for example, have “weaponised” blame and shame in an attempt to precipitate individual lifestyle change ( Scambler, 2018 ). Likewise, fat activism has gained considerable influence ( Saguy and Riley, 2005 ) with stigma becoming “a remarkable organising concept” and “a way of seeing, classifying and understanding” ( Hacking, 2004 ; Tyler and Slater, 2018 ). The power and influence of institutional knowledge (whether integrated into dominant policymaking processes, or positioned as resistance) stems from its abstracted (or ‘ideological’) characteristics ( Smith, 1987 ). Institutional forms of knowledge offer “governing frames” which enable people in one setting (e.g. policymaking) to speak about, generalise and objectify others (e.g. patients or practitioners) in ways that do not always align well with the experiences of those people ( Smith, 1990a ). In the analysis that follows, I show how dominant institutional discourses enter into practitioners' interactions with colleagues and patients.
Ethical approval was obtained from University of Leicester Medicine and Biological Sciences Research Ethics Committee. Low-carb innovators (n = 24) working in various healthcare services (mostly family practice) were interviewed July–October 2020. Recruitment was via an online special interest forum (Google Group of 200+ UK-based members), and Twitter. Informants included General Practitioners (GPs), nurses, health coaches, a dietician , and several other practitioners working in acute care. These interviews were part of a larger scoping study, which also included a further five healthcare practitioners without experience of low-carb intervention (not reported here).
Interviews were carried out by the author who (in line with the IE approach) paid particular attention to: knowledgeable work practices (how people know what to do), how this work was coordinated institutionally, and how innovators intervened to disrupt institutional forms of knowledge and practice. IE provides conceptual and methodological tools to foreground what happens in practice even when the research is reliant on interview , rather than observational, data ( Cupit et al., 2021 ). In keeping with this approach, interviews (audio recorded and transcribed) tracked practitioners' knowledgeable practices in preference to capturing their opinions on contemporary dietary debates. Studies using a similar methodological approach have shown that, when practitioners are questioned about the practical details of what they do and say rather than being asked only about their opinions, their accounts align well with both patients’ accounts and observations of practice ( Cupit et al., 2020 ). Data collection was completed when the dataset was an appropriate size and quality to meet expectations of rigorous qualitative research—taking account of the scope of the study, nature of the topic, quality of the data and study design ( Morse, 2000 ).
Analysis began with writing summary field notes after each interview (noting particular areas of interest), reading transcripts and reviewing recordings (for data immersion and clarification). Types of activity (‘work’) were drawn out using the IE analytic approach, and indexed using NVivo software. IE analysis was undertaken July to October 2020 and through the writing of this article. This included searching for unusual or contradictory evidence across the data set, and presenting/discussing findings with academic colleagues and health professionals interested in this field of research. Further information on methods, and descriptive report of low-carb intervention, were published previously ( Cupit and Redman, 2021 ). This article specifically engages in dialogue with fat studies scholarship.

Section: 5. Findings

Low-carb innovators were forced to engage with the various forms of knowledge about body weight and health used by health promoters and fat activists ( Saguy and Riley, 2005 ). They did not align with one particular framing, but incorporated knowledge from both discourses as they formed their own positioning. For example, innovators saw obesity as part of a disease process, but usually not as a primary risk factor, and definitely not to be framed as personal, moral failure. They actively resisted many of the knowledge practices associated with health promotion discourse—with its repetitive, standardised reminders to improve ‘lifestyle’, based on dominant dietary approaches such as The Eatwell Guide (see 5.2.2 below). Nevertheless, in order to justify their dietary innovation, they found it necessary to address the objections of colleagues who were aware of the potentially stigmatising impact of health promotion activities, and who also resented the strident tone of (some) low-carb proponents in the public domain (see 5.2.1 below).
Drawing on Callon (1987) , I describe the work of innovators to navigate the contemporary knowledge landscape as on-the-job sociology. Innovators became involved in “constructing hypotheses and forms of arguments that [pulled] them into the field of sociological analysis” ( Callon, 1987 )—work that was specifically geared to addressing contested ways of knowing about diet and weight, and positioning low-carb in their own practice, and society more broadly. My analysis is organised into the following sections: (1) A materialist sociology: connecting physiology and everyday life ; and (2) Remaking public health. In this second section, I show how innovators identified and “talked back” ( DeVault, 2014 ) to colleagues and patients who activated different ruling knowledges about dietary intervention.
The knowledge practices of low-carb innovators were rooted in practical, embodied experiences of implementing a low-carb way of eating. From their work with individual patients, they understood that patients were often desperate to improve their health, and that weight-loss was an important element of that ambition. Innovators maintained that (for those interested in making changes) the approach ‘worked’—was based on robust physiological science, with simple principles (e.g. advocating ‘real’ unprocessed food, reducing major sources of carbohydrate)—which could be successfully implemented and fine-tuned in real-world practice (see Cupit and Redman, 2021 ).
Innovators' experiences of implementing low-carb in their own, and their patients', everyday lives were important in demonstrating health improvements using the approach. These health improvements were contrasted with previous (failed) attempts to achieve improvements using established forms of health promotion. To illustrate, one innovator contrasted her own health improvement and weight management (using low-carb) with a colleagues’ account of personal struggles to achieve weight loss (within the health promotion approach) that undermined her ability to support patients: [My colleague] said ‘I just have never been able to tell patients to lose weight via lifestyle to improve their blood pressure, diabetes, because I just look at me and think “what a hypocrite”‘. (PN03)
Low-carb had radically changed innovators' own personal, embodied experiences of eating (and health), as well as transforming their clinical work from “heart-sink” to “joyful” practice ( Cupit and Redman, 2021 ). Interviews with innovators were replete with ‘success stories’ often evidenced with individual case reports (e.g. graphs showing improvement in metabolic markers) or population-level audit data.
However, this was a “disruptive” form of knowledge ( Bloom and White, 2016 ), which was in tension with the more authoritative forms of knowledge that governed their practice ( Smith, 1987 ). Debates about the benefits and harms of low-carb intervention made it necessary for innovators to defend their activities, and persuade colleagues and patients: I think you can use some evidence, you say ‘Well listen, you’re 56, let’s have a look at what you’ve tried in the past, for the last 20, 30 years. You’re 18 stone, and on the cusp of becoming diabetic … Has that worked for you?’ Demonstrably not. (GP14) Patients are coming back with results, which [means] ‘OK, this isn't nonsense, this works'. (GP06).
Innovators emphasised that dietary technology (whether low-carb or another approach) was inseparable from everyday implementation and sustainability. This understanding contrasted with both dietary guidelines and sociological research , which have employed loose definitions of ‘healthy eating’ and have failed to notice the interplay and connectedness between physiology and social aspects of diet/health ( Warin, 2015 ). Innovators drew attention to the physiology of carbohydrate metabolism—how dietary carbohydrates become blood sugars and, as a result of insulin response , induce hunger and normalise frequent snacking —a vicious cycle in everyday life. On the other hand, a real food, low-carb (higher fat) way of eating enabled people to experience satiety, control cravings and enjoy their food ( Vogel and Mol, 2014 )—crucial underpinnings of dietary change and sustained health improvement: [The group] were a really tricky bunch, but they all lost weight, and they all really enjoyed it and could see that this was a really useful thing for them (GP16) It's got to be easy and enjoyable because [otherwise], why would you do it? (VHC23).
In this way, innovators attended to the material dimensions of eating, fatness, and the “interplay and connectedness” between biological science and people's experiences of eating and fatness—including their ability to make and sustain dietary change ( Warin, 2015 ). They understood this interplay to be mediated differently depending on dietary protocol, and so positioned the low-carb technology (with its material actions on the body and everyday life) as a radical scientific innovation that would be critical in remaking public health.
Low-carb innovators were confronted with both the dominant knowledge practices of health promotion, and also with the counter-arguments arising from fat activism—both of which were influential within their professional networks, and shaped dietary intervention. In the subsections below, I highlight how innovators “talked back” ( DeVault, 2014 ) to: (1) colleagues (who challenged their interventionist approach using fat activist critique), and (2) patients who had previous problematic experiences of health promotion.
Innovators expressed sympathy with fat activist arguments that talking about diet could harmfully perpetuate blame/shame, but resisted the suggestion that they should hold back from talking to patients when they had experience of a dietary technology that ‘worked’. Promoting low-carb technology therefore involved “talking back” to colleagues who presented such arguments: A few years ago there was a [policy initiative] about how GPs need to be more proactive in terms of addressing the weight of their patients. And I agree, but you’ve got to be careful about how you address that, […] you can’t not do it, because we’re seeing a disaster unfolding, especially with the whole coronavirus situation, that’s really shone a light on how metabolically unhealthy we are and how we’ve been sort of just putting up with it and not mentioning it for fear of fat shaming. We actually need to be doing something about it […] As long as we can do it politely and diplomatically …. (GP16)
As this excerpt highlights, the rationalities embedded in both health promotion and fat activism competed to shape practitioners' knowledge about how to talk with patients about health and weight. In this example, GP16 negotiates an alternative position that appears to draw from both logics—‘we need to be doing something’ from health promotion; ‘we can do it politely’ from fat activism.
However, innovators resisted both health promotion and fat activist knowledge practices. They vociferously talked back against health promotion's blaming logics, and its excessive focus on weight and BMI measurement ( e.g. Williamson et al., 2020 )—often drawing from personal experiences of being perpetuators or victims of weight-related stigma (see below). However, they also rejected fat activist denials of connections between obesity and ill-health, and the widespread caution that had permeated clinical practice in relation to conversations about diet/weight: I think for people to say we can’t talk about [obesity and diet] because some people find it awkward, I’d say that that would be negligent. (GP16)
As the previous excerpt highlights, the rationalities of fat activism were in direct opposition to innovators’ experiential knowledge of patients with obesity, who suffered from numerous conditions associated with their weight, and were frequently also desperate to make health improvements. Similarly, innovators challenged fat activist rationalities that focused on “health as a product of social conditions” ( Berg et al., 2021 ). Innovators understood fat activist arguments to restrict how they could intervene to support patients—especially those from deprived communities, many of whom experienced poor metabolic health, and who they perceived to need their support most: What frustrates me no end is [that] there are some people out there blocking the offering of information about how reducing carbohydrate can improve type 2 diabetes … Effectively they’re saying people are poor and uneducated and live in deprived areas, have other challenges … therefore you shouldn’t tell them about how they can improve their physiology.’ […] There are societal drivers which are absolutely essential [to deal with at policy level], but [we need to ask] ‘what can we do to move this in the right direction’ (GP06)
In this context, innovators referenced antagonistic debates about eating and fatness that circulated widely across professional and public domains. For example: a recent anti-obesity campaign by the charity, Cancer Research UK ( Devon, 2019 ); the Royal College of GPs' conference whose title had been publicly slammed for its insensitivity ( Rimmer, 2020a ); and the ‘doughnutgate’ debacle on Twitter ( Rimmer, 2020b ). Such controversies, arising at the intersection of fat activism and health promotion discourses, meant that innovators had to continually justify themselves within the professional community: It’s really difficult to talk about, because you just get attacked. [A low-carb advocate] literally just got attacked a couple of weeks ago on Twitter when he said ‘X percent of healthcare professionals are overweight and unhealthy’. [But] he’s right, it’s true, you just look around. (PN03)
Innovators found themselves negotiating the competing logics of blame and neglect embedded (respectively) in health promotion and fat activism. They understood both these styles of practice to lead patients to be sceptical about the possibility of change. On the one hand, health promotion responsibilised patients and accentuated blame and shame—without practically supporting workable solutions. On the other hand, fat activism negated that responsibility, and promoted an ‘acceptance’ of obesity and metabolic conditions as normal—leaving patients to address their own concerns about weight and health problems by themselves ( Mol, 2008 ). Innovators therefore understood both health promotion and fat activist knowledges to be failing patients. They used their material, embodied experiences to challenge the contemporary discursive landscape—vigorously contesting that low-carb ‘works’.
Innovators reported that they were careful in how they presented low-carb to patients. They undertook various rhetorical practices to minimise blame and shame , raising the topic of diet “politely and diplomatically” (see above). However, this rhetorical work was more than just ‘politeness’ ( Redmond, 2015 ). Innovators directly tackled the knowledge environment to which patients were exposed, highlighting ‘misinformation’ produced and perpetuated within health promotion discourse (and nutrition science): We are telling people to do the wrong thing, on an industrial level, through either ignorance or conflict of interest. That is wrong and that needs calling out and challenged. (GP06)
They shifted blame away from patients and towards the powerful ruling relations that had shaped their eating habits: We are putting our hands up and saying we’re not blaming them, we’re not saying ‘you’ve got to move more and eat less' (they tend to roll their eyes when you say that). We say ‘we’ve been telling you the wrong thing for years' (GP02)
Innovators confessed (sometimes reluctantly) to engaging with the politics of the food industry, and its malevolent influence on guidelines: [In low-carb support groups], we talk about the politics of the food industry’s involvement in the Eatwell Guide, and the drug companies' involvement in managing type 2 diabetes. People get that their interests are not [being] served. [But] Public Health England, the people who design the Eatwell Guide, they don’t want me to be in that room saying what I say to those patients. (GP04)
They highlighted the role of the food industry in promoting ‘addictive’ (typically ultra-processed) foods and, in doing so, provided a ‘face-saving’ explanation for obesity and the difficulties people encountered when making dietary changes: I always say to my patients ‘this is not your fault, you are not selfish, you’re not greedy, you’re literally fighting against hormones, and your hormones are going to win. You know, if you’ve got really high insulin levels, you’re hungry.’ (D09) From a physiological point of view, we get a dopamine hit from that sweet fruit, and a sense of content, [and] a strong desire to go back to that fruit tree. Which is what you see with people's eating behaviours , and then they get blamed because they're greedy. (GP06). I get really cross [about] Monsanto and their breakfast biscuits and the language they use to entice people. (HC19).
Practitioners reported that on-the-job sociology, challenging the related practices of health promotion and the food industry (e.g. through food industry influencing nutrition science and processes of guideline production), ‘changed conversations’ with patients: Learning a lot about the food industry, really taking away the blame from the patients, and [stopping] this ‘eat less, move more’ NHS mantra that just doesn’t work for people … It just really changed those conversations for me[…] I probably sound like a conspiracy theorist half the time! They love all that! (GP17)
My analysis suggests that this work helped to: restore patients’ knowledge of themselves as responsible and competent to implement changes; introduce physiological and social explanations that made sense to patients; and allow patients to re-orientate to the practical experimentation that would be needed to implement low-carb changes (see Cupit and Redman, 2021 ): For the first time patients kind of sit back, you can just see their body language (and a lot of them are really really big and have been for many years) [They] have just always been brushed off, like ‘just lose weight’, or ‘just do this or that’. And actually when you’re explaining the physiology to them, they actually understand that of course they’re going to be hungry, it’s because they’re running on the wrong fuel …. (D09)
In pointing patients to the food industry's involvement in shaping patients' physiology and eating habits, innovators orientated them to the larger institutional and political context—limiting patients' self-ascribed moral accountability for health problems. This on-the-job sociology, innovators argued, helped patients “sit back” and imagine that improvement might be possible—a hope that had been crushed through years of being “brushed off” by practitioners—who erroneously assumed poor compliance with dietary guidance (see previous excerpt). By contrasting patients' interests with those embedded in the institutional structures of health promotion and the food industry, innovators also built trust and developed collaboration between practitioner and patient: Some patients respond well to recognition that the practitioner is on their side. (HC19)
On-the-job sociology thereby provided a route to engage patients in the forms of dietary experimentation that would almost-certainly include sensitive discussions of eating habits, social situation, education, financial resources and so on.

Section: 6. Discussion

My analysis contributes to the study of how frontline workers accomplish resistance to regimes such as health promotion—a topic that is notably absent within the institutional ethnographic, and other, research literature ( Talbot, 2020 ). Drawing on Callon (1987) , I have shown that low-carb innovators were pulled into on-the-job sociology in order to forge a space for low-carb technology in clinical practice (based on first-hand experience of implementing in their own lives). This work was orientated to two audiences. Firstly they talked back to colleagues, who (drawing on fat activist arguments) expressed discomfort at their dietary activism. Secondly, they talked back to patients, who had experienced the blame and shame arising from established health promotion approaches. In the context of patient consultations, they highlighted the role of the food industry in shaping patients’ eating habits and physiologies—again making connections between biology and social (obesogenic) environments ( Warin, 2015 ).
With Callon (1987) , I am arguing that sociologists and others have something to learn from “following innovators in their investigations and projects” as they “are forced to develop explicit sociological theories” (p.98). In this study, the on-the-job sociology of low-carb innovators was focused on the role of the food industry, drawing patients into new understandings, and new forms of activism through eating. This sociological work contrasts with contemporary fat activist sociology—which has typically critiqued health promotion practices, but overlooked the materialities of (fat) bodies and failed to interrogate how they may be shaped by food industry (and other) social relations . Sociologists are inclined to critique dietary support as participating in ‘neoliberal disciplining’ ( Vogel and Mol, 2014 ) without differentiating between dietary protocols (with their particular material impacts on the body), or the material care practices that are involved in supporting patients.
If progress is to be made in public health, sociological attention should be paid not only to the injustices associated with the representation of fat bodies, but also to the social relations that organise food environments, dietary advice, and people's practical knowledge about food and eating habits. It should be noted that, in contemporary society, pharmaceutical , food, and diet industry interests may to a significant extent be aligned. Dietary interventions that are (materially) effective in reversing metabolic health conditions and/or obesity are not in the interests of any of these industries' bottom lines. As some researchers have observed, these relations (that, for example, straddle food industry, nutrition science, and health promotion domains) are often hidden from view ( Fabbri et al., 2018 ; Harcombe, 2017 ; Lauber et al., 2021 ; Nestle, 2016 )—happening “behind our backs” ( Griffith and Smith, 2014 , p. 348). The informed-hypotheses that low-carb innovators offered—relating to these connections—shifted the blame from individuals to the food industry, and were important in developing therapeutic alliances that would support the difficult work of dietary change.
Smith's Sociology for People provides an approach which can talk back to sociology as well as to other institutional regimes. In this paper, I used the approach to take the standpoint of low-carb innovators, highlighting tensions between their experiential knowledge and ruling knowledge—including that which is produced and/or activated within academic sociology. It is important to challenge contemporary sociological critiques which may inadvertently distract from the powerful ruling relations that impede meaningful and effective dietary support. Further empirical study of the social organisation of dietary support, using IE or other materially-orientated approaches, can shed light on the intersections of different institutional discourses and facilitate better understandings of how ruling regimes work and how activists can intervene to transform them ( Smith, 1990b ).

Section: 7. Strengths and limitations

This study uniquely documents the on-the-job sociology of dietary innovators. It reports their own accounts of their practices, and does not attempt to externally verify their experiences. The findings reported here are predominantly from GP interviews, reflecting the data sample, and the dominance of GPs among early adopters of low-carb interventions in family practice.

Section: 8. Conclusion

Low-carb dietary innovators engage in situated sociological work (‘on-the-job sociology’) to justify, and forge a space for, this form of dietary intervention. Employing physiological explanations of hormones, satiety (or hunger), and pleasure (or shame), supported with personal experience, these innovators emphasise material connections between particular eating habits and the sustainability of dietary improvement in everyday life . They resist social-constructionist arguments from fat studies scholarship/activism, as well as the more extensively critiqued practices of health promotion. Deflecting blame/shame from individuals, they spotlight the role of the food industry in undermining public understandings of food and physiology, and dietary improvement that is achievable and sustainable. Through on-the-job sociology, innovators forge a space to engage patients in collaborative dietary experimentation and improvement. This study highlights the importance of on-the-job sociology in the contemporary knowledge landscape, providing new insights about public health in the making.

Section: Credit author statement

Caroline Cupit: Conceptualisation, Methodology, Investigation, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing.

Section: Acknowledgments

This work was funded through a postdoctoral fellowship from the Foundation for the Sociology of Health and Illness . I am grateful to Marjorie Devault for her helpful feedback on an earlier draft of this manuscript, and also to the three anonymous reviewers.
