Title: Social-capital-based mental health interventions for refugees: A systematic review


Abstract: Abstract

With over 80 million people forcibly displaced worldwide, providing safe, healthy, and supportive places for refugees has become an imperative for national governments, aid organizations, and host communities. While much has been written about the needs of these displaced people, organizations and practitioners tend to focus on essential material needs, medical care, and food and water provisioning. Yet a growing body of evidence points to the potential role of social capital – the bonding, bridging, and linking social ties that connect us to one another – as a critical resource for these refugees. We have little data about social capital interventions at individual and community levels to assist with mental health for this vulnerable population, and even less methodical evidence about such interventions’ impact. This systematic review analyzes nearly 400 articles to find patterns in the literature on how social-capital-based interventions can improve the mental health of refugees. Within the studies of interventions that met our filtering criteria, the reinforcement or creation of social capital, especially bridging and linking types, serves as a crucial resource to help this vulnerable group . Specifically, our review showed that community and multilevel social capital interventions are key to curbing mental health symptoms among refugees. Given this scanty evidence base among a group so vulnerable to mental health problems, this review serves as an explicit invitation for researchers to further examine social capital interventions among refugees.

Section: 1. Introduction

With more than 80 million people worldwide living in forced displacement as of the end of 2020, providing safe, healthy, and supportive places for refugees and internally displaced people (IDPs) remains an imperative for national governments, aid organizations, and host communities. While much has been written about the varied needs of these displaced people, aid organizations and practitioners tend to focus on materials and tangible services. Yet displaced people, having suffered the disruption and losses of displacement, plus in many cases trauma from the conditions that forced them to flee or that they encountered in flight, are at high risk of mental ill health. The latter is not just a form of suffering in itself: it seems likely to make the sufferers less able to capitalize on whatever material aid they receive. It also imposes a burden on their families. In large-scale displacement situations (such as the 3.7 million refugees in Turkey, 1.7 million in Colombia, or 1.4 million each in Pakistan and Uganda – UNHCR, 2021a ), individual psychiatric treatment is infeasible, especially in a typically under-funded aid environment. Lower-cost, more generalized approaches are sought to buttress displaced people's mental health . Social capital, for example, associates with better mental health ( Almedom and Glandon, 2008 ; Harpham et al., 2004 ). Moreover, displacement can plausibly be supposed to significantly disrupt social capital. Can interventions restore a degree of displaced people's social capital, and thus in turn protect or improve their mental health?
The 1951 Refugee Convention defines a refugee as an individual unable or unwilling to return to a country of origin due to a well-founded fear of persecution, conflict, generalized violence, or other circumstances that have seriously disturbed public order ( UNHCR, 2021b ). Such populations made vulnerable for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group, or political opinion have had to extricate themselves from their own government's legal reach and require international protection. Forcibly displaced people, a more general term, are those who migrate due to conditions beyond their control including war, poverty, food insecurity, persecution, human rights violation, natural hazards, abuse, and terrorism (“ New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,” 2016 ). Internally displaced people are those who have been forced to leave their homes, often for reasons similar to those of refugees (though also comprising natural disaster or other life-threatening privation), but without crossing a national border. Any of these kinds of displacement tends to become protracted, easily stretching into years or even decades, as long as the conditions that caused it, or their after-effects, persist. A relatively tiny number of refugees benefit from resettlement in third countries (only 34,400 in 2020, out of 26.4 million refugees worldwide – UNHCR, 2021a , b ). Returns to places of origin are similarly little more than a trickle: about 250,000 refugees thus returned in 2020, and 3.2 million IDPs out of a total of 48 million IDPs ( UNHCR, 2021a , b ).
Conditions for displaced people in their places of refuge vary. Many are gathered in camps, often very large, serviced by some combination of the local and national governments, the nearby communities, and aid organizations. Others find accommodation in host communities which are often themselves very poor. The ‘country of first asylum’ which refugees enter when they first cross a border may be able to offer considerable security and material adequacy, or its conditions may be nearly as deprived (if usually more secure) as what the displaced people left. Their arrival in large numbers strains local resources. Uncertainties prevail – about how long displacement will last, whether conditions in refuge can be made and kept safe and adequate, whether they will have to move again, whether or how long government and communities in the place of refuge will be supportive – indeed whether they will ever go home, re-unite their families and rejoin their friends, community and society. These are major mental-health stressors.
The material losses that such displacement typically entails, plus the characteristically sub-optimal arrangements in refuge, are a large part of the “resource loss cycles” ( Hobfoll et al., 2007 ). But importantly, forced displacement also deprives refugees of access to meaningful jobs and habitation ( Horwitz and Wakefield, 2007 ) and psychosocial resources such as social support from friends ( Wind et al., 2011 ). On the community level, refugees lose access to larger social structures (such as religious groups or other community groups) in their homeland, causing a loss of access to community social capital ( Wind et al., 2021 ; Wind and Komproe, 2012 ). This multilevel loss of material and psychosocial resources induced by disasters (whether natural or man-made), in turn, generates substantial mental health problems among displaced people ( Freedy et al., 1992 ; Hobfoll et al., 2007 ; Sattler et al., 2002 ; Wind and Komproe, 2012 ). Moreover, when displaced people finally arrive at refuge, they may have experienced a host of potentially traumatic events depending on the conflicts they have left and the manner in which they have travelled ( Tyrer and Fazel, 2014 ).
Within this cascade of resource loss, we focus on displaced people's mental health and the role of social capital in stabilizing or improving it. Social capital – the networks, norms and trust that facilitate action and cooperation for mutual benefit ( Putnam, 2000 ) – provides a broad array of benefits, including: the exchange of favors and assistance, the maintenance of group norms, the stocks of trust, the exercise of sanctions, diffusion of information, voluntary organization within a social structure, and participation in social organizations ( Takao et al., 2013 ). Social ties, whether in-group (bonding), between groups (bridging), or across levels of authority and hierarchy (linking), provide assistance and useful information, help overcome barriers to collective action, and afford mutual aid even during the most stressful of crises and disasters whether natural or man-made ( Aldrich et al., 2020 ; Aldrich, 2012 ; Aldrich, 2020 ). Studies have shown that households with more social capital recovered more easily from disaster-induced displacement at a measurably faster pace ( Wind et al., 2011 ). Social capital is often the sole remaining asset that refugees have at their disposal to access livelihoods or cost-saving measures, or to use as a form of social safety net. As a result, social capital increases refugees' resilience and improves the effectiveness of aid ( Uzelac et al., 2018 ).
Literature on the beneﬁcial nature of social capital for mental health outcomes highlights that social capital can protect against mental health problems such as depression and posttraumatic stress ( Wind et al., 2011 , 2021 ; Wind and Komproe, 2012 ). Social capital and social cohesion have been found to associate with the health and emotional well-being of refugees (e.g. Syrian refugee working children in Lebanon – Habib et al., 2020 ). Research has shown that survivors of crises such as refugees use social capital to help rebuild a sense of normality. For example, after Japan's Fukushima Dai-chi nuclear power plant meltdowns in March 2011, survivors of the radioactive contamination who had strong ties with well-known neighbors during their evacuation and resettlement had measurably lower levels of stress than similar survivors without such resources ( Iwasaki et al., 2017 ). Similarly, after terror attacks by Boko Haram in Nigeria and food-insecurity stresses in the Karamoja region of Uganda, survivors with deeper reservoirs of bonding and bridging ties had better recoveries ( Aldrich et al., 2020 ). Social capital can be especially critical for vulnerable groups such as the poor, elderly, and infirm, catalyzing more assistance to them than to fully able or fully integrated groups also facing stressors ( Ye and Aldrich, 2019 ).
A somewhat more extensive literature connects refugee/IDP mental health with ‘social support’ – which overlaps with but does not equate to social capital. Per a systematic review ( Höhne et al., 2020 , regarding unaccompanied refugee minors), social support is both a risk (when lacking) and protective factor regarding mental ill health. At least one study finds that (among Syrian refugee adolescents in Turkey) social capital's positive effect on mental health is fully mediated by social support ( Duren and Yalçın, 2021 ).
Conversely, the loss of social capital that forced displacement imposes – an under-appreciated part of its harm – can evoke the same mental health problems that social capital can buffer (such as depression and post-traumatic stress): The collapse of social networks exacts a massive toll on displaced Syrians in Jordan. This can be measured in a loss of the economic support networks which traditionally tied households through unexpected shocks … But most importantly, the collapse of social networks among Syrians has exacerbated and accelerated the very human hardships of loneliness, boredom and depression. All too often, these intangible challenges are ignored in favour of more empirical targets such as shelter, poverty and hunger, while evidence for the structural links between these two broad categories of challenges are ignored … ( Stevens, 2016 ).
Certain practitioners have long recognized the need for social capital interventions among refugees ( Hobfoll et al., 2007 ; Wind and Komproe, 2012 ). Yet, whereas the importance of social capital for displaced people's mental health is becoming increasingly evident, few refugee-hosting governments or aid organizations have implemented social capital interventions, and evidence about the impact of such interventions on improving mental health outcomes among refugees remains slim ( Villalonga-Olives et al., 2018 ; Wind and Villalonga-Olives, 2019 ). Studies to date on social capital (or ‘social support’) and displaced people's mental health are predominantly cross-sectional, whereas interveners (aid agencies and others charged with displaced people's care) need intervention studies. To address this gap between practice and evidence, we seek to analyze data centered on implementation of social capital interventions for refugees ( Villalonga-Olives et al., 2018 ). Because of their potential for cost-effectiveness and working to scale, interventions that target social capital may be crucial in this population. In consonance with a theoretical framework on social capital interventions we published in this journal in the past ( Villalonga-Olives et al., 2018 ), social capital interventions should involve a structural alteration or a behavioral induction, and a consequent change in health outcomes. This means that there should be links added between individuals or between groups that are part of a social network and there should be an increment in peer-to-peer interactions within existing network structures to motivate a behavioral change. Given this context, our analysis of the literature infers that increasing social capital among displaced people is an essential instrument in improving adverse mental health outcomes among refugees and other forcibly displaced populations.
Previous work ( Villalonga-Olives et al., 2018 ; Wind and Villalonga-Olives, 2019 ) classified social-capital interventions to better understand the role of social capital therein: (a) differentiating by intervention level, i.e. whether interventions target the community or the individual; and (b) whether the interventions use social capital as the target, channel, or segmentation variable. Social capital interventions can be distinguished at the individual level, the community level and both levels simultaneously (multilevel). On the individual level, social capital may improve the exchange of individual psychosocial resources such as individual coping strategies and information, and emotional or instrumental support between members of a network, which may reinforce mental health ( Wind et al., 2011 ; Wind and Komproe, 2012 ). At the community level, social capital enables groups to organize and to undertake collective action. For example, members of a network that has suffered displacement can organize group sessions among network members to navigate the new country they are in and promote the creation of new social ties and cohesion. Scholars have posited that multilevel interventions produce health effects by creating change at both the individual and community levels. We believe social capital interventions in refugees can target different levels. In addition, since we are looking for interventions that involve a change in mental health, we expect social capital in those interventions will be used as the channel to achieve this desired outcome ( Villalonga-Olives et al., 2018 ). An example is the organization of therapy groups to build cohesion in refugees in a new settlement to avoid the deterioration of mental health in the aftermath of a displacement event.
Our aim is to perform a systematic review of the literature on social-capital interventions that target mental health outcomes of refugees. Despite two decades of research on social capital and health, intervention studies remain scarce ( Villalonga-Olives et al., 2018 ), and indeed evidence outside refugee settings is mixed at best on whether interventions can reliably boost social capital ( Pronyk et al., 2008 ). However, one reason for the interest in social-capital interventions for forcibly displaced people is the argument that interventions to boost, restore or replace social capital among displaced people (whose communities the displacement typically disperses or intermingles) are more likely to succeed than those among static populations. Interestingly, previous reviews have concentrated on studying the relationship between social capital and mental illness and the impact of social-capital interventions on mental health ( Flores et al., 2018 ; Silva et al., 2005 ). However, none of these reviews concentrated on refugees. With monotonically increasing numbers of forcibly displaced people, whose worldwide population remains at a record high ( UNHCR, 2021a ), there is urgent need for clear evidence on how social capital interacts with mental health in forced-displacement settings, and whether interventions to improve refugee mental health by means of formation or restoration of social capital are likely to succeed for this highly vulnerable and enormous population.

Section: 2. Methods

We conducted a literature search in the Pubmed, Embase and PsychInfo repositories to evaluate the contents of published articles that investigated how social capital assists internally displaced people (IDPs), forcibly displaced people, and refugees, and how social ties are strengthened during aftershocks and crises while alleviating psychological distress (see Table 1 ). Our search followed the PRISMA guidelines. The scope of the search was global, including low and middle-income countries ( Moher et al., 2015 ) and all study years available in the three databases. Librarians at the University of Maryland-Baltimore and Northeastern University and a search simulation with several databases confirmed that these repositories likely captured all potential articles in the fields of epidemiology , public health , and mental health (that is, searches of other repositories yielded few or no new articles). The inclusion criteria were: articles that focused on IDPs, refugees, or other forcibly displaced people that involve a social-capital-based program or intervention; that include a mental health outcome; and (for logistical reasons) that are written in English or Spanish and with full abstract available. Table 1 . Search strategy of the review process in Pubmed, Embase and PsychInfo. Database and exploratory searches: Original search Results PubMed 45 (“Social Capital"[Mesh] OR “social capital"[tiab] OR “social capital"[MAJR] OR “social capital"[ti] OR “community participation"[tiab] OR “social cohesion"[tiab] OR “social organization"[tiab] OR “communal resources” AND (“refugees” [MAJR] OR“refugees” [Mesh] OR " refugees "[tiab]) Embase 75 (‘social capital'/exp OR ‘social capital':ti,ab OR ‘community participation'/exp OR ‘community participation':ti,ab OR ‘social cohesion'/exp OR ‘social cohesion':ti,ab OR ‘social structure'/de OR ‘social organization':ti,ab OR ‘social organization':ti,ab OR ‘social participation':ti,ab) AND (‘refugee'/exp OR refugee∗:ti,ab OR asylum:ti,ab OR ‘refugee camp'/exp OR ‘displaced person∗':ti,ab OR ‘displaced people∗':ti,ab) PsycInfo 277 (refugee∗ OR asylum OR displaced) AND ((“social capital” OR “community participation” OR “social cohesion”) OR (“social organization” OR “social organization")
The review process consisted of four readers scanning the manuscripts in pairs to identify manuscripts including social capital interventions in refugees. The first pair analyzed all results in Pubmed and half of the results in PsychInfo (183 manuscripts) and the other pair analyzed all results in Embase and half of the results in PsychInfo (214). Each reader analyzed the results independently and reconvened to reconcile both lists of articles to include and/or exclude manuscripts to come up with a final list. Authors EV and DA supervised the process and classified the manuscripts when there was lack of agreement. In addition, duplicates were deleted during this process. We identified 397 articles. In the abstract revision, we excluded 324 articles because they did not meet the study criteria, which led to 73 full-text articles. From these 73, considering our study inclusion criteria, we finally included 7 in this review (see Fig. 1 ). Download: Download high-res image (273KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Systematic review process.
From the 7 articles, we extracted the following information to analyze the content of the manuscripts: the region where the study was conducted, origin of displaced people, definition of IDPs, refugees, or other forcibly displaced people, objective of the study, social capital indicator and instrument used to collect the data, mental health outcome evaluated and instrument used to collect the data, methods and sample size indicating sex and age of study participants, intervention description with main components of the intervention, and main results of the study. Furthermore, we classified the articles as using bonding, bridging or linking social capital and if conducting individual, collective or multilevel interventions. Next, we critically reviewed the 7 articles based on information available, paying special attention to information gaps in the manuscripts and methodological flaws.

Section: 3. Results

In Table 2 we provide details of the content of the 7 articles retrieved. Our final, filtered list has articles where agencies carried out interventions using social capital (N = 4) and articles where scholars evaluated interventions that use social capital as a channel (N = 3) to positively affect mental health outcomes. We observe that the date of publication of most of the articles is recent. The study settings comprised high-income countries, except for one study, and most of our studies were cross-sectional. The studies that evaluate an intervention directly used qualitative methods to assess the results of the interventions. There was variation in the social capital indicators and the mental health outcomes evaluated. We organize this section by first examining the manuscripts' details about: the country of origin of refugees and the definition of refugees the mental health outcomes and social capital indicators evaluated and instruments used; and if interventions used bonding, bridging and/or linking social capital. Thereafter we detail the interventions’ study designs, intervention components, methods and main results. Lastly, categorizing the levels of intervention among the studies, we describe separately the results of individual-level, community-level, and multilevel interventions. Table 2 . Results of the literature review performed in Pubmed, Embase and PsychInfo of studies that perform or evaluate interventions in social capital with mental health as a target. Results are shown in chronological order. Manuscript Origin of study design Country of origin Objective Social capital indicator Description of intervention and intervention components Mental health outcomes Methods and sample size/characteristics Main results Bonding Bridging or linking social capital Intervention level Study design Definition of refugee Social capital instruments used Mental health instruments used Garland C., Hume F., Majid S. Remaking connections: Refugees and the development of 'emotional capital' in therapy groups. Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy . 2002 England Various countries To analyze a form of ongoing specialized psychoanalytic group therapy that addresses the psychological issues that can impede the individual’s integration into a new country Emotional capital Mutual support in local social, religious, or political groups to help refugees form potential connections that were irrespective of culture or ethnicity. Three stage treatment which included: one-to-one consultations, short term group therapy sessions with other refugees; group sessions with refugees and nationals together Out-patient mental health clinic (Tavistoc Clinic, UK) 1.5 hours; weekly; 2-6 sessions group sessions Clinical Therapist Depression, feeling of hopelessness, anxiety, and suicidal ideation that stemmed from experience in home country and/or host country. Assessment based on clinician judgement by interviewing patients - no diagnosis scale mentioned to diagnosis mental health Qualitative analysis based on description of 3 patient encounters A “sense of agency” grew among refugees due to shared circumstances: torture, brutality, rape, imprisonment, and flight, as opposed to ethnicity, culture, social groupings, kinship, religion, work and mutuality. Individuals experienced internal growth Bridging and bonding Multilevel Intervention Cross-sectional observati-onal study N/A N/A Author’s clinical judgement Im H, Rosenberg R. Building Social Capital Through a Peer-Led Community Health Workshop: A Pilot with the Bhutanese Refugee Community. J Community Health. 2002 U.S. Bhutanese To study the impact of a pilot peer-led community health workshop the Bhutanese refugee community Building social support system, community gatherings, group/family participation in solving community challenges Refugee community leaders trained to provide peer to peer community-based workshops to fellow refugees to discuss healthy coping, daily stressors of resettlement, common psychological distress and mental health issues, nutrition, healthy. Focus group discussions and interviews. Other participants include mental health service providers (authors) 8 group sessions that took place over 2 months in which participants provided feedback on bother the process and effect of intervention. Location of workshop/intervention not mentioned. Psychological wellness Qualitative method used. Focus group discussion questions embedded during the workshop, reflective questions presented to refugee group; Hybrid thematic analysis: inductive and deductive coding. Nutrition Outreach Toolkit by USCRI N=22 18.1%; male 81.1%; female Psychological wellness improved and various forms of social capital developed, including expanded social networks and opportunities for participation in the community; a growing sense of community and unity; building community capacity and leadership; and an increase in connectedness and access to instrumental help Bridging Community level intervention Cross-sectional observatio-nal study N/A N/A Trauma-informed psych-education adjustment group curricula designed by first author Dolan, Nicola; Sherlock, Catherine. Family support through childcare services: Meeting the needs of asylum-seeking and refugee families. Child Care in Practice. 2010. Ireland Kurdish and Nigeria To evaluate experiences of asylum-seeking and refugee families regarding access and participation in local childcare services Social networks, social support, social exclusion Explore the experience of asylum-seeking and refugee families in accessing and participation in childcare services using interviews and focus groups. Interventions took place at 5 child care centers located around where refugees and asylum seekers lived. Participants included Irish childcare practitioners, social workers. Interviews were conducted by social workers. Duration of intervention not mentioned Feeling marginalized and excluded Qualitative methods of interviews and focus groups N=24 parents Childcare serviced provide valuable support related to facilitating educational development, language acquisition, and networking opportunities to both refugee and asylum-seeking children and parents Bridging Individual level intervention Cross-sectional observatio-nal study N/A N/A N/A Stewart, M et al. Impacts of a social support intervention for Somali and Sudanese refugees in Canada. Ethnicity and inequalities in health and social care. 2011 Canada Sudanese; Somali To design and evaluate the effects of an accessible and culturally appropriate social support intervention that meets the support needs and preferences identified by new parents who are refugees Social support, social integration, social cohesion, social inclusion Face to face support group and telephonic support for refugees Intervention facilitated by 11 peer leaders (Sudanese and Somali background) and professional helpers (service providers specializing in refugee support) Bi-weekly interactions for 12 months; face to face group meetings lasting 60-90 minutes and 20-minute telephone sessions Multisite and virtual Stress and coping strategies Qualitative and Quantitative methods. Pre- and post-intervention evaluations -group interviews and individual interviews with professional helpers and peer leaders N=58 refugees 53%; male 47%; female 85% ;21-50 years’ old 15%; 50-60 years’ old N=22 peer and professional helpers Support group meetings provided a platform for relieving stress from home and work. Discussion of personal experiences and possible solutions with peers noted to reduce stress among refugee participants. Coping strategies learned to help ease marital friction Bridging Multilevel intervention Multi-method observatio-nal study N/A N/A The Personal Resource Questionnaire The Revised UCLA Loneliness Scale The Proactive Coping Inventory Logie CH, Lacombe-Duncan A, Lee-Foon N, Ryan S, Ramsay H. “It's for us -newcomers, LGBTQ persons, and HIV-positive persons. You feel free to be”: a qualitative study exploring social support group participation among African and Caribbean lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender newcomers and refugees in Toronto, Canada. BMC International Health and Human Rights 2016 Canada African and Caribbean newcomers and refugees To explore experiences of social support group participation among LGBT African and Caribbean newcomers and refugees in an urban Canadian city Social support, building mentorship relations Focus group discussions to explore lived experiences of being a LGBT newcomer and/or refugee. Open ended group interview questions conducted by doctoral students. Intervention took place at the community center. Focus groups lasted 60-90 minutes (1-time event) Reduced feeling of isolation Qualitative method. Focus group interview. Semi-structured focus group interview guides with open-ended questions Digitally record and transcribed verbatim. N=29 51.7%; male 37.9%; female 10.3%; transgender Mean age= 30.5 years Many participants described how their mental health improved after they began attending the support groups. Many participants explicitly discussed that participating in the support groups reduced their isolation Bridging Community level intervention Cross-sectional observational study N/A N/A N/A Chen W, Ling L, Renzaho AM. Building a new life in Australia: an analysis of the first wave of the longitudinal study of humanitarian migrants in Australia to assess the association between social integration and self-rated health. Public Health. 2017 Australia Mainly from North Africa and the Middle East Countries specified: Ethiopia, Myanmar, Nepal, Somalia, Sri Lanka To assess the relationship between social integration and physical and mental health among humanitarian migrants (HMs) in Australia Community support, information exchange with locals Secondary Data Analysis 2399 HM Participants in Participant Survey. Data collected in three waves. In waves 1 and 3, interviews were face-to-face. Wave 1 included questions about experiences prior to arrival in Australia in addition to experiences since arrival. Wave 2 interviews took place by telephone Serious mental illness Logical regression used to study association between social integration and general health; including mental health using IBM SPSS Statistics V.21.0 N= 2,399 54%; male 46%; female Mean age= 35.5(±13.9) years Data particularly highlights the serious mental illness of refugee, with 17% of them probably having a serious mental illness. Social capital may increase accessibility and widen access to health information, and provide peer/social/emotional support among refugees Bonding Community level intervention Follow-up study using data from an ongoing longitudina-l study Those who were granted permanent humanitarian visa in the 3-6 months preceding the study survey N/A SF-36 Health Status Questionnaire 6-item Kessler Screening Scale for Psychological Distress(K6) Ibrahim N, Honein-AbouHaidar G., Jomaa L. Perceived impact of community kitchens on the food security of Syrian refugees and kitchen workers in Lebanon: Qualitative evidence in a displacement context. Plos One. 2019 Lebanon Syrian Refugees To qualitatively explore the impact of community kitchens(CK) on the food security status of community kitchen workers (CWs) and Syrian refugee (SR) families in Lebanon Social support, social network, community participation, social cohesion, trust Focus group discussion with CW and SR conducted at the soup kitchens. The groups were moderated by the first author and the rest of the research team who took written and mental notes. A total of 8 focus groups which included 4 sessions with CW and 4 with SR. Interventions took place between July and October 2017 Loneliness, helplessness, depression Qualitative descriptive approach; focus group discussions N=15 community kitchen workers N=49 Syrian refugees receiving food assistance 100% female Mean age= 36.9(± 10.7) years Participation in community kitchens improved refugee social life and reduced their sense of loneliness. Supportive administration and a positive culture strengthened social cohesion between workers from different religious and cultural backgrounds. The discontinuation of the kitchen had a negative psychological impact on all study participants Bridging and bonding Community Cross-sectional observatio-nal study Individuals seeking refuge in neighboring countries N/A N/A
Refugees studied in these articles came from Bhutan ( Garland et al., 2002 ), Nigeria and Kurdish regions ( Dolan and Sherlock, 2010 ), Sudan and Somalia ( Stewart et al., 2011 ), Syria ( Ibrahim et al., 2019 ) and other non-specified locations in the Caribbean, Africa and the Middle East ( Chen et al., 2017 ; Logie et al., 2016 ). Most of the studies were in some of the top refugee-resettling countries (Canada, United States, United Kingdom and Australia), i.e. countries that accepted refugees for resettlement as legal residents ( UNHCR, 2021a ). It is notable that only one of the qualifying studies ( Ibrahim et al., 2019 ) examined part of a large and protracted refugee population in its country of first asylum, which is the type of situation that most bedevils aid agencies, refugee-hosting governments, and international aid donors and where better aid methods seem most needed. Only two manuscripts provided a definition of refugees. Chen et al. indicated that they included participants who were granted permanent humanitarian visas in the 3–6 months preceding the study survey ( Chen et al., 2017 ). Ibrahim et al. indicated that they included participants seeking refuge in neighboring countries ( Ibrahim et al., 2019 ). Not all manuscripts gave details about sex of participants. Those that did had quite balanced samples, excepting Im and Rosenberg (2016) with a majority of females and Ibrahim et al. (2019) whose entire sample consisted of females ( Im and Rosenberg, 2016 ; Ibrahim et al., 2019 ). Three of the seven manuscripts reported the average age of participants, which ranged from 30.5 to 36.9 years old ( Logie et al., 2016 ; Chen et al., 2017 ; Ibrahim et al., 2019 ).
The retrieved manuscripts employed different strategies: some used a more general definition of mental health, while others specified conditions and disorders. Garland et al. (2002) focused on psychological issues that were an obstacle for refugees’ integration, whereas Im and Rosenberg (2016) looked at overall psychological wellness ( Garland et al., 2002 ; Rosenberg et al., 2005 ). Dolan and Sherlock (2010) evaluated the feeling of being marginalized and excluded while Stewart et al. (2011) centered on stress and coping strategies of refugees ( Dolan and Sherlock, 2010 ; Stewart et al., 2011 ). Logie et al. (2016) concentrated on the feeling of isolation in the aftermath of a relocation whereas Chen et al. (2017) analyzed serious mental illness with survey data ( Chen et al., 2017 ; Logie et al., 2016 ). Finally, Ibrahim et al. (2019) discussed the sense of loneliness, feeling helpless and depressed, among other psychological issues ( Ibrahim et al., 2019 ). Four out of 7 manuscripts included in the review gave details on the instruments used to collect mental health outcomes data.
Recall that scholars have disaggregated social capital into three categories: bonding, bridging, and linking ( Aldrich et al., 2020 ; Putnam et al., 1994 ). Bonding social ties connect individuals who have much in common, such as race, ethnicity, religion, class, and language. Bridging ties connect across these identifiers and often form through institutions such as workplaces, schools, clubs, and affinity groups. Linking social ties, in contrast to the horizontal orientation of bonding and bridging ties, are vertical, and connect ordinary citizens with those in power and authority ( Ye and Aldrich, 2019 ). As with the mental health outcomes, each article targeted different social capital indicators. Some defined social capital as sharing knowledge and skills, developing friendships, and developing access to a range of resources and opportunities spanning from housing to health ( Logie et al., 2016 ). Chen et al. (2017) measured social capital as the capacity to communicate with locals, make friends, understand the culture and talk to neighbors ( Chen et al., 2017 ). Ibrahim et al. (2019) measured social capital as opportunities to socialize, feelings of unity and equity within the community, and sharing resources such as refrigerators ( Ibrahim et al., 2019 ). The social capital definitions of these three articles therefore correspond to bridging social capital: participants connected across social groups. Im and Rosenberg (2016) focused on how participants built support systems, built community capacity, and participated in group and community actions ( Im and Rosenberg, 2016 ). These manifestations correspond to bonding social capital, as participants shared similar backgrounds, being refugees from the same countries. Garland et al. (2002) measured factors promoting social coherence and integration such as kinship, marriage, friendship, and mutual support in local social, religious, or political groups ( Garland et al., 2002 ). In this case, participants created bridging and linking relations since they built trusting relationships across individuals who occupy different positions of power within a social hierarchy. None of the manuscripts we analyzed provided information on the instruments used to evaluate social capital, and none presented quantitative data on social capital.
The studies examined a variety of tools and implemented a multitude of approaches intended to help refugees build social capital with the objective of improving mental health outcomes. In this section we present first the interventions that target individuals (individual-level interventions), and after the interventions that target a group (community-level interventions). Lastly we present those that describe multilevel interventions (i.e. a combination of both individual- and community-level interventions).
Dolan and Sherlock (2010) used a cross-sectional study to analyze an intervention where asylum-seeking and refugee families got access to childcare services and evaluated their experiences and participation with qualitative methods ( Dolan and Sherlock, 2010 ). Their focus groups and interviews showed that access to childcare services plays a significant role in the provision of social support, creates social networks, strengthens informal networking and bypasses negative byproducts of social exclusion such as family breakdowns, mental and physical ill-health, educational under-achievement, unemployment and loss of self-esteem. However, policy provisions significantly impacted their ability to access childcare and thus to develop support networks in the new host community. The levels of isolation experienced were the product of such current policy. The result of this intervention was the feeling of being more included in the new society in which they lived.
Im and Rosenberg (2016) used an experimental cross-sectional study to promote refugee wellness and healthy adaptation during resettlement ( Im and Rosenberg, 2016 ) using focus groups. The overall project comprised community wellness partnership-building, competency-based training of refugee leaders and service providers, and a subsequent community health intervention fostering a peer-to-peer model. The target were Bhutanese refugees as they were considered the most vulnerable to health and mental health issues among the various refugees in the community, but at the same time the most organized group in the research setting. The intervention consisted of eight sessions focused on healthy eating and nutrition, the daily stressors of resettlement, healthy coping, common psychological distress , and mental health issues facing the refugee community. The authors showed that the intervention was associated with significant developments of social capital and improved psychological wellness among participants ( Im and Rosenberg, 2016 ).
Logie et al. (2016) implemented a cross-sectional study with qualitative methods to discuss social support groups, specifically for LGTBQ refugees, which addressed social isolation , community resilience , and better access to resources. They investigated a community-based partnership with an ethno-specific AIDS service organization serving African and Caribbean populations. The organization implemented monthly peer-support groups for African and Caribbean newcomers and refugees facilitated by staff members. The authors argued that the organization provided “services to community members who experience increased vulnerability to HIV due to social and structural drivers such as lack of access to adequate housing, financial, and social support, and interacting stigma and discrimination” ( Logie et al., 2016 ). The authors suggested that social support groups geared towards LGBTQ refugees positively affected mental health. In addition, they showed that these support groups were also associated with reduced isolation and more information-sharing, and became robust social networks ( Logie et al., 2016 ).
Chen et al. (2017) used secondary data analysis to investigate the relationship of social integration activities with health-related outcomes with a follow-up design. The study did not perform an intervention per se, but evaluated how activities related to economic integration, acculturation, social capital and self-identity were related to mental health outcomes. The study found that there was a positive relationship between social integration and physical and mental health. Having the capacity to communicate with locals, having friends from different ethnic or religious groups and attending a place of worship were the factors associated with better health-related outcomes ( Chen et al., 2017 ).
Ibrahim et al. (2019) used a cross-sectional study with qualitative methodology to describe the impact of community kitchens, which are small groups of people in community-based cooking programs who meet regularly to prepare one or more meals together. This intervention targets those vulnerable to hunger and food insecurity and empowers participants’ self-reliance and dignity through making them less dependent on charitable organizations and encouraging participants to develop their own social support groups and networks, hence reducing their feelings of social isolation. The authors noted that the community kitchens provided psychological benefits to participants and improved participants' sense of social cohesion. Participants reported worsened personal and psychological health after the discontinuation of community kitchens. The community developed a sense of trust and confidence among itself, leading to psychological support ( Ibrahim et al., 2019 ).
The results of these interventions had a positive impact on the psychological wellness of participants ( Im and Rosenberg, 2016 ) and reduced social isolation and loneliness whilst improving mental health outcomes ( Ibrahim et al., 2019 ; Logie et al., 2016 ).
Garland et al. (2002) utilized a cross-sectional study with qualitative methods to evaluate out-patient psychotherapy groups to help refugees. Participants were part of therapy groups, in which seven or eight patients met for one-and-a-half hours on a weekly basis with a single therapist and were part of individual consultations to talk about traumatic experiences to help with the process of integrating the experience into the life and personality of each person. The authors argue that working with individuals and with groups creates autonomy and self-awareness along with helping participants to recognize their roles in the broader community. The authors found that the intervention offered participants an opportunity to develop trusting relationships within the group, while improving mental health with the help of the therapist ( Garland et al., 2002 ). Stewart et al. (2011) used a cross-sectional study with face-to-face group interviews with Sudanese and Somali refugees and peer and professional helpers, as well as individual interviews. Participants selected topics for each session and topics included enhancing cultural understanding and social integration, navigating the system, promoting new skills, seeking optimum employment, improving family dynamics and overcoming racism and discrimination. The support group and dyadic interventions lasted for 12 weeks. Consequently, there were significant increases in perceived support and social integration and decreases in loneliness as well as how to cope with challenges in the host country ( Stewart et al., 2011 ). The results of these interventions were more integration and better psychological outcomes ( Garland et al., 2002 ) and better coping strategies with reduced stress ( Stewart et al., 2011 ).

Section: 4. Discussion

We classified three types of interventions that target mental health of refugees using social capital: individual, community and multilevel interventions. The most common interventions were community-based and most of them involved periodical group meetings. In all interventions we identified social capital as the channel used to achieve a change in mental health outcomes. Our findings show that interventions are an effective way to achieve a positive change in mental health outcomes in populations who have been displaced. Yet, we wish to start our findings by disclaiming that the studies we reviewed suffered from important methodological problems. One common issue is the lack of definition of refugees in five out of the seven articles under review. In addition, there is a lack of validated instruments to evaluate social capital and mental health outcomes. Furthermore, most of the studies use cross-sectional data. Studies with a clear definition of the target population, with a clear operationalization and measurement of social capital indicators and mental health outcomes allow for a better evaluation and replication when needed, and longitudinal study designs would allow to establish causality between social-capital interventions and refugees’ mental health.
Despite these methodological flaws, this review could usefully stratify the levels of intervention among the studies. Our review identified only one individual-level intervention. Scholars argue that the concept of social capital holds most value at the community level ( Kawachi and Subramanian, 2006 ; Wind and Komproe, 2012 ) and consistently most of the interventions we identified were at the community level. As we state above, to target refugees, it is more common to build interventions affecting an entire group as it is more cost-effective and impacts a larger number of people. However, the individual-level intervention (which perhaps was made practical by the setting's small scale) brought the opportunity to work in greater depth with families who were socially isolated by giving them access to resources that would be a bridge to have access to social networks in the new host community ( Dolan and Sherlock, 2010 ). Given that informal networking is critical to avoid social exclusion, such work has strong value for refugees.
Kawachi and Subramanian (2006) stress that research on individual-level social capital may be redundant: they argue that individual social capital overlaps with the traditional concept of individual social support to the extent that individual social capital may be “pouring old wine (i.e. social support) into new bottles (i.e. individual social capital)”. Beyond this conceptual argument of redundancy, community-level social capital interventions are likely to be more fruitful to reach a wider audience than individual-level interventions, and thus it is normal that interventions targeting a group have more impact on improving the functioning and the mental health status of the group. In fact, it is more cost-efficient than individual level-interventions.
Overall, community-level interventions involved periodic group meetings for refugees aiming to overcome obstacles that are common in displaced populations—the lack of coping strategies and distress, social isolation , unfamiliarity with the context in which they must now live, lack of resilience, discrimination, the need of housing and financial support and lack of connections with locals. Giving refugees access to resources with a periodic group-meeting platform – to help coping, build connections, understand the new resettlement country or helping to build healthier habits – positively impacted different mental health outcomes targeted in the interventions. The periodic meetings involved social capital in several forms. Interventions built new relationships and involved access to resources and opportunities in the place of asylum or re-settlement, building opportunities to connect with the new culture. Additionally, interventions aimed to build cohesion and offered social support, as well as a sense of belonging. Importantly, they were an opportunity for social integration and to increase social networks.
The other two interventions we identified were multilevel interventions, targeting individual and community-level programs simultaneously to help refugees. Garland et al. established group therapy that provided an equalizer that bridged the internal and external worlds, which developed progressively deeper and more trusting relationships with others in the group ( Garland et al., 2002 ). At the same time, with the help of the therapist, it led participants to understand and modify the internal factors that help or hinder those relationships within the individual. In fact, this intervention involved helping with individual traumatic experiences which are normally particular to each individual and more difficult to address in a group. Both therapies combined were crucial to address psychological issues that were an obstacle to achieve integration. Similarly, the intervention described in Stewart et al. used group and dyadic sessions with the objective of giving support to achieve social integration at the group level and decrease loneliness at the individual level ( Stewart et al., 2011 ). In this case, the sessions were to help to understand the new resettlement country giving access to information and resources of the refugees’ new country. The positive results of the interventions suggest that to help survivors of crises, social capital is a channel that is effective to build a sense of normality by making their bonds strong or by creating new bonds in the new country in which they now live. By intervening in social capital, vulnerable groups may be able to integrate and face stressors more easily ( Ye and Aldrich, 2019 ).
Schölmerich and Kawachi (2016) postulated that multilevel interventions are most effective for health outcomes, because they simply focus on specific problems and needs of individuals and, at the same time, they intervene at the group level and can promote a sense of belonging and build cohesion, among other benefits ( Schölmerich and Kawachi, 2016 ). In other words, their argument is that interventions on more than one level will yield greater effect. This leaves us with the question when to implement, or how to phase, individual- and community-level interventions. The papers in this review implemented multilevel interventions simultaneously, and we question whether this simultaneous implementation is most cost-effective. Rather, we postulate to implement multilevel interventions in a serial fashion, in which interventionists start to improve community social capital and within these interventions, practitioners can distill people in need of individual mental health care and refer them accordingly ( Wind and Komproe, 2012 ; Wind et al., 2021 ). That brings us to a holistic public health approach that is multilevel in nature in which we predominantly advise to intervene starting with a community phase, then adding the individual track once the first phase defines and distills people at risk within this community. This serial approach is naturally likely to be more effective than stand-alone community interventions, as it can identify individuals in need of mental health care, yet more economically than simultaneous multilevel interventions.
Since the objective of this study was to review interventions involving social capital in influencing mental health outcomes, all interventions identified had social capital as the channel to achieve those outcomes. Channels or mediating interventions seek to leverage social capital as an intermediary factor between the intervention and the desired outcome. For example, interventions in the built environment such as improving the walkability of neighborhoods or upgrading the quality of parks and recreational spaces may aim to improve mental health by means of aesthetics and promoting physical activity . However, the health impacts are also mediated (channeled) by changes in social capital, e.g. an increase in informal interactions between residents. Our search identified interventions that used information-sharing, development of new relationships, access to resources, new forms of socialization, and increase of community capacity and community participation to achieve a change in mental health outcomes. This means that social capital, in the forms we just indicated, was the mediator to achieve those outcomes.
The interventions on which our selected studies were based collectively used the array of bonding, bridging, and linking social ties to achieve a change in mental health outcomes and rebuild a sense of normality to overcome the trauma of having been displaced. Some of the articles talk about these different forms of social capital. Others do not mention them, but it is nonetheless possible to discern whether the interventions reinforced bonding connections, or built new connections (bridging and linking types). Logie et al. (2016) , Chen et al. (2017) , and Ibrahim et al. (2019) establish bridging connections by connecting refugees with other groups, whereas Im and Rosenberg (2016) concentrate on bonding social capital because their work built connections with people of a similar background, usually fellow refugees ( Chen et al., 2017 ; Ibrahim et al., 2019 ; Im and Rosenberg, 2016 ; Logie et al., 2016 ). Garland et al. (2002) center on bridging and linking social capital, as their intervention builds connections across individuals who occupy different positions of power within a social hierarchy ( Garland et al., 2002 ). We believe that bridging and linking connections are a good target in interventions involving refugees if the objective of the intervention is to promote integration and acculturation (lack of which may be a mental-health stressor). Economic opportunities and security may consequently rise as well (which in turn may ease other mental-health stressors): more opportunities will be available for refugees who have access to connections outside their group. These forms of social capital can affect individuals by improving access to valuable resources in the new place, by improving access to instrumental and emotional support , by social reinforcement of identity and mutual influence, and by fostering stronger connections across social divisions within and beyond the community ( Villalonga-Olives and Kawachi, 2015a , b ).
Our research and key findings have developed with several limitations. Our inclusion criteria reflected in our search terms could have limited our findings. Following past systematic reviews ( Villalonga-Olives et al., 2018 etc), we used social capital, community participation, social cohesion, social organization and communal resources as keywords and Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms to identify interventions involving social capital in three large-scale repositories. We discarded intervention as a search term to keep the search broad and avoid missing studies, since we had observed there are manuscripts published in the literature that perform interventions but do not use the term as a keyword or MeSH term. Some manuscripts may have used social capital as the channel of their interventions but may not have appeared in our results if they did not use any of our keywords or MeSH terms. To address this, we searched three major repositories, and utilized distinct search codes to keep the search very broad. There may also be publication bias, namely, that the results of some interventions were not published because of a lack of significant effects. Such putative negative or inconclusive findings, if unpublished, would not be available to and reported in this review.
A key feature of this review's findings is that the search yielded only one study ( Ibrahim et al., 2019 ) concerning part of a large refugee population in their country of first asylum (Syrians in Lebanon), which is the classic burdensome situation for host countries and international aid mechanisms; the rest concerned smaller groups re-settled in a third country. The thorough nature of our search suggests that this is a limitation of actual refugee aid practice, rather than of this review of the interventions and studies on such practice. One can speculate that such limitations of practice stem from putative factors including conservatism in aid approaches, perhaps owing to pressure on resources, official aid donors' expectations and preference for predictability, and aid agencies' embrace of the duty to do no harm and therefore caution about experimental approaches. The predominance of the studies' locations in high-income countries rather than low-resource and/or insecure settings with large refugee or IDP populations probably owes as well to the much more difficult conditions for research and interventions in the latter.
This study has strengths as well. We believe this systematic review is the first one that investigates social capital interventions for refugees aiming to achieve a change in mental health outcomes. We used a broad strategy to end up reviewing many articles for our review. If the number of studies we found meeting the criteria seems few, this probably reflects a real deficit of such interventions and corresponding studies. We believe our work is an important step to identify interventions that have actually worked in refugee populations. The relatively small scale and comfortable settings of most of the reviewed studies do not necessarily attenuate their findings’ validity for larger and more volatile displacement contexts.

Section: 5. Conclusions and implications for further research

Refugees typically find themselves in dire circumstances that are beyond their control and are therefore prone to develop mental health problems. Our results indicate that interventions targeting refugees’ mental health using social capital as a channel to achieve a positive change on those outcomes is a fruitful starting point to improve mental health among refugees. Yet, despite many millions of displaced people over the decades and a displaced population that is growing each year, we found only seven studies examining interventions that used this strategy. Within these papers, the reinforcement or creation of social capital, especially bridging and linking types, seems a crucial resource to help this vulnerable group. Specifically, our review showed that community and multilevel social-capital interventions are key to curb mental health symptoms among refugees.
Given this scanty evidence base among the most vulnerable groups to fall victim to mental ill health, this review is an explicit invitation for researchers to further examine social-capital interventions among refugees and other forcibly-displaced people, overcoming the methodological problems of the studies we identified. Specifically, we invite researchers to focus on serial multilevel interventions, in which interventionists start by bolstering community social capital and within these interventions distill people in need of individual mental health care and refer them if needed (cf. Wind and Komproe, 2012 ; Wind et al., 2021 ). Longitudinal study designs would allow to establish causality between social-capital interventions and refugees’ mental health.

Section: Author contributions

EVO, TW, RS and DA conceived the idea of the manuscript and wrote the manuscript. EVO, AA, MY and DA analyzed the data. AA and MY made critical revisions of the manuscript.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank KdR and AT for their research and assistance on this project.
