Title: Rethinking digital biopedagogies: How sociomaterial relations shape English secondary students' digital health practices


Abstract: Abstract

It is widely recognised that while many young people in high-income countries are active users of digital health technologies , their engagement can be short term. In this article, we draw on feminist materialism theory to analyse findings from the two qualitative phases of a mixed-methods three phase study of English secondary students' digital health practices. Bringing together work on biopedagogies alongside more-than-human thinking, we analyse our participants' accounts of their intra-actions with human and nonhuman affordances and materialities. Our findings reveal how young people's capacity for navigating the digital health landscape and translating knowledge into health practice is highly contingent on the complex engagement of different actors in digital health assemblages, including more-than-digital relational connections. Our study found that key human actors – typically in face-to-face settings – were crucial in doing the affective work necessary to guide adolescents through the tensions and conflicts they experienced when dealing with competing knowledges and expectations. The research underlines the ways in which feminist materialism perspectives can supplement scholarship on biopedagogies, specifically contributing to the theorising on young people's learning and embodiment through digital practices.

Section: 1. Introduction

A diverse array of digital health technologies is now available for children and adolescents to learn about and monitor their health and physical activity . Previous research has shown that many adolescents are active users of a growing range of healthy lifestyle technologies ( Depper and Howe, 2017 ; Goodyear and Armour, 2018 ; Lupton, 2020 ; Majeed-Ariss et al., 2015 ; Radovic et al., 2018 ; Ridgers et al., 2018 ). The contribution of new digital technologies to the health, physical fitness and wellbeing of children and young people is potentially far reaching. As Rich et al. (2019) observe, policy investments in digital health care are justified on the basis of their ability to deliver greater efficiency of overburdened healthcare systems. Indeed, young people are increasingly targeted for digital interventions to address a diverse range of health issues. Of particular prominence are technologies which are used to promote healthy lifestyles, physical fitness and sporting proficiency, including not only within the commercial health and fitness industries, public health care and medical contexts ( Lupton, 2022 , Lupton, 2021 ) but also within schools as part of health and physical education curricula ( Gard and Lupton, 2017 ; Lupton, 2022). These technologies include mobile phone apps, wearable technologies (for example, fitness bands and smartphones), social media platforms, digital fitness and exercise games, content-sharing sites such as YouTube and TikTok, and other websites.
Digital health technology use is increasingly promoted to all age groups as an important and effective means to achieve ‘self-optimization’ ( Ruckenstein, 2014 , 69), reflecting a kind of ‘techno-utopian’ view (Lupton, 2014) that positions these devices and software as offering significant benefits to individuals. These technologies are positioned as providing the means through which young people can ‘empower’ themselves and control their bodies, health and fitness states using digital devices and apps that involve digitised and datafied forms of information gathering. In particular, digital devices and apps with tracking and monitoring capacities, encourage users to train their bodies and learn how to live more healthy lives. These discourses and affordances as they come together with human bodies generate biopedagogical assemblages ( Leahy and Malins, 2015 ) through which young people can potentially learn about their bodies to improve their health and fitness: or what we refer to as ‘digital biopedagogies’.
Most analyses of biopedagogies directed at young people have adopted a Foucauldian emphasis, analysing discursive or visual representations of digital health technologies as objects of knowledge for how modes of biopower and citizen responsibilisation are enacted. Our focus in this article takes a more sociomaterialist approach, directing attention to how embodied actions and affective forces work together with discourses, technological affordances, human bodies and other objects to generate knowledge, learning and action. Specifically, we engage with concepts derived from feminist materialism theory to analyse interviews and a focus group discussion conducted as part of a mixed-methods study of English secondary school students' digital health practices. Drawing in particular on the perspectives offered by feminist philosophers Karen Barad and Rosi Braidotti, we explore the materialities, affective forces, relational connections and agential capacities generated when human come together with nonhuman agents, configuring dynamic digital biopedagogical assemblages.
In the interviews and focus group we conducted, young people reported a diverse range of practices, revealing how their digital landscapes of health were part of a complex assemblage of agencies which produced multiple ways of knowing – critical, normative, medicalised, resistant, embodied, multisensory. These digital biopedagogical assemblages are described in further detail below. In what follows, we begin with outlining our conceptual approach, which led both the design of our project and our analysis, followed by our methods and findings. We used feminist materialism theory to ‘think with’ ( Jackson and Mazzei, 2012 ) at all stages of the project: from conception and writing our grant application that was subsequently funded to implementation of methods and making sense of our data from the three phases of the project.

Section: 2. Analytic framing: revisiting biopedagogical assemblages through feminist materialism

In Foucauldian analyses, contemporary digital health policies and technologies are viewed as forming part of a public health landscape which enacts biopower , involving the governance and regulation of both individuals and populations through practices of the body. This body of work has shed light on the ‘meanings’ and ‘representations’ of the ‘healthy’ subjects within the neoliberal socio-cultural and political contexts of self-care and public health which have shaped digital health technologies ( Esmonde, 2020 ; Lupton, 2017 ; Rich et al., 2020 ). Moreover, attention has focused on how digital technologies are promoted and used within pedagogical practices and policies that shape embodiment and selfhood. Bringing together a focus on pedagogy and biopower , this work has revealed how digital health technologies can operate as ‘biopedagogical’ tools, shaping health and fitness knowledges and training people how to regulate and manage their bodies. Foucauldian scholars have revealed how these technologies can act as governmental apparatuses of neoliberal public health imperatives , framed through biopedagogical perspectives in which users are ‘learners’ – invited to engage in modes of control over the body through everyday digital practices. Specifically, concerns have been raised about the ways in which digital health policies and associated practices, such as self-tracking, promote neoliberal notions of empowerment and individual responsibility of the user, often ignoring broader social determinants of health ( Fotopoulou and O'Riordan, 2016 ; Lupton, 2016 ; Rich and Miah, 2014a , Rich et al., 2020 ).
This scholarship has been important in revealing the extent to which digital technologies shape people's understandings of selfhood within neoliberal contexts of public health promotion and prevention. However, like others (see also Leahy and Malins, 2015 ; Leahy, 2012; Thorpe et al., 2020a , Thorpe et al., 2020b ) we recognise the need to develop accounts of biopedagogy that move beyond a discursive focus on the way bodies are managed by these technologies. Elsewhere, researchers have pointed to the ways that imaginaries of the transformative potential of digital health circulate in powerful ways through ‘promissory discourses and practices’ ( Henwood and Marent, 2019 : 5) that suggest that technologies will improve users' health and physical fitness, offer them control over their bodies, support chronic disease management, prevent disease or help them to be more competitive in their sporting performances ( Lupton, 2017 ; Rich and Miah, 2014a , Rich et al., 2020 ). While digital health technologies might provide new opportunities for knowledge and information, critics have pointed to the capacity to reproduce dominant expectations of neoliberal health imperatives that intensify governance, surveillance and control of young people's bodies ( Depper and Howe, 2017 ; Gard and Lupton, 2017 ; ; Lupton and Williamson, 2017 ; Rail and Jette, 2015 ).
This scholarship has provided important insights into how these technologies and digital practices have pedagogical orientations, focused on maintaining, monitoring and regulating norms and promoting practices which produce particular ‘subjects’ as idealistic, fit and healthy bodies. We build on this work by attending to the messiness of these pedagogical moments and the ways that agential capacities are generated with and through the use of digital technologies. In doing so, we attempt to address what Henwood and Marent (2019 : 4) describe as the ‘long-standing challenges of avoiding technological determinism whilst maintaining a clear focus on the materiality and agency of technologies’.
We ground our analysis within the burgeoning literature of more-than-human theoretical approaches that incorporate recognition of the agency of nonhuman objects in human experience, acknowledging that digitised experiences always take place in more-than-digital contexts. From this perspective, when people are using digital health technologies, they are situated in dynamic spatial contexts and coming together with not only other people and digital technologies but with other living things and with objects, spaces and places ( Andrews and Duff, 2019 ; Fullagar et al., 2017 ; Lupton, 2018 , 2019a ; Lupton and Maslen, 2018 ; Thorpe et al., 2020a , Thorpe et al., 2020b ; Toffoletti and Thorpe, 2021 ).
There are several different approaches in more-than-human scholarship. We draw in particular on feminist materialism perspectives as articulated in the work of Rosi Braidotti (2019a , b) and Karen Barad (2003, 2007). These scholars emphasise the relationality of all entities (human and nonhuman), and see agencies as generated with and through the assemblages of these agents rather than inherent properties possessed or exerted only by humans. We use the concepts of intra-action and entanglements from Barad's scholarship. Barad (2007) coined the term intra-action to shift our thinking about the sociomaterialities of more-than-human worlds. Unlike ‘interaction’, a concept which refers to the relationships between pre-existing agents (human or nonhuman), ‘intra-action’ recognises that agents and forces are always generated with and through these connections as they respond to each other. Barad (2003) notes that it is through these intra-actions that matter ‘is made to matter’: that is, comes to have effects and affects as part of people's bodies and lives. Capacities for action are emergent, created and distributed between human and nonhuman agents as part of these entangled relations ( Barad, 2003 ).
From Braidotti's writings on what she describes as ‘affirmative ethics’ ( Braidotti, 2019a ) that are part of ‘the critical posthumanities’ analytical approaches ( Braidotti, 2019b ), we build on the role of embodiment and affective forces that are generated in relational more-than-human encounters. Rather than focus on individual agency as if it were the property of the individual using digital devices or apps, we focus instead on the distributed nature of agential capacities between the agents in assemblages, human or nonhuman. Braidotti's argument for ‘affirmative ethics’ contends that critical thinking needs to acknowledge that human subjects are ‘embedded and embodied’ ( Braidotti, 2019a , 467). From this standpoint, an affirmative ethics can begin to identify how people can ‘become all we are capable of’ ( Braidotti, 2019a , 470). For Braidotti (2019a) , such an approach recognises that human/nonhuman relations can be generative by opening capacities for action, but can also close off other possibilities.
Drawing on these concepts from Barad and Braidotti, we can adopt an approach to young people's learning through digital health technologies that can help us to think of the sociomaterial relations of human bodies with the affordances of digital technologies as always relational and connected (entangled) in complex and ever-changing configurations that are productive of possibilities but also exclusions. From this perspective, digital technologies, digital data and human bodies are viewed not as discrete entities but instead as always imbricated in digital biopedagogical assemblages ( Lupton, 2019a ). Digital technologies have affordances that are designed into them by their human developers, with certain capacities for action in mind. However, these affordances are not realised until the devices come together with human users. Human bodies have their own affordances: for feeling and action. When people engage with digital technologies, a host of potential agential capacities can be opened or closed as these technological and fleshy affordances intra-act ( Lupton, 2019a , b ). Our focus of analysis is more-than-human digital health assemblages, distributed affective forces and relational encounters rather than individual experience or device. Rather than devote attention solely to young people's practices, we also consider the affective or feeling states which mediate engagement with technology. These feeling states differ from and precede ‘thoughts and emotions’ and instead manifest as intensities ( Andrews and Duff, 2019 ). We build on a feminist materialism perspective on ‘what bodies can do’ when they come together with digital health technologies. Informed by the work of Braidotti and Barad, we examine the human–digital relations not simply as (re)presenting health knowledges and agencies but as ‘co-implicated’ in their production ( Lupton, 2019b ).
Our starting point is that young people's learning through these technologies is not reducible to totalizing notions of power or control. Instead, we recognise that biopolitical governance and knowledges are part of digital health assemblages that are constantly changing and which create forces for action through relationalities between human and non-human. Thus, in the same way that we need be cautious of ‘promissory’ potential of technologies, we must be cautious of techno-dystopian discourses that reduce these digital technologies to oppressive and disciplinary practices. We adopt the position that these digital technologies are neither inherently oppressive nor liberating, but rather can be viewed as offering affordances that in specific contexts and at specific times come together with the affordances of human bodies to generate agencies and forces.
In our analysis, therefore, we extend the work on biopedagogical assemblages to explore the more-than-human forces at work in these more-than-digital gatherings. Our central focus is to understand what and how young people are learning through their entanglements and intra-actions with these technologies, and to what extent these self-knowledges impel forces, actions and agencies. In drawing on our empirical research to advance scholarship in this area, we attempt to surface the dynamic ways in which intra-actions configure what and how young people learn about their bodies through digital health practices. We reflect on the potential utility of feminist materialism theory for supplementing and expanding our understanding of these technologies as biopedagogical. Rather than supplanting the Foucauldian concepts of biopower and governance completely, we rethink what these concepts mean when attuning to the embodied, sensory and affective relationalities that unfold between humans and digital health technologies. Following Lupton's (2019a , 76) observation that ‘we learn in and through our bodies’ we focus on how this ‘incorporates the entanglements of the digital sensors with the human senses in the process of sense making’.
Researchers of physical cultures have begun to take up more-than-human theory to contribute to understandings of embodiment, health and physical activity . They have highlighted the importance of understanding the relational dimensions between humans and other humans and also with nonhumans when inquiring into these topics ( Depper et al., 2019 ; Fullagar and Pavlidis, 2018 ; Markula, 2019 ; Rich, 2018 ; Thorpe et al., 2020a , Thorpe et al., 2020b ). Other researchers have examined the assemblages of health or recovery that bring human and nonhuman agents together in realising the possibilities of wellness and wellbeing ( Andrews and Duff, 2019 ; Duff, 2016 ; McLeod, 2017 ). The role of digital media and devices in these assemblages of health or physical fitness has received some attention from scholars engaging with feminist materialism. This includes analysis of the potential of apps and online platforms for promoting mental health ( Fullagar et al., 2017 ; Tucker and Goodings, 2015 ) as well as women's use of self-tracking apps and wearable devices ( Brice et al., 2020 ; Clark and Thorpe, 2020 ; Lupton, 2018 ; Lupton and Maslen, 2018 ) and social media use to support chronic illness ( Maslen and Lupton, 2019 ). The intensities of feeling and relational connections flowing within and between social media content on fitness and health have also received attention ( Toffoletti and Thorpe, 2021 ), as have the ways that making sense of health-related data often involves multisensory and affective intensities ( Lupton, 2019a ; Sumartojo et al., 2016 ).
This literature has identified the entanglements between human bodies and digital devices, and the capacities of health, wellness, fitness or recovery that can be opened by these assemblages. However, while there is now a large body of research on young people's use of digital health technologies (at least in the Global North) ( Lupton, 2022 , Lupton, 2021 ), few published empirical studies have as yet adopted a feminist materialism approach to analyse empirical findings. One exception is Lupton's (2020) project using interviews with young Australians (aged 16 to 25) about their use of digital health. Our multi-phase project builds on and expands this initial Australian work and moves into a younger age group (secondary school students). In engaging with these approaches, we seek to rethink the underlying assumptions made about digital practices and people's agency to realise the assumed potential of digital health.

Section: 3. Details of our study

Throughout the two-year study, which received funding from the Wellcome Trust (grant number 203254/Z/16/Z) in the UK, a mixture of quantitative and qualitative methods was used to undertake research with over 1000 young people aged between 11 and 18 years in South-West England between 2017 and 2019. The study involved three separate phases. Phase 1 involved a survey completed by 1019 respondents aged between 11 and 18 in four secondary schools mapping digital health use. The survey data findings showed a high use of digital technology use for health. A total of 70% of respondents reported using digital technologies for health purposes, while 55% of respondents identified their smartphones as the main technology they used to learn about health. Forty-two percent of the respondents said that they used digital health technology specifically to learn about how to improve their health, while 52% reported using apps to track diet, fitness or health indicators (see Rich et al., 2020 for further details of the survey and its findings).
In Phase 2 and 3, which are the focus of the present analysis, we employed qualitative methods to build on our survey findings and gain a more in-depth understanding of how young people use digital health technologies. Phase 2 involved qualitative methods with 38 young people recruited from schools in phase 1 and via a qualitative research recruitment agency (Roots Research), used to expand our participant group beyond the schools already involved in the project. It included 30 semi-structured interviews with 15 boys and 15 girls aged between 14 and 18 years old. A focus group with a further 8 young people (2 boys and 6 girls) aged between 13 and 17 years old also took place.
Phase 3 involved an experimental approach to explore the wider social contexts and relationships surrounding how young people were learning about health in digital environments. We recruited seven families via the recruitment agency to participate. During this phase, seven young people (five boys and two girls aged between 16 and 18) were given a Fitbit Charge 2 wearable device for a period of eight weeks through which they could monitor their physical activity and sleep. They were invited to use it as much or as little as they wanted. They were also invited to share their experiences with the research team via the mobile communications platform WhatsApp. Researchers sent prompts through the app to the participants and invite them to send text comments, images, audio voice to share their experiences of using digital health technologies in the course of their everyday life . The intention was to capture ‘real time’ data and experiences as they were engaging with technologies. Using a mobile messaging app has the capacity for heightening intimacy, perhaps creating an environment in which participants might be more willing to share information about themselves ( Tagg et al., 2017 ). As well as talking to the teenage participants, we also interviewed their parents/guardians.
The project was granted ethical approval by the Research Ethics Approval Committee for Health at The University of Bath , UK. Informed consent was given from all study participants and their guardians. All participants were given pseudonyms to protect their anonymity. The research team ensured that young people were not harmed through participation in the research and utilised a range of approaches to ensure that young people's voices could make an impact. In each phase of the research, the care and wellbeing of participants was a priority, including participant safety and privacy. Whatsapp was chosen because of the benefits of at the time being native to the participants' environment, creating a more naturalistic setting for data sharing, while also offering robust security systems and methods of data exporting. Whatsapp software provided end-to-end encryption of its messages, meaning that the messages can't be intercepted as they travel between devices. Participants were given documents which contained key principles derived from concerns about personal privacy, data protection, and ensuring the appropriate distance between researcher and participant during messaging. They were also briefed about setting up their phones to ensure that their Whatsapp messages were securely protected.
We drew on concepts from feminist materialism in analysing our research materials from Phases 2 and 3. The interviews, focus group discussion and WhatsApp messages were our corpus of research materials. The interviews and focus group discussion were fully professionally transcribed for analysis. Building on Lupton's (2020) feminist materialism approach to the analysis of research materials about digital health imaginaries and lived experiences of use, we reflected on the discussions we had led with the young people and read through the transcripts multiple times. In our analysis, we explored digital health practices as intra-actions with other bodies/humans, non-human matter (specifically digital health devices/platforms). We analysed how these intra-actions assemble in complex ways which produce health opportunities/affordances and constraints as part of the enactment of biopedagogies.
In contrast to thematic content analysis, the analysis was conducted with a feminist materialism sensibility that is sometimes referred to as ‘post qualitative’ ( Fullagar et al., 2017 ; Jackson and Mazzei, 2012 ; St. Pierre, 2017 ). We focused on attuning ourselves to the affects and effects of intra-actions as they were recounted to us by our participants. This involved the analytic approach of ‘thinking with theory’, whereby rather than approach the data in search of patterns or themes, or focusing on what individual voices ‘mean’, we instead directed our attention on what voices ‘do’ ( Fullagar et al., 2017 ). Therefore, the production and analysis of research materials for analysis in this article is not the result of a replicable positivist coding process, but rather result of what Maggie MacLure (2013 , 228) describes as an approach to data analysis through ‘moments that glow’. MacLure describes this attunement as generating moments of ‘wonder’: something that radiates or glows from the data as a result of ‘the entangled relation of data-and-researcher’. Specifically, this allowed for our analysis to focus on how affective, material and discursive forces entangled with young people as part of digital biopedagogical assemblages. Below we explore in detail major dimensions of the participants' accounts of their use of digital health technologies: affordances and affective intensities; and digitised embodiment, affects and capacities. We trace some of the affective forces that flow through these biopedagogical assemblages to explore the implications for how young people were learning about their embodied subjectivities .

Section: 4. Multisensory arrangements of learning through digital health

Many participants reported that they wanted to improve their health and used self-monitoring and tracking apps to do so. In attempting to achieve the health status or body ideals circulated in these digital environments, our participants often turned to health apps as a way to enhance or improve their health. As they intra-acted with these apps, personal digital data were being produced about and through their bodies. These intra-actions were mediated by discursive repertoires of biopolitical assemblages. Most of these tracking devices use ‘expert classification’ systems (e.g., Body Mass Index , or step counters against established norms of 10,000 steps) or ‘expert mode of address’ ( Fullagar et al., 2017 : 5) through which young people's bodies and health states are made ‘intelligible’ through ‘datafication’ ( Lupton and Williamson, 2017 ).
Participants frequently described an initial interest, desire and excitement to follow trends in digital health technologies. Consistent with the findings of others who have researched young people's use of wearable devices for health ( Goodyear et al., 2019a , Goodyear et al., 2019b ), participants who took part in Phase 3, using a new Fitbit for eight weeks, reported feeling quite excited about initially using this device. However, after a period of novelty, they became far less interested or engaged with this wearable device and the data it produced. Several young people reported pedagogical moments which required unexpected work from them. They described being drawn into an 'affective arrangement' ( Slaby et al., 2019 ) with the device involving the investment of the time, energy and thought to acquire insight about their bodies. In some cases, young people reported having to readjust their lives in order to achieve particular goals (and achieve that which is deemed normal and healthy) even when it felt physically uncomfortable.
The experiences recounted by Tyler, a 17-year-old Black British young man, point to the intra-actions generated as his body's feelings and sensations responded to the Fitbit's affordances. He described his experience of using the breath counting feature, which he assumed might help him relax. Tyler found that the instructions provided were too confusing, leading to feelings of agitation and discomfort rather than relaxation: I was quite disappointed with it, especially because of the fact that it was really uncomfortable. I didn’t find it comfortable, I felt like it was, I should be, I kept checking my Fitbit because I didn’t know what was going on. It didn’t give me a step through guide, it wasn’t walking me through it so I didn’t know what would happen. After a while, I kept looking and listening to it and it was 1 minute 45 through and I didn’t really have time to relax to it. Plus, the constant vibrations on my wrist were just like, it was, instead of me trying to relax my whole body, it was just kind of setting myself in the wrist so I couldn’t really relax myself. When I tried it again, I had to take the watch off instead of having it on, I took the watch off to listen to it and it still wasn’t really helpful.
In this account, Tyler was disappointed not to experience the expected pleasant restful states when his bodily affordances were intra-acting with those offered by the breathing app as a digital biopedagogical assemblage. The promissory narratives of the device were not fulfilled when Tyler's body intra-acted with it. Instead, the potential for experiencing states of calm, mindfulness or restfulness was closed off by more negative affective states of frustration, eliciting unpleasant visceral responses. In these moments, Tyler was actively tuned into sensory cues and embodied perceptions to make sense of the pedagogical instructions produced by the app. This helped him to assess how useful this practice was in the context of his own daily life.
In this example, the capacity for action is not something either lacking or centred within young people/human subject but is an affective force and multisensory phenomenon which is generated through intra-action with the materialities of the wearable device. The mobilisation of these classification systems, along with expert ‘advice’ (e.g., increase your training/goals) form part of an ‘affective arrangement’ ( Slaby et al., 2019 ) through which young people come to know who they are and come to judge themselves. Intense affects of anxiety, fear, judgement circulate in these affective arrangements, particularly as young people worried about whether they would meet expected targets or achieve the desired bodies. As Leif (aged 14, male Black Caribbean), put it: I think, in society, one of our main values is how we appear physically, and people go so far just to maintain their physical appearance. And of course, being healthy on the inside is something that I think is really important—there’s a limit, there’s a fine line between going too far and developing an obsession with fitness, and then just being healthy. And I think, a lot of these fitness apps, if you’re not seeing the results you want to see instantly… If ever I do a workout, I’ll look in the mirror and be like, “Why am I not ripped yet?”.
Affective intensities are expressed through different narratives of performance, enhancement and achievement. Leif's body is not a stable entity, not something interacting with the images online, but through a process of becoming with the bodies around him as a process of intra-action. His body is not simply acted upon by broader discourses and practices of neoliberal governance. In this digital biopedagogical assemblage, desire is not located within Leif, as a simple form of fulfilment to have a ‘ripped body’, but instead emerges as a force which is moving between body and image: both as reflected in the mirror and in digital media . Apps such as those described by Leif above typically invite the user to firstly visualise and understand themselves as in some way ‘lacking’ through comparison with material objects in the form of images online (‘Why am I not ripped yet?’); Through this affective arrangement, Leif then feels intense judgement and fear in terms of meeting these expectations.

Section: 5. Intra-acting with images of health and fitness

Aoung people in our study were also turning to social media for health-related information about a range of issues, such as sleep, diet, physical activity , mental health and body image. Image-based social media is particularly influential (see also Camacho-Miñano et al., 2019 ) and were often used by our participants either to share images of themselves or to search for images or information about health. The online content in these platforms can be sources of pleasure, empowerment and engagement as well as provoking feelings of being under surveillance or of anxiety and disaffection. Overwhelmingly, participants described the highly visual dynamics of learning ( Dobson and Ringrose, 2016 ) about their bodies through multiple intra-actions with social media that produced material discursive phenomena, such as body dissatisfaction ( Ni Shuilleabhain, Rich and Fullagar, 2021 ). Idealised images of ‘fit’ bodies circulated in social media spaces they regularly engaged with and intra-act with their own and other's bodies. These intra-actions are mediated by affects that manifest as intensities of shame , pleasure or guilt. As 16-year-old Bethany (White British) put it: Yeah, especially when I see like other people who, like especially when I see like transitions of people who have gone from say being morbidly obese, this like skinny woman say like, it’s not like, “Ooh, I want to be really skinny,” but it’s like, “Wow, they can do it, then why can’t I just get up and go to the gym?”
Young people's images online are often ‘tagged’ by peers, and this can increase the visibility of their bodies as images circulate through peer networked cultures ( Ringrose and Renold, 2016 ). Our participants repeatedly pointed towards the powerful role of images of bodies (including their own) in intensifying the learning taking place, particularly through social media. Two boys in the focus group described sharing photos in social media spaces and how these were compared with the ‘summer bodies’ circulating in these spaces; bodies which met the ideals of fit, toned, tanned and lean. Harrison (aged 15, White British): I think it’s a lot about people seeing these ‘summer bodies’, or getting hate from other people; and it’s just, like, little things that bug them can cause them … Elliot (aged 14, White British): … build up. Harrison: Yeah, build up, and then they start thinking, “Oh, three people have called me fat now. Am I actually fat?”
For some participants, these intra-actions with images produce intense feelings of guilt and subsequent actions to monitor their bodies. For example, 18-year-old Andrew (White British) described these feelings when recounting how he compared his body with other young male bodies in social media images: looking at myself and thinking, I’m getting a bit fat, probably stop eating, that kind of thing. Well, I wouldn’t say [I monitor myself] all the time, but if I, kind of, get the impression that somethings not right, then I will monitor it and then fix it, hopefully.
As these quotations suggest, the relational connections between social media image, bodies and other humans produce intense flows, multisensory and affective intensities that have material effects how young people's bodily practices and bodily forms are shaped. In the responses above, the desire to achieve the ‘summer body’ portrayed in images found online is also shaped by relations with others online, entangled with the shame of ‘being called fat’ in ways which limit bodily capacity. These agents and forces come together in ways that co-produce pedagogical moments of how young people learn about their bodies and the affordances for feeling and action.

Section: 6. Biopedagogical exchanges: the pedagogical work of reconciling competing knowledge

Many of the young people describe intra-actions between the data produced through tracking and their own bodies, moment when metrics were at odd with their own self-knowledge.
Pedagogical moments require work which involved reviewing quantified data ( Lupton, 2019a ; Sumartojo et al., 2016 ). Young people spoke of how through intra-actions with digital data, this actually involved entanglements with affective processes of the body. In this sense, these digitised experiences always take place in more-than-digital contexts of learning. Intensities of the body mediated their readings of their data, including affective forces such as comfort, stigma or pain.
Participants described the pedagogic moments in which they needed to reconcile the differences between what data tell them, and what their bodies tell them. Therefore, tensions emerge through body knowledge and the biomedical knowledge which comes to define their bodies as knowable through data collection and quantification. These are generative relationalities that emerge in these encounters as young people's bodies are constituted by and come to respond to and affect these assemblages in multiple ways. The body, as matter, is agentic and this vital capacity mediates the learning process; stabilising or disrupting biopedagogies. These lively assemblages of discourses, data and bodies ( Lupton, 2019a ) are configured in ways that can produce new intimacies of the body: I just feel like having [the wearable device] on when I’m sleeping, I don’t like it. I mean, there’s no other way of tracking your sleep without having something on you but it’s just there and it’s a tiny bit irritating. Now that I see the patterns it’s sort of the same every time. If I have nine hours sleep, well if I sleep during the times I go to bed for nine hours then the REM [rapid eye movement] thing is normally the same, compared to when I have six hours in bed. Then it’s always roughly the same results, so I can see, and I don’t have to track it every day and I would know roughly. It’s measured by how I feel as well. (Liam, 17, Chinese British, male)
Like Tyler, Liam's bodily affordances did not align well with the materialities of his device. However, Liam recognised both the potential and value of tracking alongside the personal and more intimate knowledge he was learning to recognise through comparing his bodily sensations with his digital data. In another example, Olivia (female, 16, white british) described how affects of anxiety mediated her experience of managing her food intake, which she was attempting to control using a self-tracking app: I’m really bad with my appetite; I do want to put on weight, but I think because of my anxiety and stuff, often if I feel anxious, I just won’t be hungry.
As these accounts suggest, young people were learning to recognise the powerful capacity of their bodies to generate this knowledge. This destabilises the discursive-material conditions that might produce norms of the quantified self ( Lupton, 2016 ). In this regard, young people do not passively respond to the digital data, nor act predictably in terms of the interpretations of their body or behaviours. Whilst there are moments where their bodies are ‘governed’ by these data practices, this also affords them opportunities for understanding their bodies that which involved learning to recognise affects and sensory cues as an important part of their everyday health practices.
Not all the young people in our study were able to translate the cues offered them by wearable devices or apps into sources of information that guided decisions about physical practices. For many young people, it was through intra-actions with others that more generative possibilities emerged. Bethany was one of the participants who took part in Phase 3, using a Fitbit for eight weeks. Bethany described in detail some of the tensions between her use of her Fitbit, the sleep data it generated and how her body actually felt. She mentioned that ‘one morning she woke up and told her Mum, “I didn't sleep very well”, but then her Fitbit had said to her, “No, you have actually slept well”.’ Natalie, Bethany's mother, described how they had to work together to make sense of this: You kind of gauge it a lot of the time as well. I think with teenagers especially – their expression says it all. They don’t necessarily look unwell or look pale or they are kind of a bit – you don’t mind me saying, do you Bethany, when you are tired – she just looks a bit miserable sometimes. And then to find out that you didn’t actually have a bad night, you can’t really have that excuse now.
Bethany, her body, data and her mum were entangled and responding to each other through processes of intra-action. These entangled relations were important in terms of the relational agencies it produced. It was through this intra-action with her mum that Bethany's feeling body is made to matter. The body has its own affordance, for feeling and for action, but this is potential is only released when it is authenticated by a trusted other. Multiple affects circulate in these intra-actions between what the digital data from their devices or apps tell them, how their bodies feel (cf. Sumartojo et al., 2016 ). Tensions could emerge, for example, between an exercise app and the data generated about a physical activity and how it actually felt to be moving and running; perhaps of experiencing fatigue, stigma, danger as one goes on a run. These more-than-digital dimensions of digital health use were central in our participants' accounts.

Section: 7. Discussion and conclusions

Through our more-than-human understanding of health, wellbeing and physical activity, we have explored how agential capacities are opened or closed down through entanglements with digital health technologies. We have considered how the affordances of digital technologies come together with those of human bodies to generate forces and capacities.
We have moved away from a focus on individual competencies or literacies, and instead towards considering the role of the emergent fleshly body as it intra-acts with digital technologies. We have shown how affective intensities produced through material-semiotic assemblages differentially manifest for young people.
Our participants reported a range of interactions with humans and nonhuman agents in their digital health practices. We have shown how, for our participants, learning about health is not stable, or fixed, but a series of agential capacities which are produced relationally through ongoing engagements with other bodies and things as well as digital health technologies. These assemblages establish what young people's bodies can ‘do’ and what they can ‘become’ ( Lupton, 2018 , 2020 ). Our analysis reveals how young people's capacity to enact or perform health in ways expected of them is deeply entangled with the relations, affectivity and complexities of their lives. The opportunities to enact and achieve the expected health behaviours (e.g., physical activity levels) or normative bodily appearance circulating in these digital biopedagogical assemblages is disrupted by complex sociomaterial relations and affective forces.
Our young participants described promissory narratives of health apps, social media images and wearable devices which invite young people to engage as dutiful biocitizens ( Lupton, 2016 ). The expectation, indeed, promise, is that through this engagement as ‘rational’ agents they will develop the digital knowledge or literacy to make sense of their data, their activities and make any necessary changes to their health or exercise practices. These intra-actions are therefore entangled with forms of pedagogic address which focus on ‘instructional’ and ‘regulative’ practices underpinned by ‘expert’ knowledge (see Rich et al., 2020 ). Their intra-actions online are mediated by these discursive repertoires of biopedagogies. As young people engage with a diverse range of digital health technologies, these intra-actions may come to open up or close down capacities. Digital biopedagogies shape how young people come to know learn what it means to be ‘fit’ or ‘healthy’, but more than this, they generate forces which influence what they become and what they desire to become.
Knowledge about health, offered up through these apps and other digital platforms, is not simply acquired or transferred. For example, digital data cannot be read and rationally acquired, but instead the data, bodies, discourses and affects are co-implicated in producing capacities for health, wellbeing and physical fitness. As we found, concepts of the normative attractive body (‘the summer body’ or ‘ripped body’) are imbricated within our participants' adoption or rejection of digital technologies designed for promoting health or physical fitness. For our participants, there were limits to how well digital technologies could generate better self-knowledge or certainty about their bodies: in some cases, they undermined or contradicted the knowledge that people had developed from the sensory and experiential affordances of their bodies.
Many young people are critical of the media images and health material they encounter in these digital environments, for example of the perfected, sculpted bodies circulating in social media, many of which have been ‘edited’ or ‘filtered’. However, this critical awareness does not translate easily into affective capacities to disentangle from the desire of wanting their own bodies to look this way. Affective forces worked to normalise discourses and practices of self-care and empowerment. Frissons of powerful affects emerge in their intra-actions with this digital imagery, wherein some people whose bodies meet the expectations of fitness ideals are more likely to experience reassurance and positive affect. Some participants described their bodies in reaffirming ways through digital biopedagogical assemblages while others described feelings of disaffection, frustration and stigma. Those who felt these reaffirming intra-actions were more likely to describe these digital technologies as ‘motivating’ or ‘helpful’.
The social media images and those that circulate in the health and fitness apps typically used by the participants are designed to activate flows of desire. But they also evoke and generate fear, in relation to what their bodies can or cannot do, and how they might be compared to others. Yet, despite experiencing these distressing affects, alarmingly, many young people revealed how difficult it is to simply ‘opt out’ of these immersive (see also Hardey and Atkinson, 2018 ): contrary to neoliberal discourse, this is not simply a ‘viable option’. Young people reported feeling overwhelmed and saturated by imagery of ‘perfect bodies’ to the point that constantly critiquing, separating oneself from every image felt very difficult (see also Ni Shuilleabhain, Rich and Fullagar, 2021 ). In learning about the types of bodies that are celebrated in digital media or self-tracking apps, the affective dimensions of intra-acting with visual images , other's bodies and digital social networks manifests as affective intensities implicated in processes of becoming: ‘why can't I just get up and go to the gym?’ (Bethany); ‘Am I actually fat?’ (Harrison); ‘Why am I not ripped yet?’ (Leif). The materialised effects shape what young people learn about attractive, normative ‘fit’ bodies and generate intense feelings of desire to achieve such bodies (see also Ni Shuilleabhain, Rich and Fullagar, 2021 ).
Focusing on these intra-actions therefore moves us away from simply analysing the visual representation of the body in these images and instead attunes us towards the affective forces and capacities that might be generated when young people post or engage with these media. These engagements with personal digital data and significant others, are made intelligible through the body. Such intra-actions also encouraged our young participants to recognise the limitations of their knowledge as well as the information generated by digital health and fitness technologies: there was no ‘objective knowledge or truth’ about the status of their health or bodies. These intra-actions about digital health take place in different places or spaces, not just online. Similar to the young Australians in Lupton's (2020) study, our participants described the relational connections on which they relied when they turned to the significant adults in their lives, often those who held an intimate knowledge of their health, to help them to make sense of health data. These digital practices involve the presence of others, who in these key moments can act as ‘pedagogues’ to shape and authenticate what is being learned through these digital practices. Such practices reconfigure relationships with their own bodies and in these examples, self-tracking assemblage is intricately entangled with the knowledge of ‘others’.
The insights above have also revealed the extent to which significant others – friends and family members, offline as well as online – play a crucial role in the pedagogical intra-actions through which the sensing, feeling body is made to matter. Focusing on this material-semiotic approach also provides a means for examining how young people's own agency in their learning-knowing about healthy lifestyles can disrupt normalised articulations of the neoliberal empowered subject. The categorisations of their health are not simply or easily transferred as ‘truths’ about their body; such learning about health and their bodies is not straightforwardly acquired or transferred through their engagement with digital data. Instead, their engagement with digital practices are entangled with relations of affect and multisensory engagements, which suggest far more complex forms of biopedagogical assemblages.

Section: Credit author statement

Emma Rich: Conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, writing - original draft, writing – review and editing, project administration, funding acquisition. Deborah Lupton: Conceptualization, writing original draft, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing.

Section: Funding

Financial support for the conduct of this research was provided by the following research grant: Wellcome Trust : The Digital Health Generation: The impact of ‘healthy lifestyle’ technologies on young people's learning, identities and health practices. Reference 203254/Z/16/Z .

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors would like to express their thanks to the anonymous reviewers for their comments on earlier versions of this paper.
