Title: Where do measures of health, social care and wellbeing fit within a wider measurement framework? Implications for the measurement of quality of life and the identification of bolt-ons


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

There is variability across studies in the dimensionality i.e., set of latent variables to which health, social care and wellbeing measures relate. This variability may impact the development of new measures and the identification of bolt-on dimensions. We examine the dimensionality of commonly used measures and identify a set of potential bolt-ons for the EQ-5D-5L.

Abstract_Section: Methods

We used the OMS dataset, an online survey of health, social care and wellbeing measures in patients and members of the general public. A content analysis provided a theoretical framework for results interpretation. Quantitative analyses were based on a pool of 79 items from 7 measures. Confirmatory factor analysis was used to assess health, social care and wellbeing measures dimensionality and their contribution to quality of life . The relationship between EQ-5D-5L items and the identified factors was used for bolt-ons identification.

Abstract_Section: Results

The dimensionality comprised of seven factors, namely physical functioning, psychological symptoms, energy/sleep, physical pain, social functioning, needs and satisfaction. Health measures covered five of the seven factors identified, wellbeing measures three and the social care measure one. A list of candidate bolt-on items for the EQ-5D-5L was presented e.g., cognition, energy, dignity.

Abstract_Section: Conclusions

This study provides evidence on the dimensionality of health, social care and wellbeing measures and presents a list of candidate bolt-ons for the EQ-5D-5L.

Section: 1. Introduction

Health related quality of life (HRQoL) measures are commonly used to report patient health status ( Brazier et al., 1999 ). Generic measures of HRQoL describe health in terms of a combination of dimensions, items and levels i.e., descriptive system ( Finch et al., 2022 ), and can be used for clinical studies, effectiveness studies, routine monitoring of health and cost-effectiveness studies. Among the most commonly employed HRQoL measures there are the EQ-5D, the Short-Form 6 Dimensions (SF-6D) ( Brazier et al., 2002 ; Herdman et al., 2011 ) and the more recently developed Patient-reported Outcomes Measurement System (PROMIS-29) ( Cella et al., 2019 ; Lamu et al., 2017 ).
While valid, responsive and reliable in different disease areas, patient populations ( Brazier et al., 2004 ; Buchholz et al., 2018 ; Feng et al., 2021b ; Finch et al., 2018 ; Flynn et al., 2015 ; Gandhi et al., 2019 ; Janssen et al., 2008 ; Janssen et al., 2008 ; Janssen et al., 2013 , 2018 ; Pan et al., 2022 ; Pickard et al., 2007 , 2019 ) and cultural contexts ( Qian et al., 2019 ), concerns have been raised regarding the sensitivity of these instruments’ descriptive systems to the impacts of specific healthcare interventions. For example, evidence suggests that the EQ-5D does not cover senses related impacts ( Ader, 2007 ; Brazier et al., 2002 ; Finch et al., 2018 ) and the EQ-5D and SF-6D only partially cover aspects related to mental health ( Ader, 2007 ; Brazier, 2010 ; Brazier et al., 2002 , 2014 ; Finch et al., 2018 ; Saarni et al., 2010 ). HRQoL measures may have also limited coverage of outcomes beyond health ( Bowling, 2014 ; Forder, 2007 ), which may be important to capture consequences of health conditions ( Mitchell et al., 2015 ). For example, providing hearing aids can affect the senses and functioning of individuals, but may also impact broader Quality of Life (QoL) aspects such as relationships ( Chen and Olsen, 2020 ; Peasgood et al., 2021 ).
Measurement of broader aspects of QoL may be relevant not only for healthcare but also for social care users. Non-healthcare services, examples of which are home care facilities, supporting technologies and day activities, are often needed to improve aspects of life considered important by those receiving care ( Rand et al., 2021 ). However, the goals of healthcare services and social care services differ, as the former aims at restoring status while the latter at maintaining long-term independence ( Netten, 2011 ). It is therefore not surprising that specific Social Care related Quality of life (SCrQoL) measures, such as the as the Adult Social Care Outcomes Toolkit (ASCOT), have been developed for use in this population ( Malley et al., 2012 ; Netten et al., 2012 ).
The use of measures of HRQoL and SCrQoL allows the assessment of interventions within a single sector but may prevent assessments of interventions between sectors. A practical solution could be using different instruments simultaneously. However, this option has its own limits, including possible double counting of dimensions of HRQoL and SCrQoL that may be relevant across populations ( Brazier et al., 2022 ).
Other instruments, commonly referred as wellbeing (WB) measures, may be appropriate for use across sectors ( Brazier et al., 2022 ; Coast et al., 2008 ). Notable examples of WB instruments include the subjective wellbeing (WB) ( Kahneman and Sugden, 2005 ) Office for National Statistics measure (ONS-4), the mental WB Warwick-Edinburgh Mental Wellbeing Scale (WEMWEBS) measure, and the capability WB ( Sen, 1993 ) ICEpop CAPability (ICECAP) measure. These instruments, based on developers reports, focus on different WB aspects, such as happiness and satisfaction, positive feelings, and abilities and capabilities. Yet, use of WB measures alone is generally discouraged, as arguments in favour of a large role of health aspects in assessing interventions across sectors are prevalent among decision makers ( Peasgood et al., 2019 ).
One solution to these problems consists in developing alternative measures specifically targeted to the aspects of interest, for a specific health condition, or covering aspects important across sectors. For example, condition-specific measures such as the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire (EORTC) and its EORTC Quality of Life Utility Measure-Core 10 dimensions (QLU-C10D) ( Finch et al., 2021b ; King et al., 2016 ; Norman et al., 2016 ) are employed in cancer populations to overcome the limitations of generic health measures. Similarly, recent work has resulted in the development of the EQ-HWB, a measure of benefit that could be used across health and social care ( Augustovski et al., 2022 ; Brazier et al., 2022 ; Carlton et al., 2022 ; Mukuria et al., 2022 ; Peasgood et al., 2021 , 2022 ).
Another solution is to adapt a reference HRQoL, extending its descriptive system with bolt-ons relevant for a specific disease, or to capture elements of broader QoL relevant across populations. Originally, bolt-on research focused on adding items related to senses, cognition and physical functioning to the EQ-5D-3L ( Gandhi et al., 2020 ; Krabbe et al., 1999 ; Yang et al., 2015 ). More recently, a large EQ-5D-5L research program ( Finch, 2017 ; Finch et al., 2017 , 2019 ) led to the identification of 37 bolt-ons, and to the development of 8 of them (using multiple items and wordings), for vision, hearing , speech, cognition/memory, energy, sleep, relationships and satisfaction ( Finch et al., 2021a ). There are also other bolt-ons for the EQ-5D-5L, including self-confidence and skin irritation ( Swinburn et al., 2013 ), alternative cognition items ( Geraerds et al., 2019 ), and bolt-ons for respiratory problems ( Hoogendoorn et al., 2019 ). A detailed overview of bolt-on studies is available in ( Geraerds et al., 2021 ). Lately, bolt-on research has also started for measures other than the EQ-5D i.e., DLQI ( Rencz et al., 2021 ). Other approaches have also been used in the past, such as merging profiles of different measures (an example is available in ( Mulhern et al., 2019 )).
Different methods could be used for bolt-on identification, including qualitative interviews with patients, focus groups with decision makers, psychometric studies and mixed methods research. One of such methods is using latent class analysis. Latent class analysis, such as exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), can be performed on existing data, providing a cost-effective approach that overcomes some of the limitations of other techniques e.g., scattered evidence in psychometric systematic reviews of the literature ( Finch, 2017 ; Finch et al., 2017 ) and allows to identify generic bolt-ons that are relevant across disease areas and conditions. More details on criteria for assessing and developing bolt-ons are available in ( Mulhern et al., 2022 ) and on methods to identify and select bolt-ons in ( Finch, 2017 )). Latent class analysis has also been used to inform measure development. It allows to examine the relationship between measures, including HRQoL, SCrQoL and WB instruments ( Engel et al., 2017 ; Feng et al., 2019 , 2021a ; Mulhern et al., 2017 ; Mulhern, 2020 ) and how they fit within the broader measurement framework of QoL.
This study has two objectives. It will first assess the dimensionality to which commonly used HRQoL, SCrQoL and WB measures relate in a recently available dataset that includes a large pool items. The measurement model will present a list of factors/constructs identified from the item pool and will allow the assessment of each instrument's contribution to the broader QoL framework. It will then use the measurement model and factors to identify generic bolt-ons, including candidate options related to HRQoL (and specifically mental health), SCrQoL and WB. For the latter, it will use the EQ-5D-5L as a case study , as most bolt-on research has been conducted for this instrument. Yet, the approach and methods employed could be generalized to other instruments as well.

Section: 2. Methods

This study used the Outcome Measurement Study ( Mulhern, 2020 ) dataset. The OMS dataset was collected in 2017 in Australia. A detailed explanation of data collection procedures is available in ( Mulhern, 2020 ). Broadly, participants with four common health conditions (back pain, diabetes, arthritis and mild anxiety or depression) and the general population were recruited online in Australia via a panel research company. The survey included demographic questions, three HRQOL measures, the EQ-5D-5L, the SF-36 (from which SF-6Dv1 is derived) and the PROMIS-29, 3 WB measures, the ICECAP, WEMWEBS and ONS-4, and a SCrQoL measure , the ASCOT. This results in a pool of 79 items related to different QoL constructs.
Appendix Table 1 presents the instruments, their dimensions, questions, number of levels, labels wording and recall period.
The EQ-5D-5L consists of 5 dimensions i.e., mobility, selfcare, usual activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression, described in terms of five severity levels. It uses the recall period “today” for all the dimensions.
The SF-36 consists of 8 dimensions i.e., physical functioning, role limitations (physical problems), role limitations (emotional problems), social functioning, pain, mental health , vitality, general health perception. The SF-6D was derived by reducing the number of dimensions from 8 to 6 by excluding the general health dimension and combining the role limitation dimensions. The instrument includes 11 items, 8 from the SF-12 and 3 from the SF-36. It is described in terms of four to six levels. The labels wording varies between items, and the recall period is embedded within the items.
The PROMIS-29 consists of 29 items related to 8 health dimensions i.e., physical functioning, anxiety, depression, fatigue, sleep disturbance, ability to participate in social roles and activities, pain interference and pain intensity. Each item has five levels, with the labels wording varying between items. Some items report the recall period of the last 7 days, while others do not use a recall period.
The ONS-4 consists of 4 items i.e., life satisfaction , feeling worthwhile, happiness and anxiety, each of which has 10 levels, varying from “not at all” to “completely”. Two items i.e., happiness and anxiety have recall period” yesterday” embedded in the questions, while the other two have no recall period.
The WEMWEBS covers 14 items i.e., optimism, usefulness, feeling relaxed, feeling interested in others, energy, dealing with problems, cognition, feeling good, feeling close to others, feeling confident, able to make up mind, feeling loved, feeling interested in new things, feeling cheerful. It has five levels varying from “none of the times” to “all of the times”. It has a recall period of two weeks.
The ASCOT has 9 items i.e., control over life, personal cleanness, food and drinks, safety, social participation, occupation, home cleanness and comfort and 2 dignity questions, each of which is described in terms of four levels. The labels wording varies between items, and no recall period is specified.
The ICECAP has 5 items i.e., feeling settled and secure, love, friendship and support, being independent, achievement and progress, enjoyment and pleasure, each of which is described in terms of 4 levels. Response labels vary between dimensions, and no recall period is used.
All items are ordinal categorical with the number of categories varying between 4 and 11. In the EQ-5D, SF-6D, ASCOT and ICECAP the highest score of 1 represent the best possible status, while in the WEMWEBS the worst. PROMIS-29 and ONS-4 have positively and negatively worded items, with the highest possible status being the highest score in some items and the lowest in others. Items for all measures were re-coded so that higher scores are associated with better QoL.
Data quality was ensured by screening out respondents who completed the survey in less than 10 min, and by randomising the order of the instruments to avoid order or fatigue effects.
A content analysis of the instrument item pool included in the OMS dataset was performed. In line with previous research, the Wilson and Cleary model was used as a conceptual starting point ( Wilson and Cleary, 1995 ). The Wilson and Cleary model was chosen due to its simplicity yet appropriateness to describe the relationship between items of HRQoL, SCrQoL and WB items.
The Wilson and Cleary model combines biological and psychological aspects of health, defining five main areas including physiological factors , symptom status, functioning status, general health, and overall QoL. The broader category of QoL allowed flexibility for the categorization of some constructs related to SCrQol and WB. To reflect items related to constructs commonly measured by HRQOL measures, we further classified the symptoms category into psychological and physical symptoms and the functioning category into physical functioning, psychological functioning, social functioning and role functioning ( Finch et al., 2017 ). Fig. 1 presents a graphical representation of the adapted Wilson and Cleary model. Download: Download high-res image (209KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . Adapted Wilson and Cleary conceptual model.
The content analysis first assigned items to an underlying theme e.g., an item on quality of sleep was coded with the sleep theme. Subsequently, themes were sorted and grouped according to their content e.g., fatigue and sleep themes were sorted together. Finally, themes were assigned to one of the Wilson and Cleary model categories.
The content analysis of the item pool was used to inform the CFA model. Such assessment included examination of items wordings and how these could influence the item to item, and item to factor relationships. An example of this is provided in the CFA section.
A set of exploratory factor analyses (EFAs) were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics for Mac, Version 22.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp®, to inform model specification. EFAs summarize the variance included in an item pool by assuming that all items load on all factors. The current study tested three common methods for factor extraction, namely parallel analysis i.e., a Montecarlo simulation (n = 1000) of eigenvalues generated from randomly drawn datasets ( Horn, 1965 ), eigenvalues larger than one ( Hayton et al., 2004 ) and visual examination of scree plots ( Cattell, 1966 ). The interpretation of EFA results was aided by assessing alternative rotation strategies, including orthogonal and oblique rotations. Factors’ loadings were interpreted using alternative cut-offs, among which the commonly used 0.3 or higher, and cut-offs robust in presence of non-normality of distributions i.e., 0.45 or higher ( Comrey and Lee, 1992 ). None of the EFA model was taken independently as the point of departure for the CFA model, as the constructs covered in this study had already been investigated in previous research i.e., ( Finch et al., 2017 ; Mulhern, 2020 ). Decisions on the initial model were based on triangulation of the content analysis, EFA results and previous research. This procedure is common in presence of sufficient theoretical and empirical evidence for factor analytic procedures (e.g., Hurley et al., 1997 ).
CFA differs from EFA in that it is a hypothesis testing technique. Items are not allowed to freely load on all identified factors, but latent traits are used as predictors of the items. This permits to test how well the identified measurement model mimics the pattern of covariance present in the data, and how far this is from the observed covariance pattern, using fit indexes. Therefore, possible misfits due to wrong specifications of the number of factors, the items to factors relationships, and the structural factor covariance specifications are testable.
Analysis were conducted using Mplus version 7© ( Muthén and Muthén, n.d.). A measurement model was specified as follows: y i s = μ i + λ i F s + ε i s Where y is the observed response for item i and subject s , μ is the item specific intercept i.e., expected outcome when F = 0, λ is the factor loading of item i.e., expected change in y for a one unit change in F, F is the factor score for subject s and ε is the error variance for item i and subject s.
To allow the identification of the measurement model, factors were scaled with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. The identified congeneric model assumes local independence of items loading on the same factor, which means that items related to the same factor are associated exclusively in terms of their correlation, given by λ 11 * 1 * λ 21, where 11 represent item 1 loading on factor 1 , 21 item 2 loading on factor 1 and 1 is the standard deviation of the factor. Similarly, the identified congeneric model assumes local independence between items related to different factors, which means that items related to different factors are associated exclusively in terms of their relationship with the factor and the covariance between factors.
Model refinements followed a process of specification, refinement, and re-specification, including tests of uni-dimensionality for alternative factor structures e.g., sleep and energy as independent factors were compared with sleep/energy loading on the same factor, investigations of normalized model residuals i.e., difference between the predicted and observed covariance matrix and relaxations of the congeneric model assumptions i.e., local dependencies. Refinements made use of the content analysis examining items wordings e.g., ASCOT social participation was assigned to the needs factor instead of the social functioning factor as content analysis revealed its wording tapped on emotions and feelings and not ability to function socially, and the theoretical consistency of items with the latent constructs, alongside the quantitative indicators.
Tests of uni-dimensionality were performed by specifying a bi-factor model i.e., methods factors and a global factor model, imposing no strain between factor solutions i.e., no correlation between methods-factors and global factor, and comparing the common variance accounted by the three. If at least 50% of the common variance was explained by the global factor this was taken as a demonstration of sufficient uni-dimensionality ( Reise et al., 2013 ). For example, a model was specified with positively worded mental health items loading on a method factor and negatively worded mental health items on a separate method factor, and all items loading on a global factor. The amount of common variance for methods and global factor were compared.
Two practical goodness-of-fit-indexes were used to assess model appropriateness, the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) and the comparative fit index (CFI). An RMSEA of 0.08 or less was considered acceptable and of 0.05 or less good, and a CFI of 0.90 or more was considered acceptable and of 0.95 or more good ( Browne and Cudeck, 1992 ; Fabrigar et al., 1999 ; Hu and Bentler, 1999 ).
The identified dimensionality was used to investigate the instruments and items contribution to QoL, assessing the number and type of factors identified and the items relationship to the factors.
The measurement model was then used for bolt-on identification following two approaches. The first approach aimed at identifying QoL constructs and bolt-ons that are not included or explicitly covered in the core EQ-5D descriptive system ( Finch et al., 2017 ). Based on this approach, items were considered as candidate bolt-ons if their main loading was on factors not covered by any of the EQ-5D dimensions.
The second approach aimed at identifying QoL constructs and bolt-ons that may expand the content of the instrument for a specific aspect that is already partially covered by the instrument. To illustrate this, we used mental health as an example, considering bolt-ons those items loading on the same factor as the EQ-5D anxiety/depression item.

Section: 3. Results

The final sample comprised of 794 responders . Table 1 presents the socio-demographic characteristics of the sample. As it can be seen, there was a generally balanced distribution of genders and a good representativeness across age groups. Most participants stated they were affected by a health condition (n = 500; 63.1%). Appendix Table 2 presents the instruments level sum score range, the reported minimum, maximum and median score, and the percentage of floor and ceiling effects. Table 1 . Background socio-demographic characteristics of the sample. Question Level/Specification Sample frequency Sample Percentage Gender Male 380 47.9% Female 414 52.1% Age 18 < 2 0.2% 18–29 128 16.1% 30–44 202 25.4% 45–59 222 28.0% 60–74 220 27.7% 75 > 20 2.6% Children 0 405 51.0% 1 110 13.9% 2 168 21.1% 3 or more 111 14.0% Condition No 292 36.9% Yes 500 63.1% Table 2 . Content analysis of the OMS dataset. Symptom status Physical symptoms Measure Psychological symptoms Measure Pain EQ-5D pain/discomfort SF-6D pain PROMIS pain interference activities* PROMIS pain interference work* PROMIS pain interference social act* PROMIS pain interference house chores* PROMIS average pain HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL Anxiety/depression EQ-5D anxiety/depression ONS-4 anxiety yesterday PROMIS anxiety PROMIS overwhelmed worry PROMIS felt uneasy PROMIS felt worthless PROMIS felt helpless PROMIS felt depressed PROMIS felt hopeless Coping WEMWEBS dealing prob Isolation and exclusion ASCOT social part Other items SF-6D mental health WEMWEBS feel useful WEMWEBS feel relaxed WEMWEBS feel interest WEMWEBS interest new thing HRQOL WB HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL WB SCrQoL HRQOL WB WB WB WB Functioning status Physical functioning Measure Psychological functioning Measure Independent living/self care EQ-5D self-care ICECAP being independent ASCOT cleanness and comfort ASCOT food and drink ASCOT accommodation ICECAP able to do things Ambulation EQ-5D mobility SF-6D physical functioning PROMIS up down stairs PROMIS walk15min Usual activities EQ-5D usual activities ASCOT occupation PROMIS able do chores PROMIS able to shop PROMIS troubles doing things PROMIS troubles family activity* PROMIS trouble usual work* PROMIS trouble activity friend* PROMIS pain interference activity* PROMIS pain interference work* PROMIS pain interference social act* PROMIS pain interference house chores* HRQOL HRQOL WB SCrQoL SCrQoL SCrQoL WB HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL SCrQoL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL Energy SF-6D vitality* WEMWEBS energy PROMIS tiredness PROMIS difficult start as tired PROMIS felt run down PROMIS felt fatigue PROMIS sleep quality PROMIS sleep freshness PROMIS problem sleep Other items WEMWEBS think clearly WEMWEBS make mind up HRQOL WB HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL WB WB Social functioning Measure Role functioning Measure Relationships ICECAP love, friend, support WEMWEBS feel close people WEMWEBS feel loved Other items SF-6D social functioning PROMIS trouble fam activity* PROMIS trouble usual work* PROMIS trouble activity friend* PROMIS pain interference work* PROMIS pain interference social act* PROMIS pain interference house chores* WB WB WB HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL HRQOL SF-6D role* HRQOL General health perception Measure Overall quality of life (happiness, satisfaction and wellbeing) Measure PWI satisfaction health WB Contentment with life ONS-4 satisfied with life Purposefulness ONS-4 life worthwhile Happiness ONS-4 happiness yesterday WEMWEBS feel cheerful ICECAP enjoyment Safety ICECAP feeling secure ASCOT personal safety PROMIS feel fearful Control over life ASCOT control over life Getting help ASCOT dignity WB WB WB WB WB WB SCrQoL HRQOL SCrQoL SCrQoL Characteristic of the individual Measure WEMWEBS optimism WEMWEBS feel good yourself WEMWEBS feel confident WB WB WB Note: * Items that are theoretically related to more than one category of the Wilson and Cleary model. Legend: HRQOL: Health related quality of life; WB: Wellbeing; SCrQoL: Social care-related quality of life; EQ-5D; SF-6D: Six-dimensional health state short form; PROMIS: Patient-reported Outcomes Measurement System; ICECAP: ICEpop CAPability measure; ONS-4: Office for National Statistics; WEMWEBS: The Warwick-Edibburgh Mental Wellbeing Scale; ASCOT: The Adult Social Care Outcomes Toolkit.
Table 2 provides the results of the content analysis. Among the included items, 22 related to physical functioning, with 2 of them coming from WB measures, 3 from SCrQoL measures and the remaining ones from HRQOL measures. Sixteen items from HRQOL and WB measures were assigned to the psychological symptoms’ category. One category covered a single theme (pain in physical symptoms), while other categories (e.g., QoL) covered multiple themes (safety, happiness etc.). Some items related to multiple categories and themes. For example, the PROMIS-29 pain interference with usual activities item was assigned to both physical symptoms and functioning, and the PROMIS-29 trouble with family activities item to both physical and social functioning.
Testing of alternative dimensional structure identification strategies suggested a variable number of factors ranging between 6 and 11. Parallel analysis indicated the smallest number of factors i.e., six-factor solution, while the eigenvalues larger than 1 rule the greatest i.e., eleven-factor solution. Among the different possible rotation strategies, Promax oblique rotation was selected to aid the results interpretation as numerous studies show that HRQoL, WB and SCrQoL factors are correlated (e.g. 52–54).
An initial measurement model was specified. As in some EFA psychological symptoms loaded on two different factors, positively worded psychological symptoms, and negatively worded psychological symptoms, we tested this factor uni-dimensionality. The global factor accounted for 63.35% of the common variance, compared to the 26.50% of positively worded psychological symptoms and 10.15% of the negatively worded psychological symptoms, demonstrating uni-dimensionality. A test of uni-dimensionality was performed also for the energy/sleep factor. Once again, the global factor accounted for 55.54% of the common variance, while energy for the 18.92% and sleep for the 25.54%. Sleep and energy were therefore considered a single factor.
Further model re-specification followed an iterative process which included assessing the items to factors theoretical consistency and statistical performance, the size of residual correlations and local dependencies. The process resulted in specifying two factors not identified in EFAs, satisfaction and pain. One item i.e., ASCOT dignity was poorly associated with all factors identified in the measurement model, as demonstrated by the large local dependencies and residual correlations with numerous other variables. This item was removed from the factor analysis. Alternative items-factor associations were tested and assigned to a factor e.g., PROMIS sleep quality was assigned to the factor sleep while some EFA suggested an association with psychological symptoms. The final measurement model exhibited general good fit, with an RMSEA of 0.059 (90% CI 0.058–0.061) and a CFI of 0.95.
The dimensionality of the final confirmatory measurement model and its factor loadings is presented in Table 3 . The identified measurement model comprised of 7 factors, namely physical functioning, psychological symptoms, energy/sleep, physical pain, social functioning, needs and satisfaction. The factor including the largest number of items i.e., 23 was psychological symptoms. The factor to which the smallest number of items loaded on i.e., 4 was satisfaction. Factor loadings were generally large. For example, the highest loading for physical functioning was for the EQ-5D usual activities item (0.951; SE 0.013), while the lowest loading for the same factor was for the SF-6D physical functioning item (0.712; SE 0.020). Similarly, the highest loading for the factor energy/sleep was for the PROMIS fatigue item (0.950; SE 0.005) while the lowest loading was for PROMIS sleep quality (0.733; SE 0.020). Table 3 . Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) standardized factor loadings and standard errors. Empty Cell Physical functioning Psychological symptoms Energy/Sleep Social functioning Pain Needs Satisfaction Loading SE Loading SE Loading SE Loading SE Loading SE Loading SE Loading SE EQ5D Usual activities 0.951 0.013 PROMIS Run errands 0.907 0.016 PROMIS Walk 15 min 0.901 0.012 PROMIS Do chores 0.877 0.015 EQ5D Mobility 0.868 0.014 PROMIS up down the stairs 0.841 0.015 EQ5D Self Care 0.826 0.027 SF 6D Physical Functioning 0.712 0.020 PROMIS Felt hopeless 0.935 0.006 PROMIS Felt helpless 0.915 0.009 PROMIS Felt worthless 0.909 0.008 PROMIS Felt depressed 0.906 0.008 WEMWEBS Feeling good 0.889 0.009 WEMWEBS Feeling confident 0.857 0.010 PROMIS Felt uneasy 0.856 0.011 PROMIS Anxiety 0.853 0.011 PROMIS Overwhelmed worries 0.842 0.011 Anxiety/Depression 0.820 0.014 SF 6D Mental health 0.820 0.013 PROMIS Felt fearful 0.795 0.014 WEMWEBS Feeling relaxed 0.793 0.014 WEMWEBS Feeling useful 0.783 0.015 WEMWEBS Dealing with problems 0.765 0.017 WEMWEBS Feeling close 0.758 0.015 WEMWEBS Thinking clearly 0.753 0.016 WEMWEBS Able to make up mind 0.699 0.019 WEMWEBS Interested in things 0.697 0.019 WEMWEBS Optimism 0.658 0.021 WEMWEBS Interested in others 0.655 0.021 ONS-4 Anxiety 0.557 0.021 WEMWEBS feeling cheerful 0.419 0.031 0.483 0.031 PROMIS Fatigue 0.950 0.005 PROMIS Run down 0.940 0.007 PROMIS fatigue on average 0.927 0.006 PROMIS difficulty start things fatigue 0.866 0.010 PROMIS Problems with sleep 0.761 0.020 WEMWEBS Energy 0.759 0.020 PROMIS Sleep refreshing 0.750 0.020 PROMIS difficulty falling a sleep 0.743 0.023 SF 6D Vitality 0.738 0.021 PROMIS Sleep quality 0.733 0.020 PROMIS Trouble Activities friends 0.933 0.008 PROMIS Trouble Family Activities 0.918 0.009 PROMIS Trouble Working 0.906 0.009 PROMIS Trouble doing things 0.904 0.010 SF 6D Social 0.776 0.018 SF 6D Role 0.621 0.026 PROMIS Pain interfere work 0.974 0.004 PROMIS Pain interfere house chores 0.963 0.004 PROMIS Pain interfere activities 0.956 0.005 PROMIS Pain interfere social 0.941 0.008 SF 6D Pain 0.856 0.011 EQ 5D Pain Discomfort 0.814 0.015 PROMIS Average Pain 0.805 0.014 ICECAP Independence 0.858 0.014 ICECAP Enjoyment and pleasure 0.853 0.014 ICECAP Love, Friendship, Support 0.844 0.015 ASCOT Social Participation 0.782 0.017 WEMWEBS Feeling Loved 0.779 0.019 ICECAP Security 0.775 0.018 ASCOT Occupation 0.770 0.019 ASCOT Cleanness and comfort 0.755 0.023 ICECAP Achievement 0.721 0.022 ASCOT Control Over life 0.716 0.023 ASCOT Personal Safety 0.685 0.027 ASCOT Food and Drink 0.617 0.031 ASCOT Accommodation 0.599 0.030 ONS-4 Happiness 0.931 0.008 ONS-4 Life Satisfaction 0.928 0.008 ONS-4 Worthwhile 0.909 0.009 Legend: EQ-5D; SF-6D: Six-dimensional health state short form; PROMIS: Patient-reported Outcomes Measurement System; ICECAP: ICEpop CAPability measure; ONS-4: Office for National Statistics; WEMWEBS: The Warwick-Ediburgh Mental Wellbeing Scale; ASCOT: The Adult Social Care Outcomes Toolkit.
Some instruments related to multiple aspects of QoL e.g., WEMWEBS while others measured one i.e., ICECAP. Broadly, HRQOL measures covered 5 of the 7 factors identified, namely physical functioning, psychological symptoms, social functioning, energy/sleep and pain. WB measures covered 3 factors, psychological symptoms, needs and satisfaction. And the SCrQoL measure included in the dataset covered 1 factor i.e., needs.
Table 4 presents a list of QoL constructs and candidate bolt-ons for the EQ-5D. Candidate bolt-on dimensions were based on the two chosen identification approaches described in the methods i.e., missing from the EQ-5D-5L descriptive system, and partially covered in the EQ-5D-5L descriptive system. Table 4 . List of bolt-ons identified using the BRG dataset. Selection criteria Bolt-on Domain/factor Broader construct Missing from EQ-5D descriptive system WEMWEBS energy Energy/Sleep HRQoL SF-6D Vitality PROMIS run down PROMIS fatigue PROMIS sleep quality PROMIS sleep refreshing PROMIS problem with my sleep PROMIS difficulty felling a sleep SF Role limitation Social functioning HRQoL/SCrQol/WB SF Social functioning PROMIS trouble usual work PROMIS family activities PROMIS activities friends ASCOT cleanness Needs SCrQoL/WB ASCOT food and drink ASCOT clean and comfort home ASCOT safety ICECAP settled and secure ICECAP love, friendship and support ICECAP independence ICECAP achievement and progress ICECAP enjoyment and pleasure ASCOT control life ASCOT social participation ASCOT occupation ASCOT dignity ONS-4 Life Satisfaction Satisfaction SWB ONS-4 Worthwhile ONS-4 Happiness WEMWEBS cheerful Partially covered by the EQ-5D descriptive system WEMWEBS feeling interested in others Psychological symptoms/Mental health HRQoL WEMWEBS feeling close to others WEMWEBS optimism WEMWEBS interested in things WEMWEBS feeling loved WEMWEBS dealing with problems WEMWEBS feeling useful WEMWEBS feeling good WEMWEBS feeling confident WEMWEBS feeling cheerful WEMWEBS feeling relaxed SF mental PROMIS felt fearful PROMIS anxiety PROMIS overwhelmed worries PROMIS felt uneasy PROMIS felt worthless PROMIS felt helpless PROMIS depressed PROMIS hopeless ONS-4 anxiety WEMWEBS think clearly WEMWEBS able to make up mind Legend: EQ-5D; SF-6D: Six-dimensional health state short form; PROMIS: Patient-reported Outcomes Measurement System; ICECAP: ICEpop CAPability measure; ONS-4: Office for National Statistics; WEMWEBS: The Warwick-Ediburgh Mental Wellbeing Scale; ASCOT: The Adult Social Care Outcomes Toolkit. HRQoL: Health related quality of life; WB: wellbeing; SWB: subjective wellbeing; SCRQoL: Social care related quality of life.
The CFA showed overlap in the constructs measured by SCrQoL and capability WB, when measured using the ASCOT and ICECAP. Moreover, the CFA highlighted how the measurement of mental health aspects overlaps between HRQoL instruments (the EQ-5D, SF-6D and PROMIS-29) and mental WB instruments (the WEMWEBS), as all items assess the same latent trait i.e., psychological symptoms. By contrast, differences were observed in the traits measured by subjective WB and capability WB, and in the traits measured by SCrQoL and HRQoL measures.
The results demonstrate that the EQ-5D taps on three QoL constructs defined as physical functioning, psychological symptoms and pain. Other HRQoL measures include constructs related to social functioning and energy/sleep. These aspects may be relevant to capture the impact of healthcare interventions. As the EQ-5D does not cover aspects related to SCrQoL, it may have limited applicability for the assessment of social care interventions, and it may benefit from SCrQoL bolt-ons.

Section: 4. Discussion

This study assessed the dimensionality of health, social care and WB measures in a dataset that included items related to HRQoL, SCrQoL and WB. It identified 7 factors to which the selected measures relate, namely physical functioning, psychological symptoms, energy/sleep, pain, social functioning, needs and satisfaction. As different measures are developed for different purposes, the approach helps assessing possible overlaps, and consequently how measurement can be improved. The results demonstrate that there may be overlaps in the construct measured by HRQoL and mental WB measures and by SCRQoL and capability WB measures. They also provide evidence of the multidimensionality of HRQoL constructs measured by HRQoL measures and of the distinction between subjective and capability WB.
Five of the seven identified factors, with some variation in the items due to the instruments included, were found in both this study and the study of Finch et al. which used the Multi-Instrument Comparison (MIC) dataset ( Finch et al., 2017 ). This demonstrates that datasets with a large pool of items allow to reproduce the dimensional structure of previous studies with reasonable precision. The limited availability of such types of datasets highlights the importance of supporting new data collection efforts that include comparisons of multiple measures of HRQoL, SCrQoL and WB. Recent efforts have been initiated in this direction ( EuroQol, 2021 ).
Of the 4 instruments included in both the OMS and the MIC datasets, two (EQ-5D-5L and ONS) retained identical factor structures to those identified by Finch et al. (2017) . More specifically, the EQ-5D items mobility, self-care and usual activities loaded on the factor physical functioning, the item pain/discomfort on the factor pain, and the item anxiety/depression on the factor psychological symptoms in both analyses. Similarly, three of the 4 ONS-4 items loaded on the satisfaction factor, with the last one i.e., ONS-4 anxiety loading on psychological symptoms. One instrument (SF-6D) retained an almost identical factor structure, with four of the six items i.e., pain, physical functioning, mental functioning, and vitality loading on the same factors pain, physical functioning, psychological symptoms, and energy/sleep in both datasets. The two remaining items, social functioning, and role functioning, loaded on social functioning in the current study. This factor was not identified in the MIC dataset and the two SF-6D items reported problems i.e., cross-loadings between physical functioning and psychological symptoms and residual correlations. The items of the ICECAP were well represented by the needs factor in the current analysis, while they were poorly represented in the MIC. This finding is reasonable given that the OMS dataset includes a larger pool of items related to SCrQoL and WB and a smaller pool of HRQoL items compared to the MIC, which improved the ICECAP representation within the measurement model.
The study also confirmed the appropriateness of a set of previously identified candidate items for the EQ-5D-5L e.g., ICECAP love, friendship, and support and SF-6D vitality which may be develop into bolt-ons, and further pointed at a list of candidate options for items related to constructs missing from the EQ-5D-5L descriptive system. Differently from previous studies, the current analysis also suggested a list of candidate bolt-ons that may improve the EQ-5D-5L coverage in a specific chosen area already partially covered by the instrument descriptive system i.e., mental health. For bolt-on research, such approach is in line with recent debates that encourage the expansion of the EQ-5D with a particular focus to psycho-social aspects of health ( Chen and Olsen, 2020 ; Olsen and Misajon, 2020 ). More generally, such use of factor analysis can help the identification of items related to different health dimensions but same health constructs, alongside the identification of items related to different constructs. This can be useful for the development of a range of instruments. For example, it may allow for the future development of broader QoL instruments, adaptive measures, or for identifying items that could be ‘bolted-off’ from the existing instruments.
Based on the content analysis and following the observation of residual correlations for some of the positively worded psychological symptom items, this study tested the presence of a positively worded psychological symptoms method-factor, but did not find evidence in its support. The influence of wording on HRQoL and WB instrument has been previously observed in other studies, with varying reports ( Anatchkova et al., 2011 ; Ryff and Keyes, 1995 ; Tomas and Oliver, 1999 ; Watt et al., 2014 ). While the results of this study suggest that both positively and negatively worded psychological symptoms items relate to the same latent factor, other considerations may still support the inclusion of both items wordings when choosing bolt-ons or developing new measures. For example, previous researchers have argued for the inclusion of both positively and negatively worded items to better capture the breadth of a patient's journey ( Keetharuth et al., 2019 ).
Of note, the ASCOT dignity question did not fit the dimensional structure identified in the current study and was for this reason removed. A potential explanation for this may be that not all responders in the study were social care users, which may have affected the relationship of this item with other SCrQoL ones. Similarly, this study identified that the ASCOT social participation question related to the needs factor and not the social functioning factor. An explanation for this could be found in the wording of this item, which emphasize feelings over the ability of doing things.
In this study, the ONS-4 happiness question related to the satisfaction factor and not psychological symptoms factor, and that the WEMWEBS questions loaded all on the same factor, despite possible differences identified in the content analysis. Different measures have different labels, recall periods, and response options. These aspects may have impacted the item to factor associations found in this study.
This study has various limitations. First, only 4 of the 7 instruments available in the current analysis were present also in the MIC dataset, and some of the MIC dataset instruments e.g., SWLS were not included in the OMS dataset used in this study. As the identified dimensionality depends on the measures included, it is not possible to perfectly compare the measurement models obtained from the two datasets. However, the similarity in the identified dimensionality suggests reasonable overlap between the constructs identified. It also informs how different constructs of QoL align with each other within a broader measurement framework. Second, this study suggests an appropriate method for bolt-on identification exclusively if the dimensions of interest are already covered by at least one of the instruments that were included in the dataset used. There might be other dimensions that were not included in any of the existing instruments that might still represent equivalently relevant candidate bolt-ons. Third, this study collected data in Australia. As there might be response heterogeneity between different cultural groups, the identified measurement model generalizability might be limited, albeit the MIC had an Australian arm as well. Fourth, this study used a dataset that includes healthy people and those with a variety of health conditions. Our study took the standpoint of identifying generic bolt-ons relevant across conditions and populations, for which the chosen sample is appropriate. However, differential item functioning i.e., differences in the degree to which an item relates to the underlying trait between groups, has been observed in HRQoL and WB measures for a number of characteristics, including age, gender, and condition groups (e.g., Bjorner, 2019 ; Penton et al., 2022 ). If the objective is identifying bolt-ons for a specific health condition, assessment including a sample of patients with the condition is recommended. Fifth, the dimensionality identified with factor analysis depends on the measures included. For this reason, results may differ between datasets which include different measures.
Despite these limitations, this study provides important evidence as it demonstrates how instruments of health and WB fit within a broader measurement framework of QoL. It validates a previously identified list of bolt-ons for the EQ-5D-5L ( Finch et al., 2017 ) and it identifies additional bolt-ons for SCrQoL and WB constructs. It shows how CFA can be used to identify additional items and dimensions related to the same health constructs already covered by a measure of interest. The latter could support the development of adaptive instruments of health or could help to expand the content of a measure with bolt-ons for a specific health aspect.

Section: Credit authors statement

Aureliano Paolo Finch: Funding acquisition, conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, project administration and writing. Brendan Mulhern: Funding acquisition, conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, project administration and writing.

Section: Declaration of competing interest

AF and BM are members of the EuroQol Group; AF works for the EuroQol Office.

Section: Acknowledgments

Funding from EuroQol Research Foundation / Grant: 99-2020RA .
