Title: Living the journey to school: Conceptual asymmetry between parents and planners on the journey to school


Abstract: Abstract

Research about school travel and the built environment developed using positivist and post-positivist onto-epistemologies often relies heavily on travel surveys, activity diaries, GPS tracking, and the “objective” measurement of built environment features using geographical information systems and planimetric data. That work takes up and applies specialized disciplinary and practice-based language (e.g., planning and engineering) and concepts that are used to describe, measure, and design the built environment. In this paper, we explore differences in how parents think about the built environment and school transport and the ways in which the built environment and transport are conceptualized in planning. The presence of conceptual asymmetry between a scholar's “model” and the “lived experience” of parents and children may have implications for the efficacy of school travel-related policy and planning. We use Bronfenbrenner's social ecological model to guide a thematic analysis of 37 interviews with parents about school travel behaviour in Toronto, Canada. We found that parents' experiences of the built environment are complex and varied, with different features influencing individual parents differently, and at varying levels of the ecological model. For example, mixed-use development, often held up as a necessary condition for tackling automobility, was cited as a desirable aesthetic background for driving. We were able to locate examples of conceptual asymmetry but also agreement – particularly about traffic around schools. For example, parents expressed divergent views on the impact of heavy traffic on walking, with some describing traffic and traffic safety as barriers to walking, while others indicated that resistance to driving in traffic motivated a choice to walk. Our study serves as a call to planners and geographers to better attend to the lay, everyday onto-epistemologies that shape parents' lived experiences of travel to school.

Section: 1. Introduction

At first glance, school travel appears as an unremarkable everyday activity, but it is tied to complex, multi-scalar social, economic, political, and environmental processes that invoke material and non-material concerns connected to multiple public policy issues ( Buliung et al., 2015 ). Contemporary school trips largely take place within auto-dominant environments that are thought to limit travel choices and inhibit “healthy” behaviours. Research and policy concerns range from reducing traffic congestion exacerbated by children being driven to school ( Rhoulac, 2005 ), to encouraging greater use of active modes like walking and cycling, to helping children meet recommended physical activity guidelines. Active school travel may also guard against the development of childhood obesity and overweight ( Larsen et al., 2009 ), although an independent impact of active school transport on overweight/obesity is less clear ( Faulkner et al., 2009 ). Still, early adoption of walking and cycling for daily activities could translate into an active healthy lifestyle in adulthood ( Black et al., 2001 ; Fusco et al., 2012 ; Frank et al., 2003 ). More focused on acute or chronic injury, child pedestrian safety is also a concern ( Rothman et al., 2014 ; Rothman et al., 2015a , b ), with scholars pointing to a school travel paradox whereby adults driving children in response to a perceived traffic safety risk are simultaneously contributing to the problem ( Collins and Kearns, 2002 ).
While policy motivation(s) underlying school travel research are widely accepted ( Buliung et al., 2011 ; McMillan, 2007 ; National Centre for Safe Routes to School, 2008 ; Ontario Professional Planners Institute, 2009 ; Ontario Active School Travel, 2020 ; US Department of Health and Human Services, 2020 ), the evidence is largely developed under pre-existing and a priori ontological assumptions of the potential impact of professionally designed and constructed built environment features on household travel decisions. Achieving transport and health goals related to school travel likely requires concurrence between scholarly and public policy understandings and the perceptions and motivations of parents and children for making travel decisions. However, much of the research into school transport has been developed from quantitative epistemological traditions within disciplines including planning, geography, and transport engineering that use realist notions of the environment with a focus on objectivity, neutrality, and universality ( Denzin and Lincoln, 2011 ). Parental decision making may be informed by constructivism and interpretivism, characterized by diversity, multiplicity, flux, change, and situatedness in a local environment. This paper explores the potential for incompatibility between these epistemological viewpoints, particularly, in terms of how features of the built environment that prominently figure in scholarly school travel research are conceptualized. We ask whether or not there is some conceptual asymmetry between parental perceptions of the built environment and how the built environment is understood, measured, and modelled in scholarly work about school travel. If parents do not adopt a scholarly/technocratic/professional lens, then how exactly do they conceptualize the way(s) in which interactions between the built environment and household resources (e.g., time, automobiles) produce their school travel outcomes?

Section: 2. Literature review

In qualitative research about school travel, some scholars look to a conceptual framework known as the sociology of childhood in theorizing children as active agents in school mode choice decisions using the language of structure and agency ( Fusco et al., 2012 ). In that work, children are shown to have quite nuanced understandings and experiences of mobilities and environments; i.e., a puddle on a sidewalk presenting an opportunity for play, while their parents tend to focus on the matter of convenience and ease in adopting school travel practices ( Fusco et al., 2012 ; Faulkner et al., 2010 ). Moreover, parents appear to remain, or at least think, that they are “in control” of school mode choice, especially for younger children ( Faulkner et al., 2010 ; Panter et al., 2008 ). Measurement focused studies of parental perceptions of built environments around the home or school typically use fixed-scale ratings of pre-determined categories such as safety or traffic levels ( Kerr et al., 2006 ), but few studies explore how families view, consider, and incorporate environmental features when asked about their school travel decision making . Ahlport et al. (2008) offers an early exception, using focus groups with parents and children to understand barriers and facilitators to active school travel, but environmental features such as travel distance or sidewalk provision are just one of a number of themes explored. More recently, and in a somewhat confirmatory sense (e.g., Faulkner et al., 2010 ; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008 ), Ahern and colleagues' qualitative study of parents in West Yorkshire, U.K. pointed toward distance, employment and the presence of multi-stop journeys as key factors behind driving to school. Some scholars have also aimed to better understand how “fear” is produced among parents and children in relation to school travel ( Buliung et al., 2015 ; Murray, 2009 ). Murray's (2009) work points toward a gendered and generational transfer of fear from parents to children in relation to strangers. In contrast, Buliung and colleagues illustrate socio-spatial qualities of fear; that is, what people fear (e.g., strangers, bullies, traffic, crime, even dogs) appears to depend upon parental positionality and neighbourhood location. One key aspect of all of this work is that parents and children appear to experience school travel differently, and do not always agree on what they think they need to be afraid of or concerned about.
Positivist-quantitative research on school travel tends to emphasize the modeling relationships between mode choice and variables capturing characteristics of individuals, transport supply, and the built environment. Extensive reviews have been conducted on that literature ( Rothman et al., 2018 ; Wong et al., 2011 ). We do not reproduce that work here; rather, we focus on some of that literature's key findings regarding built environment features that we might anticipate parents talk about, in some way, when asked about school travel. The design and function of the built environment is typically measured through variables including distance to school, population or housing density, land use mix, street connectivity, infrastructure provision, and, more indirectly, through measures capturing vehicle traffic flows.
Distance to school is the most reported built environment correlate of school travel mode ( Wong et al., 2011 ). Shorter distances are associated with increased likelihood of using active travel modes ( Giles-Corti et al., 2009 ; Mitra et al., 2010b ; Napier et al., 2011 ; Panter et al., 2008 ; Yarlagadda and Srinivasan, 2008 ), with longer distances negatively related (Ahlport et al., 2009; Faulkner et al., 2010 ; McDonald, 2008 ; Panter et al., 2008 ; Voorhees et al., 2010 ). Even if the environment is otherwise supportive, children are unlikely to walk if the distance is perceived to be too great or if a child cannot self-ambulate ( Panter et al., 2008 ; Ross and Buliung., 2018 ). Distance is also affected by other environmental characteristics such as low street connectivity that creates long, circuitous travel routes ( Bungum et al., 2009 ), low density housing which spreads students over a large area ( McDonald, 2008 ), and large school catchment boundaries ( Giles-Corti et al., 2011 ).
Variables of street connectivity, land use mix, and population and housing density are prominent in the general travel literature and positively related to active travel ( Ewing and Cervero, 2010 ), but findings are more mixed in the school travel literature ( Rothman et al., 2018 ). Generally, higher densities and more mixed land uses are thought to create a greater density of destinations that may be reached using active modes ( Giles-Corti et al., 2009 ; Kerr et al., 2006 ; Larsen et al., 2009 ; Saelens et al., 2003 ). Studies using variables of street connectivity test the hypothesis that better-connected street patterns are correlated with increased active travel, but findings are not consistent ( Bungum et al., 2009 ; Giles-Corti et al., 2009 ; Mota et al., 2007 ; Panter et al., 2008 ; Voorhees et al., 2010 ).
The presence of adequate pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure such as sidewalks and/or bike paths are also commonly correlated with active school commuting ( Ahlport et al., 2008 ; Ahlport et al., 2009; Kerr et al., 2006 ; Pont et al., 2009 ). The absence of bicycle storage facilities and the presence of objects blocking children from drivers' views also impede children's active commuting ( Ahlport et al., 2008 ). School site concerns have also included the impact of parking and drop-off areas, and the efficacy of crossing guards as a pedestrian safety intervention (Ahlport et al., 2009; Rothman et al., 2016 ). Relatedly, while not itself a built environment feature, traffic and traffic patterns are shaped by development densities, land uses patterns , and the planning of street networks that guide drivers toward high-volume, high speed arterial roadways ( Hebbert, 2005 ; Hess, 2008 ). Street patterns with frequent intersections may present more opportunities for child-vehicle collisions, but also more route options that may be more direct ( Giles-Corti et al., 2009 ; Mitra and Buliung, 2012 ; Sirard and Slater, 2008 ). Quantitative studies indicate parent concerns about street crossing, traffic exposure, and traffic safety in terms of school travel decisions (Ahlport et al., 2009; Kerr et al., 2006 ; Panter et al., 2008 ; Pooley et al., 2005 ; Rothman et al., 2014 , Rothman et al., 2015a , b ; Rothman et al., 2016 ; Rothman et al., 2017a , b ; Ridgewell et al., 2009 ; Panter et al., 2008 ). As concern rises, the likelihood of active travel declines ( Panter et al., 2010 ). Paradoxically, taking a motorized trip due to traffic safety concerns decreases the safety of everyone else ( Collins and Kearns, 2002 ). Of course, the streets one gets to cross on a daily basis, around their home and school, are partially a function of where one is able to live; the extent to which where one lives is a “choice” per se , rather than determined by external factors, remains largely absent from the school travel literature.

Section: 3. Research design and methods

This research stems from a three-year program of work approved by the appropriate institutional research ethics boards in 2008. Earlier qualitative studies examined household school travel decision making from a behavioural perspective ( Faulkner et al., 2010 ) and children's experiences of school travel ( Fusco et al., 2012 ). Here, these data are re-examined, using a secondary data analysis approach to explore parental conceptualizations of the built environment in school travel processes, especially possible conceptual asymmetries between parents' understandings and conceptual framings of much positivist planning research and evidence.
To help explore interactions of social characteristics and built environments, study sites focused on schools were stratified by socio-economic status and neighbourhood design (see Table 1 ). Two schools were selected from the highest median household income quartile for the City of Toronto, and two were selected from the lowest income quartile. Within each income group, one school was selected to be located in an older, more central neighbourhood with grid-like street patterns, and the other in a post-World War II suburban area with loop and cul-de-sac type streets. The final sample included one high-income centrally located school, one high-income suburban school, one low-income centrally located school, and one low-income suburban school. Table 1 . Summary of school characteristics. Empty Cell School B School D School R School T Neighbourhood type Grid-patterned streets Grid-patterned streets Suburban-style, looping streets Suburban-style, looping streets Socioeconomic status High Low High Low Note: Sampled school sites organized by neighbourhood socio-economic status and neighbourhood type described using street layout.
Research participants included 20 parents (five from each school) of children who most often travelled to school by driving or using transit, and 20 parents of children who typically travel using an active mode such as walking or cycling (five from the high SES schools, four from the grid-based, low SES school, and three from non-grid, low SES school) (see Table 2 ). Three parents of children who typically use an active mode declined or were unable to be interviewed due to scheduling challenges. Children ranged from eight to eleven years old (average age of 9.8 years), an age range when many children in the North American urban context begin to develop skills to travel without an adult ( Metrolinx, 2010 ; National Center for Safe Routes to School, 2008 ). We did not explicitly work to capture the school travel experiences of students with disabilities , although this has been a focus of subsequent research ( Ross and Buliung, 2018 ). Table 2 . Summary of participants’ characteristics. School School B School D School R School T Usual school travel mode Active Non-active Active Non-active Active Non-active Active Non-active Total number interviewed 5 5 4 5 5 5 3 5 Average age of participants' children 10.2 10.4 9.5 9.6 9.6 10.0 9.3 9.2 Note: Participants described according to usual travel mode (active or non-active) and age of their child(ren).
Participants were interviewed about mode choice decisions and how they experience school travel by their selected mode. Two research assistants completed interviews lasting between 25 min and 1 h with the children and families at the child's host school, or, in some cases, at their homes or by telephone. Interviews were audiotaped and transcribed verbatim. Photovoice methods supplementing interviews are reported elsewhere ( Fusco et al., 2012 ). We use pseudonyms and school codes to protect identities. The first letter of the pseudonyms (B, D, R, and T) represents the school attended, and the last three signify whether or not the child primarily used an active (AST) or non-active (NON) mode. Numbers (1–10) differentiate parents from the same school, with the letter P indicating the participant is a parent. For example, DP1AST is a parent whose child attends school D and usually uses an active school travel mode.
As our literature review indicates, school travel, and children's transport more broadly, has piqued the interest of scholars across a diverse disciplinary landscape. Unsurprisingly, then, scholars from various disciplines have made use of theory and conceptual frameworks that have become de rigeur within their particular knowledge domain ( Mitra, 2013 ). The authors of this paper collectively represent academic planning scholarship, planning practice, kinesiology and health, sociology of childhood and disability studies, and transport geography/planning and disability studies. Our standpoint is one that lies at the nexus of our interdisciplinarity – we do not subscribe, in this piece, to one particular disciplinary orthodoxy, which we feel enables us to examine our question by drawing on knowledge from our individual disciplinary silos, meshed together in a manner that enables interdisciplinary thinking, discussion, critique, and writing. To help organize our thinking, however, we took the decision to work with a social ecological model (SEM) approach because we knew that this approach would be widely accessible to scholars and other readers of this article who have an interest in childhood school travel and health, and public health more broadly. We also appreciated the way in which the SEM approach enables a scaling up of our thinking from the individual to the environment, while simultaneously considering what is happening within and across levels ( Bronfenbrenner, 1979 ; Sallis et al., 2008 ; Mitra, 2013 ). Moreover, an SEM approach is one way to think through the complexity of travel behaviour as it enables us to think about the myriad ways individual behaviours are shaped by multiple levels of influence, including policy levels, neighbourhood levels, cultural levels, family systems, and individual factors. Our SEM schema includes intrapersonal, interpersonal, institutional or organizational, community or environmental, and governmental policy levels of influence ( McLeroy et al., 1988 ; Ahlport et al., 2008 ).
We adopted the thematic analytic (TA) methodological tradition outlined by Braun and Clarke (2006) . TA, compatible with both post-positivist and social constructivist epistemologies, entails searching for patterns across interview data. To do so, our first step in analysis was to develop codes describing recurring perspectives and concepts to describe short sections of the parent interviews. Transcripts were then coded, and codes were grouped into themes, understood to be broader units of analysis indicating repeating patterns ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ) within parents’ understandings and decision-making processes relating to the built environment. Themes were refined and relationships between themes extrapolated.
Our identification of themes involved reflecting on the dominance of certain metrics and variables in positivist/post-positivist modeling of school travel processes, and the presence of related discussions of similar themes in the parent interview data. This approach enables our thinking about, for example, how a parent might conceptualize and use technical planning concepts like “mixed land use” or “density” that are commonly cited in the literature but are not directly present in interviews; thus, themes developed with respect to these concepts explored conceptual asymmetry or agreement between technical concepts and parental understandings and concerns. Themes were also developed for distance and for travel infrastructure provision, topics that were widespread in both the literature and the interviews. Traffic and street connectivity were closely connected in the interviews and codes related to these concepts were grouped together under a single traffic theme. Broad thematic categories include: distance, traffic and street connectivity, land use mix and density, and infrastructure. Within each theme, codes were analysed across the five levels of analysis of the social ecological model, highlighting the complexity of participants’ school travel decision-making processes, and moving understandings of the built environment beyond being conceptualized as only entering the model at the community level. We employed trustworthiness measures that were compatible with our underlying onto-epistemologies, such as maintaining an audit trail, recording notes, and engaging in team consensus building meetings ( Smith and McGannon, 2008 ).

Section: 4. Findings

Whether or not parents need to escort their child to school framed how they discussed the themes influencing their school travel decisions. Parents may decide to escort children because of perceived safety risks or because they believe that their child is too young or immature to travel independently ( Faulkner et al., 2010 ). The desire/need to escort, driven largely by safety concerns, interacts with parents’ perceptions of built environment features and recurs throughout our reporting of thematically organized findings.
Distance to school was a dominant theme mentioned by every parent, regardless of neighbourhood form or socioeconomic status. Parents indicated that short travel distances facilitated active school transportation, or, conversely, that they drove because they perceived the distance to be too far for an active mode. For many, distance was described as an insurmountable barrier to walking to school: “We're just unfortunate that we don't really have a choice because it's too far” (BP10NON).
How participants conceptualized and talked about distance, though, varied greatly. At an intrapersonal level, home and neighbourhood location preferences were linked to distance to school, and thus transportation decisions. Parents across all neighbourhood types reported that the possibility of walking affected their choice of housing location. Others indicated that distance had little impact. As one parent stated: “we choose where we wanted to live and then obviously we choose the school that was in the area, but the distance to it wasn't an issue because we had to drive him anyway” (RP10NON).
From an inter-personal and family systems perspective, parents discussed the need to coordinate family transportation to multiple locations, including having one of their other children registered at different, sometimes distant schools and daycare facilities. One parent noted: “the reason why I drive them is because I have to drive my other son to school. He goes to [another school] …. way beyond here” (TP9NON). Similarly, another stated: “If there was time I'd walk, but there isn't. I get her to school, the others have to be at school 10 min later and then I have to be at work” (RP7NON).
Some parents noted institutional-level catchment policies and community-level daycare availability influenced their school travel mode decisions. One stated: “When we put him in childcare here, we chose to go to this school, even though we didn't know it at the time …. So if you're in a childcare you automatically qualify for a catchment area …” (DP9NON).
Spatio-temporal connections and work/school institutional constraints (i.e., start and end times) between parent and child activities influenced travel decisions as well: “We're not a huge distance away, but we need about 25 min to walk if we were walking from home. Based on the time that I have to be at work and the time that she has 7:45 a.m. practice, it's just too complicated to get organized in the morning that early, so we drive.” (BP6NON).
Given the complexities of organizing travel across household members and multiple destinations, even having a parent working from home , presumably limiting one important constraint, was not clearly tied to active travel for the school trip. For instance, some parents working from home still drove for this purpose. Some parents in both urban and suburban schools also drove to pick up their children from school to travel to after-school activities they perceived to be far away.
A few participants also raised issues about policy and distance, including catchment and programming policies. For example, active travellers in a high SES suburban neighbourhood acknowledged that the school board did not have any middle schools within walking distance of their homes: “When he goes to grade seven I don't think there's a school he can actually walk to. He will have to take public transit or be driven; there isn't one near here,” (RP4AST).
Other parents disparaged the school board for assigning their child to one school when another was closer to their home. For instance, one participant (TP10NON) was not allowed to transfer to the school “right next to” her home because of strict catchment policies, while the other (RP9NON) was assigned to a specialized program necessitating “a 45-min drive”.
Our writing about traffic focuses on how parents related to and experienced several aspects of vehicular movements (e.g., volume, circulation, speed, safety), and traffic safety interventions in their neighbourhood and around the school site. Traffic safety was a dominant theme, with the exception of some parents from low SES neighbourhoods. Traffic appeared to be more on the minds of parents using non-active modes, especially those living in higher SES neighbourhoods. This may be evidence of the school travel paradox, with one driving parent stating: “There is a lot of traffic going on and a lot of people are in a rush and I don't think it's safe for the kids to be walking where there's so many cars going through …” (RP8NON). Of course, RP8NON is producing one of these “cars”.
Parents living in low SES neighbourhoods did not name traffic concerns as the primary reason for their mode choice. Rather, distance to school, lack of driver's license or vehicle, and having multiple children enrolled in different schools were identified as more important considerations.
Beyond typical quantitative analyses of speed, circulation, and design, parents talked about the qualitative and aesthetic dimensions of the transport environment. For example, one parent felt that the presence of heavy traffic discouraged driving and made walking to school a more enjoyable activity, saying that: “[walking] gives a time to gear up for school rather than that rush through traffic to get there,” (RP5AST), while another felt that traffic made walking less enjoyable: “It's just that noise, you just don't want to [walk],” (RP8NON).
Parents also commented on how traffic interacted with their child's skill or maturity level. One indicated that: “we have to walk up [a four-lane avenue], which is extremely busy, and I'm just not comfortable right now letting her do that on her own,” (RP3AST). At the intrapersonal level, this child's developmental stage may mean that walking unescorted would be unsafe. However, this decision also depended on interpersonal parental assessments of the child's abilities, and the parent's availability to escort the child.
The decision to escort appeared to also be driven by observations in the community. For example, TP9NON stated that: “If you're starting to have all those kids riding their bikes at the same time going home, it'd become a safety issue because the guys that drive around these streets they think that [the street in front of the school] especially is the Indy 500.”
In contrast, the presence of many drivers facilitated active travel for another parent: “I don't want them walking on the small streets … main streets have more car and more … less things happen … There's more people. This is better. The quiet street he walk by himself, that, I'm afraid,” (DP10NON).
At the institutional level, some parents felt that the Police Service's decision to provide crossing guards increased intersection safety: “There's always been a crossing guard there, but for sure, it makes it more safe for the kids,’” (DP2AST). However, other parents' concerns were not alleviated by crossing guards: “it's a very small landing area that they have on that sidewalk, and if they have 7, 8, 10 kids, the crossing guard can't keep tabs on all that are there. And it's a poorly designed landing area in the sense that it doesn't even go around the [corner],” (RP9NON). Others questioned the crossing guards' reliability (TP2AST) or ability to make drivers obey them (RP7NON).
Similarly, parents seem to disagree on the efficacy of traffic lights as an intersection safety intervention. Some felt that certain intersections in their area were not safe because they lacked traffic lights, and that the responsibility for safety falls mainly to the driver: “This is a very dangerous intersection. I think a lot of it honestly is because they get frustrated with this stupid intersection with all the parents trying to pull out with no stop light,” (RP9NON).
Parents did not talk about street connectivity as an abstract or technical design concept as prominently featured in the research literature. Discussions about traffic safety did, however, invoke comments concerning specific elements of their travel environments that relate to street network patterns. Parents mentioned intersections, through-roads, cul-de-sacs, or pedestrian paths. In general, parents did not like drive-through traffic, with some mentioning features such as cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets that produced low connectivity because they minimize through traffic: “I like the fact that there's not all these through streets where you're feeling like you're going to get run over by cars. You can't beat a cul-de-sac when you have children,” (RP1AST). Likewise, another said: “You're not going to get people zooming around here at 100 km an hour …. You can be a bit more relaxed going through here because you know it's not a through street, and I really like that,” (RP1AST).
Parents were not questioned about land use mix or density directly, and seldom brought it up themselves, although some did describe their neighbourhoods as “residential” (BP3AST, BP10NON, TP2AST) or “not … industrial,” (RP7NON), and that residential land use made the neighbourhood “quiet,” (BP3AST), “boring” (BP10NON), or “safe” (TP2AST). Some parents who indicated they lived in an area with nearby non-residential activities expressed concerns about commercial vehicle drivers not watching for children (DP5AST), traffic generated by nearby non-residential establishments (RP9NON), or the presence of undesirable establishments such as a needle exchange site (DP9NON). These negative views are responses to community/institutional scale policies and plans producing the mixed environment households inhabit.
Most parents were more positive about access to amenities produced through mixed land use, citing recreational activities like being able to “sit in a café” (DP9NON) or run errands en route to or from school. We also found that parents went beyond the instrumental focus on distance, describing (whether driving or walking) how the mix of uses offers a qualitatively desirable travel environment: “I opt for the drive because the drive you drive past … a nice church at the top, there's a courthouse, there's a mall, there's a hospital, there's a lot of stuff to see” (TP8NON).
Some parents talked about density tangentially, focusing on how density may produce physical or social issues at the community level, or how density effects manifest in intrapersonal perceptions. One participant from a grid-based neighbourhood (DP5AST) stated that, because the houses in his area were so close together, residents were forced to put their garbage cans on the sidewalk, creating a barrier to active school transportation. A suburban parent (RP9NON) believed that high residential density and insufficient street parking on one cul-de-sac near the school contributed to traffic safety issues in the school parking lot. Another, in line with scholarly findings, believed high residential and school density encouraged a walking culture because schools were more likely to be within walking distance: “I think it's a walking community … because it's downtown and all the houses are really, really close together and there are numerous schools in the area” (DP7NON).
Another participant saw low density as a barrier to walking because it meant fewer eyes on the street: “If I was living in this area, on this side where the school is … I would think about walking into school. The houses are close by, the neighbours are close by. The neighbourhood I live in I don't think it can change because you've got two and a half acre lots and houses are very far to each other; you don't see your neighbours” (RP10NON).
Parents expressed concerns related to pedestrian infrastructure (sidewalks), a community-level support for active travel behaviour related to policy and planning. In the low-SES, grid-based neighbourhood, some participants indicated sidewalks were part of what made their community safe for walking, and participants from the high SES suburban community pointed to a lack of sidewalks as a barrier to active transport: “even if I wanted to [walk] in the summer we have no sidewalks” (RP10NON). Conversely, some active travellers commented that the absence of sidewalks did not discourage them because there is low traffic in the area: “you can be a bit more relaxed going through here because you know it's not a through street, and I really like that …. There's no sidewalks, so you can walk on your street without feeling that a car is going to peel around the corner and run you over” (RP1AST).
Parents were also able to get quite specific about design level concerns – using non-technical experiential language. They talked about sidewalk width: “there's an awful lot of SUV-size strollers, so getting around them gets difficult on the sidewalks” (BP5AST), lack of a buffer between sidewalks and roads: “when there's a snow pile here it actually feels way more safe, but at this point cars fly down here and you don't feel so safe if you're walking close to the curb” (DP2AST), and an absence of curb ramps as a barrier for parents with strollers: “when my daughters were still in strollers and wagons, the sidewalks, they weren't wheelchair accessible. There was no ramp at the corners of two of the sidewalks” (BP9NON). Institutional-level sidewalk maintenance issues were also raised: “If there's been a really heavy snowfall, obviously the City doesn't have time, they're going to do the roads first, so they're not going to have time to do everybody's sidewalk” (RP4AST).
Parents also talked about bike lanes and bicycle storage at the school site, and school level policy and governance issues. While there were some bike racks present at every school except the low SES suburban school, some parents felt this community-level infrastructure was insufficient to promote active travel: “I think there's one small bike rack so it's not that conducive [to cycling to school]. If everyone decided that they wanted to bike I don't know what they would do with all the bikes,” (BP2AST). Others did not seem to know that racks were available, “I never think about [letting my son cycle] because … I have to find somewhere to put the bike” (DP5AST).
Parents from all three of the schools with bike racks noted that the lack of storage for other active transportation equipment such as scooters, roller blades, and skateboards was a barrier to their use: “They're not allowed to bring it into the school so … then I would have to take it back home and inevitably I knock it against my shin or something like that, so I don't like to do it” (BP4AST).
Bike lanes are found only on some streets in the study areas, and they can take different forms – from simple painted lanes to cycle tracks with an elevated curb. The presence of bike lanes was noted by several parents, but only a few noted these encouraged them to let their children cycle: “I actually tend to bike with my daughter all summer … I don't find any barriers at all” (DP1AST). Others did not feel comfortable letting their children cycle to school despite the presence of infrastructure, citing intrapersonal- and interpersonal-level concerns about their child's maturity levels: “I didn't feel like he was ready to be riding in the bike lanes because it's quite dangerous” or community-level barriers: “there are parents that park in the bike lane every day” (DP2AST).
Infrastructure that supports driving, such as parking and drop off/pick up areas, was also discussed. Parking near the school was a common theme discussed by participants, including both active and non-active travellers. Common concerns included a perceived lack of parking supply and safety concerns situated about parking and drop-off areas. Parents from all schools, except school D (gridded street design, low SES), voiced safety concerns at the community level with other parents parking illegally or dropping off their children outside the designated drop-off area, even at school R (suburban, high SES) where a drop-off driveway was provided.

Section: 5. Discussion

Our research reveals some of the ways parents think about the built environment when making decisions about school travel mode, with many parents perceiving the same built environment features differently, and some finding barriers to active travel where others found supports. Further, the language and concepts used by parents to describe how they consider the built environment in these decisions was often not aligned with technical, practice-oriented concepts and expectations. While planning researchers appear to rely on realist notions of the environment, with a focus on objectivity, neutrality, and universality ( Denzin and Lincoln, 2011 ), parent decision making appears to be grounded in different experiences and built environment concepts, and how it works. Below, we reflect on moments of conceptual asymmetry and agreement between parents, positivist technical planning research and practice.
As in the school travel literature more broadly (see Panter et al., 2008 ; Rothman et al., 2018 ), distance emerged as a dominant theme in parental decision making. The way that some parents invoked household location decisions suggested connections to the self-selection literature as well, with some parents saying that they chose to live in a neighbourhood that supports walking in the first place ( Handy et al., 2005 ). Residential mobility and location “choice,” however, is not possible for many families, particularly those facing socioeconomic hardship, and is not a policy solution to poor walking environments.
Equally important, “distance” for parents was not a simple calculation between home and school locations, but involved balancing the needs of multiple household members across multiple destinations. The presence of multiple children split across different school locations, for example, sometimes created by rule-based school assignments, creates complex household travel arrangements not captured by the distance to the nearest school. Likewise, other childcare issues or having students with disabilities (although not explored here) assigned to schools outside of the local neighbourhood create complex, labour intensive school travel contexts ( Ross and Buliung, 2019 ). More generally, the perception and experience of distance is interwoven with the fabric of everyday life, processes concerning labour, work, residential location, along with school board policies that govern student bodies and transport. We found parents rarely indicated that a simple distance metric was the deciding factor in school transport decisions; rather, distance and travel times by various modes were considered in relation to intra/inter-personal concerns and community/environmental issues. The statistical analyses found in the research literature indicates that, on average, shorter distances are associated with active travel. For most parents, thinking about distance and school travel appeared as a relational experience situated in their everyday life worlds of stress, chores, childcare, paid work, and activities, and not a question of a Euclidian measurement.
Traffic, an important issue in the research literature, was also a dominant theme for parents. However, in contrast with much of the work pointing toward traffic as a barrier, parents described traffic in diverse ways, including as enhancing personal security through mobile “eyes on the street”. Parents directed most of their attention toward interventions like crossing guards, how traffic moved around schools and through neighbourhoods, and the ways in which parking influenced their decisions and the decisions of other parents. The presence of crossing guards appeared to allay some parents’ safety concerns about street crossing, but this intervention is not always sufficient to facilitate active school transportation. So, on what basis are parents drawing their conclusions regarding the efficacy of crossing guards? It would appear again that it is experiential and observational, with little consensus about efficacy, yet with some evidence that parents use their perception about guards and risk to justify their transport decisions for or against active travel. Regarding the responsibility for safety, parents looked toward drivers (even when they are also driving parents), and while the driver-vehicle assemblage has greater physical power in this context, pedestrian behaviour can also be troublesome (i.e., crossing at mid-block), but was not raised (e.g., Rothman et al., 2012 ).
Turning toward specific built environment features, parents communicated a lay understanding about how their local traffic environment works but, again, in conceptually asymmetrical ways with the academic or policy literature. More suburban street patterns with cul-de-sacs, for example, that can increase travel distances, were also understood as decreasing through traffic and thereby creating a better walking environment. Parents never used technical descriptors of land use patterns like “mixed-use,” but described how they evaluated non-residential uses in diverse terms, including how they provided access to amenities, or created unwanted traffic, or created an undesirable social environment, or contributed to an aesthetically interesting driving experience.
Likewise, while we developed a separate theme related to the supply of infrastructures that enable either active (e.g., sidewalks, bike parking) or non/less active modes (e.g., parking), parents did not discretely separate their evaluations of these features, but combined them with other concerns such as traffic. Even the impact of the absence/presence of sidewalks on the likelihood of walking was not consistently discussed, and parents also discussed sidewalks in terms of what happens on them, not simply as to whether they adhered to a binary of existing or not. In contrast, there is more convergence between parents and scholars in regard to conclusions about parking, automobility and school travel, despite potential epistemological and methodological differences. Parents commented on basic issues of parking supply impacting travel decisions, but safety concerns situated within and around parking and drop-off areas was also an important theme as reported elsewhere (Ahlport et al., 2009; Rothman et al., 2016 ).

Section: 6. Conclusions

This study suggests that parents do not use research constructs like “density”, “mixed-use”, and “street connectivity” when they think about the material world and how it may influence their travel choices. Interventions that target one aspect of the built environment conceptualized in abstract, technical terms that address only one level of decision-making may not, therefore, be successful at achieving policy goals such as increasing active school transportation. Rather, interventions must be context-specific, taking into account the lived experiences and daily concerns that are particular to the families of an individual school or community. These concerns will vary by a neighbourhood's socioeconomic status, urban form, and geographic location. It is worth noting too, that what experiences and perceptions parents report are also likely mediated through different social positionalities. In this study, for example, safety was a dominant theme from parents from all of the schools, except for one located in an older, low income, racialized neighbourhood. Why safety was less dominant in the discussions in the latter neighbourhood may have less to do with the environment better supporting active school travel and more to do with people facing other systemic barriers that are regarded as more important than school travel issues, such as poverty or other forms of oppression. Or, our research team may not have facilitated a sense of trust, and participants did not feel comfortable voicing their experiences to researchers who appear to occupy positions of privilege and power. Given the limited nature of the research, we can only be speculative, but the point here is that it is important not to simply ascribe reported perceptions directly to environmental attributes, but to contextualize them in complex social relations . Decolonizing approaches that promote voice and reduce hierarchy might be particularly advantageous to employ here ( Datta, 2018 ).
More generally, the research suggests that policy interventions must provide multiple active travel supports that target all levels of decision-making and be flexible enough to accommodate the needs of the broad range of families they are intended to serve. We hope that our study serves as a call for planners to better consider the lay onto-epistemologies that parents use to make complex decisions about travel. There is a need to better recognize conceptual asymmetries that may exist between planning practitioners who reside in the world of evidence and parents who navigate complex and messy everyday worlds with their children on their journeys to school. Better recognizing the complexities involved in parental decision making is also a call to avoid stigmatizing those who make decisions against the policy goals of promoting active school travel, even when they live in situations that the positivist research labels as supportive. The dominance of the distance argument in public discourse and in statistical modeling , for example, lacks nuance, and rarely speaks to deterministic cases, potentially giving rise to utilitarian outcomes and policy unevenly impacting those who cannot do AST not because they won't or don't want to, but because for very meaningful, and perhaps deeply personal reasons, their everyday lives don't allow for it to happen. Indeed, in many cases, policy such as school assignments dictated the distance for some families much more so than features of neighbourhood design. These types of circumstances challenge assumptions about school travel possibilities and the victim blaming moral discourse promulgated by some active travel activist communities suggesting that all students can or should actively travel to school; after all, sometimes there is no choice at all.

Section: Author note

We have no known conflict of interest to disclose.

Section: Credit statement

Ron Buliung: Conceptualization, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Project Administration. Paul Hess: Supervision, Methodology, Writing – Original Draft, Formal Analysis. Lori Flowers: Conceptualization, Writing – Original Draft, Formal Analysis. Fiona Moola: Methodology, Writing – Review & Editing, Project Administration, Data Curation. Guy Faulkner: Conceptualization, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – Review & Editing, Project Administration.

Section: Acknowledgements

The authors wish to acknowledge the Built Environment, Obesity and Health Strategic Initiative of the Heart and Stroke Foundation , Canada and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) for providing the funding for this research. We also wish to acknowledge the work of all the parents, children, teachers and school administrators involved in our research.
