Title: Multi-sited therapeutic assemblages: Virtual and real-life emplacement of youth mental health support


Abstract: Abstract

This paper draws together work on therapeutic assemblages, geographic assemblages, and therapeutic landscapes to develop the concept of “multi-sited therapeutic assemblages.” Assemblage theory has been productively used in health research since it achieved prominence in the social sciences two decades ago. One facet that, however, remains as yet under-developed in the literature on “therapeutic assemblages” (as well as their close kin, “health assemblages,” “ill-health assemblages,” “care assemblages,” etc.) is that of the multi-sited therapeutic assemblage. This paper demonstrates the significance of the multi-locality of therapeutic assemblages by mapping the mental health support activities of young New Zealanders. Grounded theory analysis of interviews with 150 New Zealand youth (which took place from 2015 to 2020) about their online and offline engagements in mental health support highlights the importance of the emplacement of therapeutic practices whilst also foregrounding their multi-sitedness. It enables opportunities to examine how therapeutically-meaningful places can be constituted both as independent sites and simultaneously re-made through their fluid, dynamic and temporal relations with one another. Through this analytic perspective, care and other elements of the therapeutic come to be understood as neither anchored to a single site nor constituted through the inter-relation of home and clinic, but defined via a shifting, dynamic, and multi-directional assemblage of multiple places, people, and resources. This has noteworthy implications for how we envisage relationships between a wide variety of therapeutic digital and real-life sites, as well as for examining scholarly and practical understandings of the emplacement of care.

Section: 1. Introduction

Assemblage theory has been productively used in health research since it achieved prominence in the social sciences approximately two decades ago (e.g. Rabinow, 2003 ; Collier and Ong, 2005 ). One facet that, however, remains as yet under-developed in the literature on “therapeutic assemblages” (as well as their close kin, “health assemblages,” “ill-health assemblages,” “care assemblages,” etc.) is the multi-sited therapeutic assemblage. In this paper, I argue for the need to explicitly consider the multi-locality of therapeutic assemblages, focusing attention on the relational constitution of (virtual and real-life) therapeutic places as part of diagnosis, treatment , and other care activities . I illustrate the utility of this approach by mapping mental health support activities of young New Zealanders across virtual and real-life therapeutic sites.

Section: 2. Theoretical frameworks

Assemblage theory became popular in the social sciences in the early to mid-2000's, largely in response to theoretical re-working of Deleuze and Guattari's concept of “agencement” (conventionally translated into English as “assemblage”), as originally outlined in A Thousand Plateaus (1980). Scholars in not only philosophy (e.g. DeLanda, 2006 ) but anthropology , geography, media studies , sociology , and STS (e.g. Collier and Ong, 2005 ; Latour, 2005 ; Marcus and Saka, 2006 ; McFarlane, 2009 ; Rabinow, 2003 ) were inspired to expand upon Deleuze and Guattari's philosophical depiction of social forms as dynamic and fluid systems composed of independent but networked elements (or actants) that mutually influence one another.
In the health social sciences, researchers were quick to apply assemblage theory to examinations of scientific and medical “global assemblages,” such as organ transplants ( Cohen, 2005 ; Scheper-Hughes, 2005 ), stem cell research ( Franklin, 2005 ), and HIV antiretrovirals ( Nguyen, 2005 ). Subsequently, scholars have turned to broader theorizing over how to best delineate the (global, local and other) characteristics of “therapeutic assemblages” (Foley, 2010), “ill-health assemblages” ( Fox, 2011 ), and “diagnostic assemblages” ( Locock et al., 2016 ). As with assemblage theory in general, a shared commonality between many of these works has been their focus on inter-relations between a broad range of material, social, and sensory elements that collectively constitute therapeutic assemblages, with an emphasis on both humans and non-humans as actants that influence the body, health practices, and health outcomes (see also Tiaynen-Qadir and Salmenniemi, 2017 ; Bell et al., 2018 ; Ireland et al., 2018 ; Lupton, 2019 ; Chen 2020 ).
At the same time as therapeutic assemblages have received increasing scholarly attention, there has been sustained focus within the health social sciences on “the healing power of place” ( Gesler and Kearns, 2002 , p. 133). Since it was introduced in 1992, Wilbert Gesler's conceptualization of “therapeutic landscapes” as sites in which “environmental, individual, and societal factors … come together [to form] the healing process” ( Gesler, 1992 , p. 735) has altered the ways that many health researchers, especially medical anthropologists and health geographers, think about the relationships between health and place ( Winchester and McGrath, 2017 ; Bell et al., 2018 ; Gesler, 2018 ). In a review article published more than a quarter century after Gesler introduced the concept, Bell et al. (2018) highlight its enduring impact. Specifically, they document not only current attentiveness to the geographic situatedness of health practices, but also note that health activities are increasingly examined in terms of both deriving positive qualities from their emplacement and creating therapeutically meaningful places ( Bell et al., 2018 ). They also examine how the extent to which any given “therapeutic landscape” is actually therapeutically beneficial, or detrimental, depends on a variety of factors; as Williams (2016 [2007], 3) asserts “what may be healing for one individual or group may not be for another.”
We now have a broad range of work examining blue spaces ( Kearns et al., 2014 ; Foley 2017 ; Foley et al., 2019 ) as well as green ones ( Lea, 2008 ), pilgrimage sites ( Foley, 2011 ), and spas ( Gesler, 2003 ), alongside more mundane, “everyday” sites such as domestic spaces ( Bell et al., 2018 ), schools and children's playgrounds ( Spray, 2020 ), public libraries ( Harris et al., 2010 ), and outdoor camps ( Dunkley, 2009 ) as (potentially) therapeutically efficacious. Technology has been noted both for mediating between the social and physical aspects of therapeutic environments ( Brittain et al., 2010 ) and for generating new ones. Digital sites, particularly those which are perceived and experienced as meaningful places ( Boellstorff, 2012 ), are included amongst the “spatially delineated areas” perceived to enhance health and wellbeing ( Winchester and McGrath, 2017 , p. ii) as, for example, shown by studies of the therapeutic landscapes of cyberpilgrimage ( Williams, 2013 ).
Although therapeutic assemblages and therapeutic landscapes continue to be examined independently of one another, several works have demonstrated the analytical benefits of combining these two approaches to examine the assemblage of therapeutic landscapes ( Foley, 2011 ; Ivanova et al., 2016 ; Karasaki et al., 2017 ; Bell et al., 2018 ). Foley, for example, defines a “therapeutic assemblage” as drawing together the “material, metaphoric and inhabited dimensions” of a (single) place ( 2011 ) p. 470), while Bell et al. (2018) use assemblage theory to emphasize the material/physical, social, spiritual, and symbolic dimensions of healing sites (see also Emmerson, 2019 ).
The mutuality between these two approaches is not surprising, given both of their attentiveness to how places are created via the bringing together of heterogeneous elements. As Dovey, drawing on DeLanda (2006) , notes, assemblage theory enables “a conception of place as a territorialized assemblage, defined by connections rather than essences …. Place is a dynamic ensemble of people and environment that is at once material and experiential, spatial and social” ( Dovey, 2009 , p. 7). This emphasis on the fluidity and indeterminacy of places is encapsulated by Deleuze and Guattari's discussions of territorialisation, or the process through which assemblages come to “‘claim’ a territory as heterogeneous parts are gathered together and hold together” ( Anderson and McFarlane, 2011 , p. 126). As Anderson and McFarlane describe, “this can only ever be a provisional process: relations may change, new elements may enter, alliances may be broken, new conjunctions may be fostered. Assemblages are constantly opening up to new lines of flight, new becomings” (2011, p. 126). This fluidity and instability mirrors that of conceptualizations of therapeutic landscapes (particularly more recent ones) as defined by temporally-dynamic constellations of attributes rather than as inherently stable, intrinsically efficacious environments.
Thus far the examples discussed have focused primarily on single-sited therapeutic assemblages constituted via the bringing together of heterogeneous elements that compose the therapeutic, or, as defined by Bell et al., “the dynamic, material, affective and socio-cultural roots and routes to experiences of health and wellbeing” (2018, p. 214). Assemblages can, however, be made up of multiple sites as, indeed, highlighted by Collier and Ong's (2005) conceptualization of “global assemblages” in order to trace how transnational practices can be examined in terms of local specificity without losing their global identities, a process that some have referred to as “glocalisation” ( Tiaynen-Qadir and Salmenniemi, 2017 , cf. Marcus, 1995 ).
My aim here is to expand scholarly attentiveness to the mutual constitution of therapeutic places beyond relationships between the global and the local, to consider more broadly how a variety of therapeutic places combine, along with other, heterogenous elements, into a multi-sited therapeutic assemblage. In doing so, I aim to combine the focus on emplacement highlighted by the literature on therapeutic landscapes with the focus on assemblages proffered by the literature on therapeutic assemblages to consider what might be analytically gained through the concept of the multi-sited therapeutic assemblage.

Section: 3. Multi-sited therapeutic assemblages

Therapeutic endeavours frequently take place across multiple sites, impacted by and impacting upon our lived experiences of these places as well as the meanings we ascribe to them. This has been well documented by scholarly examinations of the increasing inter-relationality between clinical and domestic care (with “care” denoting a range of predominantly, but not necessarily, human endeavours directed at promoting and sustaining the health and wellbeing of oneself and/or others). These examinations have outlined not only the distribution of care activities across multiple places (i.e. the home and the clinic), but also how such activities contribute to the dynamic constitution of places themselves, most notably the reconstitution of “home.” Mattingly et al. (2011) , for example, use the concept of “chronic homework,” to examine how the exporting of rehabilitation activities out of medical clinics and into domestic spaces leads to the reconfiguration of home as a newly emergent “borderland” of healthcare. In a similar vein, Langstrup (2013) examines the “place-making involved in home treatment ,” detailing how chronic care work materially, symbolically, and affectively re-makes domestic spaces. Karasaki et al. examine “the reconstruction of home as a site for post-stroke recovery,” explicating how practicing post-stroke recovery exercises in domestic spaces “changed the experiences and meanings given to the idea of home, …reconfigur[ing its] … physical, symbolic, and practical elements” ( Karasaki et al., 2017 , p. 79). In each case, the authors vividly demonstrate how the capacities and characteristics of “home” shift when home comes to be constituted in relation to the clinic.
However, as we know from the wealth of literature on patient self-management, homes are not the only sites being reconfigured in response to shifting healthcare practices. Indeed, the emergence of homes as increasingly prominent sites of care significantly impacts on medical professionals’ authority and legitimacy, reframing the activities of the clinic ( Broom, 2005 , Trnka, 2017 ). Analyses of therapeutic landscapes, moreover, indicate that in order fully understand how therapeutic activities are emplaced, we must look beyond the home and the clinic to consider a much wider and more diverse range of sites.
Drawing on the insights of these various strands of literature, I propose the concept of “multi-sited therapeutic assemblages” which enables us to highlight: 1) the multi-sited and multi-scalar character of therapeutic practices 2) the inter-relationality of therapeutic places 3) the dynamic, changing membership and significance of therapeutic places 4) the open-ended directionality between therapeutic places
The concept of multi-sited therapeutic assemblages encourages attentiveness to multiple therapeutic places in terms of how each is composed (or “assembled”) as well as how they constitute elements within larger therapeutic networks. Like other assemblages, a multi-sited therapeutic assemblage encompasses a range of scales. As Feely notes, “any assemblage will be both composed of smaller assemblages and a component of larger assemblages” ( Feely, 2020 p. 179; see also DeLanda, 2006 ). Dovey, in explaining the notion of “becoming places,” offers the illustration of how a room may be an assemblage of furniture, books, walls, and windows, while it in turn becomes a component of a street, which is a component of a neighbourhood, which is part of a city ( Dovey, 2009 , p. 24).
While the various entities or elements of an assemblage are independent ( DeLanda, 2006 ), this does not mean that they are static nor that they do not affect each other. Indeed, in different assemblages, elements' various capacities may be differentially activated. Feely explains: “Any list of an entity's capacities to affect and be affected will necessarily be ongoing as its capacities will change in different contexts (i.e. a diamond can refract light waves, it can signify wealth, it can be used as a blade and so on). Put differently any entity's capacities will change as it enters in and out of relations with other entities” ( Feely, 2020 , p. 178). There is, moreover, a long line of geographers who have used assemblage theory to examine the inter-relationality of places, noting how entities within assemblages shift in capacity due to their relationships with one another ( Anderson et al., 2012 ).
Bearing this in mind enables an examination of how therapeutic places are simultaneously constituted via assemblages (i.e. the wheelchairs, medication, and personnel who are among the elements that make up an emergency room) and linked into larger-scale therapeutic assemblages in which their meanings and capacities may change due to other elements (i.e. how the role of the ER might change when put in relation to an ambulance service).
Elements can come in and out of an assemblage. As Anderson and McFarlane note, “elements are drawn together at a particular conjuncture only to disperse or realign” ( 2011 p. 124). Rather than depicting durable relations between two or three entities (e.g. home and clinic), multi-sited assemblages assume the possibility of changing membership, without necessitating the dissolution of the therapeutic assemblage. Assemblages also enable open-ended directionality between elements; care may flow from home to clinic, or from home to playground to school.
One consequence of this approach is that the medical clinic may be de-centred or even left out as one of multiple possible sites of care. This has implications both for scholarly analyses and practitioners’ understandings of how patients might utilize one therapeutic site in relation to another. Rather than linear views of “extending” care beyond the clinic, or “transitioning” from one care site to another, directionality as well as significance are fluid and subject to change. Care therefore can be seen as constituted via the assemblage rather than through a sum of its disparate parts – the emplacement or “where of care” is within the assemblage itself.
In what follows, I illustrate these points through the case study of therapeutic practices among New Zealand youth striving to attain or maintain mental wellbeing.

Section: 4. Methodology

The analysis below is based on semi-structured interviews with 150 young people, ages 14–24, as well as interviews with 31 healthcare professionals who work with youth, including clinical psychologists (n = 7) and counsellors or other youth mental health workers (n = 5). The interviews were conducted as part of two projects. The first project, on which the author was the sole researcher, focused on young people's use of digital technologies for improving or supporting health (leaving the category of “health” to be defined by the research participants themselves, who often spoke of not only physical and mental health but also social and spiritual health). It involved semi-structured, 20–130 min interviews (average 53 min) with 138 young people as well as all of the interviews with the healthcare professionals. Interviews took place from January 2015 to December 2020 and were conducted by either the author or a graduate student research assistant. Preliminary analysis of the interview transcripts revealed that more than half of the youth interviewees reflected on issues of mental or emotional wellbeing and the desirability, or not, of using digital technologies as part of supportive strategies. This led to the development of the second project which focuses specifically on young people's use of digital technologies to support mental wellbeing. The second project, which commenced in March 2020, is being conducted by a multi-disciplinary team of two clinical psychologists, a specialist in Pacific community health , and a medical ethicist , with the author (an anthropologist) as Principal Investigator. The second project used the same interview brief, but with additional questions on mental wellbeing. Twelve young people have been interviewed using the expanded questionnaire (with interviews lasting 28–120 min, averaging at 58 min).
Ethical permission for both studies was granted by the University of Auckland Human Participants Ethic Committee (UAHPEC). Youth, primarily from Auckland but also Hamilton, Wellington, and Dunedin, were recruited via a range of methods including visits to secondary schools (where they were interviewed individually, outside of class), posters in community areas, a radio interview highlighting the study, and word of mouth/snowballing. Interviewees aged 16+ signed individual consent forms. Those aged 14–15 gave written assent, with written consent received from a parent or guardian. School principals consented to interviews conducted on school grounds.
Across the two projects, the youth interviewees represent a broad range of educational, socio-economic, and ethnic backgrounds. (For age, gender, and ethnicity details, see Table 1 , Table 2 ). They also have a variety of experiences with professional therapy; some had never seen a therapist or counsellor, others had received significant professional mental healthcare. Either way, their interviews revealed a wide range of strategies, sometimes very intricate ones, for supporting their or others’ mental wellbeing. Table 1 . Youth interviewees by age & gender. Age Male Female Non-binary Total: 14 9 6 15 15 4 3 7 16 7 8 1 16 17 10 9 19 18 3 10 13 19 5 13 18 20 4 6 10 21 2 10 12 22 6 7 13 23 3 8 11 24 4 12 16 Total: 57 92 1 150 Table 2 . Youth interviewees by gender & ethnicity. ETHNICITY Males Females Non-binary Total a NZ European/Pākehā 32 51 1 84 Asian (including South Asian) 10 25 35 Pacific 9 10 19 European or Euro-American (not Pākehā or Australian) 5 8 1 14 Māori 7 4 11 African 0 2 2 Middle Eastern 2 0 2 Latin American 0 1 1 Australian - European descent 1 0 1 a Totals do not add up to total number of interviewees as 17 youth identified multiple ethnicities.
Health professionals from across the country were interviewed using a separate interview questionnaire, focused on eliciting their professional experiences working with youth. Ethical permission for these interviews was similarly granted by UAHPEC.
Youth interviews were voice or video recorded and transcribed. Health professionals’ interviews were either voice recorded or recorded via written notes. All the interviews underwent thematic analysis using a grounded theory approach, allowing themes to emerge from the data rather than being pre-determined ( Urquhart 2013 ).
Preliminary thematic analysis revealed discrepancies between how clinical psychologists and youth envisaged both the locations of therapeutic endeavours (i.e. where therapeutic activity takes place) and the relations between therapeutic sites, specifically in terms of how digital sites and resources (such as websites, chat forums, apps, and other online tools) relate to clinical therapy. While clinical psychologists and mental health websites tended to uphold professional therapy as the most legitimate and effective form of care, youths’ accounts reflect much broader therapeutic assemblages in which clinical encounters (when included) were not necessarily central.

Section: 5. Transitioning in and out of the clinic?

Several of the clinical psychologists interviewed envisioned digital and real-life sites as composing unidirectional pathways. Digital sites and resources were prevalently seen as either an extension of clinic-based therapy or as a means of drawing young people into the clinic. A third, less desirable possibility that was sometimes invoked was that of digital sites substituting for clinic-based therapy where none was available.
A particularly vivid example of this line of thinking occurred during an interview in October 2019 with a clinical psychologist who specializes in youth mental health and had launched an anti-anxiety app for young people. Based outside of New Zealand's second largest city of Wellington, she started off by recounting the difficulties therapists in her region face in providing sufficient care to the wide array of young people in need of psychological services. Some therapists had waiting lists of three months or longer, while others weren't taking any new clients, she told me; there simply weren't enough professionals to go around.
With this in mind, five years prior she had designed an anti-anxiety app, hired a team of programmers to develop it, and launched it on the market with, as she put it, a good deal of “naivety” about what might happen next. At the time of our interview, the app was doing a brisk trade, selling for $5 USD on the Apple App Store. The psychologist had been amazed at the app's uptake in terms of both the number of downloads and its geographic spread. People around the world were purchasing a product she had originally intended for her clients alone. Her initial motivation, she explained, had been to provide her clients with a means of accessing on their own time the same techniques that she taught them in the clinic – breathing exercises , distraction games, and coping statements – providing them with tools to “cope in the moment … when rational thinking goes out the window.”
As the psychologist described it, the app was a tool envisaged to alter not only therapeutic temporalities but also therapeutic places. Its purpose was to transform almost any place (home, at school or work, on the bus) into a potential site of care, adding an element of therapeutics into a range of possible assemblages of place. (Whether or not this addition would be actually therapeutically beneficial is, however, dependent on more than the app itself. As discussed below, digital resources’ effects depend in part on their inter-relationalities with other elements in the assemblage: e.g., at home, this might include parents, siblings, a private bedroom, visiting friends; at school, teachers, classmates, a national school curriculum).
I asked the psychologist what she thought about the possibility of a young person, who had never seen a counsellor, self-diagnosing as having anxiety and starting to treat themselves via her app. What if they might be grappling not with anxiety, but with very different kinds of issues? She responded that she didn't view this as a problem since, in her view, anything that gets young people to think about their mental wellbeing and seek out the care of therapist is a good thing.
The assumed leap from youth engaged in self-diagnosis and self-care to youth seeking out professional care was striking. It fit, moreover, with how the psychologist envisioned care as primarily constituted via professional therapeutic encounters between two parties (counsellor and client) who are co-present in a clinical space. For even though she had invented a therapeutic app, it became increasingly clear that, for her, the privileged locus of care remained a real-life site in which the therapist and client sat face-to-face. Other facets of care were deemed extensions of what took place here. As she put it, “80% of therapy occurs through one-on-one counselling between the therapist and client, and 15% comes from the tools and techniques taught to the client,” which are now also conveyed through the app. (It was notably unclear what happened to the remaining 5%). Describing apps as “a pocket psychologist … providing support when there is none,” she indicated that such tools might act as a replacement for face-to-face care, but in doing so, they indexed back to the clinic. According to this reckoning, which was expressed in various ways by several mental health specialists we spoke with, mental health tools, techniques, and the apps that convey them are the “homework” of mental healthcare, to adopt Mattingly et al.’s (2011) terminology. Such “homework” is not viewed as unimportant for mental health support, but as its name suggests, it is envisioned as secondary, acting as an extension of the more essential clinic-based work that goes on between therapist and client.
This perspective is also evident in professional mental health websites which often pitch digital resources as an extension of professional services, as a conduit towards professional care, or as a band-aid measure intended to enable support until professional services become available. Either way, digital resources index professional care, as seen by the frequent advice on government or NGO websites, including those that offer mental health “self-tests”, that diagnosis is best undertaken by a health professional (e.g. New Zealand's three main mental health websites: www.thelowdown.co.nz ; www.depression.org.nz ; and www.mentalhealth.org.nz ). A similar message is conveyed by the prominently displayed phone and text numbers that enable anyone in crisis to access professional counselling. Though digital resources may, in fact, relate in a variety of ways with real-life sites of care, the therapeutic landscape as envisioned by healthcare providers privileges the professional clinic, with other sites and resources cast in terms of how they move patients towards professional care, substitute for such care, or extend it beyond the clinic's doors.
Some of the young people we spoke with echoed this perspective. Eighteen-year-old Albert, for example, told us about how he used information he found by looking up “depression” on Wikipedia to “give my mum counselling sessions” when she seemed to be struggling. Turning home into a therapeutic place whilst also acknowledging his limitations, he recounted, “I'd tell her to talk her problems out – do what a counsellor does. If there's anything I can't help with her, I'd tell her she'd have to see an actual counsellor.” Emma (age 15) had set up her own YouTube mental health channel at the age of 12 when she was struggling with anxiety, depression and self-harm. While her aim was to make widely available her own challenges and successes with coping with mental health issues, in our interview and online she repeatedly emphasized the need for anyone struggling with mental health issues to seek professional care. People who saw her videos often messaged Emma, recounting their predicaments. When faced with particularly difficult situations online, she sought advice from both her family and her therapist. In both Albert and Emma's cases, digital sites and resources transformed both home and clinic (or, in Albert's mother's case – the potential clinic). Emma's involvement in her vlog took this a step further, enabling home and clinic to transform digital sites. The clinic, however, whether as an experienced or imagined therapeutic place (cf. Rose, 2012), remained the centrepiece of legitimate care.
But these were just two of the ways that the relationships between digital activities and professional care were temporally and spatially enacted and envisioned. Other young people suggested much greater variance in how and when (if at all) professional therapy was utilized, as well as why it was turned to. By means of illustration, I now offer three descriptive accounts in which the clinic occupies one of multiple sites within a therapeutic assemblage.

Section: 6. Young people's virtual and real-life therapeutic assemblages

Siobhan (age 23) spent a significant portion of her interview recounting the many steps she took to diagnose and treat her ADHD . It all began in a university classroom: So I self-diagnosed me … I needed to take a [first year course at university], and I did Psych 108 or 109 or something. Anyway, part of it was [on] mental health, and there was one slide which said ‘ADHD is this,’ and then they didn't focus on it at all, but I was like ‘[that's] me, me, me, me, me.’ Then I was kinda like, ‘I wonder … ?’
The next step took place in a medical library where Siobhan worked: I was shelving at [a university] library and it's mostly nursing- and medical-based, so I actually looked up the DSM-5 which had only just come out and it had the most up-to-date diagnosis that medical professionals use. … [After that] I did binge reading. I literally got every single book out of the library about ADHD , whether it was relating to children, boys, adults, girls … just literally everything . I did the same thing online, just typed out all sorts of combinations of ADHD or ADD and [read] all the different websites.
Siobhan then visited a general practitioner (G.P.) or family physician in order to confirm her self-diagnosis. Her G.P. not only gave her the assurance she expected but also a referral to a psychiatrist. She explained that she visited the psychiatrist “to get a formal diagnosis” so that she could access student disability services: “Otherwise I probably wouldn't have bothered. My G.P.'s say-so would have been enough for me.”
One of Siobhan's most useful treatment strategies was a Google Calendar app which she synched to her period tracker so she could adjust her daily activities according to her menstrual cycle . She explained the process: when you log in [to the period tracker] and say your period started or whatever, it will update [that information] on the calendar too … So I could plan my days. The first day is always a crappy day, so I'd try and not plan so much or not go out at night or whatever. … You really don't want your period at a very inconvenient time. If I can try and control a couple of those days, it benefits me. …. I'm pretty OCD with my calendar and have everything in different colours, so if I look at a week I can see if I've got balance between uni … and work and social, family, church. … If work has just overloaded the week and I've got no social [activities], then I know it's not a good idea. … I mean, that's not really health but … Interviewer: Well, that was going to be my next question – would you consider your calendar a health technology for mental wellbeing? Siobhan: Well, yeah, I use it like that, for balance. … I definitely use my calendar as some sort of mental health prediction and also [to monitor] ‘am I doing okay?’ Because you know balance is one of the things that's a serious issue. While Siobhan managed the calendar, her boyfriend also entered his activities there, looked at how her week is shaping up, and sometimes took steps to ensure she stays in “balance”: Siobhan: [The calendar] would actually help him know where I was at during the week, or what was [going on with me] … and he would be able to see if I need to take a break, or … Interviewer: Did he ever comment, like ‘I think this week you're working too much’ or … ? Siobhan: He wouldn't say it in words. He quite likes spontaneous things, so instead he would tell me that I'm busy during this period of time [so that it would be blocked out] and he would then take me out for dinner or we'd just go to the beach or something. He would do something to make me have a break.
Siobhan's diagnosis and treatment spans a multiplicity of places, persons, and resources, each of which combines with and refracts upon other elements to create a therapeutic assemblage. The therapeutic assemblage is dynamic and fluid, changing shape over time as she (and others) come to differently conceive of herself whilst also differently inhabiting various sites of care (Curtis, 2010; Foley, 2011 , 2017 ; Foley, 2011 ). What changes, crucially, is not only relationships between persons and places ( Conradson, 2005 ), but also how those places refract upon each other as elements of a larger assemblage. The university classroom turns the medical library into more than a workspace; the library and various websites then led Siobhan to visit her regular medical clinic where her G.P. prompts a further visit to the psychiatrist. A key resource is the online calendar where Siobhan not only organized her activities but engaged her boyfriend's efforts as well. A central element of the therapeutic assemblage, the calendar is not so much a meaning-laden place but a digital tool that Siobhan calibrated to enable effective monitoring and organization of her activities, reshaping or “re-tuning” ( Coyne, 2010 ) the experiences and meanings of other sites such as work, church, or the beach. Notably, rather than forming a central hub of diagnosis or treatment, the G.P. and psychiatrist emerge as two amongst many other elements that gather together to act therapeutically and create care.
Alex (age 16) identified as nonbinary but was also considering gender reassignment to become a woman. At the time of the interview, they were seeing a private therapist. While they found their sessions with the therapist useful, they were frustrated by both the cost and waiting times between appointments. As a result, they described much of their mental health support as taking place online, including on a gender identity forum. While the forum's membership shifted, the forum itself acted as a therapeutic place, where Alex knew they could receive immediate advice on issues with which they were struggling. Specifically, they knew they could readily turn for help with “smaller immediate things” without feeling like they were “overly imposing on anyone.”
Alex was also very active in giving out advice on the forum, an activity they deemed crucial to their own mental wellbeing: Helping people out [online] is always something … where it's also like you can learn. Like, if you tell people, ‘Just do this, and do that,’ and then you start thinking, ‘Oh, maybe I should do that myself.’
The online forum was a place where Alex could maintain face-to-face privacy, exploring different gender identities without exposing certain aspects of their activities to parents, friends, or medical professionals. Online, for example, they felt able to explore the embodied impact of supressing testosterone, discussing with others the effect on “emotions [and] things one might not want to talk about [with] their doctor.”
While Alex made a point of “carefully maintain[ing] a real-life friend network,” the gender forum enabled exploration that ongoing, real-life friendships were felt to preclude. As Alex explained, there's always the hesitancy to bare your deepest, darkest emotions to people, I mean, especially to close friends because … you say something and they're probably going to remember it … You might find yourself saying things that you know you don't really sort of stand by, but they'll remember you saying this thing. It's one of those things where … intimacy and closeness, it almost becomes a bad thing with friends.
The gender forum was seen as crucial to supporting Alex's sense of mental wellbeing not only in terms of the perspectives on medical care exchanged there but, just as importantly, the social relations it enabled. As Gesler and Curtis (2016 [2007], also Curtis et al., 2013) note of mental health services more broadly, their therapeutic capacities are often shaped by the specificities of their physical, social, and symbolic environments. In this case, digital (rather than physical) characteristics such as the web forum's affordability, immediate accessibility to a geographically-broad array of users, potential for user anonymity, the generally respectful social environment created by users, and the symbolic significance of having a unique site devoted to exploring these particular issues worked together to enable Alex to (sometimes self-consciously) achieve a sense of dignity and self-respect.
This was further reflected by the way Alex described another site, an online calligraphy forum, where they similarly achieved a sense of belonging. Forums such as the calligraphy site, Alex recounted: give you a sense of community … so there's like a couple … [of] usernames that I recognise, and I'll be like oh, I know that person …. And you know, they can have sort of long in-depth discussion about a specific model or a specific pen …. . and … I don't know, but [it] just gives you that sense of connection, which some people definitely have a harder time getting these days.
The assemblages of care that Alex was a part of drew together various online and real-life places that were deeply meaningful for enabling or precluding connection, advice, and support, regardless of their ostensible purposes. Indeed, just as therapeutic landscapes contain other, “more-than-therapeutic” potentials ( Emmerson, 2019 ), a digital site not explicitly focused on therapeutic activities was experienced by Alex as psychologically beneficial.
Though Alex clearly valued the therapeutic work that took place with their therapist, their relationship was just one of multiple elements that came together to create care. Digital sites, in particular, acted as meaningful places for Alex; indeed, in some instances, the site itself was seen as being conducive to care, regardless of membership at any given time. This was especially important to Alex who described a preference for sites with moderators who block out “toxic people” and create “safe spaces” for gender identity exploration.
That said, each of the therapeutic places recounted by Alex were themselves assemblages of various elements. For example, the calligraphy forum was an assemblage of a web address (pointing to a specific server address or addresses), a specific topical focus, moderators who perused and, if necessary, policed online dynamics, and participants who came and went, sometimes pleasantly recognized by others, and sometimes new to the forum. Regardless of whether any individual participant was, or was not, present at any given time, the other elements gathered together to create a unique, identifiable place which Alex considered conducive to fostering a sense of belonging. Each of these sites also simultaneously derived meaning from their inter-relations with one another. For example, The calligraphy site, how it was experienced, and what it meant to Alex cannot be adequately ascertained without taking into account its inter-relationality with other places and persons (friends, therapists, etc.) deemed conducive, or not, to care.
Katie (age 18) was part of a high school health class assigned the task of completing an online depression quiz while in the midst of New Zealand's first Covid-19 lockdown . Interviewed several weeks later (post-lockdown), she described her confusion when the quiz indicated that she, as well as several of her friends, suffered from mild depression: [At school] they were like, ‘Do it in your own time.’ This was during quarantine [i.e. lockdown] … me and my friends were talking about it, we were messaging [each other] and they were like, ‘Do you think you do [suffer from depression]?’ and I was like ‘No, I don't think I am’ and then when I did the test it said I did, so I was like ‘Well, I'm wrong’ but then I found out that most of my friends ... got that result. And we were like, ‘Well, what do we do?’ But we didn't really do anything about it. We literally just pushed it to the side and carried on.
Asked if the results made her want to find out more about depression, Katie explained that it made her less interested in the topic: I was looking at it and I was like ‘Do I want to know more or do I just want to ignore it’ and I was like ‘ignore it’ so I completely ignored it. I think I was scared of knowing exactly what it was and how you get it and things like that.
But once she was back in the classroom (and it is unclear here if she meant in the physical classroom or an online classroom held during lockdown), Katie found herself facing repeated discussion of other students' results: “sometimes when we're talking in health about it, some people will be like ‘Oh, I don't have it’ but then there are some that aren't confident to say that they go through things and that they have depression. And I just sit there being quiet …”
She found herself deeply troubled by the outcome of her quiz, recounting, “I had to question myself … because the answers I gave were honest so I probably do and I answered everything right and then … yeah.” Part of her conundrum was the sense that while there is widespread support of people with mental health issues, there is also intense stigma: “People will say, you know that saying, ‘it's okay to not be okay’ ? … [But] like if someone was to see me on that website during school, they'd be like, ‘Why are you on that?’ and they'd question you and you'd feel like you'd need to back out and be like ‘I'm just looking.’”
In Katie's account, the website neither points her towards professional care nor acts as a substitute or extension of it but becomes a focus of recurrent concern that perhaps something is not right with her mental wellbeing. Her engagement with the website is refracted by the inter-personal dynamics of both home and school, reflecting the complexities of both the realities and symbolic meanings associated with “mental health” as well as the impact of a wide range of social and power relations (c.f. Gesler and Curtis, 2016 [2007]). Notably, there is fluidity in the elements that compose home and school assemblages; at times they even cross-cut, as seen by the way Katie's friends are a significant presence in both the classroom and (digitally) at home. (And if the health class she recounted took place online during lockdown, school was similarly present at home, whilst home was present at school). Katie is differently positioned across these settings. In the relative privacy of her home, she could invite the support of friends to compare their results and collectively decide to reject them. At school, however, the dynamics between classmates and assumedly teachers (the “they” who set assignments and class discussions), repeatedly suggested the outcomes of the online self-test might be a legitimate finding that she should take seriously. What is significant here is that no single site becomes a privileged locus of diagnosis or care. Instead the inter-personal dynamics that emerge across the multi-sited assemblage produce moments of agency (when Katie decides to just ignore the results) and subjection (when Katie is surrounded by classroom discussion of others' results), producing her intense ambivalence.

Section: 7. Discussion

These brief snapshots hardly do justice to the variety of experiences young people recounted during our interviews, but I offer them here to illustrate the range of sites that make up therapeutic assemblages. Notably, sites of professional care such as psychiatric clinics or G.P.'s offices appear as several of many elements and do not necessarily function as therapeutic hubs, out of which or towards which care progresses in a unilinear fashion.
As illustrated by the above examples, using the concept of multi-sited therapeutic assemblages focuses attention to the importance of emplacement, enabling closer examination of how digital forums, homes, university and high school classrooms, libraries, and beaches act as conducive (or unconducive) to health. This does not, however, imply that we should reduce all of the elements in a therapeutic assemblage to places. Rather, it enables us to better grasp the multi-sited nature of therapeutic activities and explore how places come to be aligned with or against other entities (friends, teachers, books, etc.) to form assemblages of shifting parts and significance.
Sites themselves are constituted via an assemblage, constellations of various elements that make the meaningful places thought of as “the clinic” or “the chat forum.” This is most obvious in digital places whose physical location is not readily apparent to those who interact with them. It is also made starkly evident at moments when physical sites are augmented or stripped back of the elements that are generally viewed to characterize them, for example, when home comes to be the site of school-assigned depression tests during lockdown . In a similar vein, in a provocative reflection on what constitutes a medical clinic, Wendland (2012) describes a hospital in Malawi that is without medication, basic medical instruments, and, frequently, the presence of trained physicians: Is it still a clinic? Here the absence of the elements that constitute “clinics” deterritorialise the assemblage to the extent that the physical structure is no longer a clinic, despite the building being denoted as one.
As meaning-laden places, sites come together as (independent) elements in an assemblage that operates therapeutically. These assemblages are characterized by fluidity and inter-relationality, with multiple sites constituted in relation to one another (i.e. one's home becomes something else when in an assemblage with Wikipedia or a chat forum, whilst a depression website takes on different qualities when accessed at home or in the classroom).
The temporality, size and extent of multi-sited therapeutic assemblages varies, as does the significance of different elements. The assemblage that involves one young person may differ from that which includes another, each composed of various elements such as a parent, psychologist, online chat site, friend, or calligraphy forum. Some assemblages last longer than others. Moreover, at different points in time, specific elements may become more important than others; several youth, for example, indicated that after relying heavily on digital communication and online gaming as forms of mental health support during the first nation-wide 2020 Covid-19 lockdown, they made concerted efforts to spend less time online once physical distancing restrictions were eased.
Agency is refracted across the assemblage. Young people are indeed agentive in partially configuring assemblages, “inhabiting” therapeutic landscapes ( Foley, 2011 , 2017 ), creating new entities or fostering relationships between them (they choose whether to call a counsellor or look up depression online, whether to speak to friends, keep silent in class or start a mental health vlog), but they are also members of assemblages, influenced by other elements. This is particularly evident in the case of Katie who was deeply ambivalent about the outcome of her online depression quiz; despite her professed wish to just “ignore” the results, she was continually faced with what they might indicate about her mental wellbeing. While the website may have been a place she could have simply avoided, the dynamics of the classroom made the quiz's outcome a recurrent concern.
Rather than thinking about these elements as part of a unified therapeutic landscape, the concept of multi-sited therapeutic assemblages enables us to highlight the inter-connection of multiple spaces – both physical and virtual – that come together to create an assemblage through which care and other therapeutic elements are enacted. In several cases, the professional therapeutic encounter is just one element amongst many possible sites of therapeutic endeavour. This becomes evident by mapping the therapeutic sites and relations that young people describe (as I have done here). It is also consciously asserted by some young people who used the interview setting to explicitly delineate the multiple places where they sought care (e.g. Siobhan and Alex). This has implications for how we think about digital sites, as what emerges in many young people's accounts is not an understanding of the internet acting as a conduit , potentially leading students out of a preliminary place of exploration of mental health and into an envisioned appropriate site of professional care. Nor does home-based activity necessarily act as an extension of care from the therapist's office, i.e. as mental health “homework” or a stand-in for professional care. Instead, digital and real-life engagements often align with other entities to form therapeutic assemblages as sites of care. Rather than care being dispersed across multiple sites or elements in the assemblage, care is constituted by means of their interconnection.

Section: 8. Conclusion

When it comes to health, places matter (Kesler and Kearns, 2002), be they digital or real-life. Despite, however, the importance attributed to the constitution of place in assemblage theory ( Delueze and Guattari, 1980 ; DeLanda, 2006 ), and the use of assemblage theory to understand the “becoming” of places (both therapeutic or non-therapeutic) (e.g. Dovey, 2009 ; Anderson and McFarlane, 2011 ; Foley, 2011 ; Bell et al., 2018 ), many works on therapeutic/health/ill-health assemblages neither reflect on the multiplicity of therapeutic places that may compose an assemblage, nor explicitly examine how these places come to inter-relationally constitute one another.
In a number of ways, multi-sited therapeutic assemblages resonate with the notion of “diagnostic assemblages” put forward by Locock et al. (2016) . Locock et al.'s focus is on “the temporal and spatial diversity of the diagnostic moment or, more accurately diagnostic moments which we refer to as the diagnostic assemblage , which is threaded throughout patients' pathways pulling in a variety of human and non human actants …. ” (2016, p. 91). They, moreover, note that diagnostic moments are “played out in a multiplicity of settings …. .” (2016, p. 91). In their descriptions of diagnostic activities, they highlight the material, affective and symbolic dimensions of therapeutic places, describing, for example, how a pregnant woman receiving antenatal care felt distressed when moved out of the main waiting area and into a separate room – the “red room, which you really felt was like the bad news room, [it] was horrible.” (2016, p. 87). However, the concept of multi-sited therapeutic assemblages extends the diagnostic assemblage not only in terms of scope (encompassing a wide range of therapeutic activities beyond diagnosis) but, more significantly, through its explicit focus on places as assemblages in-and-of themselves whilst also acting as elements of larger assemblages, thus highlighting foregrounding their inter-relationality.
Other analytical framings that enable examinations across multiple sites of care include “carescapes” ( Bowlby, 2012 ; Ivanova et al., 2016 ) and “care infrastructures,” both of which (in theory, at least) expand the site of care to include multiple physical locales. These terms, as well as the ways they have been employed, tend, however, to suggest a contiguous “structure” or “scape” of care, complete with boundaries and “fringes” ( Danholt and Langstrup, 2012 , p. 518). Moreover, within the structure or scape, places are generally envisioned as “fluid,” “flow[ing]” into one another ( Ivanova et al., 2016 , 1346), as opposed to constituting independent elements that may enter and exit the assemblage (without requiring its dissolution).
Furthermore, unlike infrastructures’ connotations of involving “invisible” ( Idris, 2020 ), “inconspicuous,” or “backstage” activities ( Langstrup, 2013 , 1013, see also Bowker and Starr, 1999 ), assemblage theory does not assume that the therapeutic activities under consideration are necessarily hidden. They may, indeed, be in plain sight, openly negotiated, assessed, dismissed or contested, as the accounts of several of our youth interviewees indicated.
Perhaps more significantly, work on care infrastructures has tended to privilege the spaces linking together clinics and homes (e.g. Danholt and Langstrup, 2012 ; Langstrup, 2013 ; Weiner and Will, 2018 ). Danholt and Langstrup, for example, highlight the importance of infrastructures for revealing “the terrain between the home and the clinic,” noting that attentiveness to the infrastructure enables us to trace the “complex ecology of healthcare that …. already connects the clinic and the home” (2012, p. 529). In contrast, the concept of multi-sited therapeutic assemblages used here highlights a wide variety of non-contiguous sites which are shifting in nature and may be aligned according to a range of directionalities. Indeed, as the mapping of the mental health landscapes of New Zealand youth shows, there are times when we can best understand a young person's engagement in care by de-centring the clinic, not necessarily assuming online care to be a supplemental activity, radiating outwards from the clinic or, alternatively, pointing the way towards the clinic as the privileged locus of authentic care.
Drawing together the literature on health assemblages, geographic assemblages, and therapeutic landscapes enables opportunities to examine how therapeutically-meaningful places can be constituted both as independent sites and simultaneously re-made through their fluid and dynamic relations with one another. Through this analytic perspective, the therapeutic comes to be understood as neither anchored to a single site nor constituted through the inter-relation of home and clinic, but defined via a (shifting, dynamic, temporal) assemblage of multiple places, people, and resources. This has noteworthy implications for how we envisage therapeutic relationships between a wide variety of digital and real-life sites, as well as for examining scholarly and practical understandings of the emplacement of care.
When applied to digital design, for example, a multi-sited assemblage approach indicates that mental health resources cannot be assumed to act as either extensions of or conduits towards professional care, but must be envisioned as both stand-alone entities and in relation to a range of heterogenous practices and resources, i.e. as one element within a suite of often unpredictable elements that compose the therapeutic. It also suggests the need for more open-ended analyses of young people's quotidian practices of mental health support, looking beyond research on users' engagements with individual products or platforms to examine the wider sets of inter-relationalities which determine the meaningfulness and utility of digital resources.

Section: Credit author statement

Susanna Trnka: Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal analysis; Funding acquisition; Investigation (with assistance of student research assistants); Methodology; Project administration; Resources; Software; Supervision; Validation; Visualization; Roles/Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.

Section: Funding

Royal Society of New Zealand Marsden Fund , Grant number UOA1932 . University of Auckland, Faculty of Arts, Faculty Research Development Fund , grant number 3718356 .

Section: Acknowledgements

I would like to thank all four of the anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful and insightful comments and also Catherine Panter-Brick for overseeing the editorial process. I am very grateful to Peter Adams, Craig Gordon and other members of New Zealand's Te Hiringa Hauora/Health Promotion Agency, Grant Otsuki, Martyn Pickersgill, Marek Tesar, and Lisa Wynn for their insightful comments on article drafts and oral presentations of this material. Many thanks to my Marsden project team members – Kerry Gibson, Pikihuia Pomare, Monique Jonas, and Jemaima Tiatia-Seath – for engaging in such lively discussion about some of the interview material. Miriama Aoake, Anika Correll Trnka, Imogen Spray and Sanchita Vyas were a great help in compiling the materials necessary for this analysis. I owe a great debt to the various research assistants who helped conduct the interviews on which this examination is based: Miriama Aoake, Mira Bi, Claire Black, Thibaut Bouttier-Esprit, Shyla Rose Kelly, KDee Maimai, Andrea Merino Ortiz, Brodie Quinn, and Imogen Spray.
