Title: What matters to persons living with brain tumors and their informal caregivers? An interview study of qualities in interpersonal relations


Abstract: Abstract


Abstract_Section: Background

Brain tumor is a severe cancer that may make the person with the illness and their informal caregivers dependent on support in self-care. Social network mapping is a method to assess an individual's social relations and resources, which may help to identify high-quality relations and potential sources of support. Yet, which relations matter for individuals living with brain tumors and their informal caregivers and how social network mapping could be used in self-care need further investigation.

Abstract_Section: Aim

To explore how persons living with brain tumors and informal caregivers perceive the potential usefulness of a social network-mapping tool in their self-care and to describe the qualities in the interpersonal relations that they map.

Abstract_Section: Methods

Seven persons living with brain tumors and 12 informal caregivers (whereof six bereaved) participated in in-depth interviews and tested a social network-mapping tool developed by an informal caregiver (CareMaps). Data were analyzed inductively using thematic analysis. The COREQ checklist was used for reporting.

Abstract_Section: Findings

Participants expressed positive opinions about the CareMaps tool but raised some questions regarding its design, how to use it in their self-care, and the optimal timing of introducing the tool. Two themes reflecting qualities in relations were found: self-care supportive relations during which daily management of the brain tumor is in focus and identity-preserving relations that allow individuals to disconnect from their brain tumor experiences. Both types of relations were described as important, were found in different contexts (e.g., social life , work life, and healthcare), and emphasized contrasting qualities.

Abstract_Section: Conclusion

The CareMaps tool was helpful in elucidating qualities in interpersonal relations that contribute to individuals' self-care. Future research should investigate how social network-mapping tools that capture quality in social relations should be designed and used to support individuals in their self-care.

Section: 1. Introduction

Brain tumor is a serious cancer that accounts for approximately 2% of the total number of diagnosed cancer cases in Sweden. In 2019, the number of brain tumor cases was 25 per 100,000 people ( National Board of Health, 2018 ; National Board of Health, 2020 ). It causes various symptoms, including cognitive, neuropsychological, and functional changes and impairments ( Whisenant, 2011 ). Persons living with brain tumors have shown to have high levels of psychosocial distress and comorbid mental disorders ( Goebel et al., 2011 ). In addition, research indicates that stress levels may not subside over time ( Keir et al., 2007 ). Some of the common mental disorders that have been reported include anxiety and depression symptoms (e.g., energy and motivation loss, difficulties sleeping, and motoric slowing), as well as cognitive impairments (e.g., concentration and memory loss) ( Wellisch et al., 2002 ).
Apart from hospital visits for treatment and follow-up, persons living with brain tumors cope with their illness outside the healthcare setting through self-care. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines self-care as “the ability of individuals, families and communities to promote health, prevent disease, maintain health, and to cope with illness and disability with or without the support of a healthcare provider” ( WHO, 2020 ). Although persons living with brain tumors may spend many hours in healthcare, they spend many more hours in self-care, during which they need to find ways to cope with their illnesses and symptoms that affect them in their everyday lives . Given the increasing disabilities from which persons living with brain tumors may suffer, self-care often involves the reliance on support and care from social relations and networks outside the healthcare context ( Whisenant, 2011 ; Janda et al., 2008 ; Piil et al., 2015 ).
In Sweden, one in five of the adult population are informal caregivers ( National Board of Health, 2014 ). Informal caregivers are mostly family members who provide various degrees of unpaid assistance or care to persons living with a diagnosis ( Roth et al., 2015 ). In this study, the term informal caregiver is used to describe anyone who provides unpaid support to a person living with brain tumor. Although informal caregiving can be a positive experience, it has also been associated with caregiver burden , including physical and emotional stress, loss of social networks and loss of self ( Eifert et al., 2015 ; Fredman et al., 2010 ). The health, well-being, and quality of life of persons living with brain tumor and their informal caregivers are dependent on one another ( Kanter et al., 2014 ; Baumstarck et al., 2018 ). The varying needs of persons living with brain tumors, depending on severity of condition and phase of illness trajectory , affect the degree of caregiver burden, which has implications on the informal caregiver's well-being and ability to cope and to provide care and support ( Janda et al., 2008 ; Kanter et al., 2014 ). Thus, informal caregivers are also dependent on social relations and support networks.
Short- and long-term positive effects of social support on self-care, health, well-being, sense of fulfillment, and quality of life among persons living with chronic conditions, as well as among their informal caregivers, have previously been demonstrated ( Roth et al., 2015 ; Cockerham et al., 2017 ; Holt-Lunstad et al., 2010 ; Chou et al., 2012 ; Dobríková et al., 2015 ; Ownsworth et al., 2009 ). For example, social support has been shown to have moderating effects on depression and anxiety among persons living with brain tumors ( Cubis et al., 2018 ). One way to explore and analyze the type and extent of social support in a person's life is to use social network mapping, which is a visualization method that illustrates an individual's social relations and environment through a structured or freestyle drawing ( McCarty et al., 2007 ). Previous research has described how social network mapping in the context of healthcare has supported staff to appreciate better the situation of persons living with brain tumors and their informal caregivers in terms of their experienced burdens and resources ( Adams et al., 2017 ). As social networks are unique for each individual ( Perkins et al., 2013 ), mapping them provides a context in which to identify and navigate among the existing and potential sources of support. In healthcare, various approaches and uses of social network mapping have been described. Genograms visualize individuals' close family relations, close relatives, and friends ( McCarty et al., 2007 ; Rempel et al., 2007 ). In clinical family nursing and family caregiving research, genograms have been used to visualize the social networks of patients and informal caregivers, including supportive and unsupportive relationships, as well as health-related resources ( Rempel et al., 2007 ; Souza et al., 2016 ). Ecomaps are similar to genograms with the additional assessment of social support networks in terms of structure and strength of social relationships ( Ray and Street, 2005 ). What these approaches have in common is that social network mapping is often performed by or in collaboration with healthcare professionals or researchers.
In this study, we had the opportunity to explore the potential usefulness of a prototype social network-mapping tool, which was designed by an informal caregiver to a person living with brain tumor, intended to support individuals in their self-care. We have only identified a few other studies that describe the use of social network mapping in self-care by informal caregivers or persons living with severe progressive illness. A recent study reported on the pilot test of an online social network mapping intervention that specifically targeted informal caregivers of persons living with brain tumors ( Reblin et al., 2018 ). Informal caregivers were guided through an ecomapping process to identify individuals who could provide different types of support. This process was performed at the clinic, and the different types of support that could be mapped were predetermined by the tool itself. The Atlas CareMaps™ is another example of a social network-mapping tool that was developed for informal caregivers of persons living with chronic illness ( Mehta and Nafus, 2016 ). This tool has been shown to contribute to informal caregivers' self-reflection, understanding of the degree of dependence on caregiving and support outside formal care, and communication with healthcare professionals ( Mehta, 2018 , 2019 ). Both of these tools were designed primarily for the benefit of the individual making the drawing.
It has been found that informal caregivers of persons living with brain tumors may need encouragement to engage existing social relations in alleviating their caregiver burdens ( Reblin et al., 2018 ). This requires them to identify social relations who are potential sources of support. One of the values of social network mapping is that complex information can be visually organized in a way that provides an overview of the size, type, and quality of an individual's network. However, a meta-analysis found that most measures of social relations do not take quality into account ( Holt-Lunstad et al., 2010 ). For example, marital status is often used as a measure of social integration, but this does not reveal anything about marital quality. Thus, it is essential that social network mapping also assesses the quality of relations, which can be defined as the perceived satisfaction with social relations ( Fiorillo and Sabatini, 2011 ). To the best of our knowledge, social network mapping has not been used to assess the quality of social relations in the context of brain tumor self-care. Thus, the aim of this study was twofold: first, to explore how persons living with brain tumors and informal caregivers perceive the potential usefulness of a social network-mapping tool in their self-care; second, to describe the qualities in the interpersonal relations that they map. There is still limited research on interventions targeting informal caregivers of persons living with brain tumors ( Sherwood et al., 2016 ). Therefore, our study may contribute to the development of interventions to strengthen individuals' ability to engage in self-care or to support self-care, alleviate caregiver burden, and appreciate the caregiver's need for support.

Section: 2. Method

An exploratory qualitative research approach was used. The first author, who is a social scientist, performed in-depth interviews with persons living with brain tumor and informal caregivers who had been introduced to a prototype social network-mapping tool (CareMaps) that was developed to support individuals in their self-care.
An informal caregiver who was also the head of the Swedish Brain Tumor Association developed the CareMaps tool. The tool's purpose was to enable persons living with brain tumor and their informal caregivers to identify, value, and strengthen relations and resources that they experience as important in their self-care. The tool's design was not guided by theory, but inspired by existing social network mapping approaches for informal caregivers ( Mehta and Nafus, 2016 ; Lind and Antonelli, 2021 ). A prototype pen-and-paper CareMaps toolset was developed. It consisted of instructions, which guided the user through a process of identifying and valuing relations that matter to them; pens in different colors; and a paper canvas in which social relations are drawn manually ( Fig. 1 ). The social resources (e.g., persons, social groups, pets, and healthcare professionals) are distinguished by symbols. The type of relationship is indicated by using different colors (blue = social relations, and red = supportive relations, groups, organizations, and healthcare). The direction of relationships (who cares for whom) is visualized using arrows. Finally, the quality of relationships is valued by adding symbols used to indicate the strength of the relation (i.e., strong, weak, complicated, or neutral), the importance of the relation (i.e., not so important, quite important, or very important), and the frequency of interaction (i.e., daily, sometimes per week, sometimes per month, sometimes per year, or rare). Download: Download high-res image (722KB) Download: Download full-size image Fig. 1 . CareMaps example from the instructions for the prototype version used in this study. Printed by permission of the developer.
Study participants were recruited via a series of workshops that were organized and facilitated by the designer of the CareMaps tool in 2019. The workshops' purpose was to introduce persons living with brain tumors and informal caregivers to the tool and to develop it further. The Brain Tumor Association announced the workshops through organized events and personal contacts. All persons living with brain tumor and informal caregivers who expressed an interest were eligible to participate, irrespective of age, gender, or time since diagnosis. The researchers had no influence on the design of the workshops or recruitment of workshop participants.
The first author participated as an observer at two workshops and informed about this study, which was conducted separately from the workshops. The designer of the CareMaps tool was not involved with collecting or analyzing data for the study. Workshop participants were eligible to participate in in-depth interviews if they were least 18 years old and fluent in Swedish. Cognitive impairment resulting in the inability to provide an informed consent was reason for exclusion. Twelve eligible participants volunteered: four persons living with brain tumors, two informal caregivers, and six bereaved caregivers. Additionally, four persons living with brain tumors and four informal caregivers who did not have the opportunity to participate in the workshops were recruited. Its designer individually introduced these participants to the CareMaps tool prior to participating in interviews with the first author. Participant characteristics are presented in Table 1 . All the informal caregivers who participated in the study had close relationships with persons living with brain tumors, either as primary caregivers or closely assisting the primary caregivers. The bereaved caregivers had lost their loved ones six months to four years prior to participating in the study. Ethical approval for this study was obtained. Table 1 . Participant characteristics. Characteristics Persons living with brain tumor (n = 7) Informal caregivers (n = 6) Bereaved caregivers (n = 6) Gender: Male 5 0 1 Female 2 6 5 Age range, years 34–66 25–88 27–54 Time since diagnosis, years 5–19 0,5-19 2,5-11 Relation to person living with brain tumor: Spouse N/A 4 2 Child N/A 2 3 Sibling N/A 0 1
The first author performed the interviews. In preparation for the interviews, the participants were asked to use the CareMaps tool to map and reflect on current relations that they perceived as important in their self-care. The CareMap served as a stimulus for conversation during the interviews, where the participants' relations and resources were reflected upon and discussed. A semi-structured interview guide that covered two main topics was used ( National Board of Health, 2018 ): impressions of the CareMaps tool and its potential usefulness in individuals' self-care, and ( National Board of Health, 2020 ) experiences of supportive interpersonal relations and resources. Examples of questions that were asked include the following. What is your first impression of using the CareMaps tool? What reflections did you get when using CareMaps to identify and value your social relations? Departing from your CareMap, who provides support for you? What type of support do you get ( e.g. , emotional, social, physical, or practical)? Does the support you get meet your needs and expectations? The participants chose the interview settings (e.g., café, workplace, or home). Six of the participants were couples (person living with brain tumor and an informal caregiver). One of the couples wished to be interviewed together (group interview), and two couples were interviewed separately (one-on-one interviews). Data was collected from January to December 2019. The interviews lasted between 23 and 119 min (median time 60 min). All participants signed an informed consent form prior to their interviews.
All interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. The data was analyzed by the first author using a thematic analysis with an inductive, semantic, and data-driven approach, aiming to identify patterns of shared meaning in the data set ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ). First, the texts were read and re-read to familiarize the researchers with the data. Second, meaning units were identified and condensed by means of descriptive codes. In this step, text that related to the perceived usefulness of the CareMaps tool was separated from text that related to participants' experiences of supportive interpersonal relations. This was done to analyze the two topics that were covered in the interview separately from each other. The codes were then categorized according to similarities and differences in content. This was done separately for the two interview topics. An iterative process of identifying, defining, and naming themes and subthemes was performed. Two of the coauthors who were trained in qualitative analysis participated on several occasions to discuss the analysis. The final themes and subthemes of both analyses were discussed among all the coauthors. As a member check, the results were discussed with five of the participants in conjunction with a follow-up study. NVivo version 12 ( QSR, 2018 ) was used to code and categorize the data. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ) guided the reporting of this study ( Tong et al., 2007 ).

Section: 3. Findings

First, we describe our findings reflecting the participants' perceptions of the potential usefulness of a social network-mapping tool (CareMaps). Second, we describe identified qualities in the interpersonal relations that the participants had mapped by using the CareMaps tool. Illustrative quotes from the participants have been translated from Swedish to English.
The analysis of the CareMaps tool's perceived usefulness yielded three themes: potential areas of use, capturing the complexity of social relations , and timing for introduction of the CareMaps tool.
The participants' perceptions of using the CareMaps tool to reflect on their interpersonal relations were generally positive. Participants described that using the tool gave them a helicopter view, helped them to identify interpersonal relations that mattered to them, and supported reflection not just on others' roles but also on their own roles in relation to others. Well, the first impression was … you don't understand how many relations you have. And there are many relations that perhaps you didn't think of and how those have changed. So that can be a lesson learned in itself. Also, […] you can be angry […] because you think people have failed you or … so when you think about it, maybe that's not really it. Because you've been so caught up with yourself [ …] Maybe you don't even let people in. So, I think it is really important to sit down and reflect on your relations a little. (Bereaved caregiver 4)
One person living with a brain tumor expressed that the CareMaps gave an overview of their social and healthcare resources but provided no additional guidance on how these resources could be coordinated. Due to the frustration of lacking understanding about how their different healthcare contacts related to each other, some envisioned CareMaps as a tool to help them navigate the healthcare system to save time and energy.
Some participants perceived that relational dynamics were not captured by the current version of the CareMaps tool, which only illustrated relations at a specific time point. For example, participants described that many relations are not stable but change over time. Although some relations became increasingly important, others gradually decreased in value. Further, they sought a way to capture the nature of more complex relationships. A relation that matters can be strong and complicated, sometimes making it a source of frustration rather than support. The relations are so complex that it is not so easy to put a number on them, or to indicate who cares about whom or how strong or weak [the relationship] is. / … / For me, it is more of a thought process of, well, what really was my relation to my brother and what worked well and what didn't? And I can do that from his name on the map, but to put a number on it and value it as strong or weak? I would say that the relation to my brother is strong, but at the same time complicated. So, I think, maybe, this grading system / … / I don't really see how much it would give me to put a number on my brother. (Bereaved caregiver 2)
Thus, participants expressed a need to visualize the overall perceived value or support of relations. Some expressed that it would also be beneficial to visualize trust and sense of security in relation to other individuals in the CareMap. Another suggested feature was to visualize interpersonal relations that could be a potential source of support.
Participants reasoned that the CareMaps tool was likely not suitable for use at the time of diagnosis and initial treatment – periods that were described as traumatic and chaotic. Nevertheless, it was suggested that the tool could be introduced at an early stage, enabling individuals to start using it whenever they feel ready and see a potential value. Maybe, for some people, it would work from day one. Others might need some time before they feel that they are interested and so on. But it should be available, so that you know that it is there when you need it. (Person living with brain tumor 4)
The participants desired a clearer specification of how the tool could be of support at different time points in the illness trajectory and in different contexts, such as in self-care or collaboration with healthcare. They saw persons living with brain tumors, informal caregivers, and healthcare staff as potential tool users but were not sure about how and when the different user groups could benefit most from it. Some participants expressed uncertainty about the benefits of disclosing their personal CareMaps to healthcare staff and the ways healthcare staff would use the information.
The analysis of qualities in interpersonal relations yielded two main themes and six subthemes ( Table 2 ). Table 2 . Two main themes and six sub-themes reflecting qualities in interpersonal relations that matter to persons living with brain tumor and their informal caregivers. Themes Sub-themes Self-care supportive relations Family and friends providing committed and proactive support Persons with similar experiences having the ability to relate Healthcare staff using a person-centered approach Identity-preserving relations Workplace supportive of professional identity Activities and contexts supportive of personal identity Contexts supportive of social identity and group membership
Self-care supportive relations enhance individuals' abilities to take care of their health and well-being in their roles as persons living with brain tumors and as informal caregivers. Three subthemes were identified: family and friends providing committed and proactive support ; persons with similar experiences having the ability to relate; and healthcare staff using a person-centered approach.
Commitment and proactivity were central qualities that were mainly found in participants' descriptions of caring family members and other close and well-established relations. Their high levels of mutual trust and contribution of unconditional psychosocial and practical support characterized these relations, actively and over time. Commitment was illustrated, for example, by family members who temporarily moved in with persons living with brain tumors, in-laws who created fun and memorable moments, or people who were always there to listen and to provide comfort and support. These individuals were described as “energy boosters” and “go-to persons” with whom the participants could be completely open, even with difficult and dark thoughts. Having a forthright attitude, for example by daring to ask uncomfortable questions and even argue, was an appreciated characteristic that recurred in these types of relations.
Participants living with brain tumors and informal caregivers declared that they had become more selective regarding social relations and had no room for “energy thieves.” Although some participants described that they actively excluded such unrewarding relations from their social networks, some also experienced unexpectedly committed support. Individuals who had not been particularly close or engaged before the diagnosis suddenly became involved. For example, relatives came from afar to help, and friends from way back reemerged and took their friendships to a stronger and deeper level. Others had put old conflicts aside and stepped in to help.
Proactive support was exemplified by seemingly spontaneous initiatives: neighbors who engaged with the children, colleagues who made lunch boxes, relatives who trimmed the hedge, and friends who came by just to talk. This was particularly appreciated by informal caregivers, some of whom described that they could not always pinpoint what their needs were. And that you sometimes feel that you need help, but […] you don't really know with what or in what way, everything is just a huge pile. I feel that it is hard to ask for help until I know what I want. (Bereaved caregiver 3)
The frequent social encounters with family and friends made it easier for these close social relations to identify where there was a need for proactive supportive actions. This could also contribute to alleviate caregivers from the expectation of always keeping their social networks updated on the latest information, a role that bereaved caregivers labeled as being a “project leader” or “liaison officer.”
Persons with experiences similar to those of persons living with brain tumors or those of informal caregivers were identified as a central source of self-care support. The participants described that these individuals had the ability to relate to living with brain tumor. This enabled them to share the challenges and solutions of living with progressive illness, which provided a sense of relief. Furthermore, the participants expressed that persons with similar experiences provided a sense of belonging. An informal caregiver described them as her “glioblastoma family,” which was comprised of individuals that understood and could relate without explanations, in contrast to “the outsiders” who “didn't get it.” I can only speak for myself […] but friends can say ‘You'll fix this' or ‘It's going to be alright’. That really makes me mad! You have no idea what you are talking about, it's not going to be okay! But when you meet someone who is in the same situation or has been, they know exactly, you don't even have to explain. It's like ‘Yes, I feel the same way’. So that support is really, really important, I think. (Bereaved caregiver 4)
The Swedish Brain Tumor Association, in particular, was commended as a forum for supporting the building of new relationships to other persons living with brain tumors, as well as informal caregivers. This nationwide patient organization facilitates gatherings that participants described as a source of motivation.
Persons living with brain tumors spoke somewhat differently about the experiences they cared to share than informal caregivers did. Among persons living with brain tumors, the focus was primarily on their illness experiences and on how to lighten the burden for their loved ones. They expressed an interest in gaining a better understanding of the informal caregiver situation and advocated for increased social and healthcare support for their loved ones. They described their own well-being as dependent on that of their informal caregivers and expressed frustration and fear that the illness might take a long-term toll on the informal caregivers' well-beings. I'm not worried that she will break. What worries me is that her physical and mental energy level will be so suppressed that she will lose her joy of life along the way. It's a lot about that. I find that part the hardest. (Person living with brain tumor 7)
Among the informal caregivers, the emphasis was on sharing experiences on problem-solving and balancing caregiving with parenthood, work life, own priorities, and their own well-beings. They appreciated that persons with similar experiences provided an open and safe environment where they could freely express not only positive emotions but also their anger and frustration about their situation. This nonjudgemental attitude was an important quality because they experienced that the expression of negative emotions was not socially accepted in other settings. Informal caregivers could feel that they were expected to put their own lives on hold. People get divorced because they feel that they don't get enough space. But as an informal caregiver you are expected to think that it’s okay, […] that I can't live on my own terms […] have wishes, that it should be okay for me to live in a void. That feeling makes me irritated sometimes. No one told me that, but it's still what is expected. (Informal caregiver 4)
A person-centered approach among healthcare staff was important to the participants. They expressed satisfaction with healthcare staff who acknowledged and respected the experience and competence, as well as the concerns of persons living with brain tumors and their informal caregivers. In particular, empathy and the ability to listen were considered important. Even if the professional competence is there, it's not always just that you are looking for. Maybe you are also looking for a bit of understanding and the emotional bit. (Person living with brain tumor 7)
One of the informal caregivers shared an experience of having been approached in exclusive and inclusive ways by healthcare staff. First, she had to fight to be acknowledged and heard, only to be reduced to a “hysteric, ignorant informal caregiver” when raising concerns about available treatment options. A contrasting and inclusive approach was used by a new physician who opened up the dialogue by asking the person living with brain tumors and her, “What do you want to do?” She described how this empathetic approach baffled her but gave satisfaction, hope, and relief.
The participants highlighted continuity as an important aspect of their relation to healthcare staff. Although the persons living with brain tumors explained that they had entire healthcare teams provided for them, the informal caregivers stated that they perceived the contact nurses as their only resource. They described that continuity enabled mutual understanding of the situation, which provided reassurance and alleviated stress. The contact nurses made the informal caregivers feel involved and were there for guidance for the informal caregivers' own concerns. Their role in cancer care can't be stressed enough. [ …] they helped us through so many of those steps. […] [and] they gave an immense sense of security. We could call and they gave us answers, they asked a bit about how you were doing, gave you the warm tap on the shoulder. It became a little bit of a family. […] Otherwise, you are pretty much left on your own. (Informal caregiver 4)
Identity-preserving relations enabled the participants to preserve their individual identities rather than being defined only by their roles as persons living with brain tumors or as informal caregivers. Three subthemes were identified: workplace supportive of professional identity ; activities and contexts supportive of personal identity; and contexts supportive of social identity and group membership .
Participants described their work as places where they were expected to perform and produce. It allowed them to focus on tasks that they could control. Informal caregivers, in particular, expressed that they appreciated colleagues who focused on their professional competence and skills rather than primarily on their caregiving situations. They explained how it made them feel useful and important and provided a temporary escape from cancer. My job is extremely important. I can actually make a difference there, actually do something about things, unlike with mom's illness, where I can't do anything. […]. And the understanding [from the employer] is important. (Informal caregiver 5)
Persons living with brain tumors described that they sometimes had to find new ways of performing their work tasks. For example, one of the participants explained that when she realized that she no longer had the same ability to take notes while listening, she started to audio record meetings and interviews and transcribe them afterwards. Although their professional identities were important, participants also emphasized the significance of having a supportive, flexible, and solution-oriented workplace that was willing to facilitate the schedule and workload to allow a combination of work and life with a brain tumor or being an informal caregiver. For example, participants described how coworkers would allow them to control the pace and direction of conversations and would offer practical support by covering for them during hospital visits, treatment periods, or temporary sick leaves. A bereaved caregiver illustrated the importance of having a supportive and flexible workplace to go back to after their loved one's passing. It was […] the only place where it was business as usual. At home somebody was missing, and other places reminded me that he was gone. But at work, there was … my tasks were the same, my colleagues were the same, nothing was missing there. (Bereaved caregiver 6)
The participants emphasized that active engagement in social interactions or physical activities could help to create or maintain a meaningful existence. On a day-to-day basis, a walk with friends, a lunch with former colleagues, or a cup of coffee with a neighbor would serve as meaningful social activities and could give life a sense of a normality. Organized activities, some of which the participants had engaged in for many years, such as regular choir sessions, church gatherings, and sports activities, were perceived as energizing and helped to maintain social relations. Although socially engaging activities could be cognitively challenging, some participants described how they would prioritize these and take measures to adjust the ways of socializing rather than foregoing them. For example, social activities with too many people involved were reduced to smaller gatherings in familiar environments with people with whom they felt comfortable.
The participants emphasized the importance of engaging in physical activities on a regular basis. Persons living with brain tumors expressed that it was a way for them to rehabilitate and keep fit. Additionally, the regularity of physical activities helped to maintain social contact. One person living with a brain tumor explained how he played golf with friends once a week, and although the golf itself was not as enjoyable anymore, he played for “social reasons” to maintain membership in the group. Another participant described how he combined treatment visits with physical activities to socialize. Then there was six weeks of radiation therapy […] so I took a taxi […] to the hospital five days a week […] and walked […] to the sports centre, worked out a little and hung out and had coffee with the people there, because, you know, I knew them. […] Then there was six months of chemotherapy. Yes, the same thing all over again. (Person living with brain tumor 4)
Among informal caregivers, the mentally recreational aspect of physical activities was stressed, as well as the physical health benefits. For example, some described that the gym offered relief from caregiving and allowed them to focus on themselves to gain energy and mental strength. Similar to the workplace, the gym was described as an environment that offered structure and control. One informal caregiver explained that, to be able to cope, she would work out five to six times a week during the time her father was sick. At the gym, she would “let everything go” and let the instructor tell her what to do.
Identity-preserving relations were also facilitated through new social contexts, often comprised of individuals that were unknown to the participants prior to the diagnoses. These social relations offered settings separated from cancer. Some of the informal caregivers explained how it was sometimes easier to talk to new friends because they were unaware of their personal histories and, thus, did not have any preconceived opinions about them. This offered an opportunity to control the narratives about their life stories and to select the information about themselves that they wished to share, or to exclude. I have some friends who say, ‘but you're a little like this or that’. […] And then, it can be difficult to develop as an individual because that person knows that I used to be in a certain way and so I continue to be that way. It's nicer with new connections, so that you can start over. (Bereaved caregiver 3)
Participants described that, by not disclosing their cancer experiences, they could more easily detach from it and could spare their new acquaintances from worrying about how to approach them. Especially, informal caregivers described how not sharing their caregiving roles enabled a restart, a new beginning, and allowed them to create a respite to regain energy for their caregiving roles. They explained that they did not feel the need to talk about their cancer experiences at all and felt that the new social relations and groups enabled other conversations and allowed them to grow. It gives me something to get to know people I did not know before […]. It's different for different people but for me […], sometimes I don't want to be only with those who know my background, sometimes it can be extremely relaxing to hang out with people who didn't know me before […] to not have that common story […]. (Bereaved caregiver 1)

Section: 4. Discussion

This study explored how persons living with brain tumors and informal caregivers perceived the potential usefulness of a social network-mapping tool and identified qualities in the interpersonal relations they mapped by using the tool.
The study participants found the CareMaps tool helpful in identifying and reflecting on supportive relations and resources in their self-care. Yet, they also expressed challenges in using suggested symbols and ratings to assess the quality of relations. For example, a relation could be described as complicated but important, which made it difficult to assess its quality. We believe that the design of the CareMaps tool could benefit from theoretical underpinning and comparisons with other approaches. One approach that shares some similarities with the CareMaps tool is social identity mapping, which focuses specifically on the mapping of social group memberships ( Cruwys et al., 2016 ). In social identity mapping, the quality of social group memberships is assessed in terms of the perceived importance of groups, how positive individuals feel about being a member of a group, and the similarity and compatibility between groups. These aspects, in combination with the interpersonal relations qualities identified in this study, should be considered when further developing and refining the design of CareMaps tool.
The participants also raised some questions about the use of the CareMaps tool in self-care. One question concerned the optimal timing in the illness trajectory. Receiving a cancer diagnosis has been described as “a process rather than an event,” ( Tobin and Begley, 2008 ) and some participants suggested introducing individuals to social network mapping at an early stage and allowing them to determine when they felt ready. Longitudinal studies have shown that there is a change of needs and support throughout the illness trajectory among glioma patients and their informal caregivers ( Cavers et al., 2012 , 2013 ). Therefore, individuals would also need to adjust and update their CareMaps to reflect changes in their personal self-care ecosystems, which may be a tedious process. Another question concerned the potential usefulness of the CareMaps tool in collaboration with healthcare professionals. Because the tool was developed for personal use in self-care, individuals can choose if they want to share their personal CareMap with healthcare professionals. However, the potential usefulness in collaboration with healthcare, the optimal timing of using the tool, and ways to visualize changes over time are all aspects that merit further research.
Qualities in interpersonal relations were found in various contexts, from close and well-established relations among family and friends to more distant relations, including persons with similar experiences, the healthcare team, the workplace, wider networks for social and physical activities , and newly established connections. These contexts involved relations with contrasting values. On the one hand, the participants valued relations for which the daily management of life with brain tumors was in focus (i.e., self-care supportive relations). On the other hand, they also appreciated relations disconnected from their brain tumor experiences (i.e., personal identity-preserving relations). These supportive contexts relate to the concept of social capital, which can be described as the accumulated benefits and resources that people gain from investing in social relationships and networks ( Bourdieu, 1986 ; Putnam, 1995 ). The reciprocal exchange of social capital has been shown to moderate stress ( Cockerham et al., 2017 ) and depressive symptoms ( Cruwys et al., 2013 ), promote well-being ( Cockerham et al., 2017 ), and support self-care ( Vassilev et al., 2011 ).
Supportive social groups may be particularly important to manage uncertainties related to daily life with a brain tumor, treatment, and prognosis. The importance of family caregiving to persons living with brain tumors is well-documented ( Janda et al., 2006 , 2008 ; Ownsworth et al., 2011 ; Piil et al., 2018 ). In this study, persons with similar experiences were identified as particularly important. Previous research has shown that people are more inclined to give and receive support to those with whom they can relate or share similar experiences ( Haslam et al., 2009 ; Kellezi et al., 2009 ). Highly supportive relations have also been described as “supergroups,” referring to their high quality in terms of meaningfulness, positivity, and representativeness, which is helpful for adjustment ( Bentley et al., 2020 ). This emphasizes the importance of patient associations or similar forums that allow persons with similar experiences to meet. Furthermore, identifying oneself as belonging to a specific group increases access to social support ( Sonderlund et al., 2017 ). Individuals who identify themselves with several different groups may be more likely to seek social support and engage in positive health behaviors, which has also been shown to have implications on treatment compliance among persons living with cancer ( Harwood and Sparks, 2003 ). Our findings suggest that the healthcare team could be one such group. Healthcare staff and contact nurses, in particular, were also emphasized as a resource for self-care support. Empathy, continuity, and inclusion were recurring ways to describe positive experiences with healthcare and enhanced the sense of group membership. Similar to our findings, previous research has described the “relational function” of nurses acting as primary points of contact ( Ford et al., 2012 ). Further, contact nurses may constitute a family resource or “personal platform” to informal caregivers and, thus, increase caregiver support and inclusion ( Spetz et al., 2008 ).
The self-categorization theory explains the benefit of identifying oneself with different social groups ( Turner et al., 1987 ). This theory suggests that individuals categorize themselves into groups of people with similar characteristics, backgrounds, behaviors, and interests to secure their self-worth and reduce their uncertainty ( Turner et al., 1987 ; Hogg, 2000 ). Different group memberships can be activated to varying degrees in a person, concurrently or consecutively ( Turner et al., 1987 ). In our study, this was illuminated by the participants in their descriptions of important groups and in the change and selectivity of interpersonal relations and groups, including those separated from the participants' cancer experiences.
Common for identity-preserving relations in our study was that they enabled membership in social groups and contexts disconnected from cancer. They helped preserve the individuals' identities on professional, personal, and social levels. This enhanced individuals' senses of self, which is also referred to as social identity ( Beckwith et al., 2019 ). The assumption that individuals' identities are shaped by memberships in different social groups is known as the social identity approach, which builds partly on the self-categorization theory ( Beckwith et al., 2019 ). In our findings, the workplace and work performance were described as meaningful and important to the participants' social identities. These findings concur with literature, showing that, even with reduced work capacity, the workplace can bring meaning and structure to everyday life and increase an individual's well-being ( Piil et al., 2019 ; KiasuwaMbengi et al., 2016 ). Membership in multiple distinctive groups may be enriching on personal, social, emotional, and intellectual levels ( Haslam et al., 2009 ). It may strengthen one's social identity, affect health behavior, secure one's self-worth, and reduce uncertainty ( Turner et al., 1987 ; Hogg, 2000 ; Beckwith et al., 2019 ). In addition, joining new groups may have positive mental health outcomes ( Cruwys et al., 2013 ). Other meaningful activities, physical, as well as social, of personal importance to the participants in our study helped to preserve their personal and social identities and gave them a sense of being “normal.” Similar to our findings, other research has illustrated how persons living with cancer make adjustments to attain or maintain normality ( Harrop et al., 2017 ). It has also been shown that activities perceived as meaningful may reduce the risk of depression and anxiety ( Paek et al., 2018 ), improve well-being, prevent social isolation, and contribute to maintaining a sense of normality ( Brom et al., 2019 ).
Being able to socialize without the constraints or external demands that may occur at the workplace or in relation to organized social and physical activities was highly valued and contributed to maintaining a sense of normality. This normality was maintained in contexts and groups in which the participants could detach from their roles as a person living with a brain tumor or an informal caregiver. These social relations and groups had become increasingly important, which resonates with previous research that suggested membership in high-quality groups had a positive impact on well-being ( Bentley et al., 2020 ). This was particularly highlighted by the informal caregivers, many of whom experienced their caregiver identities becoming dominant. Other research has shown that the informal caregiving role has been embraced to various degrees. To some, it becomes an integrated part of their identities, but others separated their caregiving roles from their identities ( Hughes et al., 1982 ). Distancing from cancer has previously been described as a way to strive for normality ( Brom et al., 2019 ). Our findings suggest that identity-preserving relations support physical, mental, and social self-care and are vital to maintain well-being among persons living with brain tumors and informal caregivers over time.

Section: 5. Methodological considerations

This exploratory study gave insight into experiences of mapping social and healthcare relations that matter to informal caregivers and persons living with brain tumors by using a prototype pen-and-paper social network-mapping tool (CareMaps). Our findings about the tool's perceived usefulness should be interpreted with some caution. The participants had been introduced to the tool and tested it as a preparation for the interview, but they had not yet used it in their self-care. Thus, although our study provides some insights about prospective users' initial impressions of the tool, more research is needed to draw practical implications. Yet, the testing of the tool engaged the participants in reflecting on interpersonal relations that matter to them, which enabled us to collect rich descriptions reflecting qualities in interpersonal relations for individuals coping with progressing illnesses.
The transferability of our findings to other populations and contexts is dependent on a number of factors that need to be considered. The study participants represented variation in terms of age (25–88 years), time since diagnosis (0.5–19 years), bereavement (6 months–4 years), and the nature of the relationship between the persons living with brain tumors and informal caregivers (e.g., parent–child, siblings, or spouses). Due to the large variation in time since diagnosis, there may have been a recall bias among some of the participants, in particular among the bereaved caregivers. As the Swedish Brain Tumor Association recruited the participants from a workshop, there may also have been a selection bias towards proactive and engaged persons living with brain tumors and informal caregivers. In addition, the majority of informal caregivers were female. These factors could be of importance to the ways individuals perceive qualities in interpersonal relations. The study's aim was to capture variation in the perception of qualities. Future studies may explore how well these qualities fit with different populations and contexts, as well as how to develop interventions that provide persons living with progressive illness and informal caregivers with the support they need in their self-care, while protecting their professional, personal, and social identities.

Section: 6. Conclusions

In contrast to many other social network-mapping approaches, an informal caregiver developed the CareMaps tool for informal caregivers and persons living with chronic illness . This study suggests that the CareMaps tool, intended for personal use in self-care, may be useful as a stimulus for conversation about the quality of social relations. The visual mapping of social and healthcare relations using the CareMaps tool was helpful to elucidate interpersonal relations that contribute to individuals' self-care, beyond structure and function. Our findings indicate that persons living with brain tumors and informal caregivers value membership in various social groups and contexts within and outside their closest social networks to manage their everyday challenges of living with brain tumors and to secure their professional, personal, and social identities. We identified two general types of interpersonal relations that enabled these eventualities: self-care supportive relations and identity-preserving relations. Future research should further investigate how social network-mapping tools that capture quality in social relations should be designed and used to support individuals in their self-care.

Section: Credit author statement

Marie Dahlberg: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Formal analysis (qualitative), Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing Ami Bylund: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Supervision Petter Gustavsson: Methodology, Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing Teresa Herlestam Calero: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing Carolina Wannheden: Methodology, Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration

Section: Funding

The CareMaps project and workshops were partly funded by the Swedish Cancer Society . The research was funded by the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare (grant numbers 2014-4238 and 2018–01472 ).

Section: Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the research reported.

Section: Acknowledgments

The authors extend their gratitude to the individuals who contributed to this study with their personal experiences. We thank Eskil Degsell (Brain tumor pathway at Karolinska University Hospital and Regional Cancer Centre, Stockholm Gotland), project leader for the Swedish adaptation of CareMaps. We also thank the Swedish Brain Tumor Association and Putte Angelins Minnesfond for facilitating workshops and supporting participant recruitment, and Anna Essén, Assistant professor, Stockholm School of Economics, for her contributions to the study design.
